                                         Journal of Machine Learning Research A (B) C                                  Submitted 1/2021; Published E




                                                      Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers

                                         Vojtech Franc                                                                   xfrancv@fel.cvut.cz
                                         Daniel Prusa                                                                       prusa@fel.cvut.cz
                                         Vaclav Voracek                                                                  voracva1@fel.cvut.cz
                                         Department of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
arXiv:2101.12523v1 [cs.LG] 29 Jan 2021




                                         Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic


                                         Editor: Editors


                                                                                        Abstract
                                             In classification with a reject option, the classifier is allowed in uncertain cases to abstain
                                             from prediction. The classical cost-based model of a reject option classifier requires the cost
                                             of rejection to be defined explicitly. An alternative bounded-improvement model, avoiding
                                             the notion of the reject cost, seeks for a classifier with a guaranteed selective risk and
                                             maximal cover. We coin a symmetric definition, the bounded-coverage model, which seeks
                                             for a classifier with minimal selective risk and guaranteed coverage. We prove that despite
                                             their different formulations the three rejection models lead to the same prediction strategy:
                                             a Bayes classifier endowed with a randomized Bayes selection function. We define a notion
                                             of a proper uncertainty score as a scalar summary of prediction uncertainty sufficient to
                                             construct the randomized Bayes selection function. We propose two algorithms to learn the
                                             proper uncertainty score from examples for an arbitrary black-box classifier. We prove that
                                             both algorithms provide Fisher consistent estimates of the proper uncertainty score and
                                             we demonstrate their efficiency on different prediction problems including classification,
                                             ordinal regression and structured output classification.
                                             Keywords: Reject option classification, prediction uncertainty, selective classifiers


                                         1. Introduction

                                         In safety critical applications of classification models, prediction errors may lead to serious
                                         losses. In such cases estimating when the model makes an error can be as important as its
                                         average performance. These two objectives are taken into account in classification with a
                                         reject option when the classifier is allowed in uncertain cases to abstain from prediction.
                                             The cost-based model of a classification strategy with the reject option was proposed by
                                         Chow in his pioneering work Chow (1970). The goal is to minimize the expected loss equal
                                         to the cost of misclassification, when the classifier predicts, and to the reject cost, when
                                         the classifier abstains from prediction. An optimal strategy leads to the Bayes classifier
                                         abstaining from prediction when the conditional expected risk exceeds the reject cost. The
                                         known form of the optimal strategy allows to construct the classifier by plugging in an
                                         estimate of the class posterior probabilities to the formula for the conditional risk. Besides
                                         the plug-in rule, the reject option classifiers can be learned by empirical risk minimization
                                         based approaches like e.g. modifications of Support Vector Machines (Grandvalet et al.,

                                         ©B G.
                                         License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
                                         at http://jmlr.org/papers/vA/F.html.
                                   Franc, Prusa and Voracek




2008), Boosting (Cortes et al., 2016), or Prototype-based classifiers (Villman et al., 2016)
to name a few.
    The cost-based model requires the reject cost to be defined explicitly which is difficult
in some applications e.g. when the misclassifiation costs have different physical units than
the reject cost. An alternative bounded-improvement model coined in Pietraszek (2005)
avoids explicit definition of the reject cost. The rejection strategy is evaluated by two
antagonistic quantities: i) a selective risk defined as the expected misclassification cost
on accepted predictions and ii) a coverage which corresponds to the probability that the
prediction is accepted. An optimal strategy for the bounded-improvement model is the one
which maximizes the coverage under the condition that the selective risk does not exceed a
target value. In contrast to the cost-based model, it has not been formally shown what is
the optimal prediction strategies when the underlying model is known. A solution has been
proposed only for special instances of the task. Pietraszek (2005) coined a method based
on ROC analysis applicable when a score proportional to posterior probabilities is known
and the task is to find only the optimal thresholds. El-Yaniv and Wiener (2010) proposed
an algorithm learning the optimal strategy in the noise-free setting, i.e. when a perfect
strategy with zero selective risk exists. Geifman and El-Yaniv (2017) shows how to equip
a trained classifier with a reject option provided an uncertainty measure is known and the
task is to find only a rejection threshold optimal under the bounded-improvement model.
    A large number of other works address the problem of uncertainty prediction, including
recent papers related to deep learning like e.g. Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017); Jiang et al.
(2018); Corbiere et al. (2019). They seek for an uncertainty score 1 defined informally
as a real valued summary of an input observation that is predictive of the classification
error. These works do not formulate the problem to be solved explicitly as a rejection
model. However, most of these works asses performance of their uncertainty scores using
evaluation metrics for the rejection models, namely, using the Risk-Coverage (RC) curve
and the Area under the RC curve (AuRC).
    This article unifies and extends existing formulations of an optimal reject option classifier
and proposes theoretically grounded algorithms to learn the classifiers from examples. The
main contributions are as follows:

  1. We provide necessary and sufficient conditions for an optimal prediction strategy of the
     bounded-improvement model when the underlying distribution is known. We show
     that an optimal solution is the Bayes classifier endowed with a rejection strategy,
     which we call randomized Bayes selection function. The randomized Bayes selection
     function is constructed from the conditional expected risk and two parameters: a
     decision threshold and an acceptance probability. The strategy rejects prediction
     when the conditional risk is above the threshold, accepts prediction when it is below
     the threshold and randomizes with the acceptance probability otherwise. We provide
     an explicit relation between the decision threshold, the acceptance probability and
     the target risk.

  2. We formulate a bounded-coverage model whose definition is symmetric to the bounded-
     improvement model. The optimal prediction strategy of the bounded-coverage model
1. Some works use term confidence score which is inverse to the uncertainty score utilized in this paper.


                                                    2
                   Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




     minimizes the selective risk under the condition that the coverage is not below a tar-
     get value. We provide necessary and sufficient conditions for an optimal strategy and
     we show that the conditions are satisfied by the Bayes classifier endowed with the
     randomized Bayes selection function. We provide an explicit relation between the
     decision threshold, the acceptance probability and the target coverage.

  3. We define a notion of a proper uncertainty score as a function which preserves ordering
     of the inputs induced by the conditional expected risk. A proper uncertainty score
     is sufficient for construction of the randomized Bayes selection function. We propose
     two generic algorithms to learn the proper uncertainty score from examples for an
     arbitrary black-box classifier. The first is based on regression of the classifier loss.
     The second is based on minimization of a newly proposed loss function which we call
     SELEctive classifier learning (SELE) loss. We show that SELE loss is a tight ap-
     proximation of the AuRC and at the same time amenable to optimization. We prove
     that both proposed algorithms provide Fisher consistent estimate of the proper uncer-
     tainty score. As a proof of concept we apply the proposed algorithms to learn proper
     uncertainty scores for different prediction problems including classification, ordinal
     regression and structured output classification. We demonstrate that the algorithm
     based on the SELE loss minimization learns uncertainty scores which consistently out-
     perform common baselines and work on par with the state-of-the-art methods that
     are, unlike our algorithm, applicable only to particular prediction models.

    Besides the proposed algorithms applicable to learning uncertainty score for an arbitrary
classification model, our contributions may have the following uses. Firstly, our analysis
shows that despite their different objectives the cost-based, the bounded-improvement and
the bounded-coverage rejection models are equivalent in the sense that they lead to the same
prediction strategy. Secondly, the explicit characterization of optimal strategies provides a
recipe how to construct plug-in rules which has been so far possible only for the cost-based
model. That is, any method estimating the class posterior distribution can be turned into
an algorithm learning the reject option classifier that solves the bounded-improvement and
the bounded-coverage model, respectively. Thirdly, there is a tight connection between the
proposed bounded-coverage model and the RC curve. The RC curve represents quality
of all solutions of the bounded-coverage model that can be constructed from a pair of a
classifier and an uncertainty score. The AuRC is then an expected quality of the reject
option classifier constructed from the pair when the target coverage is selected uniformly at
random. This connection sheds light on many published methods which do not explicitly
define the target objective but use the RC curve and the AuRC as evaluation metrics.
    This article is an extension of our previous work published in Franc and Prusa (2019).
The major extensions involve introduction of the bounded-coverage model and its analysis,
analysis of the learning algorithms including the proof of Fisher consistency, and most of
the experiments.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the three rejection models and
provides characterization of their optimal solutions. Algorithms to learn a proper uncer-
tainty score from examples are discussed in Section 3. Survey of related literature is given
in Section 4. Experimental evaluation of the proposed learning algorithms is provided in
Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper. Proofs of all theorems are deferred to Appendix.

                                             3
                                    Franc, Prusa and Voracek




2. Reject Option Models and Their Optimal Strategies
Let X be a set of input observations and Y a finite set of labels. Let us assume that inputs
and labels are generated by a random process with p.d.f. p(x, y) defined over X × Y. A
goal in the non-reject setting is to find a classifier h : X → Y with a small expected risk
                                       Z X
                             R(h) =           p(x, y)ℓ(y, h(x)) dx ,
                                            X y∈Y


where ℓ : Y × Y → R+ is a loss penalizing the predictions.
    The expected risk can be reduced by abstaining from prediction in uncertain cases. To
this end, we use a selective classifier 2 (h, c) composed of a classifier h : X → Y and a
selection function c : X → [0, 1]. When applying the selective classifier to input x ∈ X it
outputs                           
                                     h(x) with probability c(x) ,
                      (h, c)(x) =
                                    reject with probability 1 − c(x) .
In the sequel we introduce three models of an optimal selective classifier: the cost-based, the
bounded-improvement and the bounded-coverage model. We characterize optimal strategies
of the three models provided the underlying distribution p(x, y) is known.

2.1 Cost-based model
Besides the label loss ℓ : Y × Y → R+ , let us define a reject loss ε ∈ R+ incurred when
a classifiers rejects to predict. The selective classifier (h, c) is evaluated in terms of the
expected risk
                              Z X
                                                                         
                   RB (h, c) =     p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x))c(x) + (1 − c(x))ε dx .
                                  X y∈Y



Problem 1 (Cost-based model) The optimal selective classifier (hB , cB ) is a solution
to the minimization problem
                              min RB (h, c) ,                                      (1)
                                               h,c

where we assume that both minimizers exist.

The well-known optimal strategy (hB , cB ) solving Problem 1 reads
                                          X
                        hB (x) ∈ argmin       p(y | x) ℓ(y, ŷ) ,                                          (2)
                                           ŷ∈Y      y∈Y

                                             1 if r ∗ (x) < ε ,
                                            

                                   cB (x) =   τ if r ∗ (x) = ε ,                                           (3)
                                              0 if r ∗ (x) > ε ,
                                            

2. The classifier with a reject option is usually represented by a single function h′ : X → Y ∪{reject}. We use
   the decomposition h′ (x) = (h, c)(x), and the terminology selective classifier from El-Yaniv and Wiener
   (2010) because we analyze h and c separately.


                                                       4
                     Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




where                                                X
                                   r ∗ (x) = min               p(y | x) ℓ(y, ŷ)
                                              ŷ∈Y
                                                     y∈Y

is the minimal conditional expected risk associated to input x, and τ is any real number
from the interval [0, 1]. In the boundary cases when r ∗ (x) = ε one can arbitrarily reject or
return the best label hB (x) without affecting the value of the risk RB (h, c). In turn there
always exist a deterministic optimal strategy solving the cost-based model. In the sequel
we denote the classifier hB alone as the Bayes classifier.

2.2 Bounded-improvement model
One can characterize the selective classifier by two antagonistic quantities: i) the coverage
                                           Z
                                   φ(c) =      p(x) c(x) dx
                                                     X

corresponding to the probability that the prediction is accepted 3 and ii) the selective risk
                                   R P
                                         p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) c(x) dx
                                            X y∈Y
                            RS (h, c) =                                            ,
                                                                 φ(c)
defined for non-zero φ(c) as the expected classification loss on the accepted predictions.
Problem 2 (Bounded-improvement model) Given a target risk λ > 0, the optimal
selective classifier (hI , cI ) is a solution to the problem

                                   max φ(c)         s.t.       RS (h, c) ≤ λ ,                          (4)
                                    h,c

where we assume that both maximizers exist.

Theorem 1 Let (h, c) be an optimal solution to (4). Then, (hB , c), where hB is the Bayes
classifier (2), is also optimal to (4).

    According to Theorem 1 the Bayes classifier hB is also optimal for the task (4) defining
the bounded-improvement model which is not surprising. Note however that the Bayes
classifier is not a unique solution to (4) because the predictions on the reject region Xc(x)=0
do not count to the selective risk and hence they can be arbitrary.
    Theorem 1 allows to solve the bounded-improvement task (4) in two consecutive steps:
First, set hI to be the Bayes classifier hB . Second, when hI is fixed, the optimal selection
function cI is obtained by solving the task (4) only with respect to c which boils down to
Problem 3 (Bounded-improvement model for known h(x)) Given a classifier h(x),
the optimal selection function c∗ (x) is a solution to

                                   max φ(c)          s.t.        RS (h, c) ≤ λ .                        (5)
                                 c∈[0,1]X
3. For a function f : X → R and a ∈ R ∪ {∞}, we define Xf (x)≤a = {x ∈ X | f (x) ≤ a}, Xf (x)<a = {x ∈ X |
   f (x) < a}, Xf (x)=a= {x ∈ X | f (x) = a}, Xf (x)>a = {x ∈ X | f (x) > a}, Xf (x)≥a= {x ∈ X | f (x) ≥ a}.


                                                           5
                                      Franc, Prusa and Voracek




Note that Problem 3 is meaningful even if h is not the Bayes classifier hB . In practice
we can seek for an optimal selection function c∗ for any fixed h which is usually our best
approximation of hB learned from data. We will show that the key concept to characterize
an optimal selection function of Problem 3 is the conditional expected risk of h defined as
                                      X
                               r(x) =    p(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) .                          (6)
                                              y∈Y



Theorem 2 A selection function c∗ : X → [0, 1] is an optimal solution to Problem 3 if and
only if it holds
                 Z                    Z
                       p(x)c∗ (x)dx =          p(x)dx,                                 (7)
                        Xr(x)<b                       Xr(x)<b
                                                               ρ(Xr(x)<b )
                    Z                                (
                                  p(x)c∗ (x)dx =         R−        b        if b > 0 ,
                                                                                          (8)
                        Xr(x)=b                            Xr(x)=0   p(x)dx if b = 0 ,
                    Z
                                  p(x)c∗ (x)dx = 0 ,                                      (9)
                        Xr(x)>b

where r(x) = r(x) − λ measures how much the conditional risk r(x) of the classifier h(x)
exceeds the target λ,                 Z
                                         ρ(X ′ ) =           p(x)r(x) dx                 (10)
                                                      X′

is the expectation of r(x) restricted to inputs in X ′ , and

                                    b = sup {a | ρ(Xr(x)≤a ) ≤ 0} ≥ 0 .                  (11)

   Theorem 2 defines behaviour of an optimal selection function c∗ (x) on a partition of
the input space X into three regions Xr(x)<b , Xr(x)=b and Xr(x)>b . In each region the
expected value of c∗ (x) is constrained to a particular constant the value of which depends
on parameters of the problem. A particular selection function satisfying the optimality
condition is given by the following theorem.

Theorem 3 Let r : X → R be the conditional risk (6) of a classifier h : X → Y, γ = b + λ
the rejection threshold given by the target risk λ and a constant b computed by (11). Then
the selection function                   
                                          1 if r(x) < γ ,
                                c∗ (x) =    τ if r(x) = γ ,                            (12)
                                            0 if r(x) < γ ,
                                         

where τ is the acceptance probability given by
                             (
                                      1        if ρ(Xr(x)=γ ) = 0 ,
                        τ=        ρ(Xr(x)<γ) )                                           (13)
                               − ρ(X         ) if ρ(Xr(x)=γ ) > 0 ,
                                            r(x)=γ)


satisfies the optimality condition of Theorem 2, and hence it is a solution to Problem 3.

                                                         6
                   Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




    The selection function (12) is defined by the conditional risk r(x), the decision threshold
γ and the acceptance probability τ . The prediction is always accepted when r(x) < γ and
always rejected when r(x) > γ. In the boundary cases, when r(x) = γ, the strategy
randomizes and the prediction is accepted with probability τ . The decision threshold is
given by γ = b + λ where λ is the target risk in the definition of Problem 3 and b is given
by (11). Solving (11) is hard and it requires knowledge of p(x, y). When the probability mass
of the set of boundary cases Xr(x)=γ is zero, which usually happens in case of continuous
p(x), the acceptance probability is τ = 1 and the boundary cases are always accepted, i.e.
no randomization is needed.

2.3 Bounded-coverage model
In this section we introduce bounded-coverage model the definition of which is symmetric
to the definition of the bounded-improvement model. Although the problem seems equally
useful in practice we are unaware of its formal definition in literature.

Problem 4 (Bounded-coverage model) Given a target coverage ω > 0, the optimal
selective classifier (hC , cC ) is a solution to the problem
                                  min RS (h, c)     s.t.       φ(c) ≥ ω ,                 (14)
                                   h,c

where we assume that both minimizers exist.

Theorem 4 Let (h, c) be an optimal solution to (14). Then, (hB , c), where hB is the
optimal Bayes classifier (2), is also optimal to (14).

    Theorem 4 ensures that the Bayes classifier hB is an optimal solution to (14) defining
the bounded-coverage model. Note that the solution is not unique as the predictions on
Xc(x)=0 do not count to the selective risk hence they can be arbitrary. After fixing the
classifier h = hB the search for an optimal selection function leads to:

Problem 5 (Bounded-coverage model for known h(x)) Given a classifier h(x) and a
target coverage 0 < ω ≤ 1, the optimal selection function c∗ (x) is a solution to the problem
                                  min RS (h, c)         s.t.    φ(c) ≥ ω ,                (15)
                                 c∈[0,1]X

where we assume that the minimizer exists.

Theorem 5 A selection function c∗ : X → [0, 1] is an optimal solution to Problem 5 if and
only if it holds
                     Z                      Z
                                   ∗
                             p(x)c (x)dx =           p(x)dx,                         (16)
                             Xr(x)<β                     Xr(x)<β
                         Z                                     Z
                                            ∗
                                       p(x)c (x)dx = ω −                     p(x)dx,      (17)
                             Xr(x)=β                               Xr(x)<β
                         Z
                                       p(x)c∗ (x)dx = 0 ,                                 (18)
                             Xr(x)>β



                                                    7
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




where                                 (       Z                      )
                            β = inf      a|             p(x)dx ≥ ω       .                (19)
                                              Xr(x)<a

    Theorem 5 defines necessary and sufficient conditions on an optimal solution to Prob-
lem 5. A particular selection function satisfying the optimality conditions is given by the
following theorem.

Theorem 6 Let r : X → R be the conditional risk (6) of a classifier h : X → Y, 1 ≥ ω > 0
be a target coverage and β be the constant computed by (19). Then the selection function
                                       
                                        1 if r(x) < β ,
                                ∗
                               c (x) =    κ if r(x) = β ,                             (20)
                                          0 if r(x) > β ,
                                       

where κ is the acceptance probability given by
                                                  R
                                    0          if X        p(x)dx = 0 ,
                               R                     r(x)=β
                         
                     κ=     ω−  Xr(x)<β  p(x)dx                                           (21)
                          R
                         
                               Xr(x)=β
                                       p(x)dx
                                                otherwise ,

satisfies the optimality condition of Theorem 6, and hence it is a solution of Problem 5.

    The selection function (20) is determined by the conditional risk r(x), the decision
threshold β and the acceptance probability κ. Both computations of the decision threshold
β, defined by (19), and the acceptance probability κ, defined by (21), involve integration of
p(x). When the probability mass of the set of boundary cases Xr(x)=β is zero, the acceptance
probability is κ = 0 and the boundary cases are always rejected without any randomization.

2.4 Summary
We have shown that the three rejection models, namely, the cost-based model (c.f. Prob-
lem 1), the bounded-improvement model (c.f. Problem 2) and the bounded-coverage model
(c.f. Problem 4), share the same class of optimal prediction strategies. An optimal selective
classifier (h, c) can be always constructed from the Bayes classifier h = hB given by (3) and
a selection function                      
                                           1 if r(x) < α ,
                                 cR (x) =    ν if r(x) = α ,                             (22)
                                             0 if r(x) > α ,
                                          

where r(x) is the conditional expected risk of h(x) given by (6), α ∈ R is a decision threshold
and ν ∈ [0, 1] is an acceptance probability. We denote cR defined by (22) as the randomized
Bayes selection function. Note that the randomized Bayes selection function cR is also an
optimal solution of the rejection models defined for an arbitrary (i.e. non-Bayes) classifier
h, that is, an optimal solution of Problem 3 and Problem 5.
    The constants (ν, α) are defined for each rejection model differently and their value
depends on parameters of the model (i.e. reject cost ε, target risk λ or target cover-
age ω), the conditional risk r(x) and the underlying distribution p(x, y). For example, in

                                                  8
                    Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




case of the cost-based model the acceptance threshold α equals to the reject cost ε and
the acceptance probability τ can be arbitrary. In case of the bounded-improvement and
the bounded-coverage model the constants (ν, α) are defined implicitly via optimization
problems and integral equations. In practice (ν, α) can be tuned on data. For example,
Geifman and El-Yaniv (2017) show how to find α from a finite sample such that it is optimal
for the bounded-improvement model in PAC sense.
    The key component of randomized Bayes selection function cR is ranking of the inputs
X according to r(x). We introduce notion of a proper uncertainty score which is less
informative than the conditional risk r(x), yet it is sufficient to construct cR .
                                                        P
Definition 1 Let h : X → Y be a classifier and r(x) = y∈Y p(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) its condi-
tional expected risk. We say that function s : X → R is a proper uncertainty score of h iff
∀(x, x′ ) ∈ X × X : r(x) < r(x′ ) ⇒ s(x) < s(x′ ).

By definition the proper uncertainty score s(x) preserves ordering of the inputs X induced
by the conditional risk r(x). Therefore replacing r(x) by s(x) in function (22), and changing
the decision threshold α appropriately, leads to the same optimal selection function.

3. Learning the uncertainty function
Assume we want to construct a selective classifier (h, c) solving any of the three rejection
models described in Section 2. We have shown that regardless the rejection model, an
optimal h is the Bayes classifier hB given by (2) and an optimal c is the randomized Bayes
selection function cR given by (22). In this section we consider the scenario when h : X → Y
has been already trained and we want to endow it with cR . The key component of cR is
a proper uncertainty score s : X → R satisfying Definition 1. In this section we address
problem of learning a proper uncertainty score from examples Tn = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y | i =
1, . . . , n} assumed to be generated from n i.i.d. random variables with distribution p(x, y).
Before describing the algorithms, in Section 3.1 we introduce the notion of Risk-Coverage
(RC) curve and Area under Risk-Coverage curve (AuRC). In line with the literature we use
the AuRC as a metric to evaluate performance of the learned uncertainty scores. We also
show a connection between the RC curve, the AuRC and the bounded-coverage model. In
Section 3.2 we describe a plug-in condition risk rule and point out that a frequently used
Maximum Class Probability rule (MCP) is its special instance. In Section 3.3 we outline
a learning approach based on a loss regression. In Section 3.4 we introduce a proxy of the
AuRC which we call a loss for SELEctive classifier learning (SELE). We prove that both
proposed methods learn the Fisher consistent estimator of the proper uncertainty score.

3.1 Area under Risk Coverage curve
Majority of existing methods that learn selective classifiers output a classifier h : X → Y
and a deterministic selection function c : X → [0, 1] defined as 4

                                         c(x) = [[s(x) ≤ θ]] ,                                      (23)
4. Note that the deterministic (23) and the randomized Bayes selection function cR coincide if the accep-
   tance probability is ν = 1, which is a usual case when p(x) is continuous.


                                                   9
                                   Franc, Prusa and Voracek




where s : X → R is an uncertainty score and θ ∈ R a decision threshold. Performance of the
pair (h, s) is evaluated by the RC curve obtained after computing the empirical selective risk
and the coverage for all settings of the threshold θ. Namely, the computation is as follows.
Let us order the examples Tn = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y | i = 1, . . . , n} according to s(x) so that
s(xπ(1) ) ≤ s(xπ(2) ) ≤ · · · ≤ s(xπ(n) ), where π : {1, . . . , n} → {1, . . . , n} is a permutation
defining the order 5 . Let L(i, s) = ij=1 ℓ(yπj , h(xπj )) be a sum of losses incurred by the
                                       P
classifier h(x) on the examples with uncertainty not higher than the i-th highest uncertainty
on the examples Tn . The Risk-Coverage curve C = {( 1i L(i, s), ni ) | i = 1, . . . , n} is a set
of 2-dimensional points, where the pair ( 1i L(i, s), ni ) corresponds to the empirical estimate
of the selective risk RS (h, c) and the coverage φ(c) of a selective classifier (h, c) with the
deterministic selective function (23) and decision threshold θ = s(xπi ). The area under the
RC curve C is then
                                           n                  n      i
                                 1X1           1X1X
                  AuRC(s, Tn ) =     L(i, s) =      ℓ(yπj , h(xπj )) .                          (24)
                                 n i           n i
                                          i=1                i=1    j=1

The value of AuRC(s, Tn ) can be interpreted as an arithmetic mean of the empirical selective
risks corresponding to coverage equidistantly spread over the interval [0, 1] with step n1 .
    There is a tight connection between RC curve, AuRC and the bounded-coverage model.
The RC curve C represents quality of all admissible solutions of the bounded-coverage model
that can be constructed from the pair (h, s) when using the sample Tn for evaluation.
The value of AuRC(s, Tn ) is an estimate of the expected quality of the selective classifier
constructed from the pair (h, s) when the target coverage is selected uniformly at random.

3.2 Plug-in conditional risk rule
Prediction models, like e.g. Logistic Regression or Neural Networks learned by cross-
entropy loss, use the training set Tn to learn an estimate p̂(y | x) of the class posterior
distribution p(y | Px). The estimate is then used to construct a plug-in Bayes classifier
ĥ(x) ∈ argminŷ∈Y y∈Y p̂(y | x)ℓ(y, ŷ). Similarly, using p̂(y | x) instead of p(y | x) in (6)
yields the plug-in rule for the conditional risk of classifier h defined as
                                         X
                                 r̂(x) =    p̂(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) .
                                                y∈Y

Provided p(y | x) = p̂(y | x),∀x ∈ X , ∀y ∈ Y, the plug-in conditional risk r̂(x) is by definition
a proper uncertainty score and it can be used to construct the randomized Bayes selection
function cR which is an optimal rejection strategy for all the three rejection models.

Example 1 (Maximum Class Probability rule) In case of 0/1-loss ℓ(y, y ′ ) = [[y 6= y ′ ]]
the plug-in Bayes classifier decides based on the maximum posterior probability ĥ(x) ∈
argmaxy∈Y p̂(y | x) and the plug-in conditional risk rule is
                                  X
                        r̂(x) =         p̂(y | x) ℓ(y, ĥ(x)) = 1 − max p̂(y | x) .
                                                                    y∈Y
                                  y∈Y
5. To break ties we use the index of the input in case the scores are the same.


                                                      10
                     Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




3.3 Loss regression
A straightforward approach to learn the uncertainty score is to pose it as a regression
problem. The regression function gets an input x ∈ X and outputs an estimate of the
classification loss ℓ(y, h(x)). Formally, given a hypothesis space F ⊂ {s : X → R}, classifier
h(x) and training set Tn , the loss regression score s : X → R is a solution to mins∈F Freg (s)
where
                                          n
                                        1 X                         2
                             Freg (s) =       ℓ(yi , h(xi )) − s(xi ) .
                                        n
                                               i=1

It is easy to show that the loss regression score is Fisher consistent estimate of the proper
uncertainty score. This amounts to defining the expectation Freg (x) with respect to i.i.d.
generated training set Tn , i.e.,

          Ereg (s) = ETn ∼p(x,y) Freg (s)
                                 n              X n                         2 
                                                1
                     Z     X Y
                   =                p(xi , yi )        ℓ(yi , h(xi )) − s(xi )     dx1 · · · dxn   (25)
                      X n y∈Y n i=1             n
                                                  i=1
                     Z X                                2
                   =        p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) − s(x) dx ,
                     X y∈Y

and showing that its minimizer is the conditional risk r(x) which is by definition a proper
uncertainty score. This is ensured by the following theorem.

Theorem 7 The conditional risk r(x) defined by (6) is an optimal solution to min Ereg (s).
                                                                                          s:X →R


3.4 Minimization of SELE loss
In this section we define a computationally manageable proxy of AuRC which we call
SElective classifier LEarning (SELE) loss. The SELE loss ∆sele : Rn × X n × Y n → R+ is
defined as 6
                                        n n
                                      1 XX
                     ∆sele (s, Tn ) = 2     ℓ(yi , h(xi ))[[s(xi ) ≤ s(xj )]] .    (26)
                                     n
                                            i=1 j=1

In contrast to AuRC the computation of ∆sele does not require sorting the examples, i.e.
we got rid of the permutations that make the evaluation hard. ∆sele is still hard to optimize
directly due to the step function in its definition. After replacing the step function [[·]] by a
logistic function we obtain its proxy ψsele : Rn × X n × Y n → R+ defined as
                                      n n
                                  1 XX                                              
               ψsele (s, Tn ) =     2
                                          ℓ(yi , h(xi )) log 1 + exp(s(xj ) − s(xi ) .             (27)
                                  n
                                     i=1 j=1

The function ψsele (s, Tn ) is smooth and convex w.r.t. the argument s and hence it is
amenable to optimization. Minimization of ψsele is in the core of the proposed learning
algorithm which works as follows.
6. We assume that the training set Tn has at least two examples, i.e. n ≥ 2.


                                                      11
                                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




    Given a hypothesis space F ⊂ {s : X → R}, a classifier h(x) and training set Tn , the
SELE score s : X → R is a solution to the problem mins∈F ψsele (s, Tn ). We justify the
proposed algorithm empirically in Section 5. The theoretical justification is based on the
following three arguments:
     1. The value of ∆sele is a tight approximation of AuRC. In case when value of s(x) is
        different for each input in Tn , i.e. s(xi ) 6= s(xj ), ∀i 6= j, then it holds that

                                        ∆sele (s, Tn ) ≤ AuRC(s, Tn ) ≤ 2 · ∆sele (s, T ) .

          The first inequality follows from
                                                   n                        n
                                                1X1            1X1
                           ∆sele (s, Tn ) =         L̂(i, s) ≤     L̂(i, s) = AuRC(s, Tn ) .
                                                n n            n i
                                                  i=1                      i=1

          The second inequality is ensured by Theorem 8.

     2. The uncertainty score estimator defined as ŝ ∈ argmins∈[0,1]X ∆sele (s, Tn ) is Fisher
        consistent. Namely, Theorem 9 ensures that a population minimizer of ∆sele is a
        proper uncertainty score.
     3. The Fisher consistency is preserved even for the smooth proxy ψsele the minimization
        of which is in the core of the proposed algorithm. Namely, Theorem 11 ensures the
        population minimizer of ψsele is a proper uncertainty score.

Theorem 8 The inequality AuRC(s, Tn ) ≤ 2 · ∆sele (s, Tn ) holds true for any s : X → R and
Tn = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y | i = 1, . . . , n}.

   To show the Fisher consistency of ∆sele we define its expectation with respect to i.i.d.
generated examples Tn , i.e.,
              Z X Y  n
  Esele (s) =            p(xi , yi )∆sele (s, Tn )dx1 · · · dxn
                    X n y∈Y n i=1
                             n                 n
                                             n X
                 1
                      Z      Y               X
               = 2                  p(xi )             r(xi ) [[s(xi ) ≤ s(xj )]] dx1 · · · dxn
                n         X n i=1            i=1 j=1
                   1 X
                             Z Z
               =                        p(xi )p(xj )r(xi )[[s(xi ) ≤ s(xj )]]dxi dxj
                   n2         X     X
                      i6=j
                        n Z Z
                    1 X
                 + 2             p(xi )p(xi )r(xi )[[s(xi ) ≤ s(xi )]]dxi dxi
                    n
                       i=1 X X
                 n2 − n
                                     Z                             
                                                                              1
                        Z                                                       Z Z
               =           p(x) r(x)       p(z) [[s(x) ≤ s(z)]]dz dx +               p2 (x)r(x)dx dx .
                   n2    X               X                                   n   X X
                                                                                                   (28)

Minimizers of Esele are characterized by the following theorem 7 .
     R R                                          R R
7.    X         z6=x   f (x,z)dz dx stands for     X X′
                                                           f (x,z)dz dx where X ′ = {z ∈ X | z 6= x ∧ s∗ (z) = s∗(x)}, etc.
           s∗ (z)=s∗ (x)



                                                                  12
                    Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Theorem 9 A function s∗ : X → R is an optimal solution to mins:X →R Esele (s) iff
                     Z Z
                                   z6=x
                                         max{r(x), r(z)}p(x)p(z)dz dx = 0 , and                    (29)
                        X
                              s∗ (z)=s∗ (x)
                     Z Z
                               r(z)<r(x)
                                            (r(x) − r(z)) p(x)p(z)dz dx = 0 .                      (30)
                        X
                              s∗ (z)>s∗ (x)


The conditions (29) and (30) imply that the conditional expectations Ex,z∼p(x)[max{r(x), r(z)} |
z 6= x ∧ s∗ (x) = s∗ (z)] and Ex,z∼p(x)[r(x) − r(z) | r(z) < r(x) ∧ s∗ (z) > s∗ (x)] are both zero.
If combined it further implies that a subset of input space X ′ = {(x, z) ∈ X × X | r(z) <
r(x) ∧ s∗ (z) > s∗ (x)}, on which the order is violated, has probability measure zero. In other
words the optimal s∗ (x) preserves the ordering induced by r(x) almost surely 8 .

Corollary 10 Any function s : X → R fulfilling

                            ∀(x, x′ ) ∈ X × X : x 6= x′ ⇒ s(x) 6= s(x′ ), and                      (31)
                                   ′                                ′                  ′
                            ∀(x, x ) ∈ X × X : r(x) < r(x ) ⇒ s(x) < s(x )                         (32)

satisfies the optimality conditions of Theorem 9.

Note that (31) requires the minimizer of ∆sele to assign a unique value to each input x ∈ X
which is not necessary for the score to be proper. Hence the minimizers of ∆sele form a
subset of all proper uncertainty scores.
    To show the Fisher consistency of the smooth proxy ψsele we define its expectation with
respect to i.i.d. generated examples Tn , i.e.,
                        Z         n
                                X Y
         Eproxy (s) =                       p(xi , yi ) ψsele (s, Tn ) dx1 · · · dxn
                            X n y∈Y n i=1

                      n2 − n
                             Z             Z                                   
                                                                             
                    =            p(x) r(x)      p(z) log 1 + exp(s(z) − s(x)) dz dx
                        n2     X              X
                         log(2)
                                Z
                      +            p(x) r(x)dx .                                                   (33)
                           n     X

We omitted the derivation as it is similar to (28). The key property of the minimizers of
Eproxy is stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 11 Let s∗ : X → R be an optimal solution to mins : X →R Eproxy (s). Then, the
condition
                 ∀(x, x′ ) ∈ X × X : r(x) < r(x′ ) ⇒ s∗ (x) < s∗ (x′ )

is satisfied almost surely.
8. This means that the condition can be violated at most on a subset of X with probability measure zero.


                                                           13
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




4. Related Works
The cost-based rejection model was proposed in Chow (1970) who also provides the optimal
strategy in case the distribution p(x, y) is known, analyzes the error-reject trade-off, and
proves basic properties of the error-rate and the reject-rate, e.g. that both functions are
monotone with respect to the reject cost. The original paper considers the risk with 0/1-loss
only. The model with arbitrary classification costs was analyzed e.g. in Tortorella (2000);
Schlesinger and Hlaváč (2002).
    The bounded-improvement model was coined in Pietraszek (2005). He assumes that
a classifier score proportional to the posterior probabilities is known and the task is to
find only an optimal decision threshold, which is done numerically based on ROC analysis.
The original formulation assumes two classes and 0/1-loss. In this article we consider a
straightforward generalization of the bounded-improvement model, see Problem 2, which
allows arbitrary number of classes, arbitrary loss and puts no constraint on the class of
optimal strategies. We have proved necessary and sufficient conditions on an optimal strat-
egy in case p(x, y) is known. We showed that a particular optimal solution is composed of
the Bayes classifier and the randomized Bayes selection function. In addition, we coined
the bounded-coverage model, see Problem 4, the definition of which is symmetric to the
bounded-improvement model. Although the bounded-coverage model seems equally useful
in practice we are unaware of its formal definition in a literature.
    There exist another formulations of rejection models for two-class classifiers. For exam-
ple, in Hanczar and Dougherty (2008) the objective is to maximize the coverage under the
constraints that each class has an error rate below a specific threshold. Hence it can be
seen as a generalization of the bounded-improvement model. The objective of a rejection
model proposed in Lei (2014) is to maximize the total coverage under the constraint that
each class has coverage above a specific threshold. None of the two papers analyzes optimal
strategies of the corresponding models.
    A common approach to construct the selective classifiers for the cost-based model is
based on the plug-in rule, which involves learning the class posterior distribution from ex-
amples and plugging the distribution to the formula defining the Bayes-optimal strategy (2).
In the case of 0/1-loss the plug-in rule rejects based on the maximal class posterior which is
denoted as Maximal Class Probability (MCP) rule (see Example 1). The MCP rule is proba-
bly most frequently used uncertainty score in the literature. The statistically consistency of
the plug-in rejection rule is discussed in Herbei and Wegkamp (2006). Fumera et al. (2000)
investigate how errors in estimation of the posterior distribution affect effectiveness of the
plug-in rule and they also try to improve its performance by using class-specific thresh-
olds. Other methods trying to improve the plug-in rule by tuning multiple thresholds were
proposed in Kummert et al. (2016); Fischer et al. (2016). In our work we have derived the
optimal strategies for the bounded-improvement model and the newly proposed bounded-
coverage model. Our results thus provides a recipe to construct the plug-in rules also for
these two rejection models.
    There exist many modifications of standard prediction models to learn reject option
classifiers for the cost-based model. For example, extensions of the Support Vector Ma-
chines to learn a reject option classifier have been studied extensively in Grandvalet et al.
(2008); Bartlett and Wegkamp (2008); Yuan and Wegkamp (2010). These works are limited

                                             14
                  Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




to two-class problems and 0/1-loss. Learning leads to minimization of a convex surrogate
of the cost-based model’s objective function. Under some conditions the algorithms are
statistically consistent. A boosting algorithm for learning a two-class classifier with reject
option is proposed in Cortes et al. (2016). The algorithm minimizes a convex surrogate for
the cost-based model and show that the surrogate is calibrated with Bayes solution. Learn-
ing prototype-based classifier with rejection option has been addressed in Villman et al.
(2016). All these methods require the reject cost to be fixed at the time of learning, and
hence changing the cost requires re-training. In contrast, we propose algorithms to learn the
proper uncertainty score on top of a pre-trained classifier so that the risk-coverage trade-off
can be set by tuning the reject threshold without re-training.
    For many prediction models it is easy to devise an ordinal uncertainty score from out-
puts of the learned (non-reject) classifier. Such strategies are often heuristically based but
work reasonably in practice. For example, LeCun et al. (1990) proposed a reject strat-
egy for a Neural Network classifier based on thresholding either the output of the max-
imally activated unit of the last layer or a difference between the maximal and runner
upper output units. Other heuristically based strategies for neural networks were eval-
uated in Zaragoza and d’Alche Buc (1998); Fisher et al. (2015). In case of Support Vec-
tor Machine classifiers (Vapnik, 1998) the trained linear score, proportional to the dis-
tance between the input and the decision hyper-plane, is directly used as the uncertainty
score (Fumera and Roli, 2002). We denote this approach as the margin score and use it as
a baseline in our experiments.
    Learning of a selective classifier optimal for the bounded-improvement model was dis-
cussed in El-Yaniv and Wiener (2010). Their method requires a noisy-free scenario, i.e.
they maximize the coverage under the constraint that the selective risk is zero. They pro-
vide a characterization of the lower and upper bound of the risk-coverage curves in PAC
setting. Geifman and El-Yaniv (2017) assume a selective classifier based on thresholding an
uncertainty score and show how to find a decision threshold for the bounded-coverage model
which is optimal in PAC sense. They do not address the problem of learning the uncertainty
score. We complement their work by showing that the thresholding based selective classifier
is an optimal solution when the uncertainty function is proper, and we propose algorithms
to learn the proper uncertainty score from examples.
    Recent works address uncertainty prediction in context of deep learning (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Corbiere et al., 2019). These works do not formulate the problem
to be solved explicitly as a rejection model. However, they evaluate their uncertainty
scores empirically in terms of the Risk-Coverage curve and the Area under the RC curve
which we have shown to be connected with the bounded-coverage model (see Section 3.1).
Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017) construct the MCP rule from a posterior distribution mod-
eled as an ensemble of neural networks trained from multiple random initialization. They
use adversarial examples to smooth the posterior estimate. Jiang et al. (2018) propose a
Trust Score as the ratio between the distance from the test sample to the samples of the
nearest class with a different label and the distance to the samples with the same labels as
the predicted class. Corbiere et al. (2019) propose a True Class Probability (TCP) score as
a measure of prediction confidence. The TCP predicts the value of p(y ∗ | x) where y ∗ is the
ground truth label. They learn a NN, so called ConfNet, by minimizing L2-loss between
the ConfNet output and p̂(yi | x) on training examples, where p̂(y | x) is the soft-max

                                            15
                                Franc, Prusa and Voracek




distribution trained by standard cross-entropy loss. They show that the TCP empirically
outperforms the MCP score and the Trust Score (Jiang et al., 2018) in terms of the AuRC
metric. Both Jiang et al. (2018); Corbiere et al. (2019) consider the two-stage approach
to learn the uncertainty score similarly to our paper. We show empirically that our pro-
posed SELE score, besides having a theoretical backing and being applicable for a generic
classification problem, outperforms the the state-of-the-art TCP score.


5. Experiments
In Section 3, we outlined two risk minimization based methods to learn the uncertainty
score s(x) for a pre-trained predictor h(x), namely, the algorithm based on i) loss regres-
sion (Section 3.3) and ii) minimization of SELE loss (Section 3.4). We have shown that
both methods are Fisher consistent, i.e. they are guaranteed to find the proper score in
the idealized setting when the distribution p(x, y) is known (estimation error is zero), the
hypothesis space F contains the proper score (approximation error is zero) and the loss
minimizer can be found exactly (optimization error is zero). In this section we evaluate
these methods experimentally on real data when all assumptions are presumably violated.
We design the experiments so that the optimization and the estimation error are small by
using a large number of training examples and linear rules making the loss minimization a
convex problem. We compare against the recently proposed True Class Probability (TCP)
score (Corbiere et al., 2019) which is learned from examples like the proposed methods.
Unlike the proposed methods, the TCP requires the prediction model h(x) to provide an
estimate of the posterior p(y | x), hence it is not applicable to fully discriminative models
like e.g. SVMs. We emphasize that the experiments are meant to be a proof of concept
rather than an exhaustive comparison to all existing methods. On the other hand, we are
not aware of any other generic method (i.e. being not connected to a particular prediction
model) we could compare against.
     To demonstrate that the proposed methods are generic we consider three different cate-
gories of prediction problems: classification, ordinal regression and structured output clas-
sification. For each prediction problem we use several benchmark datasets and frequently
used prediction models like the Logistic Regression (LR), three variants of Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) and Gradient Boosted Trees. For each prediction model there exists an
uncertainty score that is commonly used in practice, like e.g. Maximal Class Probability
(MCP) for logistic regression or distance to the decision hyper-plane (a.k.a. margin score)
for SVMs. We use these uncertainty scores as additional baselines in our experiments.

5.1 Compared methods for uncertainty score learning

In this section we describe three algorithms that use a training set Tn = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y |
i = 1, . . . , n} to learn an uncertainty score s(x) for a pre-trained classifier h(x). We con-
sider linear scores sθ (x) = hθ, ψ(x)i, where θ ∈ Rm are parameters to be learned and
ψ : X → Rm is a fixed mapping that will be defined for each prediction model separately in
the following sections. All evaluated methods are instances of regularized risk minimization
framework. In all cases learning leads to an unconstrained minimization of a convex objec-
tive F (θ) = C2 kθk2 + R̂(θ, Tn ), where C > 0 is a regularization constant and R̂(θ, Tn ) is an

                                              16
                    Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




empirical risk defined by each method differently. The optimal value of C is selected from
{0, 1, 10, 100, 1000} based on the minimal value of the AuRC evaluated on a validation set.

5.1.1 Regression score
The parameters θ ∈ Rm are learned by minimizing a convex function
                                         n
                                C   2  1X                           2
                      FREG (θ) = kθk +     ℓ(yi , h(xi )) − sθ (xi ) .
                                2      n
                                                 i=1

Minimization of FREG (θ) is an instance of the ridge regression that can be solved efficiently
e.g. by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).

5.1.2 SELE score
Evaluation of the proposed SELE loss ψsele (s, Tn ) as defined by (27) requires O(n2 ) opera-
tions. To decrease the complexity we approximate its value by splitting the examples into
chunks and computing the average loss over the chunks. Namely, the parameters θ ∈ Rm
are learned by minimizing a convex function

                                                         P
                                       C       1 X
                            FSELE (θ) = kθk2 +     ψsele (s, Tnk ) ,
                                       2       P
                                                         i=1


where C > 0 is a regularization constant and Tn1 ∪Tn2 ∪· · ·∪TnP is a randomly generated par-
tition of the training set Tn into P approximately equally sized batches. In all experiments
we used P = round(n/500), i.e. the chunks contain around 500 examples. We minimize
FSELE (θ) by the Bundle Method for Risk Minimization (BMRM) algorithm (Teo et al.,
2010) which is set to find a solution whose objective is at most 1% off the optimum 9 .
The total computation time of the BMRM algorithm is in order of units of minutes for all
dataset using a contemporary PC.

5.1.3 True Class Probability score
The TCP (Corbiere et al., 2019) was originally designed for getting uncertainty score on
top of a Convolution Neural Network (CNN) trained with cross-entropy loss. The setting
we consider here can be seen as the original method applied to a single layer CNN. Namely,
let p̂(y | x) be an estimate of the posterior distribution, in our experiments provided by
the Logistic Regression (a.k.a. single layer NN). The parameters θ ∈ Rm are learned by
minimizing a convex function
                                                    n
                                     C        1X
                       FTCP (θ) =      kθk2 +    (p̂(yi | xi ) − sθ (xi ))2 .
                                     2        n
                                                   i=1

Minimization of FREG (θ) is an instance of the ridge regression which we solve by SVD.

9. We use (Fprimal − Fdual )/Fprimal ≤ 0.01 as the stopping condition of the BMRM algorithm.


                                                  17
                                    Franc, Prusa and Voracek




5.2 Benchmark problems
5.2.1 Classification
Given real valued features x ∈ X ⊆ Rd , the task is to predict a hidden state y ∈ Y =
{1, . . . , Y } so that the expectation of 0/1-loss ℓ(y, y ′ ) = 100 [[y 6= y ′ ]] is as small as possi-
ble 10 . We selected 11 classification problems from the UCI repository (Dua and Taniskidou,
2017) and libSVM datasets (Chang and C.J.Lin, 2011). The datasets are summarized in
Table 1. We chose the datasets with sufficiently large number of examples relative to the
number of features, as we need to learn both the classifier and the uncertainty score and
simultaneously keep the estimation error low. Each dataset was randomly split 5 times
into 5 subsets, Trn1/Val1/Trn2/Val2/Tst, in ratio 30/10/30/10/20 (up to CODRNA with
ratio 25/5/20/20/30 and COVTYPE with ratio 28/20/2/20/30). The subsets Trn1/Val1
were used for learning and tuning the best regularization constant of the classifier h(x).
The subsets Trn2/Val2 were used for learning and tuning the regularization constant of the
uncertainty score s(x) as described in Section 5.1. All features were normalized to have
zero mean and unit variance. The normalization coefficients were estimated using only the
Trn1 and Trn2 subsets, respectively. The Tst subset was used solely to evaluate the test
performance.
    We used two prediction models: Logistic Regression (LR) (Hastie et al., 2009) and Sup-
port Vector Machines (SVM) (Vapnik, 1998).
Logistic Regression learns parameters θ LR = ((w y , by ) ∈ Rd × R | y ∈ Y) of the
posterior probabilities p̂θ (y | x) P
                                    ≈ exp(hw y , xi + by ) by maximizing the regularized log-
likelihood FLR (θ) = 2 kθk + m m
                       C      2   1
                                      i=1 log p̂θ (yi | xi ) . The optimal C was selected from
{1, 10, 100, 1000} based on the validation classification error. After learning θ LR we used
the plug-in Bayes classifier h(x) = argmaxy∈Y p̂θLR (y | x). As a baseline uncertainty score
we use the plug-in class conditional risk r̂(x) = 1 − p̂θLR (h(x) | x). In accordance with the
literature we refer to this baseline as the Maximal Class Probability (MCP) rule. As shown
in Section 3.2, the MCP score is the proper uncertainty score provided the estimate p̂(y | x)
matches the true posterior p(y | x).
Support Vector Machines learn parameters θ SVM = ((w y , by ) ∈ Rd × R | y ∈ Y) of
the linear classifier h(x) = argmaxy∈Y (hw y , xi + by ) by minimizing FSVM (θ) = C2 kθk2 +
 1 Pm
                                                 
m    i=1 maxy∈Y [[y 6= yi ]] + hw y − w yi , xi i . The optimal C was selected in the same way as
in case of the LR. As the baseline uncertainty measure we use s(x) = maxy∈Y hwy , xi+by . In
the binary case
             Pm|Y| = 2, the setting was θ SVM = (w, b), h(x) = sgn(hw, xi + b), FSVM (θ) =
C
   kθk2 + 1
 2         m    i=1 max{0, 1 − yi (hw, xi i + b)} and s(x) = |hw, xi + b|. In both cases, the
value of s(x) is proportional to a distance between the input x and the decision boundary.
We denote this baseline as the margin score.
    Given the pre-trained LR or SVM classifier h(x), we apply the methods from Section 5.1
to learn the uncertainty score
                                       sθ (x) = hwh(x) , xi + by ,                                      (34)
where θ = ((wy , by ) ∈ Rd × R | y ∈ Y) are the parameters to be learned. It is seen that
the rule (34) can be re-written as sθ (x) = hθ, ψ(x)i, where ψ : X → Rd is an appropriately
10. Due to the factor 100 the reported errors correspond to the percentage of misclassified examples.


                                                    18
                     Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




defined feature map. The form of the score (34) can be justified by noting that its special
instance is the margin score which is obtained after substituting θ SVM for θ.

5.2.2 Ordinal regression
The task is to predict a hidden state from Y = {1, . . . , Y } based on real valued features
X ⊆ Rd . Unlike the classification problem, the hidden states Y are assumed to be ordered
and the goal is to minimize the expectation of the Mean Absolute Error ℓ(y, y ′ ) = |y − y ′ |.
We selected 11 regression problems from UCI repository (Dua and Taniskidou, 2017). The
datasets are summarized in Table 1. The real-valued hidden states were discretized into
Y bins which are constructed to get uniform class prior. Each dataset was randomly split
5 times into 5 subsets, Trn1/Val1/Trn2/Val2/Tst, in ratio 30/10/30/10/20. We used the
same normalization and evaluation protocol as described for the classification benchmarks.
    As a prediction model we used a variant of the Support Vector Machine algorithm
developed for ordinal regression (Chu and Keerthi, 2005) 11 .

Support Vector Ordinal Regression (SVOR) learns parameters                      PY −1θ SVOR = (w ∈
  d
R , (b1 , . . . , bY −1 ) ∈ R Y −1 ) of the ordinal linear classifier h(x) = 1 + y=1 [[hx, wi > by ]] by
                                            1 Pm      Pyi −1                        PY −1
minimizing FSVOR (θ) = 2 kθk2 + mC
                                                i=1     y=1 max(0, 1−hw, xi i+by )+     y=yi max(0, 1+
                   
hxi , wi − by ) . The optimal C was selected from {1, 10, 100, 1000} based on the valida-
tion MAE. The ordinal classifier can be thought of as a standard linear classifier com-
posed of parallel decision hyper-planes. Similarly to the standard SVM, we use s(x) =
miny∈{1,...,Y −1} |hx, wi − by | as a baseline uncertainty score. The value of s(x) is propor-
tional to the distance of x to the closest hyper-plane hence we also denote it as the margin
score. When learning the uncertainty from examples we use the parametrization (34).

5.2.3 Structured Output Classification
Given an RGB image x ∈ X = {0, . . . , 255}W ×H×3 capturing a human face, the task
is to predict a pixel positions of 68 landmarks y = (l1 , . . . , l68 ) ∈ Y = ({1, . . . , W } ×
{1, . . . , H})68 corresponding to contours of eyes, mouth, nose, etc. We use the 300-W
dataset and the associated evaluation protocol which was created by organizers of landmark
detection challenge (Sagonas et al., 2016). The 300-W dataset contains 5,807 faces each
annotated with 68 landmarks. The faces are split into 3,484 training, 1,161 validation and
1,162 test examples. The prediction    accuracy is measured in terms of normalized average
                                100 P68
localization error ℓ(y, ŷ) = iod(y) i=1 kli − l̂i k, where iod(y) is the inter-ocular distance
computed from the ground-truth landmark positions y.
    As the structured classifier h(x) we use the landmark detector from DLIB package (King,
2009). The detector predicts the landmark positions based on HOG descriptors (Dalal and Triggs,
2005) of the input image using an ensemble of regression trees that are trained by gradient
boosting (Kazemi and Sullivan, 2014). The DLIB landmark detector has been widely used
by developers due to its robustness and exceptional speed even on a low-end hardware.
The detector does not provide any measure of prediction uncertainty and it is unclear how
to derive it from outputs of the regression trees. A commonly used uncertainty score for

11. (Chu and Keerthi, 2005) introduced two variants of SVOR algorithm. We use so called SVOR with
    implicit constraints which is designed for minimization of the MAE loss.


                                                  19
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




face recognition related prediction problems is a score function of a face detector. The face
detector score is an output of a binary classifier trained to distinguish face from non-face
images. The value of the score is high for well looking prototypical faces and low for cor-
rupted or “difficult” faces. As a baseline we use the score of the DLIB face detector which
is a linear SVM classifier on top of HOG descriptors extracted from the image.
    When learning the uncertainty score from examples the score is a linear regressor
sθ (x) = hθ, ψ(x)i on top of a feature vector ψ(x) ∈ R2,448 which is a concatenation of
HOG descriptors extracted from the input facial image x along landmark positions pre-
dicted by the landmark detector h(x). The DLIB detector uses the same features to predict
the landmark positions hence the extra computational time required to evaluate the uncer-
tainty score is neglectable.

           Classification problems                     Ordinal regression problems
   dataset            examples feat    cls         dataset         examples feat cls
   AVILA                20,867   10    12          ABALONE            4,177     10 19
   CODRNA              331,152    8     2          BANK               8,192     32 10
   COVTYPE             581,012   54     7          BIKESHARE         17,379     11 10
   IJCNN                49,990   22     2          CALIFORNIA        20,640     8  10
   LETTER               20,000   16    26          CCPP               9568      4  10
   MARKETING            45,211   51     2          CPU                8192      21 10
   PENDIGIT             10,992   16    10          FACEBOOK          50,993     53 10
   PHISHING             11,055   68     2          GPU              24,1600     14 10
   SATTELITE            6,435    36     6          METRO             48,204     30 10
   SENSORLESS           58,509   48    11          MSD              499,671     90 41
   SHUTTLE              58,000    9     7          SUPERCOND         21,263     81 10

Table 1: Summary of 11 classification problems (left) and 11 ordinal regression problems
         (right) selected from UCI repository (Dua and Taniskidou, 2017) and libSVM
         datasets (Chang and C.J.Lin, 2011). The table shows the total number of ex-
         amples, the number of features and the number of classes.




5.3 Results

5.3.1 Classification problems

For both classification models, LR and SVM, we recorded the test risk of the classifier h(x)
and the AuRC computed from h(x) and uncertainty score s(x) produced by the correspond-
ing method under evaluation. In case of LR, we compare the baseline MCP score (sec 5.2.1)
and scores learned from examples including the state-of-the-art TCP score (sec 5.1.3) and
the two proposed SELE score (sec 5.1.2) and Regression (REG) score (sec 5.1.1). In case
of SVM, we compare the baseline Margin score (sec 5.2.1) against the proposed SELE and
REG scores. Note that TCP score is not applicable for SVM classifier as it does not provide
an estimate of the posterior probability p(y | x). The results are summarized in Table 2.

                                             20
                        Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




    For each dataset we rank the compared methods according to the AuRC 12 . Following
the methodology of Demšar (2006) we summarize performance of each method by its average
rank and use the Friedman test and the post-hoc Nemenyi test to analyze significance of
the results.
    • We used the Friedman test to check whether the measured average ranks are signif-
      icantly different from the mean rank. The null hypothesis states that the compared
      scores are equivalent so that their average ranks should be equal. In both cases the
      null hypothesis is rejected for p-value 0.05, i.e., the performance of compared methods
      is significantly different.
    • We used post-hoc Nemenyi test for pair-wise comparison. For each pair of methods
      it checks whether their average ranks are significantly different. In case of LR, when
      we compare K = 4 methods using N = 11 datasets, the critical difference for p-value
      0.10 is CD = 1.26. By comparing the average ranks we conclude that SELE score
      performs significantly better than MCP score and REG score. In case of SVM, when
      we compare K = 3 methods using N = 11 dataset, the critical difference for p-value
      0.10 is CD = 0.98. We conclude that SELE performs significantly better than REG
      score and Margin score. The data is not sufficient to reach any conclusion about other
      pairwise comparisons. The result of the Nemenyi test is visualized in Figure 1.
     We further computed relative improvement gained by using the scores SELE, TCP and
REG, that are all learned from examples, with respect to the baseline scores derived from the
classifier output, i.e. MCP in case of LR and Margin score in case of SVM. The results are
summarized in Figure 2. It is seen that the MCP uncertainty computed from the estimated
p(y | x) constitutes much stronger baseline than the Margin score of fully discriminative
SVM model. The relative improvement of scores learned on top the LR is only moderate in
contrast to the SVM classifier where the improvements are more significant and consistent.
It is also seen that on majority of datasest the performance of the learned scores is similar
taking into account the statistical error of the AuRC estimate. It is also worth mentioning
that results of SELE score have the lowest variance of the AuRC estimates as seen from
error bars in Figure 2.
                  CD                                                   CD
              4     3      2    1                                  3        2    1

  LR+REG                            LR+SELE         SVM+Margin                       SVM+SELE
  LR+MCP                            LR+TCP          SVM+REG
 a) Average ranks for scores on top LR.          b) Average ranks for scores on top of SVM.

Figure 1: Comparison of all uncertainty scores against each other with the Nemenyi test.
          The test is computed separately for the LR classifier (4 scores compared) and the
          SVM classifier (3 scores compared). The figures show the average ranks for each
          score and the critical distance (CD). Groups of scores that are not significantly
          different at p-value 0.10 are connected.


12. The score with smallest AuRC is ranked 1, the second smallest 2 and so on.


                                                   21
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




                    LR+MCP         LR+SELE       LR+REG        LR+TCP             LR
                      AuRC           AuRC          AuRC          AuRC            R@100
         AVILA 27.18±0.55 25.79±0.44 26.62±0.74 26.85±0.78                    43.71±0.42
       CODRNA       0.88±0.05      0.65±0.03     0.82±0.06     0.78±0.04       4.81±0.08
     COVTYPE 16.49±0.06 17.58±0.07 17.62±0.09 17.19±0.07                      27.56±0.17
         IJCNN      1.26±0.04      1.00±0.03     1.16±0.08     1.14±0.06       7.54±0.15
       LETTER       7.43±0.40      6.42±0.34     7.44±0.59     6.71±0.42      23.32±0.60
  MARKETING         2.60±0.31      1.88±0.11     1.97±0.12     1.90±0.11       9.88±0.29
     PENDIGIT 0.69±0.04            1.55±0.19     1.97±0.55     1.47±0.39       5.29±0.40
     PHISHING       0.76±0.10      0.75±0.10     0.91±0.31     0.85±0.25       6.29±0.44
   SATTELITE        3.83±0.26      3.68±0.27     4.93±1.07     4.52±0.85      15.06±0.46
  SENSORLESS        2.03±0.11      1.82±0.08     2.69±0.09     2.37±0.22       8.23±0.45
      SHUTTLE       0.59±0.09      0.26±0.07     1.24±0.51     0.58±0.13       3.36±0.25
    average rank       2.73           1.36          3.55          2.36
               (a) Uncertainty scores on top of LR classifier.

                       SVM+MARGIN SVM+SELE SVM+REG                             SVM
                             AuRC            AuRC          AuRC               R@100
             AVILA        31.65±0.83      25.26±0.67 25.95±0.75            43.34±0.70
           CODRNA          0.89±0.05       0.65±0.03     0.82±0.05          4.78±0.08
         COVTYPE          25.71±0.81       17.79±0.21 17.77±0.14           27.41±0.11
             IJCNN         1.40±0.04       1.01±0.04     1.18±0.08          7.56±0.16
           LETTER         10.20±0.22       6.05±0.65     7.15±0.65         22.06±0.69
      MARKETING            2.24±0.20       1.97±0.10     2.04±0.20         10.48±0.39
         PENDIGIT          2.79±0.40       1.57±0.21     2.16±0.43          4.88±0.57
         PHISHING          0.84±0.12       0.72±0.12     0.90±0.30          6.37±0.44
       SATTELITE           4.75±0.60       3.82±0.27     5.44±0.68         15.36±0.37
      SENSORLESS           3.68±0.20       1.56±0.08     2.46±0.29          6.92±0.17
          SHUTTLE          1.31±0.47       0.24±0.07     0.55±0.15          2.02±0.15
        average rank          2.82             1.09         2.09
                     (b) Uncertainty scores on top of SVM classifier.

Table 2: Performance of the uncertainty scores on 11 classification problems. The scores
         are constructed on top of the LR classifier and the SVM classifier measured in
         terms of AuRC. For each score we show the mean and the standard deviation of
         the test AuRC computed over 5 random splits. We compare the performance of
         scores learned from examples (SEL, REG, TCP) and the baseline scores derived
         from the classifiers output (MCP and Margin score). The last column shows the
         risk of the base (non-selective) classifier. All the values correspond to percentage
         of misclassification. The best results for each dataset are shown in bold. The last
         row shows the average rank.




                                             22
                                                       Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




        (a) Improvement over LR+MCP score.                                                                                                 (b) Improvement over SVM+Margin score.
                   100                                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                      SVM+SELE
                                                                                                                                                                      SVM+REG
                      0




                                                                                                                                            improvement [%]
 improvement [%]




                                                                                                                                                               50

                   -100

                                                                                                                                                                0
                   -200     LR+SELE
                            LR+REG
                            LR+TCP
                   -300                                                                                                                                       -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SENSORLESS
                                                                                                                                                                                               IJCNN
                                                                                                                                                                                     COVTYPE
                                                                                                                    SENSORLESS




                                                                                                                                                                                                       LETTER
                                                     IJCNN
                                           COVTYPE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SATTELITE



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SHUTTLE
                                                             LETTER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                MARKETING
                                                                                                        SATTELITE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PENDIGIT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PHISHING
                                                                                                                                                                            CODRNA
                                                                                                                                 SHUTTLE




                                                                                                                                                                    AVILA
                                                                      MARKETING

                                                                                  PENDIGIT

                                                                                             PHISHING
                                  CODRNA
                          AVILA




Figure 2: Relative improvement gained by using the uncertainty scores (SELE, REG and
          TCP) that are learned from examples over the baseline scores (MCP for LR
          and Margin score for SVM) constructed from the classifier output. The relative
          improvement is computed as 100×(AuRCbaseline −AuRCmethod )/AuRCbaseline . We
          show the mean and the standard deviation (error bar) of the relative improvement
          computed over the random 5 splits.



5.3.2 Ordinal regression
In case of SVOR classifier we compared the baseline Margin score (sec 5.2.2) and the scores
learned from examples including SELE (sec 5.1.2) and REG score (sec 5.1.1). We used
exactly the same evaluation protocol as for the classification task, however, instead of 0/1-
loss the errors were evaluated by the MAE loss. The results are summarized in Table 3.
    We again ranked the methods according to the AuRC and summarized their performance
by the average rank:

                   • We applied the Friedman test checking whether the measured average ranks are signif-
                     icantly different from the mean rank. The null hypothesis, stating that the compared
                     scores are equivalent, is rejected for p-value 0.05, i.e., the performance of compared
                     methods is significantly different.

                   • We used post-hoc Nemenyi test to check for each pair whether their average ranks are
                     significantly different. Considering K = 3 compared methods using N = 11 dataset
                     yields the critical difference for p-value 0.10 is CD = 0.98. We conclude that both
                     SELE and REG scores are significantly better than the baseline Margin score. The
                     data is not sufficient to reach any conclusion about comparisons of SELE and REG.
                     The result of the Nemenyi test is visualized in Figure 3(a).

    The relative improvement gained by using SELE and REG scores learned from examples
w.r.t. the baseline Margin score is shown in Figure 3(b). It is seen that the performance
of the learned scores is similar and that they consistently outperform the baseline by a
significant margin.

                                                                                                                                           23
                              Franc, Prusa and Voracek




                         SVOR+MARGIN          SVOR+SELE       SVOR+REG          SVOR
                              AuRC               AuRC            AuRC           R@100
     CALIFORNIA             0.98±0.03          0.82±0.02       0.84±0.02      1.18±0.01
        ABALONE             1.48±0.10          1.19±0.09       1.21±0.05      1.54±0.02
             BANK           1.07±0.04          0.99±0.04       0.98±0.03      1.50±0.03
               CPU          0.41±0.01          0.36±0.02       0.36±0.02      0.64±0.03
      BIKESHARE             1.60±0.07          1.25±0.01       1.27±0.01      1.70±0.03
             CCPP           0.46±0.02          0.41±0.02       0.42±0.02      0.58±0.02
      FACEBOOK              0.51±0.01          0.37±0.01       0.36±0.01      1.11±0.01
              GPU           1.43±0.02          0.85±0.03       0.86±0.03      1.49±0.02
           METRO            2.20±0.07          1.97±0.01       1.98±0.03      2.37±0.03
              MSD           6.23±0.07          4.26±0.03       4.25±0.03      6.22±0.03
  SUPERCONDUCT              0.98±0.02          0.75±0.01       0.77±0.01      1.07±0.01
       average rank            3.00               1.27            1.73

Table 3: Performance of the uncertainty scores on 11 ordinal regression problems. The
         scores are constructed on top of the SVOR classifier. For each score we show the
         mean and the standard deviation of the test AuRC computed over 5 random splits.
         We compare the performance of scores learned from examples (SEL, REG) and the
         baseline Margin score derived from the SVOR classifier output. The last column
         shows the risk of the base (non-selective) classifier. All the values correspond to
         the Mean Absolute Error (MAE). The best results for each dataset are shown in
         bold. The last row shows the average rank.




5.3.3 Structured Output Classification

We trained SELE score (sec 5.1.2) and REG score (sec 5.1.1) on top of the DLIB detector
and compared them with the baseline which uses the DLIB face detector score (sec 5.2.3)
as an uncertainty measure. The Risk-Coverage curves of the three methods and their
corresponding AuRC are shown in Figure 4(a). Both the learned scores, SELE and REG,
are significantly better than the baseline face detector score. The SELE is slightly better
than REG score. The largest difference between the three scores are seen for low values of
coverage where SELE most outperforms the other two methods. High selective risk for low
values of coverage means that faces with very bad landmark predictions are assigned the
lowest uncertainty scores. SELE score does not suffer from this problem. This can be seen
in Figure 5 where we show examples of 10 test faces with the lowest uncertainty and the
highest uncertainty predicted by SELE.
    Unlike the experiments in the previous section, the number of parameters to be learned
(m = 2, 448) relative to the number of training examples (n = 3, 484) is much higher. To
see whether the number of examples is sufficient we trained SELE and REG scores from
increasingly bigger training set. Figure 4(b) shows the test AuRC as a function of the the
number of training examples. It is seen that AuRC of the SELE is not yet saturated and

                                            24
                      Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




 a) Average rank for scores on top of SVOR.                                b) Relative improvement over
                                                                               SVOR+Margin score.
                      CD                                              50
                                                                                 SVOR+SELE
                                                                      40         SVOR+REG
                  3        2   1




                                                    improvement [%]
                                                                      30
   SVOR+Margin                     SVOR+SELE
                                   SVOR+REG                           20

                                                                      10

                                                                       0




                                                                                                                            CCPP




                                                                                                                                                    SUPERCONDUCT
                                                                                                          CPU




                                                                                                                                   FACEBOOK

                                                                                                                                              GPU
                                                                                                                BIKESHARE




                                                                                                                                                                   METRO
                                                                            CALIFORNIA



                                                                                                   BANK




                                                                                                                                                                           MSD
                                                                                         ABALONE
Figure 3: Statistics derived from results obtained on 11 ordinal regression problems. Fig-
          ure (a) shows pair-wise comparison of uncertainty scores with the Nemenyi test.
          The figure shows the average ranks for each score and the critical distance (CD).
          Groups of scores that are not significantly different at p-value 0.10 are connected.
          Figure (b) shows relative improvement gained by using the SELE and REG un-
          certainty scores learned from examples over the baseline Margin score.



would most likely converge to a significantly lower value relative to the REG score provided
300-W dataset had more training examples.


6. Conclusions
The standard cost-based rejection model introduced by Chow (1970) requires explicit def-
inition of the rejection cost which is difficult in applications when the reject cost and the
label loss have different nature or physical units. Pietraszek (2005) proposed the bounded-
improvement model which avoids the problem by defining an optimal prediction strategy
in terms of the coverage and the selective risk. We have coined a symmetric definition, the
bounded-coverage model, which is useful when defining the target coverage is easier than
defining the target selective risk. Our main result is a formal proof that despite their differ-
ent objectives the three rejection models are equivalent in the sense that they lead to the
same prediction strategy: the Bayes classifier and the randomized Bayes selection function.
Thanks to the common optimal solution it is possible to convert between parameters of dif-
ferent rejection models. For example, for any target risk defining the bounded-improvement
model there exists a corresponding reject cost so that both models have the same optimal
strategy.
    The explicit characterization of the optimal strategies provides a recipe to construct
plug-in rules solving the bounded-improvement and the bounded-coverage models. Any
method estimating the class posterior probabilities can be thus turned into an algorithm
for learning the selective classifier that solves the bounded-improvement and the bounded-
coverage model.

                                               25
                                                Franc, Prusa and Voracek




                             (a) Risk-Coverage curve                               (b) Learning curve
                  0.06                                                 0.029
                               DLIB+SELE, AuRC=2.6                                                  DLIB+SELE
                               DLIB+REG, AuRC=2.8                                                   DLIB+REG
                  0.05
                               DLIB+FACE-SCORE, AuRC=3.5
                                                                       0.028
 selective risk




                  0.04




                                                                AuRC
                  0.03
                                                                       0.027
                  0.02

                  0.01                                                 0.026
                         0                0.5              1                10 2                   10 3
                                       coverage                                      #training examples

Figure 4: Evaluation of uncertainty scores on top of DLIB landmark detector using the
          300-W benchmark. Figure (a) shows the RC curve and AuRC of computed from
          the predictions of DLIB detector endowed with the three compared uncertainty
          scores: the proposed SELE and REG scores and the DLIB face detector score
          used as a baseline. Figure (b) shows the test AuRC for SELE and REG scores
          as a function of the number of training examples.



    We have defined a notion of a proper uncertainty score which is sufficient to construct
the randomized Bayes selection function. We proposed two algorithms to learn a proper
uncertainty score from examples for a given classifier. We have shown that both algorithms
provide a Fisher consistent estimate of the proper uncertainty score. As a proof of concept
we evaluated the proposed algorithms on different types of prediction problems. We have
shown that the proposed algorithm based on minimization of the SELE loss outperforms
existing approaches tailored for a particular prediction model and it works on par with
the recently published state-of-the-art TCP score (Corbiere et al., 2019). Unlike the TCP
score which requires the classifier to output the class posterior probabilities the proposed
algorithms are applicable for an arbitrary black-box classifier.
   We have drawn a connection between the proposed bounded-coverage model and the RC
curve. Namely, the RC curve represents quality of all admissible solutions of the bounded-
coverage model that can be constructed from a pair of classifier and uncertainty score. The
AuRC is then the expected quality of the selective classifier constructed from the pair when
the target coverage is selected uniformly at random. This connection sheds light on many
published methods which do not explicitly define the target objective but use the RC curve
and the AuRC as evaluation metrics.
    Finally let us mentioned some topics for future work. Firstly, the proposed algorithms
consider two-stage scenario when the classifier and the uncertainty score are learned sep-
arately from independent training sets. Although the scenario is useful in practice, an
algorithm learning the classifier and the uncertainty score simultaneously from a single
training set constitute an interesting topic to be solved. Secondly, we have shown how

                                                           26
                  Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




to learn the proper uncertainty score but have not discussed how to set up the decision
threshold and the acceptance probability that are also needed to construct the selective
classifier. It is straightforward to tune these parameters on empirical data using the RC
curve. Analysis of the generalization error of this empirical approach is an open issue
which has been solved only for the decision threshold of the bounded-improvement model
by Geifman and El-Yaniv (2017). Thirdly, the empirical evaluation is limited to uncertainty
scores linear in the parameters to be learned. Efficient implementations of the algorithms
applicable to non-linear models, like e.g. the neural networks, is an another topic left for
future.


Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge support for this work from Czech Science Foundation project
GACR GA19-21198S.




                                            27
                              Franc, Prusa and Voracek



       1: loss=0.02          6: loss=0.03         1153: loss=0.53       1158: loss=0.25




       2: loss=0.02          7: loss=0.02         1154: loss=0.71       1159: loss=0.82




       3: loss=0.02          8: loss=0.03         1155: loss=0.32       1160: loss=0.30




       4: loss=0.02          9: loss=0.02         1156: loss=0.49       1161: loss=0.46




       5: loss=0.03          10: loss=0.02        1157: loss=0.43       1162: loss=0.37




Figure 5: Figure shows examples of 10 test faces from 300-W database with the lowest and
          10 faces with the highest value of the SELE uncertainty score. The ground-truth
          landmark positions (red) and the landmark positions predicted by DLIB detector
          (blue) are superimposed into the image. The image title shows the rank induced
          by the SELE score and the normalized localization error which is used as the
          classification loss in this application.

                                             28
                      Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Appendix A. Proofs of theorems from Section 2
A.1 Proof of Theorem 1
The Bayes classifier reads
                                                     X
                                 hB (x) ∈ argmin           p(y | x) ℓ(y, ŷ)                           (2)
                                              ŷ∈Y   y∈Y



Problem 2 (Bounded-improvement model) Given a target risk λ > 0, the optimal
selective classifier (hI , cI ) is a solution to the problem

                                   max φ(c)       s.t.    RS (h, c) ≤ λ ,                              (4)
                                    h,c

where we assume that both maximizers exist.

Theorem 1 Let (h, c) be an optimal solution to (4). Then, (hB , c), where hB is the Bayes
classifier (2), is also optimal to (4).

Proof It is sufficient to show that (hB , c) is feasible to (4), i.e., that RS (hB , c) ≤ λ. Then
(hB , c) attains the same maximum objective value φ(c) as (h, c). Derive
                                   1
                                      Z X
                  RS (hB , c) =              p(x, y) ℓ(y, hB (x)) c(x) dx
                                 φ(c)
                                      X y∈Y
                                                                              
                                   1
                                      Z              X
                              =          p(x)c(x)        p(y | x) ℓ(y, hB (x)) dx
                                 φ(c)
                                      X              y∈Y
                                                                             
                              (2) 1
                                       Z              X
                               ≤          p(x)c(x)        p(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) dx
                                  φ(c)
                                                      y∈Y
                                      ZX X
                                   1
                              =              p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) c(x) dx
                                 φ(c)
                                          X y∈Y
                               = RS (h, c) ≤ λ.




A.2 Proof of Theorem 2
The presented proof of the theorem uses Lemmas 13 and 14, both derived based on Lemma 12
bellow.

Lemma
    R    12 For a set X , let f : X → R+ 13 and g : X → R be R measurable functions such
that X f (x)dx > 0 and g(x) > 0 for all x ∈ X . Then it holds X g(x)f (x)dx > 0.
13. We use R, R+ and N+ to denote the set of real numbers, non-negative real numbers and positive integers,
    respectively.


                                                     29
                                        Franc, Prusa and Voracek




Proof For n ∈ N+ , define functions

                                                        f (x) if g(x) ≥ n1 ,
                                                    
                                        fn (x) =
                                                          0   otherwise.

The sequence {fn }∞
                  n=1 is monotone and converges to f . Using the monotone convergence
theorem (Stein and Shakarchi, 2009), derive
                      Z           Z                      Z
                  0 < f (x)dx =       lim fn (x)dx = lim   fn (x)dx .
                                                    n→∞                n→∞
                                 X              X                              X
                                                            R
This means that there is a k ∈ N+ such that X fk (x)dx > 0, hence we conclude

                                                       1
                  Z                Z                Z
                     g(x)f (x)dx ≥ g(x)fk (x)dx ≥        fk (x)dx > 0.
                                                       k
                             X                  X                      X




Lemma
R         13 For a set X , let f : X → R+ and g : X → R be measurable functions
                                                                        R       such that
  R f (x)dx > 0 and g(x) > b for all x ∈ X and some b ∈ R. Then it holds X g(x)f (x)dx >
  X
b X f (x)dx.

Proof By Lemma 12, we have
                                            Z
                                                (g(x) − b)f (x)dx > 0,
                                            X

thus              Z                     Z                          Z                  Z
                      g(x)f (x)dx =         (g(x) − b)f (x)dx +        bf (x)dx > b       f (x)dx.
                  X                     X                          X                  X




Lemma
R          14 For a set X , let f : X → R+ and g : X → R be measurable
                                                                  R          functions
                                                                                R      such that
  X g(x)f (x)dx > 0  and g(x)  <  1 for all x ∈ X . Then it holds   X f (x)dx >   X g(x)f (x)dx.
        R                             R
Proof X g(x)f (x)dx > 0 implies X f (x)dx > 0. Since it holds ∀x ∈ X : (1 − g(x)) > 0,
Lemma 12 yields
                        Z                        Z           Z
                    0 < (1 − g(x))f (x)dx = f (x)dx − g(x)f (x)dx,
                                 X                          X              X
       R                 R
and        X f (x)dx >       X g(x)f (x)dx is obtained as a direct consequence.




                                                           30
                     Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Problem 3 (Bounded-improvement model for known h(x)) Given a classifier h(x),
the optimal selection function c∗ (x) is a solution to

                                         max φ(c)         s.t.     RS (h, c) ≤ λ .                              (5)
                                     c∈[0,1]X

Theorem 2 A selection function c∗ : X → [0, 1] is an optimal solution to Problem 3 if and
only if it holds
                 Z                    Z
                             ∗
                       p(x)c (x)dx =           p(x)dx,                                 (7)
                         Xr(x)<b                          Xr(x)<b
                                                                   ρ(Xr(x)<b )
                     Z                                    (
                                          ∗
                                   p(x)c (x)dx =              R−       b        if b > 0 ,
                                                                                                                (8)
                         Xr(x)=b                               Xr(x)=0   p(x)dx if b = 0 ,
                     Z
                                   p(x)c∗ (x)dx = 0 ,                                                           (9)
                         Xr(x)>b

where r(x) = r(x) − λ measures how much the conditional risk r(x) of the classifier h(x)
exceeds the target λ,                 Z
                                              ρ(X ′ ) =          p(x)r(x) dx                                   (10)
                                                          X′
is the expectation of r(x) restricted to inputs in X ′ , and

                                     b = sup {a | ρ(Xr(x)≤a ) ≤ 0} ≥ 0 .                                       (11)

Proof Observe that b ≥ 0, because ρ(Xr(x)≤0 ) ≤ 0. Next, observe that Problem 3 can be
rewritten into the form
                          Z                   Z
                      max   p(x)c(x)dx s.t.     p(x)c(x)r(x)dx ≤ 0                (35)
                         c∈[0,1]X    X                             X

since
                                   R P
                                          p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) c(x) dx − λφ(c)
                                X y∈Y
           RS (h, c) − λ =                                                                                     (36)
                                                    φ(c)
                                   R                     R                           R
                                     p(x)c(x)r(x) dx − λ p(x)c(x)                        p(x)c(x)r(x) dx
                                X                                  X                 X
                            =                                                    =                         .   (37)
                                                     φ(c)                                    φ(c)
                     R
Let F (c) = φ(c) =       X p(x)c(x)dx denote the objective function of (35).

Case 1 b > 0.
Claim I Each c∗ : X → [0, 1] which fulfils (7), (8) and (9) is feasible to (35) and
                                                    1
                                    Z
                        F (c∗ ) =         p(x)dx − ρ(Xr(x)<b ).                                                (38)
                                                    b
                                               Xr(x)<b

Proof of Claim I.

                                                              31
                                         Franc, Prusa and Voracek




    Equality (38) is simply obtained by summing LHS and RHS of (7), (8) and (9). To
verify the constraint of (35), observe that, since r is a bounded function and
                               Z
                                                           (7)
                                       p(x)(c∗ (x) − 1)dx = 0 ,                 (39)
                                          Xr(x)<b

it holds that                      Z
                                                  p(x)(c∗ (x) − 1)r(x)dx = 0 ,                                (40)
                                        Xr(x)<b

which implies
                      Z                                      Z
                                   ∗                                           (10)
                              p(x)c (x)r(x)dx =                      p(x)r(x)dx = ρ(Xr(x)<b ).                (41)
                    Xr(x)<b                                Xr(x)<b

If b < ∞, then
          Z                                     Z                                    Z
                              (9)
             p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx =                               ∗
                                                          p(x)c (x)r(x)dx +                p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx
          X                                Xr(x)<b                               Xr(x)=b
                                                  Z                              Z
                                        (41)
                                         =                 p(x)r(x)dx + b                p(x)c∗ (x)dx         (42)
                                               Xr(x)<b                         Xr(x)=b

                                        (8),(10),(41)
                                               =           ρ(Xr(x)<b ) − ρ(Xr(x)<b ) = 0.                     (43)

If b = ∞, then
                                                                            (41)
             Z                                        Z
                    p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx =                      p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx = ρ(Xr(x)<b ) ≤ 0.
                X                               Xr(x)<b

Claim II Let c : X → [0, 1] be a feasible solution to (35) that violates at least one of the
constraints (7), (8) and (9). Then, F (c) < F (c∗ ), where c∗ : X → [0, 1] is a confidence
function satisfying (7), (8), (9), and, without loss of generality,

                                             ∀x ∈ Xr(x)<b : c∗ (x) = 1 .                                      (44)

Proof of Claim II.
   Distinguish three cases.
Case 1.1 Condition (9) is violated (note that this is possible only if b < ∞), i.e.
                                  Z
                                       p(x)c(x)dx > 0.                                                        (45)
                                               Xr(x)>b

Inequality (45) and Lemma 13 (applied to f (x) = p(x)c(x) and g(x) = r(x)) yield
                        Z                         Z
                            p(x)c(x)r(x)dx > b        p(x)c(x)dx.
                              Xr(x)>b                                Xr(x)>b


                                                              32
                             Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Therefore, we can write
                                       Z                                             Z
                                                   p(x)c(x)r(x)dx = b′                      p(x)c(x)dx                             (46)
                                 Xr(x)>b                                          Xr(x)>b

for a suitable b′ ∈ R+ such that
                                                                   b′ > b > 0.                                                     (47)
     Based on the constraint of (35), derive
 Z                         Z                                                        Z                                 Z
                    (46)                                                                                      ′
     p(x)c(x)r(x)dx =           p(x)c(x)r(x)dx + b                                          p(x)c(x)dx + b                 p(x)c(x)dx
 X                                   Xr(x)<b                                      Xr(x)=b                      Xr(x)>b

                              (35)
                                                        Z                                      Z
                                   (43)
                                ≤ 0 =                        p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx + b                      p(x)c∗ (x)dx.               (48)
                                                   Xr(x)<b                                  Xr(x)=b

Let σ(x) = 1b r(x). Inequality (48) can be rearranged and upper bounded as
                                              b′
     Z                    Z                       Z
                                    ∗
         p(x)c(x)dx −          p(x)c (x)dx +          p(x)c(x)dx                                                                   (49)
                                              b
     Xr(x)=b                     Xr(x)=b                                  Xr(x)>b

               (48)
                        Z                                                          Z                              Z
                                           ∗                                                       ∗
                ≤               p(x)(c (x) − c(x))σ(x)dx ≤                                  p(x)c (x)dx −                 p(x)c(x)dx
                      Xr(x)<b                                                    Xr(x)<b                     Xr(x)<b

where the second inequality follows from ∀x ∈ Xr(x)<b : σ(x) ≤ 1. From this we get
                                                    (49)                            b′
                       Z                                      Z                                    Z
                                                                             ∗
                              p(x)c(x)dx ≤                            p(x)c (x)dx −                      p(x)c(x)dx .              (50)
                                                                                    b
                 Xr(x)≤b                                    Xr(x)≤b                           Xr(x)>b

Now, derive
                                        Z                                    Z
                           F (c) =                  p(x)c(x)dx +                    p(x)c(x)dx
                                     Xr (x)≤b                           Xr (x)>b
                                (50)
                                                                       ′   
                                                                       b
                                               Z                                               Z
                                                               ∗
                                 ≤                      p(x)c (x)dx −     −1                           p(x)c(x)dx
                                                                       b
                                       Xr(x)≤b                                              Xr(x)>b

                                (45),(47)
                                                        Z
                                      <                      p(x)c∗ (x)dx = F (c∗ ).
                                                   Xr(x)≤b

Case 1.2 Condition (9) holds, condition (8) is violated.
                           ρ(X     )
                                     , then obviously F (c) < F (c∗ ). Hence, assume
    R
  If X     p(x)c(x)dx < − r(x)<b
                               b
           r(x)=b


                                                                                    ρ(Xr(x)<b )
                                                    Z
                                                            p(x)c(x)dx > −                      .                                  (51)
                                                                                        b
                                               Xr(x)=b


                                                                        33
                                          Franc, Prusa and Voracek




Analogically to (48), derive
                                                                            (35)
                   Z                                       Z
                        p(x)c(x)r(x)dx + b                        p(x)c(x)dx ≤ 0                                  (52)
                     Xr(x)<b                            Xr(x)=b

                               (43)
                                          Z                                   Z
                                =                p(x)c∗ (x)r(x)dx + b                 p(x)c∗ (x)dx,               (53)
                                      Xr(x)<b                               Xr(x)=b

and
  Z                                   Z                          Z                                Z
                                                                               ∗
          p(x)c(x)σ(x)dx +                    p(x)c(x)dx ≤               p(x)c (x)σ(x)dx +                p(x)c∗ (x)dx
Xr(x)<b                          Xr(x)=b                     Xr(x)<b                            Xr(x)=b
                                                                                                                  (54)
where σ(x) = 1b r(x) < 1 for all x ∈ Xr(x)<b .
   Denote and derive
                                                                                             ρ(Xr(x)<b ) (51)
       Z                     Z                                       Z
                                               (8)
 ∆=         p(x)c(x)dx −          p(x)c∗ (x)dx =                            p(x)c(x)dx +                  > 0. (55)
                                                                                                 b
      Xr(x)=b                    Xr(x)=b                         Xr(x)=b

Then, (54) can be rewritten as
                                                           (55)
                         Z
                              p(x)(c∗ (x) − c(x))σ(x)dx ≥ ∆ > 0.                                                  (56)
                               Xr(x)<b

                                                                                      (44)
Inequality (56) and Lemma 14 (applied to g(x) = σ(x) < 1 and f (x) = p(x)(c∗ (x)−c(x)) ≥
0 over Xr(x)<b ) yield        Z
                                                 p(x)(c∗ (x) − c(x))dx > ∆.                                       (57)
                                       Xr(x)<b

Now, combine and rearrange (55) and (57) to obtain
                                                               (57)
                         Z                    Z
                   ∗               ∗
               F (c ) =       p(x)c (x)dx +        p(x)c∗ (x)dx > ∆                                               (58)
                                 Xr(x)<b                        Xr(x)=b
                                          Z                          Z
                               (55)
                                =               p(x)c(x)dx +                p(x)c(x)dx = F (c).                   (59)
                                      Xr(x)<b                    Xr(x)=b

Case 1.3 Conditions (8) and (9) hold, condition (7) is violated, i.e.
                           Z                    Z
                                p(x)c(x)dx <         p(x)dx.                                                      (60)
                                      Xr(x)<b                     Xr(x)<b

Then,
                                               ρ(Xr(x)<b ) (60)                               ρ(Xr(x)<b )
                 Z                                                   Z
   F (c∗ ) =             p(x)c∗ (x)dx −                     >               p(x)c(x)dx −                  = F (c).
                                                   b                                              b
               Xr(x)<b                                            Xr(x)<b


                                                           34
                   Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Case 2 b = 0.        R
  This occurs only if X            p(x)r(x)dx = 0. The constraint of (35) implies
                          r(x)<0

                                       Z
                                               p(x)c(x)r(x)dx = 0 ,
                                   Xr(x)>0

thus                                       Z
                                                 p(x)c(x)dx = 0 ,
                                       Xr(x)>0

which confirms condition (9).
   Finally, the obvious equations
                               Z                            Z
                       max                 p(x)c(x)dx =             p(x)dx , and
                      c:X →[0,1]
                                Xr(x)<0                   Xr(x)<0
                                   Z                        Z
                        max                p(x)c(x)dx =             p(x)dx
                      c:X →[0,1]
                                Xr(x)=0                   Xr(x)=0


confirm condition (7) and (8), respectively.




A.3 Proof of Theorem 3
Theorem 3 Let r : X → R be the conditional risk (6) of a classifier h : X → Y, γ = b + λ
the rejection threshold given by the target risk λ and a constant b computed by (11). Then
the selection function                   
                                          1 if r(x) < γ ,
                                c∗ (x) =    τ if r(x) = γ ,                            (12)
                                            0 if r(x) < γ ,
                                         

where τ is the acceptance probability given by
                             (
                                      1        if ρ(Xr(x)=γ ) = 0 ,
                        τ=        ρ(Xr(x)<γ) )                                            (13)
                               − ρ(X         ) if ρ(Xr(x)=γ ) > 0 ,
                                           r(x)=γ)


satisfies the optimality condition of Theorem 2, and hence it is a solution to Problem 3.

Proof The optimality conditions (7) and (9) given in Theorem 2 are equivalent to a prob-
abilistic statement Px∼p(x)[c∗ (x) = 0 ∧ r(x) < b] = 0 and Px∼p(x) [c∗ (x) = 1 ∧ r(x) > b] = 0,
respectively. Hence the two conditions are satisfied by a selection function which predicts,
c∗ (x) = 1, whenever r(x) < b and rejects, c∗ (x) = 0, whenever r(x) > b. Or equivalently,
using the identity r(x) = r(x) − λ and a threshold γ = b + λ, by c∗ (x) = 1 when r(x) < γ
and c∗ (x) = 0 when r(x) > γ. Finally, if we opt for a selection function that is constant

                                                     35
                                  Franc, Prusa and Voracek



                                                                                      ρ(X      )
c∗ (x) = τ inside the boundary region Xr(x)=b , then the condition (8) implies τ = − b·ρ
                                                                                     r(x)<γ
                                                                                        0
                        R
if b > 0, where ρ0 = X           p(x) dx, and τ = 1 if b = 0. Using Xr(x)<b = Xr(x)<γ and
                          r(x)=b
b · ρ0 = ρ(Xr(x)=b ) = ρ(Xr(x)=γ ), we derive (13).



A.4 Proof of Theorem 4
Theorem 4 Let (h, c) be an optimal solution to (14). Then, (hB , c), where hB is the
optimal Bayes classifier (2), is also optimal to (14).
Proof The theorem follows from the fact that RS (hB , c) ≤ RS (h, c) for any (h, c) feasible
to (14), which is derived as follows:
                                 1
                                     Z X
                 RS (hB , c) =             p(x, y) ℓ(y, hB (x)) c(x) dx
                               φ(c)
                                    X y∈Y
                                                                            
                                 1
                                     Z             X
                             =         p(x)c(x)        p(y | x) ℓ(y, hB (x)) dx
                               φ(c)
                                    X              y∈Y
                                                                          
                            (2) 1
                                    Z             X
                             ≤         p(x)c(x)       p(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) dx
                               φ(c)
                                    X             y∈Y
                                 1
                                     Z X
                             =             p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) c(x) dx
                               φ(c)
                                       X y∈Y
                             = RS (h, c).




A.5 Proof of Theorem 5
Problem 5 (Bounded-coverage model for known h(x)) Given a classifier h(x) and a
target coverage 0 < ω ≤ 1, the optimal selection function c∗ (x) is a solution to the problem
                                 min RS (h, c)         s.t.   φ(c) ≥ ω ,                    (15)
                                c∈[0,1]X

where we assume that the minimizer exists.
Theorem 5 A selection function c∗ : X → [0, 1] is an optimal solution to Problem 5 if and
only if it holds
                     Z                      Z
                                   ∗
                             p(x)c (x)dx =           p(x)dx,                         (16)
                            Xr(x)<β                     Xr(x)<β
                        Z                                     Z
                                           ∗
                                      p(x)c (x)dx = ω −                     p(x)dx,         (17)
                            Xr(x)=β                               Xr(x)<β
                        Z
                                      p(x)c∗ (x)dx = 0 ,                                    (18)
                            Xr(x)>β



                                                  36
                       Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




where
                                                   (        Z                           )
                                  β = inf              a|              p(x)dx ≥ ω           .              (19)
                                                             Xr(x)<a



Proof By substituting the definitions of RS (h, c) and φ(c) to (15), we rewrite the problem
into the form
                           R
                             p(x)c(x)r(x)dx          Z
                           X
                    min      R                s.t.     p(x)c(x)dx ≥ ω .                 (61)
                  c∈[0,1]X     p(x)c(x)dx
                                      X                                      X

                 R
                     XR p(x)c(x)r(x)dx
   Let F (c) =                            denote the objective function of (61). Whenever c∗ : X →
                       X p(x)c(x)dx
[0, 1] fulfils (16), (17) and (18), it is feasible to (61) and

                                              1                                  β
                                                    Z                                  Z
                       F (c∗ ) = β +                         p(x)r(x)dx −                       p(x)dx ,   (62)
                                              ω                                  ω
                                                  Xr(x)<β                            Xr(x)=β


which is a value independent of c∗ .
    We will prove the theorem by showing that any c : X → [0, 1] feasible to (61) that
violates at least one of conditions (16), (17), (18) is not an optimal solution. Three cases
will be examined.
Case 1 Condition (16) is violated, i.e.,
                                          Z                              Z
                                                   p(x)c(x)dx <                  p(x)dx.                   (63)
                                  Xr(x)<β                              Xr(x)<β


This means that there is a subset X ⊆ X such that

                                                    ∀x ∈ X : r(x) ≥ β                                      (64)

and
                                                                                           (63)
                  Z                                Z                      Z
                        p(x)c(x)dx =                        p(x)dx −             p(x)c(x)dx > 0 .          (65)
                  X                           Xr(x)<β                  Xr(x)<β


Define c′ : X → [0, 1] as follows.

                                              
                                                 1      if      r(x) < β ,
                               c′ (x) =           0      if      x∈X,                                      (66)
                                                c(x) otherwise .
                                              


                                                                37
                                      Franc, Prusa and Voracek




c′ is feasible to (61) as φ(c′ ) = φ(c). Derive
                            Z                                     Z                                 Z
                      ′
                        
    φ(c) F (c) − F (c ) = p(x)c(x)r(x)dx −                              p(x)r(x)dx +                        p(x)c(x)r(x)dx
                              X                               Xr(x)<β                             Xr(x)<β
                                                                                                                        (67)
                          (64),(65)
                                          Z                                               Z
                               ≥                   β · p(x)(1 − c(x))dx −                          p(x)(1 − c(x))r(x)dx
                                      Xr(x)<β                                         Xr(x)<β
                                                                                                                        (68)
                                  Z
                          =             p(x)(1 − c(x))(β − r(x))dx > 0                                                  (69)
                              Xr(x)<β

where the inequality in (69) is obtained from Lemma 12 applied to f (x) = p(x)(1 − c(x)),
g(x) = β − r(x), and the set Xr(x)<β . This shows that c is not an optimal solution.
Case 2 Condition (16) is satisfied, condition (17) is violated and
                      Z                          Z
                               p(x)c(x)dx < ω −           p(x)dx > 0 .               (70)
                           Xr(x)=β                                    Xr(x)<β

   In this case, there is a c′ : X → [0, 1] such that

                                        c′ (x) = c(x)          if r(x) < β ,                                            (71)
                                          ′
                                        c (x) = 0              if r(x) > β ,                                            (72)

and          Z                                 Z                                 Z
                         p(x)c′ (x)dx =                      p(x)c(x)dx +                         p(x)c(x)dx .          (73)
               Xr(x)=β                             Xr(x)=β                           Xr(x)>β

   If Lemma 13 is applied to f (x) = p(x)c(x), g(x) = r(x), and the set Xr(x)>β , we get
                    Z                            Z
                            p(x)c(x)r(x)dx > β           p(x)c(x)dx .                  (74)
                          Xr(x)>β                                      Xr(x)>β

   It also holds that φ(c′ ) = φ(c). Now, deriving
                                       Z                                                      Z
                                 (73)
            φ(c) F (c) − F (c′ ) =         p(x)c(x)r(x)dx − β                                        p(x)c(x)dx         (75)
                                               Xr(x)>β                                   Xr(x)>β

                                        (74)
                                                     Z                               Z
                                         > β                 p(x)c(x) − β                     p(x)x(x)dx = 0            (76)
                                                 Xr(x)>β                        Xr(x)>β

shows that c is not an optimal solution.
Case 3 φ(c) > ω, which occurs if
                       Z                       Z
                              p(x)c(x)dx > ω −                                   p(x)dx > 0                             (77)
                           Xr(x)=β                                    Xr(x)<β


                                                             38
                   Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




(implying that condition (17) is violated), or if condition (18) is violated.
    Observe that F (c) = F (α · c) for any a ∈ R+ . Let c′ = φ(c)ω
                                                                     · c. Since φ(c′ ) = ω, the
selection function c′ is feasible to (61). Because

                                        ω
             Z                             Z                     Z
                            ′
                      p(x)c (x)dx =                 p(x)c(x)dx <          p(x)dx ,         (78)
              Xr(x)<β                  φ(c) Xr(x)<β               Xr(x)<β

c′ violates condition (16) and is therefore not an optimal solution (see Case 1). This implies
that c is not an optimal solution too.



A.6 Proof of Theorem 6
Theorem 6 Let r : X → R be the conditional risk (6) of a classifier h : X → Y, 1 ≥ ω > 0
be a target coverage and β be the constant computed by (19). Then the selection function
                                       
                                        1 if r(x) < β ,
                                ∗
                               c (x) =    κ if r(x) = β ,                             (20)
                                          0 if r(x) > β ,
                                       

where κ is the acceptance probability given by
                                                  R
                                    0          if X        p(x)dx = 0 ,
                               R                     r(x)=β
                         
                     κ=     ω− X         p(x)dx                                           (21)
                          RX
                                 r(x)<β
                         
                                       p(x)dx
                                                otherwise ,
                                 r(x)=β


satisfies the optimality condition of Theorem 6, and hence it is a solution of Problem 5.

Proof It is easy to see that c∗ satisfies
                                     R     conditions (16) and (18).
                                                                R      The validity of con-
dition (17) is proved as follows. If X         p(x)dx = 0, then X         p(x)dx = ω, and
                         R              r(x)=β                     r(x)=β
condition (17) is met. If X      p(x)dx > 0, we derive
                            r(x)=β

                             R
  Z                      ω− X          p(x)dx Z                      Z
                 ∗              r(x)<β
            p(x)c (x)dx = R                             p(x)dx = ω −          p(x)dx .    (79)
    Xr(x)=β                 Xr(x)=β p(x)dx      Xr(x)=β               Xr(x)<β




Appendix B. Proofs of theorems from Section 3
B.1 Proof of Theorem 7
The expectation of the squared loss deviation reads
                                Z X                           2
                     Ereg (s) =       p(x, y) ℓ(y, h(x)) − s(x) dx .                      (80)
                                 X y∈Y


                                              39
                                       Franc, Prusa and Voracek




Theorem 7 The conditional risk r(x) defined by (6) is an optimal solution to min Ereg (s).
                                                                                                s:X →R



Proof We can rewrite Ereg (s) as
             Z           X                                                    Z
                                                  2                       2
Ereg (s) =        p(x)         p(y | x) ℓ(y, h(x)) −2 ℓ(y, h(x)) s(x)+s(x) dx =   p(x)f (s(x))dx.
             X           y∈Y                                                                X



Due to additivity we can solve mins : X →R Ereg (s) for each x ∈ X separately by setting
derivative of f (s) to zero and solving for s which yields
                 X                              X                                   X
f ′ (s) = −2           p(y | x)ℓ(y, h(x)) + 2         p(y | x)s(x) = 0 ⇒ s∗ (x) =         p(y | x)ℓ(y, h(x)) .
                 y∈Y                            y∈Y                                 y∈Y




B.2 Proof of Theorem 8
Lemma 15 For an integer n ≥ 1, let {ai }ni=1 and {bi }ni=1 be sequences of positive real
numbers such that { abii }ni=1 is a non-increasing sequence. For each non-decreasing sequence
{ℓi }ni=1 of non-negative real numbers with a positive sum it holds that
                                           Pn            Pn
                                            i=1 ai ℓ i        ai
                                           Pn          ≤ Pi=1
                                                          n      .
                                            i=1 bi ℓi     i=1 bi



Proof By induction on n. Base case: If n = 1, then ab11ℓℓ11 = ab11 .
    Induction step: Let n > 1. The fact that { abii }ni=1 is non-increasing implies ai ≤ ab11 · bi
for all i = 1, . . . , n, hence
                                Pn       Pn a1
                                     ai    i=2       · bi    a1
                                 i=2
                                Pn      ≤ Pn b1           =     .                            (81)
                                 i=2 bi      i=2 bi          b1

   The lemma is obviously satisfied if 0 < ℓ1 = ℓ2 = . . . = ℓn . Assume that ℓn > ℓ1 .
Then, the sequence {ℓi − ℓn }ni=2 is non-decreasing with positive sum, hence the induction
hypothesis yields that
                            Pn                      Pn
                                i=2 ai (ℓi − ℓ1 )        ai   a1
                            Pn                    ≤ Pi=2
                                                     n      ≤    .                    (82)
                                i=2 bi (ℓi − ℓ1 )    i=2 bi   b1

The induction hypotheses also ensures that
                                           Pn            Pn
                                            i=2 ai ℓ i        ai
                                           Pn          ≤ Pi=2
                                                          n      .                                        (83)
                                            i=2 bi ℓi     i=2 bi


                                                         40
                           Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




We can thus derive the following sequence of equivalent inequalities:
                                               n
                                               X                        (82)         n
                                                                                     X
                                          b1         ai (ℓi − ℓ1 ) ≤ a1                    bi (ℓi − ℓ1 )
                                               i=2                               i=2
                                    n
                                    X                         n
                                                              X                 n
                                                                                X                         n
                                                                                                          X
                               b1         ai ℓ i + a1 ℓ 1           bi ≤ a 1             bi ℓi + b1 ℓ1          ai
                                    i=2                      i=2                i=2                       i=2
               n
               X                    Xn           n
                                                 X          n
                                                            X                                n
                                                                                             X                        n
                                                                                                                      X            n
                                                                                                                                   X    n
                                                                                                                                        X
a1 ℓ1 b1 +b1         ai ℓi +a1 ℓ1         bi +         bi         ai ℓi ≤ a1 ℓ1 b1 +a1              bi ℓi +b1 ℓ1              ai +   bi   ai ℓ i
               i=2                  i=2          i=2        i=2                               i=2                     i=2         i=2 i=2
               Xn                   Xn           Xn         Xn         (83)                    Xn                      Xn          Xn  Xn
a1 ℓ1 b1 +b1         ai ℓi +a1 ℓ1         bi +         bi         ai ℓi ≤ a1 ℓ1 b1 +a1             bi ℓi +b1 ℓ1     ai +     ai     bi ℓ i
               i=2                 i=2          i=2         i=2                                i=2              i=2      i=2    i=2
                                   n
                                   X            Xn          Xn                       n
                                                                                     X           Xn      Xn
                          a1 ℓ 1         bi +         bi          a i ℓ i ≤ b1 ℓ 1         ai +           ai         bi ℓ i
                                   i=1          i=1         i=2                      i=1            i=1        i=2
                                                Xn            Xn             n
                                                                             X             n
                                                                                           X
                                                      ai ℓi         bi ≤         bi ℓ i        ai
                                                i=1           i=1   i=1      i=1
                                                      Pn            Pn
                                                           ai ℓ i          ai
                                                      Pi=1
                                                       n          ≤ Pi=1
                                                                       n      .
                                                       i=1 bi ℓi       i=1 bi




                                                                                                           Pn       n
  For i = 1, . . . , n and a permutation π on {1, . . . , n}, let aπi =                                         j=i j and bπi = n − i + 1.
We can write
                                                         n
                                                   1 X
                                  ∆sele (s, Tn ) = 2        bπ i ℓ π i
                                                  n
                                                                                i=1
and
                                                                                     n
                                                                             1 X
                                                AuRC(s, Tn ) =                   aπi ℓπi ,
                                                                             n2
                                                                                i=1

where ℓπi = ℓ(yπi , h(xπi )).
   Without loss
             P of generality, assume that ℓ1 ≤ ℓ2 ≤ . . . ≤ ℓn and πi = i for all i = 1, . . . , n.
   Let Hk = ki=1 1i denote the k-th harmonic number. It fulfils
                                                        1                         1
                                   ln(k) + γ +               ≤ Hk ≤ ln(k) + γ +                                                             (84)
                                                      2k + 1                    2k − 1
where γ ≈ 0.5772156649 is the Euler–Mascheroni constant. Moreover, let us define H0 = 0.
                                                                       Pn n
Lemma 16 Let n ≥ 2 be an integer. For each i = 1, . . . , n, let ai =    j=i j and bi =
                 ai   ai+1
n − i + 1. Then, bi ≥ bi+1 holds for all i = 1, . . . , n − 1.

Proof Since
                                   ai ai+1     n · (Hn − Hi−1 ) n · (Hn − Hi )
                                      −      =                 −
                                   bi   bi+1       n−i+1             n−i

                                                                        41
                                 Franc, Prusa and Voracek




it suffices to show that

                           (n − i)(Hn − Hi−1 ) ≥ (n − i + 1)(Hn − Hi )

and this is equivalent to showing that

                               (n − i + 1)Hi − (n − i)Hi−1 ≥ Hn .

If we substitute Hi−1 = Hi − 1i , the inequality further reduces to

                                               n−i  n
                                   Hn − Hi ≤       = − 1.                             (85)
                                                i   i
Now we derive
                                (84)  n     1       1    n
                         Hn − Hi ≤ ln     +       −       < −1
                                       i    2n − 1 2i + 1  i
where the second inequality follows from the fact that ln(x) < x − 1 for all x > 1. This
confirms inequality (85).



             Pn
Lemma 17        i=1 (Hn − Hi−1 ) = n.

Proof By induction on n. The lemma trivially holds for n = 1. Let n > 1. Then, using
the induction hypothesis, we derive
                 n                                   n−1
                                                     X                          
                 X                                          1
                        (Hn − Hi−1 ) = Hn − Hn−1 +            + Hn−1 − Hi−1
                                                            n
                  i=1                                i=1
                                                    n−1
                                        1 n−1       X
                                    =     +   +           (Hn−1 − Hi−1 ) = n .
                                        n   n
                                                    i=1




Theorem 8 The inequality AuRC(s, Tn ) ≤ 2 · ∆sele (s, Tn ) holds true for any s : X → R and
Tn = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y | i = 1, . . . , n}.

Proof The theorem trivially holds if ni=1 ℓi = 0. If ni=1 ℓi > 0, we apply Lemmas 16, 15
                                    P               P
and 17 to derive
                         Pn       Pn
       AuRC(s, Tn )       i=1 ai       n · (Hn − Hi−1 )         n2       2n
                       ≤ Pn      = i=1
                                    Pn                  = n           =      <2.
        ∆sele (s, Tn )    i=1 bi      i=1 (n − i + 1)       2 (n + 1)   n+1




                                               42
                      Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




B.3 Proof of Theorem 9
Remark 18 For the sake of simplicity, for predicates ϕ1 (x, z), . . . , ϕk (x, z) and a function
f : X × X → R, we write        Z Z
                                                                 f (x, z)dz dx
                                                  X ϕ1 (x,z)
                                                        ..
                                                         .
                                                    ϕk (x,z)

to represent                  Z Z
                                    f (x, z)[[ϕ1 (x, z) ∧ . . . ∧ ϕk (x, z)]]dz dx .
                              X X

Theorem 9 A function s∗ : X → R is an optimal solution to mins:X →R Esele (s) iff
               Z Z
                       z6=x
                            max{r(x), r(z)}p(x)p(z)dz dx = 0 , and                                             (29)
                          X
                              s∗ (z)=s∗ (x)
                          Z Z
                                r(z)<r(x)
                                            (r(x) − r(z)) p(x)p(z)dz dx = 0 .                                  (30)
                          X
                              s∗ (z)>s∗ (x)

Proof We first present four equalities to be used later. We assume that s : X → R is any
measurable function. The validity of the equalities can be easily verified.
Z            Z                Z          Z                    Z           Z
  r(x)p(x)        p(z)dz dx = p(z)           r(x)p(x)dx dz = p(x)           r(z)p(z)dz dx ,
X             r(z)>r(x)                X             r(x)<r(z)                      X      r(z)<r(x)
              s(z)<s(x)                              s(x)>s(z)                             s(z)>s(x)

                                                                                                               (86)
                                         1
Z     Z                                       Z         Z
              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx =                                max{r(x), r(z)}p(x)p(z)dz dx
                                         2
X r(z)<r(x)                                   X       z6=x
  s(z)=s(x)                                        s(z)=s(x)
                                             1
                                                    Z        Z
                                           −                          max{r(x), r(z)}p(x)p(z)dz dx ,           (87)
                                             2
                                                    X      z6=x
                                                        r(z)=r(x)
                                                        s(z)=s(x)
                              1                                                 1
Z     Z                                 Z           Z                               Z      Z
          r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx =                               r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                 r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx ,
                              2                                                 2
X r(z)=r(x)                             X r(z)=r(x)                                 X r(z)=r(x)
  s(z)<s(x)                                                                           s(z)=s(x)
                                                                                                               (88)
Z     Z                                       Z         Z                               Z Z
              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx = 2                              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx +            r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx .
X r(z)=r(x)                                 X         z>x                               X z=x
  s(z)=s(x)                                        r(z)=r(x)
                                                   s(z)=s(x)
                                                                                                               (89)

                                                                 43
                                                 Franc, Prusa and Voracek




Since argmins:X →R E(s) = argmins:X →R (E(s) − E(r)), it suffices to analyze minimizers of
E(s) − E(r) instead of E(s). Derive
                      Z    Z                        Z     Z
        E(s) − E(r) =           r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                                 X s(z)≥s(x)                                      X r(z)≥r(x)
                                 Z           Z                                    Z           Z
                            =                        r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                                 X r(z)<r(x)                                      X r(z)≥r(x)
                                   s(z)≥s(x)                                        s(z)<s(x)
                                 Z           Z                                    Z           Z
                            =                        r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                                 X r(z)<r(x)                                      X r(z)>r(x)
                                   s(z)>s(x)                                        s(z)<s(x)
                                 Z           Z                                    Z           Z
                            +                        r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                             r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                                 X r(z)<r(x)                                      X r(z)=r(x)
                                   s(z)=s(x)                                        s(z)<s(x)

                            = F1 (s) + F2 (s)

where
                        Z            Z                                    Z           Z
            F1 (s) =                             r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                        X r(z)<r(x)                                       X r(z)>r(x)
                          s(z)>s(x)                                         s(z)<s(x)
                            Z            Z                                    Z           Z
                    (86)
                        =                         r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                              r(z)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                            X r(z)<r(x)                                       X r(z)<r(x)
                              s(z)>s(x)                                         s(z)>s(x)
                        Z            Z
                    =                            (r(x) − r(z)) p(x)p(z)dz dx
                        X r(z)<r(x)
                          s(z)>s(x)

and
            Z       Z                                        Z        Z
 F2 (s) =                       r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                           r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
            X r(z)<r(x)                                      X r(z)=r(x)
              s(z)=s(x)                                        s(z)<s(x)
        (87,88,89) 1                                                            1
                            Z        Z                                                               Z Z
                =                                max{r(x), r(z)}p(x)p(z)dz dx +                              r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx
                        2                                                       2
                            X      z6=x                                                              X z=x
                                s(z)=s(x)
          1
                Z       Z
        −                        r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx .
          2
                X r(z)=r(x)

Observe that
                                                         min F1 (s) = 0,
                                                        s:X →R


                                                                 44
                    Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




                      1                               1
                          Z Z                             Z     Z
         min F2 (s) =             r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx −                   r(x)p(x)p(z)dz dx ,
        s:X →R        2                               2
                          X z=x                           X r(z)=r(x)

and both minima are attained by a scoring function s∗ : X → R if and only if conditions
(29) and (30) hold for s∗ . Also note that the conditions can be fulfilled, e.g. by any s∗ such
that

         (∀x, z ∈ X ) (x 6= z ⇒ s∗ (x) 6= s∗ (z) ∧ r(x) < r(z) ⇒ s∗ (x) < s∗ (z)) .




B.4 Proof of Theorem 11
The expectation of ψsele reads

             n2 − n
                             Z                              
                                                                  log(2)
                   Z                                                    Z
                                                          
Eproxy (s) =         p(x)r(x)    p(z) log 1+exp(s(z)−s(x)) dz dx+         p(x)r(x)dx.
               n2 X            X                                    n X

Theorem 11 Let s∗ : X → R be an optimal solution to mins : X →R Eproxy (s). Then, the
condition
                 ∀(x, x′ ) ∈ X × X : r(x) < r(x′ ) ⇒ s∗ (x) < s∗ (x′ )
is satisfied almost surely.

Proof For every a ∈ X , Eproxy (s) can be seen as a function of one variable s(a), where the
others s(b), b ∈ X \ {a} are fixed. Hence if s is a minimizer of Eproxy (s), then for every
s(a), a ∈ X , the partial derivative w.r.t. s(a) must be zero, i.e.,
                             Z                                     
          ∂
               Z
   0=              p(x) r(x)      p(z) log (1 + exp(s(z) − s(x))) dz dx
        ∂s(a) X                 X
                            − exp(s(z) − s(a))                           exp(s(a) − s(x))
                  Z                                       Z
     = p(a)r(a)       p(z)                      dz + p(a)     p(x)r(x)                      dx
                    X      1 + exp(s(z) − s(a))             X          1 + exp(s(a) − s(x))
                 r(a) p(x) + r(x) p(x)
            Z                                     Z
     = p(a)                             dx − p(a)     p(x) r(x) dx
              X 1 + exp(s(a) − s(x))                X
     = f (r(a), s(a)) − C .

It shows that f (r(a), s(a)) = C for any a ∈ X in order to guarantee that s is a minimizer
of Eproxy (s). We prove by contradiction that the condition r(a) < r(b) ⇒ s(a) < s(b) is
satisfied up to a set {(a, b)|(a, b) ∈ X 2 } of zero measure. Assume s is optimal and the
condition is violated, i.e. r(a) < r(b) ∧ s(a) ≥ s(b) holds for a pair (a, b) ∈ X 2 . Since s
is optimal then f (r(a), s(a)) = C. Since r(b) > r(a) and s(b) ≤ s(a) then f (r(b), s(b)) >
f (r(a), s(b)) because the function f (u, v) is strictly increasing in u and strictly decreasing
in v. Combined it implies that f (r(b), s(b)) > 0 which leads to a contradiction because an
optimal s requires f (r(b), s(b)) = C.




                                               45
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




References
P. L. Bartlett and M. H. Wegkamp. Classification with a reject option using a hinge loss.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(59):1823–1840, 2008.

C.C. Chang and C.J.Lin. LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines.                  ACM
  Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1–27:27, 2011.               URL
  http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.

C. Chow. On optimum recognition error and reject tradeoff. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
  mation Theory, 16(1):41–46, 1970.

W. Chu and S. S. Keerthi. New approaches to support vector ordinal regression. In Pro-
 ceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 145–152, 2005.

C. Corbiere, N. Thome, A. Bar-Hen, M. Cord, and P. Perez. Addressing failure prediction
  by learning model confidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32, pages 2902–2913, 2019.

C. Cortes, G. DeSalvo, and M. Mohri. Boosting with abstention. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 29, pages 1660–1668, 2016.

N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In Proceedings
  of Conference on Computer Vision and Patter Recognition, volume 1, pages 886–893,
  2005.

J. Demšar. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 7(1):1–30, 2006.

D. Dua and E. Karra Taniskidou.          UCI machine learning repository, 2017.         URL
  http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.

R. El-Yaniv and Y. Wiener. On the foundations of noise-free selective classification. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 11(53):1605–1641, 2010.

L. Fischer, B. Hammer, and H. Wersing. Optimal local rejection for classifiers. Neurocom-
  puting, 214:445–457, 2016.

L. Fisher, B. Hammer, and H. Wersing. Efficient rejection strategies for prototype-based
  classification. Neurocomputing, 169:334 – 342, 2015.

V. Franc and D. Prusa. On discriminative learning of prediction uncertainty. In Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pages 1963–1971,
  2019.

G. Fumera and F. Roli. Support vector machines with embedded reject option. In Pattern
  Recognition with Support Vector Machines, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume
  2388. Springer, 2002.

G. Fumera, F. Roli, and G. Giacinto. Multiple reject thresholds for improving classification
  reliability. In Advances in Pattern Recognition, pages 863–871, 2000.

                                             46
                   Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers




Y. Geifman and R. El-Yaniv. Selective classification for deep neural networks. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, pages 4878–4887, 2017.

Y. Grandvalet, A. Rakotomamonjy, J. Keshet, and S. Canu. Support vector machines with
  a reject option. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 21, pages
  537–544, 2008.

B. Hanczar and E. R. Dougherty. Classification with reject option in gene expression data.
  Bioinformatics, 24:1889–1895, 2008.

T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The elements of statistical learning: data mining,
  inference and prediction. Springer, 2009.

R. Herbei and M.H. Wegkamp. Classification with reject option. The Canadian Journal of
  Statistics / La Revue Canadienne de Statistique, 34(4):709–721, 2006.

H. Jiang, B. Kim, M. Y. Guan, and M. Gupta. To trust or not to trust a classifier.
  In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, page 5546–5557, 2018.

V. Kazemi and J. Sullivan. One millisecond face alignment with an ensemble of regression
  trees. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1867–
  1874, 2014.

D. E. King. Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  10:1755–1758, 2009.

J. Kummert, B. Paassen, J. Jensen, C. Göpfert, and B. Hammer. Local reject option for
   deterministic multi-class SVM. In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning –
   ICANN, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 9887. Springer, 2016.

B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncer-
  tainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30, pages 6402–6413, 2017.

Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J.S. Denker, D. Henderson, R.E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L.D. Jakel.
  Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation networks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 2, pages 396–404, 1990.

J. Lei. Classification with confidence. Bimetrika, 101:755–769, 2014.

T. Pietraszek. Optimizing abstaining classifiers using ROC analysis. In Proceedings of the
  22nd International Conference on Machine Learning, page 665–672, 2005.

C. Sagonas, E. Antonakos, G. Tzimiropoulos, S. Zafeiriou, and M. Pantic. 300 faces in-the-
  wild challenge: database and results. Image and Vision Computing, 47:3 – 18, 2016.

M.I. Schlesinger and V. Hlaváč. Ten lectures on statistical and structural pattern recognition.
 Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.

                                               47
                               Franc, Prusa and Voracek




E.M. Stein and R. Shakarchi. Real Analysis: Measure Theory, Integration, and Hilbert
  Spaces. Princeton University Press, 2009.

C. H. Teo, S.V.N. Vishwanthan, A. J. Smola, and Q. V. Le. Bundle methods for regularized
  risk minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(10):311–365, 2010.

F. Tortorella. An optimal reject rule for binary classifiers. In Advances in Pattern Recogni-
  tion, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 1876. Springer, 2000.

V.N. Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998.

T. Villman, M. Kaden, A. Bohnsack, J. M. Villman, T. Drogies, S. Saralajew, and B. Ham-
  mer. Self-adjusting reject options in prototype based classification. In Advances in Intel-
  ligent Systems and Computing, volume 428. Springer, 2016.

M. Yuan and M. Wegkamp. Classification methods with reject option based on convex risk
 minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(5):111–130, 2010.

H. Zaragoza and F. d’Alche Buc. Confidence measures for neural network classifiers. In 7th
  Conference on Information Processing and Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-
  Based Systems, 1998.




                                             48
