                                           Graphical Abstract
                                           Classification with Reject Option: Distribution-free Error Guarantees via Conformal Pre-
                                           diction
                                           Johan Hallberg Szabadváry, Tuwe Löfström, Ulf Johansson, Cecilia Sönströd, Ernst Ahlberg, Lars Carlsson

                                                                                                             Empirical Validation using Batch ICP




                                                    Conformal Predictor as Model with Reject
arXiv:2506.21802v1 [stat.ML] 26 Jun 2025




                                                                    Option


                                                                           Input




                                                                       CP output: Γε




                                                                          |Γε | = 1

                                                              Yes                        No

                                                 Accepted Prediction                   Rejected Prediction

                                                         Γε                                    ®
Highlights
Classification with Reject Option: Distribution-free Error Guarantees via Conformal Pre-
diction
Johan Hallberg Szabadváry, Tuwe Löfström, Ulf Johansson, Cecilia Sönströd, Ernst Ahlberg, Lars Carlsson


   • Proven Distribution-Free Error Rates for Singleton Predictions: Delivered theoretical guarantees on error rates
     for accepted singleton predictions, resolving inaccuracies found in prior works.
   • Refinement of Reject Option in Conformal Prediction: Clarified the relationship between error rate and reject
     rate using error-reject curves, offering a more accurate approach than existing models.
   • Practical Implementation Guidelines for Reject Option Models: Presented clear practical insights for implement-
     ing conformal predictors with reject options, providing empirical guidance for managing trade-offs in real-world
     applications.
   • Corrected Error Rate Analysis for Conformal Prediction with Reject Option: Provided a rigorous and corrected
     analysis of the error rate for binary classification with reject option, addressing weaknesses in previous studies.
Classification with Reject Option: Distribution-free Error
Guarantees via Conformal Prediction
Johan Hallberg Szabadvárya,c,∗,1 , Tuwe Löfströma , Ulf Johanssona , Cecilia Sönströda ,
Ernst Ahlbergb,d and Lars Carlssona,b
a Department of Computing, Jönköping University, Sweden
b Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
c Department of Mathematics, Stockholm University, Sweden
d Mölnlycke Health Care AB, Gothenburg, Sweden



ARTICLE INFO                                     ABSTRACT
Keywords:                                        Machine learning (ML) models always make a prediction, even when they are likely to be
reject option                                    wrong. This causes problems in practical applications, as we do not know if we should trust
conformal prediction                             a prediction. ML with reject option addresses this issue by abstaining from making a prediction
binary classification                            if it is likely to be incorrect. In this work, we formalise the approach to ML with reject option in
abstain prediction                               binary classification, deriving theoretical guarantees on the resulting error rate. This is achieved
refrain prediction                               through conformal prediction (CP), which produce prediction sets with distribution-free validity
error-reject curve                               guarantees. In binary classification, CP can output prediction sets containing exactly one, two or
                                                 no labels. By accepting only the singleton predictions, we turn CP into a binary classifier with
                                                 reject option.
                                                      Here, CP is formally put in the framework of predicting with reject option. We state and
                                                 prove the resulting error rate, and give finite sample estimates. Numerical examples provide
                                                 illustrations of derived error rate through several different conformal prediction settings, ranging
                                                 from full conformal prediction to offline batch inductive conformal prediction. The former has
                                                 a direct link to sharp validity guarantees, whereas the latter is more fuzzy in terms of validity
                                                 guarantees but can be used in practice. Error-reject curves illustrate the trade-off between error
                                                 rate and reject rate, and can serve to aid a user to set an acceptable error rate or reject rate in
                                                 practice.




1. Introduction
    Traditional machine learning (ML) models always make a prediction, even when it is likely that the prediction
will be incorrect. This is often undesirable, as in the case of decision support applications, where we want to be able
to trust the information we are given. Machine learning with reject option aims to avoid making predictions when
they are likely to be wrong, increasing the trustworthiness of a model. Most of this work trace back to C.-K. Chow
(1957) and C. Chow (1970). In these papers a theoretical framework is established for optimum rejection rules and in
particular the relation between rejection rate and the error rate for the accepted predictions. A rejection is achieved by
allowing the model to abstain from giving predictions for some objects. The rejected objects can further be divided
into two categories, ambiguity rejection and novelty rejection. For a more comprehensive description, see Hendrickx,
Perini, Van der Plas, Meert, and Davis (2024).
    The main contribution of this work, is a method for ML with reject option with a provable distribution-free
error rate. While optimal strategies for reject option has been studied in e.g. Franc, Prusa, and Voracek (2023),
Cortes, DeSalvo, and Mohri (2016), and Hendrickx et al. (2024), no strategy to the best of our knowledge provides
a distribution-free error rate. We achieve this through Conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, & Shafer,
2022), a method to generate prediction sets with guarantees on the error rate, although defined for set predictions.
The key property of conformal predictors is that their predictions are valid, meaning, in the strongest formulation,
that errors, i.e. the true label is not included in the prediction set, are independent, and happen with a user specified
    ∗ Corresponding author

        johan.hallberg.szabadvary@ju.se (J. Hallberg Szabadváry); tuwe.lofstrom@ju.se (T. Löfström); ulf.johansson@ju.se (U.
Johansson); cecilia.sonstrod@ju.se (C. Sönströd); ernst.ahlberg@molnlycke.com (E. Ahlberg); lars.carlsson@ju.se (L. Carlsson)
     ORCID (s): 0000-0001-7240-8919 (J. Hallberg Szabadváry); 0000-0003-0274-9026 (T. Löfström); 0000-0003-0412-6199 (U.
Johansson); 0009-0009-0404-2586 (C. Sönströd); 0000-0003-2050-9069 (E. Ahlberg); 0000-0001-9491-4134 (L. Carlsson)


: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
probability. In recent years, work has been done suggesting that validity is supported for singleton predictions, i.e.
just one label is within the prediction set, see e.g. Linusson, Johansson, Boström, and Löfström (2016), Linusson,
Johansson, Boström, and Löfström (2018) and Johansson, Sönströd, Löfström, and Boström (2023). By rejecting all but
the singleton predictions, one can view conformal prediction as a case of ML with reject option. For another example of
this, see e.g. Bortolussi, Cairoli, Paoletti, and Stoller (2019). Common for these works is that they each present different
procedures for creating singleton predictions with an associated error rate and empirical results have been presented to
support the different procedures, respectively. However, none of the above works use the correct singleton error rates,
and different formulas are used in different papers, which leads to confusion about what is theoretically justifiable.
The formula appearing in Linusson et al. (2016) and Bortolussi et al. (2019) is close to being correct, but since both
works consider CP in the inductive, offline setting, the overall error rate must be adjusted accordingly, which they fail
to account for, making their singleton error rate approximately correct only for large calibration sets. We present the
relevant theory in Section A.4, and the correct singleton error rate in Section B.2, which is of the PAC type, including
two parameters.
    This work resolves the confusion by providing the theoretical singleton error rates in the online setting (where the
formula appearing in Linusson et al. (2016) actually holds) as well as the offline setting, with the relevant modifications
to account for training conditional validity. Moreover, we formally describe the model with reject option that results
from using CP in this mode, aligning the notation with that of Hendrickx et al. (2024). A self-contained introduction
to conformal prediction as well as statements of the error rates in different scenarios are given in the appendices.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We give a brief introduction to classification with regret option in
Section 2, followed by an informal introduction to conformal prediction in Section 3. Section 4 makes precise the
connection between ML with reject option and CP, defining formally the CP rejector, which abstains from making
predictions whenever the prediction set is not a singleton. We then move on to prove the error rate of CP rejectors in
Section 5. Section 6 is devoted to numerical illustrations of the singleton error rates. Observations and discussions
conclude, and the interested reader will find more details on conformal prediction and singleton validity in the
appendices.


2. Classification with reject option
    In ML with reject option, the label space is extended to include a new label Ⓡ, which indicates a rejection. Formally,
a model with rejection 𝑚 ∶ 𝑿 → 𝒀 ∪ {Ⓡ} is represented by a pair (ℎ, 𝑟) where ℎ ∶ 𝑿 → 𝒀 is the predictor and
𝑟 ∶  → ℝ is the rejector. Here  may be for example 𝑿 so that 𝑟 takes examples as input, the unit interval so that 𝑟
takes a confidence level as input, or even both. When the rejector determines that a prediction is likely to be wrong, 𝑚
outputs Ⓡ. Otherwise, the predictors output is accepted:
              {
                 ®      if the prediction is rejected
       𝑚(𝑥) =                                                                                                         (1)
                 h(x) if the prediction is accepted.

The rejector can use any available information as input, such as estimated probabilities, confidence levels, the object
to be classified or any combination of these. Often, a reject threshold 𝑡 is specified, and a rejection depends on the
value of 𝑟. A concrete example, similar to the one described in Hanczar (2019), could be a situation with 𝑑 classes,
so that 𝒀 = {𝑐1 , … , 𝑐𝑑 }, and ℎ(𝑥) = argmax𝑖 {𝜋𝑖 (𝑥)}, where 𝜋𝑖 is a probability estimate for the class 𝑐𝑖 . We take
𝑟(𝑥) = max𝑖 {𝜋𝑖 (𝑥)}, and the corresponding model with reject option is then
               {
                  ®     if 𝑟(𝑥) < 𝑡
      𝑚(𝑥) =                                                                                                        (2)
                  h(x) otherwise

The motivation for model (2) is that if the largest probability estimate is large enough, it should make us trust the output
more, and the error rate should decrease. However, the price we pay, is that if 𝑡 is large, the model will reject more
objects. This means that there is a tradeoff between the reject rate and the error rate that has to be balanced. A common
visualisation of the performance of a model with reject option, is to plot the error-reject curve. This, and some other
visualisations, is described in detail in Hanczar (2019).
    As discussed in Hendrickx et al. (2024), there are, at a high level, four principal reasons why a model exhibits large
uncertainty in its predictions:

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                              Page 2 of 18
   1. There can be objects 𝑥 ∈ 𝑿 that are associated with multiple labels in 𝒀 . This can arise in situations where
      classes overlap.
   2. Some examples in the training data are incorrect, e.g. labelling errors.
   3. A shift in distribution between the training set and deployment.
   4. An object 𝑥 ∈ 𝑿 could simply be inherently rare, thus making it difficult to classify.
Based on these intuitions, rejections can be separated into two distinct kinds.
    Ambiguity rejection happens when the object 𝑥 falls within a region where the label 𝑦 is ambiguous (corresponding
to 1 and 2 above). Commonly, this means that 𝑥 falls close to the decision boundary.
    Novelty rejection occurs when 𝑥 falls in a region where there was little or no training data (corresponding to 3 and
4 above).
    Classification with reject option goes back to C.-K. Chow (1957), and it is well known that the optimal rejector
is a version of Bayes rule: it rejects samples whose maximum posterior is below a threshold 1 − 𝜆𝑟 , which is known
as Chows rule (Pillai, Fumera, & Roli, 2013). With modern deployment of ML systems in high-stakes, real-world
applications, reject option has gained renewed attention (Shah & Manwani, 2020) and (Lei, Song, & Luo, 2020). In
safety-critical applications, such as medical diagnoses, a classifier could handle the easy cases, thus freeing up human
resources, while deferring the difficult ones to a human by rejecting them. Interesting developments include learning
reject rules (Zhang, Xie, Li, Mei, & Liu, 2023) and partial rejection (Karlsson & Hössjer, 2024) and (Le Capitaine,
2014), the latter being closely connected to conformal prediction, which we introduce in Section 3.


3. A Brief Introduction to Conformal Prediction
    Conformal prediction (CP), developed by Vovk, Gammerman and Shafer (Vovk et al., 2022), is a method to generate
prediction sets for essentially any predictive model, with a user specified confidence level 1 − 𝜀. These prediction sets
are valid not just in the asymptotic sense that the error frequency in the long run is 𝜀, but also in the sense that for a
smoothed CP, the error probability is exactly 𝜀, independently for each trial.
    Since its introduction in the late 90s, there has been an increasing interest in CP as a distribution-free method for
uncertainty quantification, with several special issues of journals devoted to the topic, including Pattern Recognition
(Gammerman, Vovk, & Cristani, 2022) and Neurocomputing (Gammerman, Vovk, Luo, Smirnov, & Peeters, 2020).
The motivation is similar to that of reject option. With increasing deployment of ML in high-stakes application,
uncertainty quantification can help guide decision-making, and as we shall see, CP can be used as a reject option.
There are several excellent, shorter introductions to the field of CP, which include Toccaceli (2022) and Shafer and
Vovk (2008). While the present work will only consider the basic form of CP, that produces valid prediction sets, the
framework also includes probabilistic classification (Venn predictors) (Vovk & Petej, 2014), and regression (Conformal
Predictive Systems) (Vovk, 2022).
    This section introduces what is known as full CP, which is an online procedure. We consider only the case of
classification, although CP can be used for regression as well. Throughout this work, we follow the notation and
conventions used in Vovk et al. (2022). Assume that Reality outputs a sequence of examples

      (𝑥1 , 𝑦1 ), (𝑥2 , 𝑦2 ), …                                                                                       (3)

where 𝑥𝑖 ∈ 𝑿 is called an object and 𝑦𝑖 ∈ 𝒀 is its label. For convenience, we write 𝑧𝑖 = (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) which is an element
of the example space 𝒁 ∶= 𝑿 × 𝒀 . We assume that the examples are drawn from a distribution 𝑃 on 𝒁 ∞ , and our
standard assumption is that the distribution 𝑃 is exchangeable. Intuitively, exchangeability means that any permutation
of the examples is equally probable. The exchangeability assumption is similar to the standard i.i.d. assumption, but is
slightly weaker.

Nonconformity Measures
     In order to construct a conformal predictor, one needs to define a nonconformity measure 𝐴. Informally, this is a
function that measures how “strange” a new example is, given what we have seen before. Examples of nonconformity
measures include the residuals of an ML model trained on all the past examples. Given a sequence of examples
𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 , we form the bag (or multiset) Σ ∶= *𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 +. The bag Σ can be seen as a summary of our examples
in the sense that it disregards the order in which they were observed. The number

      𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴(H𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 I, 𝑧𝑖 )                                                                                    (4)

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                             Page 3 of 18
is called the nonconformity score of the new example 𝑧𝑖 .

p-values
   The nonconformity score 𝛼𝑖 by itself does not tell us how unusual 𝑧𝑖 is with respect to the other examples. For this,
we need to compare it to the other nonconformity scores. A convenient comparison is to compute the fraction
        |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 ≥ 𝛼𝑖 }|
                                     ,                                                                                 (5)
                     𝑛
i.e. the number of examples that are less conforming than 𝑧𝑖 divided by the total number of examples. This fraction,
which is a rational number between 1∕𝑛 and 1 is called the p-value of example 𝑧𝑖 . A small p-value indicates that 𝑧𝑖 is
very nonconforming, and a large p-value indicates that it is typical. To get the strongest validity guarantees, we need to
handle the cases when 𝛼𝑗 = 𝛼𝑖 more carefully by introducing some randomisation. This leads to the notion of smoothed
conformal predictors. For a description of this, see A.
     The conformal predictor determined by a nonconformity measure 𝐴 is
                                       {                                           }
                                                  |{𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑖 ≥ 𝛼𝑛 }|
         𝜀                         𝜀
       Γ (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 ) ∶= Γ𝑛 ∶= 𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 ∶                                >𝜀                                      (6)
                                                               𝑛
where
        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴(Σ, (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )),                           𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 1
        𝛼𝑛 ∶= 𝐴(Σ, (𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦)),                                      𝑦∈𝒀                                                  (7)
        Σ = H(𝑥1 , 𝑦1 ), … , (𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 ), (𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦)I.
The procedure producing the prediction set Γ𝜀 may be viewed as for each possible label 𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 , testing the hypothesis
that 𝑦𝑛 = 𝑦. This is done by tentatively setting 𝑦𝑛 = 𝑦 and computing the resulting p-value. The prediction set consists
of all labels which result in a p-value larger than a specified significance level 𝜀.
    It is important to note that the output of a conformal predictor is a subset of the label space, rather than a single
point. As hinted at before, this can be viewed as a partial rejection (Karlsson & Hössjer, 2024). Predicting Γ𝜀𝑛 is the
same as rejecting 𝒀 ∖Γ𝜀𝑛 . The notion of error is therefore somewhat unusual compared with classical ML methods. Let
Γ be a confidence predictor, processing the infinite data sequence
        𝜔 = (𝑥1 , 𝑦1 , … )                                                                                              (8)
The event that Γ makes an error at trial 𝑛, at the significance level 𝜀, i.e., 𝑦𝑛 ∉ Γ𝜀𝑛 , can be represented by a number
                      {
                       1 if 𝑦𝑛 ∉ Γ𝜀𝑛
      err𝜀𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) ∶=                                                                                                    (9)
                       0 otherwise.
The total number of errors committed by Γ after 𝑛 trials is then
                          ∑
                          𝑛
        Err𝜖𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) ∶=         err𝜖𝑖 (Γ, 𝜔).                                                                          (10)
                          𝑖=1
The number err𝜀𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) is the realisation of a random variable err𝜀𝑛 (Γ). We say that a confidence predictor Γ is exactly
valid if, for each 𝜀,
        err𝜀1 (Γ), err𝜀2 (Γ), …                                                                                        (11)
is a sequence of independent Bernoulli random variables with parameter 𝜀. In words, the event of making an error is
like getting heads when tossing a biased coin where the probability of getting heads is always 𝜀.
    The main result regarding conformal predictors is the following proposition, whose proof can be found in (Vovk
et al., 2022).
Proposition 1. Any smoothed conformal predictor is exactly valid.
In other words, the prediction sets output by a smoothed CP will contain the true label with probability 1 − 𝜀
independently for each trial. A self-contained introduction to CP in different settings, including more details on
exchangeability, can be found in A. For a full discussion of conformal predictors, see Shafer and Vovk (2008) and
Vovk et al. (2022).

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                              Page 4 of 18
Confidence and Credibility
    The confidence of an object 𝑥𝑖 is denoted 1 − 𝛾𝑥𝑖 , and is defined as one minus the smallest 𝜀 such that Γ𝜀𝑖 is a
singleton set, i.e.

      1 − 𝛾𝑥𝑖 ∶= sup{1 − 𝜀 ∶ |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 1}.                                                                              (12)

Similarly the credibility, 𝑐𝑥𝑖 of 𝑥𝑖 is the smallest 𝜀 for which Γ𝜀 is empty,

      𝑐𝑥𝑖 ∶= inf {𝜀 ∶ Γ𝜀𝑖 = ∅}.                                                                                        (13)

The confidence is equal to the second largest p-value associated with 𝑥𝑖 , and the credibility is equal to the largest
p-value.


4. Conformal Predictors as models with reject option
    We have already seen that CP prediction sets may be viewed as a partial rejection (everything not included in the
prediction set is rejected). In binary classification, the prediction sets output by a CP can contain one, two or no labels,
but we really only make a clear prediction when they contain exactly one label. The other two situations contain little
useful information; in terms of partial rejection, empty sets reject everything, and a two-label prediction simply states
the tautology that the true label is a member of the label set. We may thus regard both empty and double predictions
as a rejection. But the cause for rejection is different. In Hendrickx et al. (2024), the authors distinguish between
novelty and ambiguity rejection, which we discuss in Section 2. An empty prediction set is rejected because we are
not sufficiently confident in any label. This is novelty rejection. A double prediction set is rejected because we are
too confident in predicting both labels. This is ambiguity rejection. We are unable to confidently distinguish between
labels. So conformal prediction may be seen as applying two rejectors. Formally we augment the label space 𝒀 with
two new symbols, Ⓡ∅ , indicating a novelty rejection, and Ⓡ , indicating an ambiguity rejection. Our model with reject
option is then the CP rejector

                ⎧Ⓡ     if |Γ𝜀 (𝑥)| = 0
                ⎪ 𝜀∅
      𝑚(𝑥, 𝜀) = ⎨Γ (𝑥) if |Γ𝜀 (𝑥)| = 1                                                                                 (14)
                ⎪Ⓡ     if |Γ𝜀 (𝑥)| = 2
                ⎩ 

with a slight abuse of notation (we actually predict the single element in Γ𝜀 rather than the set). In this formulation,
𝜀 ∈ (0, 1) is a reject parameter that determines which objects are rejected. In particular, we accept a prediction if and
only if 𝜀 ∈ 𝐼𝑥 ∶= [𝛾𝑥 , 𝑐𝑥 ) (see (12) and (13)).
    Conformal prediction provides validity guarantees in the sense that the true label is contained in the prediction set
with probability 1 − 𝜀, but in a reject scenario we want to be more precise. Accepting only objects with sufficiently
high confidence and credibility, i.e. the singleton predictions, we want to be able to state the error rate of the accepted
predictions. The next section deals with the question of error rate for the predictions we actually make in this scenario;
the singleton prediction sets.


5. Error Rate of the Accepted Predictions
     This section discusses the error rate of the accepted predictions. What is the probability of err𝜀𝑖 (Γ, 𝜔) = 1 if we
have observed |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 1? The rationale behind this question is that, in terms of CP, a prediction set that covers all of 𝒀
is always correct, and an empty prediction set is always an error. In binary classification, the only remaining possibility
is when the prediction set is a singleton, and thus it makes sense to ask for the probability that the singleton predictions
                                                                                            |
are in error. In essence, what we need to compute is the conditional probability ℙ(err𝜀𝑖 | |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 1).
                                                                                            |
5.1. Online Smoothed Conformal Prediction
    Consider the cardinality of a prediction set, |Γ𝜀𝑖 |, as a random variable that takes values in {0, 1, 2}. Moreover, let
err be the event err𝜀𝑖 (Γ, 𝜔) = 1, 𝐸 the event |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 0, 𝑆 the event |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 1 and 𝐷 the event |Γ𝜀𝑖 | = 2. Then {𝐸, 𝑆, 𝐷}



: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                              Page 5 of 18
is a partition of the sample space of |Γ𝜀𝑖 |. By Proposition 1, the probability of making an error (in the CP sense) is 𝜀,
and by the law of total probability,

      𝜀 = ℙ(err) = ℙ(err | 𝐸)ℙ(𝐸) + ℙ(err | 𝑆)ℙ(𝑆) + ℙ(err | 𝐷)ℙ(𝐷) = ℙ(𝐸) + ℙ(err | 𝑆)ℙ(𝑆)                             (15)

since the error probabilities conditioned on 𝐸 and 𝐷 are known to be 1 and 0 respectively. Our main result follows
immediately.

Proposition 2. Let Γ be a smoothed conformal predictor in the online setting that processes the data sequence (22).
The probability of a singleton prediction making an error is
              𝜀 − ℙ(𝐸)
      𝜎 ∶=             .                                                                                                (16)
                ℙ(𝑆)
PROOF. Rearranging (15) leads to (16). The condition ℙ(𝐸) ≤ 𝜀 ≤ ℙ(𝐸) + ℙ(𝑆) = 1 − ℙ(𝐷) ensures that 𝜎 ∈ [0, 1].
Note however that the p-values of the correct label are uniformly distributed on [0, 1] (Theorem 11.2 (Vovk et al.,
2022)). Hence ℙ(𝐸) ≤ 𝜀 and ℙ(𝐷) ≤ 1 − 𝜀 for all 𝜀 ∈ (0, 1), ensuring that both bounds are always satisfied.

While this proposition tells us exactly what the singleton error probability is, it is not of much practical use since we do
not know the probabilities of making empty and singleton predictions. Note, however, that by the law of large numbers,
             𝑒
       lim       = ℙ(𝐸)
      𝑛→∞ 𝑛
             𝑠
       lim       = ℙ(𝑆)
       𝑛→∞ 𝑛

where 𝑒 is the number of empty predictions and 𝑠 is the number of singleton predictions. It follows that
                   𝑛𝜀 − 𝑒
      𝜎 = lim             .                                                                                             (17)
             𝑛→∞     𝑠
In the online setting, this does not help much since Reality reveals the true label before we move on to make a new
prediction. Nevertheless, if we insist on being ignorant, we may look away as Reality outputs 𝑦𝑖 . After making 𝑛 such
user-blind predictions, (𝑛𝜀 − 𝑒)∕𝑠 is an approximation of 𝜎.
    In light of Proposition 2 we can now state the error rate and rejection rate of our rejector (14). The error rate for a
fixed 𝜀 is 𝜎, and the reject rate is 1 − ℙ(𝑆).

Remark 1. We called 𝜀 our reject parameter in (14) which is not consistent with the use of the term in (C. Chow,
1970). It does however fill the essential function of a reject parameter since the reject rate and error rate are functions
of 𝜀 which justifies the use of the term here.


6. Numerical Examples
    We will now turn our attention to a few examples, illustrating 𝜎 for the cases covered earlier. The cases that we
will look at are transductive conformal prediction in an online setting, inductive conformal prediction in an offline
setting and inductive conformal prediction in an offline batch setting (see Appendix A.4 for a description of inductive
conformal prediction).
    Transductive CP in the online setting can be quite computationally complex. In the batch mode, inductive CP simply
involves training a machine learning model, computing the nonconformity scores of a calibration set, and sorting them.
Assuming the calibration set is of size 𝑚, this can be done in (𝑚 log 𝑚) once the base model has been trained.
    For the purpose of these illustrations, three different datasets will be used. More details are provided for the datasets
in Table 1.

6.1. Full Conformal Prediction
    We will start by explaining our interpretation of Full Conformal Prediction (FCP). In our interpretation of FCP,
we will use a training set to predict one object at a time, taking into account how well the different possible labels for
the object conforms to the training set. When a batch of objects is to be predicted, we will not learn the true labels of

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                               Page 6 of 18
                          Name                                                      Nr. examples   Nr. features
                          qsar-biodeg                                                   1055            41
                          spambase                                                      4601            57
                          California-Housing-Classification                            20640             8
Table 1
Some details on the datasets used.


the predicted object and update our training set. In this setup, the order of the objects to be predicted is not important
and will not affect the prediction sets of each individual object. We may as well describe an FCP as a single object
Transductive Conformal Predictor (see Section 4.5 Vovk et al. (2022)).
    Here, we will use a Mondrian one nearest neighbour approach. The non-conformity measure is defined as

      𝐴((𝑥1 , 𝑦1 ), … , (𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 ), (𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦)) ∶=     min         𝑑(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ),                                        (18)
                                                       𝑖,𝑗∈𝐼𝑦 ,𝑖≠𝑗

where 𝑑(⋅, ⋅) is the Euclidean distance between two objects and 𝐼𝑦 = {𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝑦𝑖 = 𝑦}. An example is considered
conforming if the distance between its object to the nearest object with the same label is small. The data set used is
qsar-biodeg and the initial training set size is 100, and we predict 200 objects. If we run this 100 times, reshuffling
the data before each run, we get the results, with statistical variations, shown in Figure 1. Note that the curve in Figure
1b indicates two different error rates for some reject rates. This happens because some 𝜀 yield the same number of
singleton predictions in this case. In this situation, it is prefereable to choose the 𝜀 that leads to the lower error rate,
which will always be the smallest one (the curve is parameterised by 𝜀, and goes form the lower right corner to the upper
right corner). The achievable reject rates depend on the specific conformal predictor, in particular on the distribution
of p-values in the set [0, 1] × [0, 1]. The highest proportion of singleton predictions for the one nearest neighbour
CP on this dataset is approximately 0.4, which means that the lowest achievable reject rate (indicated in Figure 1b) is
approximately 0.6. The stacked fraction in Figure 1a indicate the proportion of empty, double and singleton predictions
for each class that result form a fixed 𝜀. We also remark that the application of an FCP probably is not of practical
interest, but it follows our theoretical reasoning for the singleton error rate, 𝜎. Computing the prediction set for a test
object 𝑥𝑛 involves computing all distances ((𝑛2 )) and sorting nonconformity scores ((𝑛 log 𝑛)). Note that this is the
complexity for one prediction.

6.2. Offline Inductive Conformal Prediction
    In this case, we are using the software package Crepes (Boström, 2022) to do the offline Inductive Conformal
Prediction, offline (ICP) (see Appendix A) using RandomForest from Pedregosa et al. (2011) with the default Crepes
nonconformity measure, and using the data set spambase. We are doing the experiments with proper training set size
of 500, calibration set size of 500, and test set size of 100. This is done 1000 times, reshuffling the data set before
selecting the different sets. The results are illustrated in Figure 2.

6.3. Batch Offline Inductive Conformal Prediction
    Here we use exactly the same setup as in the previous section, except that for the objects predicted we will learn
their respective labels, a batch at a time, and add them to the training set. This will be repeated for ten times. The proper
training set size will initially be 200 examples, but will grow with 100 for each batch, and the calibration set will be
fixed at a size of 300 examples. The data set used is
California-Housing-Classification. The division between proper training examples and calibration examples
will be done randomly each time a new offline ICP model is trained. The results are illustrated in Figure 3.




: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
                             (a) This shows the fraction of prediction set sizes and 𝜎 as a function of 𝜀




(b) Error rate as a function of reject rate, parameterised by 𝜀. The curve goes from the lower right corner to the upper right corner,
with 𝜀 increasing in the direction indicated by the arrow.

        Figure 1: Singleton error rates and error reject curve in the FCP case. The data set used is qsar-biodeg

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
                            (a) This shows the fraction of prediction set sizes and 𝜎 as a function of 𝜀




                           (b) This shows the error rate as a function of reject rate, parameterised by 𝜀

                Figure 2: Singleton error rates and error reject curve in the offline ICP case for spambase.


: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                               Page 9 of 18
                            (a) This shows the fraction of prediction set sizes and 𝜎 as a function of 𝜀.




                           (b) This shows the error rate as a function of reject rate, parameterised by 𝜀.

Figure 3: Singleton error rates and error reject curve in the batch ICP case for California-Housing-Classification.


: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                             Page 10 of 18
7. Conclusions
     We have formally presented a theoretical probability for the error of a singleton prediction, and given a way to
approximate it in practice. The expression has appeared before in Linusson et al. (2016) and Bortolussi et al. (2019).
However, these previous works did not take into account the relevant adjustments needed to account for the inductive
conformal predictor. Our main contribution is the proof of the singleton error rate, which translates to the error rate and
the classifier with reject option. The formula in Proposition 2 holds only in the online setting. The singleton error rates
in other settings, can be found in Appendix B, and are proved analogously, but taking into account the overall error
rate in the relevant setting, as described in Appendix A. With these results, models with reject option can be created
in both the online and offline setting, with guaranteed distribution-free error rates.
     In our numerical illustrations, our approximation of 𝜎 is (𝑛𝜀 − 𝑒)∕𝑠. The plots indicate that this approximation is
noisy for large 𝜀, which likely is caused by a large number of traditional CP empty predictions in combination with a
small number of accepted predictions.
     The theoretical error can only be known exactly if we know the true data-generating distribution, but the empirical
distribution is in practice typically close to the true one, which leads to a useful contribution in practical applications.
E.g. in a typical use case, one would predict many objects at once, using an inductive conformal predictor without
knowing the true labels. Then 𝜎(𝜀)̂    ∶= (𝑛𝜀 − 𝑒)∕𝑠 is an unbiased estimator of the error rate for each 𝜀 ∈ (0, 1). A user
could easily compute 𝜎(𝜀)̂    for any 𝜀 directly from the p-values, plotting the estimated error rates as in our figures to
guide decisions about suitable reject rates.
     The significance level, 𝜀, can be used to set a reject threshold along the lines of C. Chow (1970), since we can
have a scenario where we only accept singleton predictions. However, the actual limits for the reject rate and the
error rate will depend on the conformal predictor and the data set used, as is seen in our results. The error-reject rate
curves can potentially be useful in practical applications when a user needs to define a tolerable error rate or reject
rate. Depending on the specific conformal predictor, not all reject rates are achievable. Consider e.g. Figure 1b, where
the lowest possible reject rate is approximately 0.6. Moreover, the same reject rate may lead to different error rates,
which follows from two different significance levels leading to the same number of singleton predictions. In such a
case, it is preferable to choose the significance level that yields the lowest error rate. In other cases, such as Figure
2, the error-reject curve shows that very low error rates are achievable, but perhaps at an unacceptably high reject
rate. Depending on the use case, a rejected prediction may trigger different actions, which lead to different desiderata.
If, say, rejected predictions lead to costly expert evaluation, and the consequences of errors are not catastrophic, the
maximum tolerable reject rate may be quite low. On the other hand, if lower error rates are desirable regardless of the
reject rate, the curves allow users to identify the lowest achievable error rate, and know what reject rate they have to
accept to achieve it. In this work, we have only considered the case of binary classification. This is no fundamental
restriction, as multiclass problems (with more than two possible labels) can be handled by building several models in
a one-against-all fashion.


A. More Details on Conformal Predictions
    Conformal prediction (CP), developed by Vovk, Gammerman and Shafer, is a method to generate prediction sets
for essentially any predictive model, with a user specified confidence level 1 − 𝜀. These prediction sets are valid not just
in the asymptotic sense that the error frequency in the long run is 𝜀, but also in the sense that for a smoothed CP, the
error probability is exactly 𝜀, independently for each trial. For a full introduction to conformal predictors, see Shafer
and Vovk (2008) andVovk et al. (2022). Conformal predictors are a type of confidence predictors which we introduce
for completeness, but first some basic assumptions.
    Assume that Reality outputs a sequence of examples

      (𝑥1 , 𝑦2 ), (𝑥2 , 𝑦2 ), …                                                                                        (19)

where 𝑥𝑖 ∈ 𝑿 is called an object and 𝑦𝑖 ∈ 𝒀 is its label. The measurable sets 𝑿 and 𝒀 are then called the object
space and the label space, respectively. For convenience, we may write 𝑧𝑖 ∶= (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) for an example, and consider
it an element of the example space 𝒁 ∶= 𝑿 × 𝒀 . For the entirety of this paper, we will be concerned with binary
classification, that is |𝒀 | = 2. The standard assumption in ML is that Reality chooses the examples independently
from some probability distribution 𝑄 on 𝒁; the examples are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Most
results for conformal predictors hold under the weaker assumption that the infinite data sequence (19) is drawn from an

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                             Page 11 of 18
exchangeable distribution 𝑃 on 𝒁 ∞ . That 𝑃 is exchangeable means that for every positive integer 𝑛, every permutation
𝜋 of {1, … , 𝑛}, and every measurable set 𝐸 ⊆ 𝑍 𝑛 ,

      𝑃 {(𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … ) ∈ 𝒁 ∞ ∶ (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 ) ∈ 𝐸}
                                                                                                                       (20)
                        = 𝑃 {(𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … ) ∈ 𝒁 ∞ ∶ (𝑧𝜋(1) , … , 𝑧𝜋(𝑛) ) ∈ 𝐸}.

In words, the distribution of the examples does not depend on their order. All results that we will state also hold
in the finite-horizon setting, where Reality generates 𝑁 examples. The exchangeability assumption then simplifies
to assuming that the distribution 𝑃 on 𝒁 𝑁 has the property that for every permutation 𝜋 of {1, … , 𝑁} and every
measurable 𝐸 ⊆ 𝒁 𝑁

      𝑃 (𝐸) = 𝑃 {(𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑁 ) ∈ 𝒁 𝑁 ∶ (𝑧𝜋(1) , … , 𝑧𝜋(𝑁) ) ∈ 𝐸}.                                                     (21)

A confidence predictor Γ is an algorithm that takes as input 𝑥1 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 and a significance level 𝜀, and
outputs a prediction set
                                        Γ𝜀𝑛 = Γ𝜀𝑛 (𝑥1 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 ).
                                                                                             𝜀      𝜀
We require also that the prediction sets shrink as 𝜀 increases, that is whenever 𝜀1 ≥ 𝜀2 , Γ𝑛1 ⊆ Γ𝑛2 .

A.1. Validity
    Let Γ be a confidence predictor, processing the data sequence

      𝜔 = (𝑥1 , 𝑦1 , … )                                                                                               (22)

drawn from an exchangeable distribution where 𝑥𝑖 ∈ 𝑿. The event that Γ makes an error on the 𝑛th trial, that is
𝑦𝑛 ∉ Γ𝜀𝑛 , can be represented by a number
                        {
                            1     if 𝑦𝑛 ∉ Γ𝜀𝑛
      err𝜀𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) ∶=                                                                                                  (23)
                            0     otherwise.

The total number of errors committed by Γ after 𝑛 trials is then

                        ∑
                        𝑛
      Err𝜖𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) ∶=           err𝜖𝑖 (Γ, 𝜔).                                                                          (24)
                        𝑖=1

The number err𝜀𝑛 (Γ, 𝜔) is the realisation of a random variable err𝜀𝑛 (Γ). We say that a confidence predictor Γ is exactly
valid if, for each 𝜀,

      err𝜀1 (Γ), err𝜀2 (Γ), …                                                                                          (25)

is a sequence of independent Bernoulli random variables with parameter 𝜀. In words, the event of making an error is
like getting heads when tossing a biased coin where the probability of getting heads is always 𝜀.

A.2. Full Conformal Prediction Online
     In the online setting, where Reality first outputs an object 𝑥𝑛 , we produce Γ𝜀𝑛 , and then immediately Reality outputs
the true label 𝑦𝑛 , which can then be used to produce Γ𝜀𝑛+1 . While this procedure is both computationally intensive, and
in practice not very useful; if we immediately see the true labels, predicting them beforehand makes little sense, it is
still of theoretical interest, mainly because CP provides the strongest possible validity guarantees here. There are ways
of taking CP offline and lighten the computational load dramatically, but the cost of this is that the validity suffers. In
practice, however, the difference in validity is typically small.




: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                             Page 12 of 18
A.2.1. Nonconformity Measure
   A nonconformity measure is a way of scoring ho strange an example is, given all the previous examples we have
seen. Formally, it is a measurable mapping
        𝐴 ∶ 𝒁 (∗) × 𝒁 → ℝ                                                                                              (26)
where 𝒁 (∗) is the set of all bags (or multisets) of elements of 𝒁. We write H𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 I for the bag consisting of the
elements 𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 , some of which are allowed to be identical. A bag, in other words, is a set with repetition allowed.
Given a sequence of old examples 𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 , and a new example 𝒁, the number
        𝐴(H𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 I, 𝑧)                                                                                           (27)
is called the nonconformity score of 𝒁.

A.2.2. p-values
   Given a nonconformity measure 𝐴 and a bag H𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 I, we can compute the nonconformity score
        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴(H𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 I, 𝑧𝑖 )                                                                                   (28)
for each example 𝑧𝑖 in the bag. By itself, 𝛼𝑖 does not tell us how unusual 𝑧𝑖 is with respect to the other elements in the
bag. For this, we need to compare the nonconformity scores of all the examples. We do this by computing the fraction,

        |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 ≥ 𝛼𝑖 }|
                                 ,                                                                                      (29)
                  𝑛
which we denote the p-value of 𝑧𝑖 . If the fraction is small, then 𝑧𝑖 is very nonconforming (an outlier), and if it is large
𝑧𝑖 is very conforming. To get the strongest validity guarantees, we need to handle the borderline cases when 𝛼𝑗 = 𝛼𝑖
more carefully. The smoothed p-value of 𝑧𝑖 is defined as
        |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 > 𝛼𝑖 }| + 𝜏𝑛 |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 = 𝛼𝑖 }|
                                                                ,                                                 (30)
                                    𝑛
for 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 1] uniformly distributed at random, and independent of everything else. The function that maps a sequence
of examples to (smoothed) p-values in [0, 1] is called a (smoothed) conformal transducer;
        𝑓 (𝑥1 , 𝜏𝑖 , 𝑦1 , …, 𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝜏𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 , 𝜏𝑛 , 𝑦𝑛 )
                                |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 > 𝛼𝑖 }| + 𝜏𝑛 |{𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 = 𝛼𝑖 }|                           (31)
                            ∶=
                                                                 𝑛
A.2.3. Conformal Predictors
    We are now in a position to define conformal predictors. For our purposes, we will be mainly interested in smoothed
CPs, which utilise smoothed p-values. The smoothed conformal predictor determined by the nonconformity measure
𝐴 is the randomised confidence predictor,
        Γ(𝑥1 , 𝜏𝑖 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝜏𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 , 𝜏𝑛 )
                                       |{𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑖 > 𝛼𝑛 }| + 𝜏𝑛 |{𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 ∶ 𝛼𝑖 = 𝛼𝑛 }|                    (32)
                         = {𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 ∶                                                                 > 𝜀},
                                                                    𝑛
where
        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴(Σ, (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ),                            𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 1
        𝛼𝑛 ∶= 𝐴(Σ, (𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦),                                                                                           (33)
        Σ = H(𝑥1 , 𝑦1 ), … , (𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 ), (𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦)I.
The main result regarding conformal predictors is the following proposition, whose proof can be found in (Vovk et al.,
2022).
Proposition 3. Any smoothed conformal predictor is exactly valid.
In other words, the prediction sets output by a smoothed CP will contain the true label with probability 1 − 𝜀
independently for each trial.

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                             Page 13 of 18
A.3. Mondrian Conformal Predictors
    A Mondrian taxonomy is a function

        𝜅 ∶ℕ×𝒁 →𝑲                                                                                                          (34)

where 𝑲 is a measurable space of categories. 𝜅 maps each pair (𝑛, 𝑥) to its category, and we require that the pre-image
𝜅 −1 (𝑘) of each category 𝑘 ∈ 𝑲 for a rectangle 𝐴 × 𝐵 for some 𝐴 ∈ ℕ and 𝐵 ∈ 𝒁. Given a Mondrian taxonomy, we
can define a Mondrian nonconformity measure

        𝐴 ∶ 𝐾 ∗ × (𝑍 (∗) )𝐾 × 𝑍 → ℝ,                                                                                       (35)

and the smoothed Mondrian conformal transducer (smoothed MCT) determined by 𝐴, which produces p-values

        𝑝𝑛 = 𝑓 (𝑥1 , 𝜏1 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑛 , 𝜏𝑛 , 𝑦𝑛 )
               |{𝑖 ∶ 𝜅𝑖 = 𝜅𝑛 , 𝛼𝑖 > 𝛼𝑛 }| + 𝜏𝑛 |{𝑖 ∶ 𝜅𝑖 = 𝜅𝑛 , 𝛼𝑖 = 𝛼𝑛 }|                                                  (36)
           ∶=
                                          |{𝜅𝑖 = 𝜅𝑛 }|

where 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝜅𝑖 ∶= 𝜅(𝑖, 𝑧𝑖 ), 𝑧𝑖 = (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) and

        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴(𝜅1 , … , 𝜅𝑛 , (𝑘 ∈ 𝑲 ↦ H𝑧𝑗 ∶ 𝑗 ∈ {𝑖, … , 𝑛}, 𝜅𝑗 = 𝑘I)𝑧𝑖 )                                                  (37)

for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 such that 𝜅𝑖 = 𝜅𝑛 .
    By Proposition 4.6 (Vovk et al., 2022), any smoothed MCT is category-wise exact with respect to 𝜅, meaning that
for all 𝑛, the conditional probability distribution of 𝑝𝑛 given 𝜅(1, 𝑧1 ), 𝑝1 , … , 𝜅(𝑛 − 1, 𝑧𝑛−1 ), 𝑝𝑛−1 , 𝜅(𝑛, 𝑧𝑛 ) is uniform
on [0, 1].
    Given a (smoothed) MCT we can always produce a (smoothed) Mondrian conformal predictor (MCP)

        Γ(𝜀𝑘 ∶𝑘∈𝑲) (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛−1 , 𝑥𝑛 ) ∶= {𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 ∶ 𝑓 (𝑥1 , 𝜏1 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑛 , 𝜏𝑛 , 𝑦) > 𝜀𝜅(𝑛,(𝑥𝑛 ,𝑦)) }                  (38)

which is then category-wise exactly valid with respect to 𝜅 in the sense that the error events for each category 𝑘 ∈ 𝐾
are Bernoulli random variables with parameter 𝜀𝑘 .

A.4. Inductive Conformal Predictors
    Full conformal predictors are notoriously computationally heavy to implement. Inductive conformal predictors
solve this practical issue. For details, we refer the reader to 4.2 in Vovk et al. (2022).

Offline ICP
   In the offline mode, an ICP Γ is obtained by splitting the training set of size 𝑙 into a proper training set of size 𝑚
and a calibration set of size ℎ ∶= 𝑙 − 𝑚. Then for each test object 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑖 = 𝑙 + 1, … , 𝑙 + 𝑘, the prediction sets are
                              {                                                   }
                                        |{𝑗 = 𝑚 + 1, … , 𝑙 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 ≥ 𝛼𝑖 }| + 1
        𝜀
      Γ (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 , 𝑥𝑖 ) ∶= 𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 ∶                                        >𝜀 .                                     (39)
                                                    𝑙−𝑚+1

where
        𝛼𝑗 ∶= 𝐴((𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑚 ), 𝑧𝑗 ),       𝑗 = 𝑚 + 1, … , 𝑖 − 1
                                                                                                                           (40)
        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴((𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑚 ), (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦)

Smoothed ICPs offline are defined as in the case of full conformal predictors, by introducing a random tie breaking
rule for the nonconformity scores. For offline ICPs, it is still true that the probability of making an error is bounded by
𝜀, but the error events are unfortunately no longer independent. With a small modification, one can however ensure a
modified notion of validity. After each test example 𝑥𝑖 is processed, we add its corresponding nonconformity score 𝛼𝑖
to the pool of nonconformity scores used to generate the next prediction set.




: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
Semi-online ICP
   The semi-online ICP is thus
                             {                                          }
                                      |{𝑗 = 𝑚 + 1, … , 𝑖 ∶ 𝛼𝑗 ≥ 𝛼𝑖 }|
      𝜀
     Γ (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 , 𝑥𝑖 ) ∶= 𝑦 ∈ 𝒀 ∶                                 >𝜀 ,                                          (41)
                                                 𝑖−𝑚
where
        𝛼𝑗 ∶= 𝐴((𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑚 ), 𝑧𝑗 ),          𝑗 = 𝑚 + 1, … , 𝑙
                                                                                                                    (42)
        𝛼𝑖 ∶= 𝐴((𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑚 ), (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦)
for an inductive nonconformity measure 𝐴 (see 4.4.2. in Vovk et al. (2022)).

Validity of semi-online ICPs
    The semi-online ICP (41) is conservatively valid, and the corresponding smoothed semi-online ICP is exactly valid
by proposition 4.1 (Vovk et al., 2022).

Validity of offline ICPs
   Generally, a confidence predictor is said to be (𝛿𝑛 )-conservative, where 𝛿1 , 𝛿2 , … is a sequence of non-negative
numbers, if for any exchangeable probability distribution 𝑃 on 𝒁 ∞ there exists a family
        𝜉𝑛(𝜀) , 𝜀 ∈ (0, 1), 𝑛 = 1, 2, …                                                                             (43)
of {0, 1}-valued random variables on (𝒁 ∞ × [0, 1], 𝑃 × 𝑼 ) such that
    • for all 𝑛 and 𝜀, 𝜉𝑛(𝜀) depends only on the first 𝑛 examples;

    • for fixed 𝜀, 𝜉1(𝜀) , 𝜉2(𝜀) , … is a sequence of independent Bernoulli random variables with parameter 𝜀:
                            (𝜀−𝛿𝑛 )
    • for all 𝑛 and 𝜀, err𝑛           (Γ) ≤ 𝜉𝑛(𝜀) .
Note that when 𝛿𝑛 = 0, 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , this reduces to the definition of conservative validity. By proposition 4.3 (Vovk
et al., 2022), the confidence predictor
                                    {
        ̃Γ𝜀 (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑖−1 , 𝑥𝑖 ) ∶= Γ (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 , 𝑥𝑖 ) if 𝑖 > 𝑙
                                       𝜀
                                                                                                                   (44)
                                     𝒀                     otherwise,

where Γ𝜀 (𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 , 𝑥𝑖 ) is defined by (39), is (𝛿𝑛 )-conservative where
              {
                 𝑖−𝑙
                         if 𝑖 > 𝑙
     𝛿𝑛 ∶= 𝑙−𝑚                                                                                                      (45)
                0        otherwise.

A.5. Training-Conditional Validity of ICPs
    A set predictor Γ is (𝜀, 𝛿)-valid for 𝜀, 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) if, for any probability distribution 𝑄 on 𝒁,
        𝑄𝑙 {(𝑧, 1, … , 𝑧𝑙 ) ∶ 𝑄(Γ(𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 )) ≥ 1 − 𝜀} ≥ 1 − 𝛿,                                                  (46)
where
        Γ(𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 ) ∶= {(𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝒁 ∶ 𝑦 ∈ Γ(𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑙 , 𝑥)}.                                                   (47)
This means essentially that with probability at least 1 − 𝛿, the probability of making an error is at most 𝜀.
    Let Γ be an offline ICP with training and proper training set sizes 𝑙 and 𝑚 respectively. By proposition 4.9 (Vovk
et al., 2022), if we define
                  √
                     ln 𝛿1
        𝜀̃ ∶= 𝜀 −          ,                                                                                       (48)
                      2ℎ
where ℎ ∶= 𝑙 − 𝑚 is the size of the calibration set, the set predictor Γ𝜀̃ is (𝜀, 𝛿)-valid.

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                            Page 15 of 18
A.6. Batch Offline ICP
    In practical settings, one common scenario is that we have access to a training set of size 𝑙, and want to make
predictions for, say, 𝑁 objects. We can do this using an offline ICP. After making the predictions, we may gather the
true labels for our objects, and include the resulting examples in the training set, which can then be used to make 𝑁
more observation. We are in a batch update setting.
    Formally, let 𝑙0 ∶= 𝑙 the training set size for batch 0. Then we choose a proper training set size 𝑚0 = 𝑚, and obtain
a calibration set size ℎ0 ∶= 𝑙 − 𝑚. If we fix the batch size to be 𝑁, we see that the training set size for the batch 𝑘 is
𝑙𝑘 = 𝑙 + 𝑘𝑁. Then we pick a proper training set size 𝑚𝑘 and the calibration set size is ℎ𝑘 ∶= 𝑙𝑘 − 𝑚𝑘 . In each batch,
have that Γ𝜀̃ is (𝜀, 𝛿)-valid, where 𝜀̃ is defined in (48). We are then faced with a choice about how to use the new 𝑁
examples obtained since the last batch. Keeping 𝛿 fixed, we can aim for decreasing 𝜀.   ̃ Let 𝜀̃𝑘 be the 𝜀̃ required for Γ𝜀̃
to be (𝜀, 𝛿)-valid in the 𝑘th batch. Then we see that
                            √
                               ln 𝛿1
        lim 𝜀̃𝑘 = lim 𝜀 −            = 𝜀,                                                                              (49)
       𝑘→∞        𝑘→∞           2ℎ
but the uncertainty in our validity is fixed at (1 − 𝛿). On the other hand, we could be happy with the correction in 𝜀 and
instead aim to decrease the uncertainty. Letting 𝛿0 ∶= 𝛿 we may choose 𝛿𝑘 to be
                𝑞
      𝛿𝑘+1 = 𝛿𝑘𝑘+1                                                                                                         (50)

                ℎ
where 𝑞𝑘+1 = ℎ𝑘+1 , and keep 𝜀̃ fixed. To realise this, just solve the equation 𝜀̃𝑘+1 = 𝜀̃𝑘 for 𝛿𝑘+1 . If we require ℎ𝑘+1 > ℎ𝑘 ,
                  𝑘
since 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1), we see that

       lim 𝛿𝑘 = 0.                                                                                                         (51)
      𝑘→∞

                                                                                                  𝑞
Of course, we may be interested in decreasing both 𝜀̃𝑘 and 𝛿𝑘 . Choosing 𝛿𝑘+1 < 𝛿𝑘𝑘+1 accomplish this goal.
Alternatively, we may choose to first decrease 𝛿 to some desired level, and only then start decreasing 𝜀̃𝑘 to ensure
higher efficiency. Recall that a confidence predictor must satisfy the property of nested prediction sets (2.4) in (Vovk
et al., 2022)), so decreasing the significance level will increase the efficiency.
    We may also choose to increase the proper training set size, which would also be expected to increase the efficiency
of Γ.
    To summarise, in each batch 𝑘 we have two choices to make. The proper training set size, 𝑚𝑘 which will determine
the calibration set size ℎ𝑘 , and the uncertainty parameter 𝛿𝑘 which will determine the batch significance level 𝜀̃𝑘 . Of
course, we do not need to keep the batch size fixed. If we let 𝑁0 = 𝑙 we may choose batch sizes 𝑁1 , 𝑁2 , … where
𝑁𝑘 ≥ 1 for 𝑘 = 1, 2, … , and everything above still holds.


B. More Details on Error Rate of Singletons
    This section discusses the validity of singleton predictions in some other settings.

B.1. Singleton Validity of Mondrian Conformal Predictors
    Recall that a smoothed MCP is category-wise exactly valid with respect to the Mondrian taxonomy 𝜅. For the
singleton errors, this means that in each category 𝑘 ∈ 𝑲 = {0, 1}, the probability of a singleton error is

             𝜀𝑘 − ℙ(𝐸𝑘 )
      𝜎𝑘 =               .                                                                                                 (52)
                ℙ(𝑆𝑘 )

Label-Conditional Validity
    In (Linusson et al., 2016) it is shown that it is impossible to arrive at a label-conditional 𝜎, since ℙ(𝐸𝑘 ) is unknown.
They do however give a conservative estimate by assuming ℙ(𝐸𝑘 ) = 0. In practice, a better estimate ℙ(𝐸𝑘 ) could be
to use the observed frequencies of 𝐸0 and 𝐸1 respectively as observed in the training set.



: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
Object-Conditional Validity
    If, on the other hand, we want to use some other Mondrian taxonomy, the situation can be different. Consider for
example the case when we try to predict whether a patient has Alzheimer’s disease. It is known that about twice as
many females have Alzheimer’s disease than males, presumably due to the fact that females tend to live longer. This
observation leads to at least two possible Mondrian taxonomies of interest, where the categories are determined by
features of the objects, not the labels. We could either have just two categories, males and females, or we could have
age related categories. In each case, crucially for us, we can observe the number of empty and singleton predictions
we make. For each category 𝑘, we can observe 𝑛𝑘 , the total number of predictions made for the category 𝑘, 𝑒𝑘 and 𝑠𝑘 ,
the number of empty and singleton predictions we make for the category 𝑘. Then
        𝑛𝑘 𝜀𝑘 − 𝑒𝑘
                                                                                                                                             (53)
            𝑠𝑘
is our estimate of the object-conditional singleton validity of our MCP, and it converges to 𝜎𝑘 when 𝑛𝑘 → ∞ by the
law of large numbers.

B.2. Training-Conditional Singleton Validity ICPs
    Suppose Γ is an ICP. We know Γ𝜀̃ with 𝜀̃ defined in (48) is (𝜀, 𝛿)-valid. This means

       ℙ(ℙ(err) < 𝜀) ≥ 1 − 𝛿,

and we may use the law of total probability as before to deduce
       (                         )
                      𝜀̃ − ℙ(𝐸)
     ℙ ℙ(err | 𝑆) <                ≥ 1 − 𝛿.                                                                                                  (54)
                         ℙ(𝑆)
Let us denote this upper bound on the singleton error probability by 𝜎.
                                                                      ̃ In this setting, we typically use the same ICP to
produce many prediction sets without retraining and/or recalibrating. Say we have a test set of size 𝑛, and wish to test
the validity of our ICP on just the singleton predictions. We observe that we have 𝑒 empty predictions and 𝑠 singletons.
Then
              𝑛𝜀̃ − 𝑒
        lim           = 𝜎.
                        ̃                                                                                                                    (55)
       𝑛→∞       𝑠
B.3. Batch Offline ICP
    We are, as always, interested in what can be said about the validity of the singleton predictions in the batch update
scenario. In each batch we have an offline ICP, and we make 𝑁 predictions. Our approximation of 𝜎 in (55) still holds,
but with 𝑁 in place of 𝑛. If 𝑁 is large, this approximation can be expected to be good. Explicitly,
                 𝑁𝑘 𝜀̃𝑘 − 𝑒𝑘
       𝜎̃ 𝑘 ∶=                                                                                                                               (56)
                      𝑠𝑘
where 𝑒𝑘 and 𝑠𝑘 are the number of empty and singleton predictions respectively, is a good approximation of 𝜎̃ if 𝑁𝑘 is
sufficiently large. Moreover, if we use the batch updates to decrease 𝜀̃𝑘 , we have that
                           𝜀 − ℙ(𝐸)
        lim 𝜎̃ 𝑘 = 𝜎 =              ,                                                                                                        (57)
       𝑘→∞                   ℙ(𝑆)
and if we have also chosen to decrease 𝛿𝑘 , this is exactly the error probability of the singleton predictions in the limit.
Looking closely at (46) we see that this means that the probability of a singleton prediction being in error is at most 𝜎
so that Γ is conservatively valid in the limit.


References
Bortolussi, L., Cairoli, F., Paoletti, N., & Stoller, S. D. (2019). Conformal predictions for hybrid system state classification. In (pp. 225–241).
       Springer.
Boström, H. (2022). crepes: a python package for generating conformal regressors and predictive systems. In (Vol. 179).
Chow, C. (1970). On optimum recognition error and reject tradeoff. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 16(1), 41–46.

: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
Chow, C.-K. (1957). An optimum character recognition system using decision functions. IRE Transactions on Electronic Computers(4), 247–254.
Cortes, C., DeSalvo, G., & Mohri, M. (2016). Learning with rejection. In Algorithmic learning theory: 27th international conference, alt 2016,
         bari, italy, october 19-21, 2016, proceedings 27 (pp. 67–82).
Franc, V., Prusa, D., & Voracek, V. (2023). Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(11), 1–49.
Gammerman, A., Vovk, V., & Cristani, M. (2022). Special issue on conformal and probabilistic prediction with applications: Preface. Pattern
         Recognition, 126, 108561. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108561
Gammerman, A., Vovk, V., Luo, Z., Smirnov, E., & Peeters, R. (2020). Special issue on conformal and probabilistic prediction with applications.
         Neurocomputing, 397, 264-265. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.11.025
Hanczar, B. (2019). Performance visualization spaces for classification with rejection option. Pattern Recognition, 96, 106984. doi: https://doi.org/
         10.1016/j.patcog.2019.106984
Hendrickx, K., Perini, L., Van der Plas, D., Meert, W., & Davis, J. (2024). Machine learning with a reject option: A survey. Machine Learning,
         113(5), 3073–3110.
Johansson, U., Sönströd, C., Löfström, T., & Boström, H. (2023). Confidence classifiers with guaranteed accuracy or precision. Proceedings of
         Machine Learning Research, Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction with Applications.
Karlsson, M., & Hössjer, O. (2024, Mar 01). Classification under partial reject options. Journal of Classification, 41(1), 2-37. doi: 10.1007/
         s00357-023-09455-x
Le Capitaine, H. (2014). A unified view of class-selection with probabilistic classifiers. Pattern Recognition, 47(2), 843-853. doi: https://doi.org/
         10.1016/j.patcog.2013.07.020
Lei, L., Song, Y., & Luo, X. (2020). A new re-encoding ecoc using reject option. Applied Intelligence, 50, 3090–3100.
Linusson, H., Johansson, U., Boström, H., & Löfström, T. (2016). Reliable confidence predictions using conformal prediction. In Pacific-asia
         conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 77–88).
Linusson, H., Johansson, U., Boström, H., & Löfström, T. (2018). Classification with reject option using conformal prediction. In PAKDD, Springer,
         94–105.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., . . . Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
         Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825–2830.
Pillai, I., Fumera, G., & Roli, F. (2013). Multi-label classification with a reject option. Pattern Recognition, 46(8), 2256-2266. doi:
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2013.01.035
Shafer, G., & Vovk, V. (2008). A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(3).
Shah, K., & Manwani, N. (2020). Online active learning of reject option classifiers. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence
         (Vol. 34, pp. 5652–5659).
Toccaceli, P. (2022). Introduction to conformal predictors. Pattern Recognition, 124, 108507. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108507
Vovk, V. (2022). Universal predictive systems. Pattern Recognition, 126, 108536. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108536
Vovk, V., Gammerman, A., & Shafer, G. (2022). Algorithmic learning in a random world (Second ed.). Springer. doi: https://doi.org/10.10007/
         978-3-031-06649-8
Vovk, V., & Petej, I. (2014). Venn-abers predictors. In Proceedings of the thirtieth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (pp. 829–838).
Zhang, X.-Y., Xie, G.-S., Li, X., Mei, T., & Liu, C.-L. (2023). A survey on learning to reject. Proceedings of the IEEE, 111(2), 185–215.




: Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                                      Page 18 of 18
