
at the Ak-Sar-Ben racetrack, when his friend Bob Russell’s mother introduced the boys to the world of
pari-mutuel betting.
Warren and Russ were too young to wager, but they quickly figured out how to make a buck. Amid the
cigarette butts, beer slops, old programs, and hot-dog remnants in the grime and sawdust of the Ak-Sar-Ben
floorboards were thousands of discarded tickets, peeping out like mushrooms on the forest floor. The boys
turned themselves into truffle hounds.
“They call that ‘stooping.’ At the start of the racing season you get all these people who’d never seen a
race except in the movies. And they’d think that if your horse came in second or third, you didn’t get paid,
because all the emphasis is on the winner, so they’d throw away place and show tickets. The other time you
would hit it big was when there was a disputed race. That little light would go on that said ‘contested’ or
‘protest.’ By that time, some people had thrown away their tickets. Meanwhile, we were just gobbling them
up. We wouldn’t even look at them when we were working. At night we’d go through them. It was awful;
people would spit on the floor. But we had great fun. If I found any winning tickets, my aunt Alice, who
didn’t care anything at all about races, would cash them in for us, because they wouldn’t cash them for
kids.”
Warren wanted to go to the races all the time. When Mrs. Russell wasn’t taking him, “my dad would never
go to the races,” says Buffett. “He did not believe in the races.” Instead, his parents let his great-uncle
Frank, the oddball of the family, take him. Frank had long ago reconciled with Ernest and had eventually
married a woman whom the family referred to as “the gold-digger.”1 He had no particular interest in the
horses, but he took Warren to Ak-Sar-Ben because his great-nephew wanted to go.
At Ak-Sar-Ben, Warren had learned something about how to read the tip sheet, and it opened up a whole
new world. Handicapping horses combined two things he was very, very good at: collecting information and
math. It was not unlike counting cards at blackjack, except that the winning hand had four legs and ran
around a track. Soon, he and Russ knew enough to put out their own tip sheet, the cannily named Stable-Boy
Selections.
“We got away with it for a while. They weren’t the hottest sellers in the world. I mean, a couple of little kids
selling this thing we typed up in my basement on an old Royal typewriter. The limiting factor was carbons
in those days. You could probably only get in five or so carbons. But I got on the Royal and Bob Russell and
I doped out the horses and then we typed up this thing.
“We were in the track, yelling, ‘Get your Stable-Boy Selections!’ But the Blue Sheet was the number-one tip
sheet, and the racetrack was getting a commission on it. The Blue Sheet sold for a little more. At twenty-five
cents, we were a cut-rate product. They shut down the Stable-Boy Selections fast because they were getting
a cut on everything sold in the place except for us.”
When the Buffetts moved to Washington, D.C., the only plus for Warren was the chance to upgrade his
handicapping skills.
“The one thing I knew about Congress was that Congressmen had access to the Library of Congress—and
the Library of Congress had everything that had ever been written. So when we got to Washington, I said,
‘Pop, there’s just one thing I want. I want you to ask the Library of Congress for every book they have on
horse handicapping.’ And my dad said, ‘Well, don’t you think they’re going to think it’s a little strange if
the first thing a new Congressman asks for is all the books on horse handicapping?’ I said, ‘Pop, who was
out there at the county fairs stumping for your election? Who was down there at the packinghouses ready to
get to the cops if something happened?’ I said, ‘And you’re coming up for reelection in two more years.
You’re going to need me. So this is payoff time.’ And he got me hundreds of books on horse handicapping.2
“Then what I would do is read all these books. I sent away to a place in Chicago on North Clark Street
where you could get old racing forms, months of them, for very little. They were old, so who wanted them? I
would go through them, using my handicapping techniques to handicap one day and see the next day how it
worked out. I ran tests of my handicapping ability day after day, all these different systems I had in my

mind.
“There are two kinds of handicappers. There are speed handicappers and class handicappers. Speed
handicappers figure out the horse with the best times in the past. The fastest horse will win. Class
handicappers feel that the horse that’s run against ten-thousand-dollar horses and done well and now is
running against the five-thousand-dollar horses will beat them. Because, they say, the horse runs just fast
enough to win.
“In horse racing it pays to understand both types of handicapping. But back then I was basically a speed
guy. I was a quantitative guy to start with.”
As he tested, thought, and observed, Warren discovered the Rules of the Racetrack:
1. Nobody ever goes home after the first race.
2. You don’t have to make it back the way you lost it.
The racetrack counts on people to keep betting until they lose. Couldn’t a good handicapper turn these rules
around and win?
“The market is a racetrack too. But I was not developing elaborate theories in those days. I was just a little
kid.”
Betting in Washington was ubiquitous.
“I would go down to my dad’s office fairly often, and there was actually a bookie in what was then called
the Old House Office Building. You could go to the elevator shaft and yell ‘Sammy!’ or something like that
and this kid would come up and take bets.
“Now, I used to do a little bookmaking too, for guys who wanted to bet on the Preakness or something like
that. That’s the end of the game I liked, the fifteen percent take with no risk. My dad, you know, was
struggling somewhat to keep this under control. He was amused by it to some extent, but he could also see
how it could veer off in the wrong direction.”
During summer vacations, Warren returned to Omaha and went stooping at the Ak-Sar-Ben track, this time
with his friend Stu Erickson.3 Back in Washington, he found a new friend to go to the racetrack with,
someone who could advance his handicapping skills. Bob Dwyer, his high school golf coach, a potbellied,
enterprising young man, made far more than his teacher’s stipend by selling life insurance and ice chests and
other things during the summer when school was out.4 The other members of the golf team viewed Dwyer as
tough and crusty, but he took a shine to Warren, who had a way about him and played enthusiastically
despite his glasses always fogging up.
One day Warren asked Dwyer to take him to the races. His coach said he needed permission. “The next
morning,” Dwyer says, “bright and early, he came prancing in with a note from his mother, saying it was all
right to go to the races.” So Dwyer wrote Warren some phony excuse to get out of class5 and then they took
the Chesapeake & Ohio from Silver Spring, Maryland, over to the racetrack in Charleston, West Virginia.
Going to the races with a teacher polished Warren’s sophistication about handicapping. Dwyer taught
Warren advanced skills in reading the most important tip sheet, the Daily Racing Form.
“I’d get the Daily Racing Form ahead of time and figure out the probability of each horse winning the
race. Then I would compare those percentages to the odds. But I wouldn’t look at the odds first, to avoid
prejudicing myself. Sometimes you would find a horse where the odds were way, way off from the actual
probability. You figure the horse has a ten percent chance of winning but it’s going off at fifteen to one.*9
“The less sophisticated the track, the better. You have people betting on the jockey’s colors, and you have

them betting on their birthdays, you have them betting on the horses’ names. And the trick, of course, is to
be in a group where practically no one is analytical and you have a lot of data. So I would study the forms
like crazy when I was a kid.”
One grade behind Warren at Woodrow Wilson but slightly older, Bill Gray went to a few horse races with
him. “He was very sharp with numbers. Very talkative.6 Very outgoing. We would discuss baseball, batting
averages, sports.7
“He knew which horses he was going to pick the minute he got off the train. He would go down to the track
and say, well, this horse is too much weight, or this horse, where he’s come in the last few races has not been
good enough, or his times are not good enough. He knew how to judge the horses.” Warren made six-to
ten-dollar bets, sometimes on the nose.*10 He only bet big if the odds looked good, but he had a way of
risking some of his hard-earned paper-route money on the right horse. “He might change his mind as the
different races came forward,” says Gray. “But for a sixteen-year-old, that’s not so common, you know?”
Then one time, Warren went to Charleston by himself. And he lost in the first race. But he didn’t go home.
He kept on betting and he kept on losing, until he had lost more than $175 and his pockets were stripped
nearly bare.
“I came back. I went to the Hot Shoppe, and I treated myself to the biggest thing they offered—a giant
fudge sundae or something—and there went all the rest of my money. While I ate, I figured out how many
newspapers I had to deliver to make up what I had lost. I was going to have to work more than a week to
make back the money. And I’d done it for dumb reasons.
“You’re not supposed to bet every race. I’d committed the worst sin, which is that you get behind and you
think you’ve got to break even that day. The first rule is that nobody goes home after the first race, and the
second rule is that you don’t have to make it back the way you lost it. That is so fundamental, you know.”
Did he realize that he’d made an emotional decision?
“Oh, yeah. Oh, I was sick. It was the last time I ever did anything like that.”

14
The Elephant
Philadelphia • 1947–1949

Warren graduated sixteenth out of 350 in his high school class, putting “future stockbroker” under his
picture in the yearbook.1 The first thing he and Danly did with their freedom was to go in together and buy a
used hearse. Warren parked the hearse in front of the house and used it to take a girl out on a date.2 When
Howard came home later, he asked, “Who put that hearse out here?” Then Leila said one of their neighbors
was gravely ill, and she was not having a hearse in front of the house. That was the end of the hearse.
While he and Don were selling the hearse, Warren gave up his paper routes and got a summer job as a relief
circulation manager for the Times-Herald, moving up in the world. Whenever he had to substitute for his
paper carriers, he rose at four a.m., and delivered the papers from a little Ford coupe he borrowed from
David Brown, a young man from Fredericksburg who had a crush on Doris and who had gone into the Navy.3
Standing on the running board of the car with the door open, he coasted at about fifteen miles an hour, one
hand reaching inside the car to hold on to the wheel, the other hand grabbing the papers and pitching them

onto the subscribers’ lawns. He rationalized that at such an early hour of the morning, nothing too terrible
was likely to result from driving the car that way.4
Afterward he stopped by the Toddle House at four forty-five a.m. to treat himself to a double order of hash
browns with paprika for breakfast. Then he went on to his second job, distributing papers at Georgetown
University Hospital.
“I had to give the priests and nuns about a half a dozen papers free, which always irritated me no end. I
thought they weren’t supposed to be interested in secular things. But this was part of the deal. And then I
went room by room, ward by ward.
“After they had the baby, the women in the obstetrics ward would see me come in and say, ‘Oh, Warren! I’m
going to give you something more valuable than a cash tip. I’m going to tell you when my baby was born
and how much it weighed. Eight thirty-one a.m., six pounds and eleven ounces.’” The babies’ birth times and
weights were meant for betting on the “policy racket,” the numbers game in Washington.5
Warren ground his teeth whenever he got useless information instead of a cash tip. As a handicapper, he
would never have played the policy racket. The odds were terrible. “The policy racket paid off six hundred
to one, and the guy that was your runner got ten percent of it. So you have a five hundred forty-to-one
payoff on what was a thousand-to-one shot, basically. People made penny bets and dime bets. If you put a
penny up, you might win $5.40 net. And everybody in town played. Some of my newspaper delivery
customers used to ask me, ‘Do you run policy numbers?’ I never did. My dad would not have approved if
I’d become a policy runner.”
He was already a good enough oddsmaker to work in Vegas, but he probably would not have bet on the next
thing his father did. Howard Buffett voted for a bill that actually passed, joining 330 other Congressmen who
made the Taft-Hartley Act law over President Truman’s veto. One of the most controversial pieces of
legislation ever enacted in the United States, the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act severely restricted the tactics used by
labor unions. It made it illegal for them to support one another through secondary strikes and authorized U.S.
Presidents to declare a national emergency and force striking workers back to work. It was referred to as a
“slave labor” bill.6 Omaha was, of course, a union town, but it would never have occurred to Howard to vote
according to his constituents’ preferences; he always voted his principles.
So when the Buffetts went home to Omaha for a visit during the summer, and Warren went to a hometown
baseball game with his father, he saw just how unpopular Howard had become among the blue-collar voters.
“They introduced the dignitaries in between the doubleheader. And he stood up and everybody in the place
started booing. He just stood there and didn’t say anything. He could handle things like that. But you just
can’t imagine the effect that has on a kid.”
Even the mildest forms of confrontation terrified him. But soon he would be standing on his own, out from
under his father’s wing. At almost seventeen, Warren was barely a kid. One year older and a few years
earlier he might have been fighting in the war.
Instead of the military, in the fall he was starting college. The Buffetts had long taken for granted that Warren
would attend the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton business school.7 Wharton was the nation’s most
important undergraduate business college and Penn the brainchild of Benjamin Franklin, creator of aphorisms
like “he that goes a’borrowing goes a’sorrowing,” “time is money,” and “a penny saved is a penny earned.”
In theory, Penn and Warren, who had the energy of two people and hustled like a stevedore while other kids
played, were a perfect fit.
However, Warren would have just as soon skipped the whole thing. “What was the point?” he asked himself.
“I knew what I wanted to do. I was making enough money to live on. College was only going to slow me
down.” But he would never have defied his father on something so important, so he acquiesced.
Knowing their son’s immaturity, the Buffetts arranged a roommate for him who was the son of some friends

from Omaha. Five years older, Chuck Peterson had just returned from eighteen months’ service in the war.
He was a handsome young man-about-town, dating a different girl every night, and drinking. Naively, the
Petersons supposed that Warren might settle Chuck down, while the Buffetts reckoned that an older boy
might help Warren adjust to college.
In the fall of 1947, the entire family piled into the car and drove Warren to Philadelphia, where they
deposited him and his raccoon coat in a little dormitory suite with a shared bathroom. Chuck had already
moved in, but was out on a date somewhere.
As the Buffetts drove away to return to Washington, they left their son at a campus filled with people much
like Chuck. An army of World War II veterans marched across College Green and filled the Quad, the
centers of Penn university life. Their worldliness widened by years the gap Warren had felt between himself
and his classmates ever since moving to Washington. On an organized, busy, social campus, his baggy
T-shirts and worn tennis shoes stood out among the purposeful men dressed in sports coats and polished
oxfords. Penn was a football powerhouse; its fall social life revolved around football dates, followed by
fraternity parties. Warren loved sports, but the social requirements were beyond him. He was used to
spending much of his time honing ideas, counting his money, organizing his collections, and playing music in
the privacy of his room. At Penn, his solitude battered by the sixteen hundred flirting, necking, jitterbugging,
keg-tapping, football-tossing members of the Class of 1951,8 he was a butterfly in a beehive.
The bees reacted much as expected to the butterfly that had flown into their midst. Chuck retained his
military tidiness and the habit of constantly polishing his shoes. When he met his new roommate, Warren’s
disgraceful wardrobe shocked him. He soon discovered that the way Warren dressed symptomized something
else. Just as Leila waited hand and foot on Howard and did all the work around the house, Warren had never
been taught the most basic ways of taking care of himself.
Chuck stayed out late socializing as usual his first evening after they met. The next morning, he woke late to
find the bathroom in a mess and his new roommate gone to early classes. When he saw Warren that evening,
he said, “Clean up after yourself, will you?” “Okay, Chas-o,” Warren said. “I came in this morning and you
left a razor lying at the bottom of the sink,” Chuck went on. “You left soap all over the sink, the towels were
on the floor, and it’s sloppier than hell. I like things neat.” Warren appeared to agree. “Okay, Chas-o, okay,
Chas-o,” he said.
The next morning, when Chuck got up, he stepped through sodden towels on the bathroom floor to find tiny
damp hairs covering the sink, and a brand-new, soaking-wet electric razor lying in the basin, tethered to the
outlet in the wall by its cord. “Warren, lookit,” said Chuck that evening. “Unplug the damn thing.
Somebody’s going to get electrocuted. I’m not going to pick it up out of the sink every morning. You’re
driving me nuts with your sloppiness.” “Okay, okay, fine, Chas-o,” said Warren.
The next day was exactly as before, the razor lying in the sink. Chuck realized that his words were bouncing
off Warren’s head. He lost his temper and decided to take action. He unplugged the razor, filled the sink with
water, and threw the razor in.
The following morning, Warren had bought a new razor, plugged it in, and left the bathroom in the same state
as before.
Chas-o gave up. He was living in a pigsty with a hyperactive teenager who hopped around in constant
motion, drumming his hands, beating them on every nearby surface. Warren was obsessed with Al Jolson and
played Jolson records day and night.9 He sang, over and over, imitating Jolson: “Mammy, my little Mammy,
I’d walk a million miles for one of your smiles, my Mammy!”10
Chuck needed to study, and he could not hear himself think inside the suite. Warren, on the other hand, had
plenty of time to sing. He hadn’t bought a lot of textbooks, but he had read the ones he bought at the
beginning of the semester, before classes started, the way someone else might flip through a Life magazine.
Then he threw them aside and never opened them again. This left him all night long to sing “Mammy” if he

felt like it. Chuck thought he was going mad. Warren knew he was immature, but he couldn’t help it.
“I probably wouldn’t have fit in very well anyplace at that time. I was still out of sync with the world. But I
was also younger than anybody else, and, on top of that, I was young for my age in many ways. I really
didn’t fit in socially.”
Chuck’s social life, on the other hand, was in full swing; he had pledged Alpha Tau Omega. Warren had little
interest in Greek life but pledged his father’s fraternity, Alpha Sigma Phi. It was not a jock house nor
particularly brutal, but the rituals of pledging turned him red-faced. The secret motto of Alpha Sig was zeal,
humility, courage.11 Warren had plenty of the first two, but courage was his Achilles’ heel. When the
pledges were sent to Wanamaker’s to buy extra-large women’s panties and brassieres, he circled the
underwear department for a looooong time before facing the snickering coed salesgirls.12
That fall, Leila and Doris struggled to describe Warren’s crew-cut, slightly bucktoothed appearance truthfully
on a radio show in Washington called Coffee with Congress.
Host: Incidentally, is Warren good-looking?
Leila: He was good-looking as a small child. He’s just boyish—I wouldn’t call him good-looking, but he’s not
poor-looking either.
Host: He’s handsome-looking.
Leila: No, not handsome, just friendly.
Host: Let’s take the girls’ angle: Is he a cute boy?
Doris (diplomatically): I think he has a rugged sort of look.13
Despite the drumming and the “Mammy” singing, Chuck came to be fond of Warren, viewing him as a sort of
goofy kid brother, although he still could not believe his roommate continued to wear beat-up Keds
throughout the winter, and even when dressed up, was likely to wear one black shoe and one brown shoe
without noticing.
Like many people who met Warren, Chuck began to feel the urge to take care of him. They had lunch
together at the Student Union a couple of times a week. Warren always ordered the same thing: a minute
steak, hash browns, and a Pepsi. Then he discovered chocolate sundaes topped with malted-milk powder and
had those every day too. One day after lunch Chuck took Warren over to the new Ping-Pong table that had
just been installed in the Student Union. After four years in Washington, Warren was so rusty that Chuck got
the impression he had never played Ping-Pong. In the first couple of games Warren could just about return
Chuck’s serve. Chuck won easily.
Within a day or two, however, Warren played like a demon. The first thing every morning, he got up, went
straight over to the Student Union, found a hapless victim, and slaughtered him at the Ping-Pong table.
Before long, he was playing Ping-Pong three or four hours at a stretch every afternoon. Chuck could no
longer hold his own. “I was his first victim at Penn,” he recalls. But Ping-Pong kept Warren out of the suite
and away from the record player while Chuck was studying.14
Ping-Pong, however, did not fulfill Penn’s physical-education requirement. Rowing and sculling on the
Schuylkill River were two of Penn’s most popular sports. Gaily painted boathouses belonging to the school’s
many rowing clubs lined the riverbanks. Warren went out for the 150-pound freshman crew with the Vesper
Boat Club. He rowed on a team of eight oarsmen guided by a coxswain. Rowing was repetitious and
rhythmic, like weight lifting, basketball, golf, Ping-Pong, and his game of bolo, all activities that Warren
enjoyed—but it was a team sport. Warren liked to shoot a basketball in his driveway because you could
practice alone. He had never succeeded at team sports or learned to dance with a partner. He had been the
