
Fear And Greed Riding The Wave – Top Of Bull Trend

Fig 7.11 Fear & Greed : Bull Trend
As we can see in the schematic in Fig 7.11 it is all very logical once we begin to think of it in terms of emotional
buying and selling. The over riding emotion as the market hits the top of the first wave is greed, combined with
the emotion of fear – the fear of missing out on a good trading opportunity. Remember, these traders are weak
anyway. Why? Because they have been waiting and waiting, watching the market continue higher, frightened to
get in, as they are nervous and emotional traders, but at the same time, frightened of missing a 'golden
opportunity' to make some money. After all they have seen the market rise and are now wishing they had
entered earlier. They eventually buy at the top of the first wave.
The market then promptly reverses, and they immediately become fearful of a loss. The market moves lower
then bounces. At the bottom of the first wave, buyers come in, entering on the pull back and pleased to be
getting into the market at a 'good price'. The market moves back higher towards the top of the first wave.
The buyers at this level cannot wait to exit, as the fear drains away and they get out with a small loss.
Remember, throughout this phase of price action, they have NEVER seen a profit, only an increasing loss,
which has then reduced back to close to zero. Their emotional level of fear, a fear indicator if we had one, would
have been rising steadily on the downwards leg, and then falling on the upwards leg, but at no time was their
position in any sort of 'potential profit' so this group is simply pleased to exit with just a small loss.
After all, at one point the potential loss could have been much worse, so this group considers it has done well in
closing with just a small loss. Remember also, that this group always trades on emotion anyway, so is almost
always in a weak position when they open any trade, and therefore very easy to manipulate using emotional
price swings.

The group that has bought at the bottom of the first wave lower are a completely different proposition. They have
been prepared to wait, and buy on a pullback in price, they are not chasing the market, and are prepared to be
patient. In general, they are more experienced.
As the market moves higher to the top of the third wave, their position has a potential profit, before it reverses
lower, back to the level at which they entered the market. However, at no point during this journey have they
suffered the emotion of a potential loss. They may be regretting the decision not to close at the top of the wave,
but are likely to continue to hold on the expectation of a bounce back higher.
Their emotional response is therefore very different. Unlike the weak group at the top of each wave, this group
has less emotional stress pressure to deal with on each wave. All they have to deal with is the emotional
pressure of seeing a potential profit drain away, not the emotional pressure of recovering from a potential loss.
The buyers at the top of each wave can be considered to be weak, but the buyers at the bottom of each wave
can be considered to be strong. Naturally I accept this is a very simplistic way of looking at market price action
in these regions, nevertheless it is typical of what happens when markets consolidate.
It is this constant flow of buyers and sellers entering the market in these contained areas, that creates the
invisible barriers of price, which then become barriers and platforms in the future, since within these price
regions we have dense populations of buyers and sellers, both weak and strong.
So do we see the same at the bottom of a trend lower? And the answer is, yes. We have exactly the same
principles at work here.

Fear And Greed Riding The Wave – Bottom Of Bear Trend

Fig 7.12 : Fear & Greed Bear Trend

The principles here are exactly the same as for the bullish trend that we looked at earlier. As we can in our
schematic in Fig 7.12 the market has been in a down trend for some time, and once again, the weak emotional
traders are drawn into the market, just as it is about to reverse. They have seen other traders making nice profits
from the move lower, and finally overcome their fear of trading, and make an emotional decision to join the
market.
The market immediately reverses against them and bounces higher locking them instantly into a losing position,
which then worsens. Fear mounts as the losses increase.
Finally the market reverses back to where they first entered their position, and they exit, relieved to have been
able to close out with just a small loss.
The strong traders are selling into the market at the tops of the waves, and their positions are generally positive
throughout as the market moves back and forth in the trading range.
Once again, the price consolidation creates the invisible barriers which are then densely populated with both
weak and strong groups of traders, and which then become platforms either of support or resistance during
future market activity.
I hope the above explanation has at least given you an insight into why these levels are important. What this
constant price action creates is invisible barriers and platforms all over our charts, which we then 'see' by
joining up the price action at the top and bottom of each wave with horizontal lines. These give us the visual
perspective on where these regions are on the charts. Each time future price action approaches these regions,
because of the dense population of buyers and sellers marooned in these zones, we can expect the market to
at least pause and 'test' these areas in the manner I will be covering shortly.
Of equal importance is when the market pauses in one of these areas, but then continues on its journey in the
same direction as the original trend. Both of these have important consequences and send us key signals, all
validated with volume, which we will look at shortly. But first, let me set out some general principles when using
this analytical technique.

First Principle
The lines we draw on our charts to define the ceiling and the floor of these price regions are NOT rods of steel.
Consider them more as rubber, flexible bands. Remember, technical analysis and VPA is an art, and NOT a
science. Whilst these levels do constitute barriers and platforms, they are not solid walls, and on occasion you
will see them broken, only for the market to then move back into the channel once again. Consider them to be
'elastic' with a little bit of 'give'.

Second Principle
Always remember Wyckoff's second law, the law of cause and effect. If the cause is large, then this will be
reflected in the effect, which applies to support and resistance. The longer a market consolidates in a narrow
range, then the more dramatic the resulting price action once the market moves away from this region. Naturally
this is all relative, not least because a market that has been consolidating on a daily chart for several weeks is
likely to trend for a similar period, whilst any breakout from a consolidation phase on a 5 minute chart may only
be for an hour or so – it is all relative.

Third Principle
The third principle is perhaps the one which perplexes most new traders and it is this – how do I know when the
market is in congestion? After all, it's easy to look back in hindsight and see where the price action has been
consolidating for some time, but when the market action is live, it is only 'after the event' that any consolidation
phase becomes self evident.
This is where the concept of an isolated pivot high and an isolated pivot low become key signals, and whilst
there are indicators available to create these automatically, they are simple to spot visually.

Isolated Pivots

Fig 7.13 Isolated Pivots
These are the defining points for the start of any congestion phase. And the easiest way to understand pivots is
to suppose the market is moving higher in an up trend, and we see an isolated pivot high formed on the chart.
We have now seen the first sign of possible weakness in the market. These pivots are created by a three
bar/candle reversal and as shown in Fig 7.13 above. To qualify as a three bar/candle reversal the candle in the
centre has to post a higher high and a higher low, creating the pivot high pattern. The appearance of one pivot
does not mean we are moving into a congestion phase at this point. All we can say at this stage is that we have
a possible short term reversal in prospect.
Now we are waiting for our equivalent isolated pivot low to be created. This occurs when we have a three
bar/candle pattern where the centre candle has a lower low and a lower high than those on either side. Again
we have an example in Fig 7.13.
Once this candle pattern appears on our chart, we can now draw the first two lines to define the ceiling and the
floor of our congestion zone. The pivot high is the ceiling and the pivot low is the floor. These simple candle
patterns not only define the start of any congestion phase, they also define the upper and lower levels as the
market moves into a period of sideways price action. This is referred to as congestion entrance as we can see
in Fig 7.14.

Fig 7.14 Congestion Entrance - Bullish Trend
The same applies when a market has been falling and enters a congestion phase. Here we are looking for the
reverse, with an initial pivot low, followed by a pivot high which we can see in Fig 7.15.

Fig 7.15 Congestion Entrance - Bearish Trend
At this point we now have our ceilings and floors clearly defined, and as the market moves further into
congestion, we see further pivot points to the upper and lower price levels, which adds further reinforcement to
these areas. What happens next?
At some point of course, the market finally breaks out from these regions, and this is the trigger that we have
been waiting for, either to confirm the continuation of a current trend, or to signal a reversal.
However, throughout the price congestion phase we are constantly looking for clues and signals using our VPA
knowledge to confirm weakness or strength as the market moves sideways. Moreover, if the congestion phase
has been created as a result of a buying or selling climax, then the signals will be very clear.
But, the signal we are constantly watching for now, once we are in a congestion phase, is the volume
associated with any breakout and consequent strong move away from this region. As we have already seen,
congestion areas, are densely populated areas, with traders locked in a variety of weak positions, and therefore
any break away from these areas requires volume, and generally lots of it. A break out from such a price area
on low volume, is a classic trap move by the insiders, and is often referred to as a 'fake out'.
The insiders are trying to trap traders on the wrong side of the market once again, and a break out from recent
congestion is another classic strategy. Only VPA traders will be aware of such a false move, since the volume
associated with any move higher or lower will be clearly visible. This is why these price regions are so
important and they are important for three reasons :
First, if we have a current position in the market, and we see a breakout validated in our direction, then this is a
VERY clear signal of a continuation of the move, and therefore gives us confidence to hold the position.

Second, if we do NOT have a current position, then this gives us an excellent entry signal, once the move away
has been validated with volume.
Third, if we have an existing position and the trend reverses against us, then we have been given a clear signal
to exit.
Finally, once the market has broken away from these regions, we then have clearly defined platforms of future
price regions, which then come into play as both support and resistance. These are immensely powerful and
helpful in giving us simple targets for managing and exiting positions, based on the price action on our charts. If
you remember back to something I wrote earlier; getting in is easy, it's getting out that is always the hardest part,
and this is where these areas can help, in providing a visual map of likely places where the market may
struggle, reverse or find support. This helps us as traders to manage our positions more effectively.
Let's start with breakouts and volume and what we should expect to see as the market pulls away from these
congestion zones.
Fig 7.16 is an ideal schematic of what we should expect to see, and in this case we are seeing a bullish
breakout. This could either be a continuation of a recent bullish trend higher, where the market has paused,
before moving on once more, or this could be a reversal in trend. It doesn't really matter. The key points are the
same, and are these.

Fig 7.16 Breakout From Congestion : Bullish Trend
First, for any break and hold out of congestion to be valid we need to see 'clear water' above the ceiling of price
action. Remember what I said earlier. These lines are NOT rods of steel, they are pliable, rubber bands and we
have to treat then as such, so if the market ticks a few points above or below, this is NOT in itself a signal of a
breakout. We need to see a clearly defined close above the ceiling. And one question I am always asked is
how much is ‘clear water’. Unfortunately, there is no hard and fast rule. It all comes down to judgement,

experience, and the market or instrument as each will have its own unique price behaviour and risk profile. But
there needs to be a 'clearly visible' gap in terms of the closing price of the candle which finally breaches the
ceiling level. This is the first signal that a breakout is in progress. The second is volume.
As we can see in Fig 7.16 the initial move higher up and through the ceiling level, has to be accompanied by
strong and rising volume. It takes effort for the market to move away, rather like dragging someone out of
quicksand or a bog. The same applies here, and you should see this reflected in the associated volume of the
next few bars. If you DON'T see this, then you know it is either a trap up move by the insiders, or there is simply
no interest from market participants to take the market higher at this stage.
If it is a valid move, then the volumes on the initial break will be well above average and rising, as the market
finally throws off the shackles and starts to build a trend. At this stage, do not be surprised to see the market pull
back to test the ceiling as it moves higher, but this should be accompanied with low or falling volume, since we
are now developing a bullish trend higher and expect to see a rising market with rising volume, if this is a true
move higher. Once clear, VPA then takes over and we are back to a candle by candle analysis of the price
action as the trend unfolds.
Exactly the same principles apply when the breakout is into a bearish trend (See Fig 7.17). Once again, it
makes no difference whether this is a continuation of a bearish trend, or a reversal from bullish to bearish. The
only difference is that this time we are breaking through the floor of price congestion, and not the ceiling.
As before, this breakout should be clean and well developed, and accompanied by well above average volume
to reflect the effort required to break away. Again, do not be surprised to see the market move back higher to test
the floor area, but this should be on low volume, and as the market pulls away rising volume should reflect the
downwards move. Remember, falling markets should ALSO see rising volume reflecting a genuine move lower.

Fig 7.17 Breakout From Congestion : Bearish Trend
I cannot stress too strongly the importance of price congestion regions. They are one of the foundations stones
of price action, as they reveal so much, and give us so many trading opportunities. There are many traders
around the world who only trade on breakouts, and nothing else.
We can trade breakouts by defining congestion zones using pivots, then charting the price action using VPA,
and finally when the breakout is validated by volume, enter any positions.
At this point I cannot reiterate too strongly support and resistance is one of the foundation stones of price
analysis. Every full time trader I have ever spoken to, uses this concept in one way or another, and as you will
see, now that we understand price congestion, it is a powerful and simple concept which can be applied in
several ways.
It can be used to identify entry positions; it can be used in managing positions, and finally it can also be used as
a target for closing out positions. In simple terms, it is one of the most powerful techniques you can apply, and
when combined with an understanding of VPA, will give you an insight into market behaviour that few traders
ever achieve. It is also the phase of price action where trends are borne. Many traders become frustrated when
markets move into a congestion phase, but in reality this is one of the most exciting phases of market behaviour,
as it is just a question of being patient and waiting. When the market is ready, it will break out, and a new trend
will then be established. And the extent of any trend will be dictated by the cause and effect rule!
To round off this chapter, let me summarise the concept of support and resistance which builds on the
knowledge we already have of price congestion, and the analogy I always use here, is that of a house! Which is
why I have used the terms floor and ceiling to describe the upper and lower levels of price congestion.

Support And Resistance – The House!

Fig 7.18 Support & Resistance : The House
Imagine that you are looking at a vertical cross section of a house which is shown in the schematic in Fig 7.18.
In other words, what we are looking at here is a house with the whole of the front removed, rather like an old
fashioned dolls house with the door open. Now you can see all the floors and ceilings in the house, and as you
can see here we have a ground floor, first floor, second floor and roof.
The black line is the market which has moved from the ground floor to the roof and back again. Let me explain
the price action on the schematic as it moves through the house, to better visualise the concept of support and
resistance.
The market moves higher from the ground floor, and eventually reaches the ceiling, where it moves into
sideways price congestion. At this point, the ceiling is providing an area of price resistance to any further move
higher for the market. However, at some point the ceiling is breached and the market climbs through to the first
floor level. Now at this point, what was the ceiling of the ground floor, has now become the floor of the first floor.
In other words, what was an area of price resistance, has now become an area of price support.
Once again, the market continues higher until it reaches the ceiling of the first floor, where once again the price
moves into a consolidation phase. Finally it breaks out into the second floor level. Now what was price
resistance, as represented by the ceiling of the first floor, is now support as represented by the floor of the
second floor.
Finally the market continues higher in our house until it reaches the ceiling of the second floor, where the price
resistance proves to be too strong, and the market reverses at this level. The ceiling has remained firm and the
barrier of price activity has prevented the market continuing any further.

The market then moves lower, having reversed, back to the floor, where it consolidates, before breaking through
and back down through the floor and past the ceiling of the first floor level. Here we see the reverse in action.
What was price support in terms of the floor, has now become price resistance in terms of the ceiling.
This is repeated once again at the first floor level, before the market finally breaks lower once more, with the
floor of price support now becoming price resistance in the ceiling, and we are then back to square one again.
But, why is this concept so important?
The concept of support and resistance is important for a number of reasons. First, as we have already seen, a
breakout from a consolidation phase can be validated with volume, and if confirmed, provides excellent trading
opportunities. The so called breakout trades.
Second, and perhaps just as important, the reason that this trading approach is so popular is that it embraces in
its strategy, the whole concept of support and resistance which is this – that in creating these regions, and using
them as part of the trading strategy, you are in effect, using the markets own price behaviour to provide you with
protection on your positions. By this I mean that in trading using a breakout, the market has put in place its own
natural barriers to protect you against any sudden changes in market direction as the trend develops.
Returning to the price action in our ‘house’. As we approach the ceiling of the first floor we move into price
congestion, pause, and then break through into the first floor room above. We now have a 'natural floor' of price
support in place, which is giving us protection in the event that the market pauses and perhaps moves back to
test the price in this area. This floor is our natural protection, defined by the market for us. After all, we know
from our VPA studies that to move back and through this area would take effort and volume, so we therefore
have a natural area of support now working in our favour. Not only does the floor offer us protection should the
market pull back, it also offers the market support to the continued move higher.
It is a WIN/WIN. You have the comfort of knowing that once the market has broken through a ceiling of price
resistance, not only does this become a floor of price support, it has also become a barrier of price protection in
the event of any short term re-test of this area. Any stop loss for example could then be placed in the lower
regions of the price congestion. This is why breakout trading is so popular, and when backed with VPA
validation becomes even more powerful.
The same principles apply when markets are moving lower. In our ‘house’ example we were in an up trend, but
if we take the down trend example, then this works in identical fashion.
Picking up the price action where the market has reversed at the roof level, we are approaching the second
floor, floor level. The market moves into congestion and then breaks through the ceiling of the first floor room
below. What was the floor of price support has now become the ceiling of price resistance, and once again
offers two things. Price resistance to any short term reversal, adding pressure to any downwards move lower,
and secondly, a natural barrier of price protection in the event of any short term pullback.
Once again, it is a WIN/WIN situation for the breakout trader, this time to the short side of the market.
This is using this concept in taking trading positions as the market action develops, but its power also lies in the
price action and history that the market leaves behind. The market leaves its own DNA, buried in the charts.
These areas of price congestion remain on the charts forever. The price moves on, but these areas remain, and
at some point in the future, price behaviour moves back into these regions, and at this stage these areas, often
dormant for long periods, then become powerful once again, and begs the question as to whether the market
has a memory.
Or is it because, as traders we are all looking at the same charts, and therefore these areas of price become self
fulfilling prophecies? Perhaps it’s because these areas are densely populated with weak traders, still holding
on and waiting for a reversal so they can exit with small losses or small profits?
It may well be a combination of all of these. Whatever the reasons these areas can and do play a significant role
in price behaviour as they are visited by the market repeatedly. Once again, where there are extensive areas of
congestion, then the more significant will be their impact.
Let's go back to our house schematic again, and in particular the failure to break the ceiling of resistance on the
