
6. In extended bear markets, the final low is usually confirmed by a bot-
toming in smoothed long-term momentum. In this instance, the
Coppock Index, described in Chapter 10 and featured in Chart 10-8, is
probably the most reliable, as it appears to work with amazing reliabil-
ity on a number of different markets. During shallow bear markets not
associated with recessions, smoothed long-term momentum can often
prove to be agonizingly slow. Long-term ROCs will occasionally prove
to be better substitutes when it is possible to observe momentum price
pattern breakouts or upside penetrations of down trendlines.

7. If short-term oscillators are signaling mega-overbought or extreme
swing conditions, as described in Chapter 10, this is also a sign that psy-
chology has changed for the better.

Economic Factors

8. Normally, it is a prerequisite of a bottom for the economic news to be
at or close to its worst. Charts 28-2(@) and 28-2(6) show that the 9-month
trend deviation indicator for the coincident indicators is usually nega-
tive and close to its low at the time of a stock market bottom. Note that
the major exceptions, flagged by the dashed arrows, develop during
double-cycle lows such as 1984 and 1994. This is not surprising since
these were not classic bear markets.



536 Part Il: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Chart 28-2(a) The S&P Composite, 1956-1 inci i iat
feel) Geom va pring eee . 980, and the coincident indicator (deviation

4004 S&P Composite

; vy Y i]
Le

“1157 Ba [59 [oo [o1_ [oo [6364 65 66 [67 [68 Joo [7 [7 [ra [73 [7a [7s [6 [77 [7a Do

Chart 28-2(b) The S&P Composite, 1978-2000. i indi
from trend.) (From www.pring.com.) + end the coincident indicator (evition

1800 4
1000 4

500 4 S&P Composite

I 4 4
44 Coinpident index

A
ay

{DRE BE ME RV RP PPE ew

eer

Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 537

Chronological and Cyclical Factors

9.

10.

In terms of the financial market chronological sequence, it is normal
for a stock market bottom to be preceded by the 3-month commercial
paper yield crossing below its 12-month MA. At the actual bottom, the
S&P will be below its 12-month MA, but so too will the CRB Spot Raw
Material Index. If the yield and Commodity Index are below their aver-
age and the S&P is above its, then the S&P crossover confirms that a
bottom is in place, and the markets are in the correct sequence fora
Stage II, as described in Chapter 2.

Is it possible to observe three discernable intermediate declines during
recession-associated bear markets? This is by no means infallible, but
often a good sign.

. Does the market meet most of the characteristics cited previously in a

year in which the 4year stock market cycle is due to bottom? If so, the
odds of a major bottom are greatly increased. If the year ends in the
number 4, this is also a positive sign since years ending in a 5 are the
most bullish of the decade. Hence, 1954, 1974, 1984, and 1994 were
major bottoms (the first bottom developed at the end of 1953), all of
which were followed by 5 strong years. With the exception of 1984, all
were also 4-year cycle lows.

Psychological Fctors

12.

13.

14,

Sentiment is typically very bearish at a major bottom. This can show up
in extreme readings in advisory sentiment, public short ratios, or the
put/call ratio reversing from its overbought level.

Sentiment is also reflected in the media, and here cover stories are a
great place to build a contrary case. Occasionally, brokers use the buy-
ing opportunity derived from the bear market as the basis for an ad cam-
paign. Such ads do not necessarily indicate the wisdom of brokerage
houses, although they are certainly courageous for taking a bullish
stance. Rather, it is a recognition of the fact that the decline in equity
prices has caught the attention of the public. Remember, when every-
one thinks alike, it is time to expect a market turn.

How does the market respond to bad news? During the decline, it would
be normal for it to sell off on bad news, such as an unexpectedly poor
earnings report, huge layoffs, a major bankruptcy, and so on. However,
if it starts to shrug off such news and actually rises, the psychology has
probably changed.


538 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Summary

Ifit were necessary to summarize these characteristics for peaks and troughs
into a few vital points, they would probably be as follows:

* Crowd psychology has moved to a measurable extreme.

Interest rates have already reversed their trend.

Long-term momentum is at an extreme or has already reversed from one.
The technical position of leading versus lagging groups is consistent with
the direction of the turning point in question.

These conditions have been confirmed with the completion of a price

pattern and the penetration ofa long-term MA, for example, 124
200-day, and so on. 6 ple, 12-month,

29

~ Automated Trading

Systems

In recent years, there has been a substantial increase in the use of personal
computers for the purposes of technical analysis. Not surprisingly, this has
encouraged many traders and investors to use their own mechanical, or
automated, trading systems. These systems can be very helpful as long as they
are not adopted as a substitute for judgment and thinking. Throughout this
book [I have emphasized that technical analysis is an art, the art of inter-
preting a number of different and reliable, scientifically derived indicators.

I believe that mechanical trading systems should be used in one of two
ways. The preferred method is to incorporate a well thought-out mechani-
cal trading system to alert the trader or investor that a trend reversal has
probably taken place. In this method the mechanical trading system is an
important filter, but represents just one more indicator in the overall deci-
sion-making process.

The other way in which a mechanical trading system can be used is to take
action on every signal. If the system is well thought out, it should generate
profits over the long term. However, if you pick and choose which signal to
follow without other independently based technical criteria, you run the risk
of making emotional decisions, thereby losing the principal benefit of the
mechanical approach.

Unfortunately, most mechanical trading systems are based on historical
data and are constructed from a more or less perfect fit with past, in the
expectation that history will be repeated in the future. This expectation will
not necessarily be fulfilled, because market conditions change. A well
thought-out and designed mechanical system, however, should do the job
reasonably well. In this respect, it is better to design a system that gives a
less-than-perfect fit, but more accurately reflects normal market conditions.

539



540 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Remember that you are interested in future profits, not perfect historical
simulations. If special rules have to be invented to improve results, the

chances are that the system will not operate successfully when extrapolated
to future market conditions.

Advantages of
Mechanical Systems

One of the great difficulties of putting theory into practice is that a new fac-
tor, emotion, enters the scene as soon as money is committed to the mar-
ket. The following advantages theréfore assume that the investor or trader
will follow the buy and sell signals consistently:

* A major advantage of a mechanical system is that it automatically decides
when to take action; this has the effect of removing emotion and prejudice.
The news may be atrocious, but when the system moves into a positive
mode, a purchase is automatically made. In a similar vein, when it appears
that nothing can stop the market from going through the floor, the system
will override all possible emotions and biases and quietly take you out.

* Most traders and investors lose in the marketplace because they lack dis-
cipline. Mechanical trading requires only one aspect of discipline: the
commitment to follow the system.

¢ Awell-defined mechanical system will give greater consistency of profits than
a system in which buying and selling decisions are left to the individual.

* Amechanical system will let profits run in the event that there is a strong
uptrend, but will automatically limit losses if a whipsaw signal occurs.

* A well-designed model will enable the trader or investor to participate in
the direction of every important trend.

Disadvantages of
Mechanical Systems

* No system will work all the time, and there may well be long periods when
it will fail to work.

* Using past data to predict the future isn’t necessarily a valid approach
because the character of the market often changes.

* Most people try to get the best or optimum fit when devising a syste™,
but experience and research tell us that a historical best fit doesn’t usu-
ally translate into the future.

Automated Trading Systems 541

* Random events can easily jeopardize a badly conceived system. A classic
example occurred in Hong Kong during the 1987 crash, when the mar-
ket was closed for 7 days. There would have been no opportunity to get
out, even if a sell signal had been triggered. True, this was an unusual
event, but it’s surprising how often special situations upset the best rules.

* Most successful mechanical systems are trend following by nature.
However, there are often extended periods during which markets are in
a nontrending mode, which renders the system unprofitable.

 “Back-testing” won’t necessarily simulate what actually would have hap-
pened. It is not always possible to get an execution at the price indicated
by the system, because of illiquidity, failure of your broker to execute
orders on time, and so forth.

Design of a Successful System

A well-designed system should try to capitalize on the advantages of the
mechanical approach, but should also be designed to overcome some of the
pitfalls and disadvantages discussed. In this respect there are eight impor-
tant rules that should be followed:

* Back-test over a sufficiently long period with several markets or stocks. The
more data that can be tested, the more reliable the future results are likely
to be.

* Evaluate performance by extrapolating the results over an earlier period.
In this case, the first step would involve the design of a system based on
data for a specific time span, such as 1977 to 1985 for the bond market.
The next step would be to test the results from 1985 to 1990 to see
whether or not your approach would have worked in the subsequent
period. In this way, rather than “flying blindly” into the future, the system
is given a simulated but thorough testing using actual market data.

* Define the system precisely. This is important for two reasons. First, if the

rules occasionally leave you in doubt about their correct interpretation,

some degree of subjectivity will permeate the approach. Second, for every
buy signal there should be a sell signal, and vice versa. Ifa system has been
devised using an overbought crossover as a sell and an oversold crossover
as a buy, it might work quite well for a time. An example is shown in Fig.

29-1(a). On the other hand, there could be long periods during which a

countervailing signal is not generated, simply because the indicator does

not move to these extremes. Failure to define the system precisely can

therefore result in significant losses, as shown in Fig. 29-1(6).



is 042 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior Automated Trading Systems 543

« Make sure that you have enough capital to survive the worst losing streak.
When you are devising a system, it is always a good idea to assume the
worst possible scenario and to make sure that you start off with enough
capital to survive such a period. In this respect, it is worth noting that the
most profitable moves usually occur after a prolonged period of whip-
sawing.

* Follow every signal without question. If you have confidence in your sys-
tem, do not second-guess it. Otherwise, unnecessary emotion and undis-

. ciplined action will creep back into the decision-making process.

/ yy ¢ Use a diversified portfolio. Risks are limited if you place your bets over a

oa

number of different markets. If a specific market performs far worse than

: it ever has in the past, the overall results will not be catastrophic.

| * Trade only markets that show good trending characteristics. Chart 29-1
ef f shows the lumber market between 1985 and 1989. During this period the
- 7 price fluctuated in a volatile, almost haphazard fashion and clearly would
| not have lent itself to a mechanical trend-following system. On the other
{ hand, the Commodity Research Bureau (CRB) Spot Raw Industrial

+
(a)

re | Chart 29-1 Lumber, 1985-1989, CRB weekly charts.
Ve Sel! a Weekly high low and close of neorest futures er F mare
¥ | 220
e A — i

i i by

i F 1 410
Fi f 4200

f sa?
Buy

| t

en aa

130

t

()
Figure 29-1 Overbought/oversold crossovers.

$985 ABB a 887 8888 BR de oo

AMS JASONOJFRAMUJASONOUF HAM JJ ASONOUFHANJJS AS OND JFHA KY JAS ONO UF

Sa NETS Be



544 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Materials Index (shown in Chart 29-2), although it is subject to the odd

confusing trading range, has by and large moved in consistent trends.

° Keep it simple. It is always possible to invent special rules to make back-
testing more profitable. Overcome this temptation. Keep the rules sim-
ple, few in number, and logical. The results are more likely to be profitable

in the future, when profitability counts.

Trading Range and
Trending Markets

' There are basically two types of market conditions: trending and trading
range. A trending market, as shown in Figure 29-2, is clearly suitable for mov-
ing average (MA) crossovers and other types of trend-following systems. In
this kind of situation, it is very important to define the risk since an MA isa
trade-off between volatility and sensitivity. In Figure 29-2, the maximum dis-
! tance between the short-term MA, shown as the dashed line, and the series,
i shown as the solid line, is the maximum risk. Unfortunately, the short-term

TOT Weakly high wand dase TTT tr

60

; eae as : : ne |
WE 20

280

: s 60
: ae ——200

bene 1995 ott 988 1 i AOE, ABBE tt HOOP. La tedseo

MANS IASON DUF MAM JUABONOUF HAM UJ ASONDJ FRA MUS AB OND UFMAKU JAS ONO UE

Chart 29-2 CRB Spot Raw Industrial Materials Index, 1985-1989, and CRB weekly charts.

aS eeeeione

Automated Trading Systems 545

MA whips around and gives several false signals. Although the risk of the indi-
vidual trade defined by the crossover of this MA is small, the chances of
unprofitable signals are much greater. On the other hand, a longer-term MA,
shown by the X’s, offers larger maximum risk but fewer whipsaws.

MAs, as shown in Figure 29-3, are virtually useless in a trading range mar-
ket since they move right through the middle of the price fluctuations, and
almost always result in unprofitable signals. Oscillators, on the other hand,
come into their own in a trading range market. They are continually mov-
ing from overbought to oversold extremes, which trigger timely buy and sell
signals. During a persistent uptrend or downtrend, the oscillator is of rela-
tively little use because it gives premature buy and sell signals, often taking
the trader out at the beginning of a major move. The ideal automated sys-
tem therefore should include a combination of an oscillator and a trend-
following indicator.

The risk and reward for oscillator-type signals generated from overbought
and oversold extremes are shown in diagrammatic form in Figure 29-4. The
number of potential trading opportunities is represented on the horizon-
tal axis and the risk on the vertical axis. There are very few times when an
oscillator is extremely overbought or extremely oversold, but these are the
occasions when the profit per trade is at its greatest and the risk the small-
est. Moderately overbought conditions are much more plentiful, but the
profits are lower and the risk higher. Taken to the final extreme, slightly
overbought or oversold conditions are extremely plentiful, but the risk per

Whipsaw

a
7 Maximum
- ¥
risk x* Long-term MA

4. xXx
5 X

x _ x
PORK SY KK XX KK KKM

Figure 29-2 Trade-off between timeliness and sensitivity.



546 Part ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

sy Price

Figure 29-3 MA crossovers in trendless markets.

trade is much higher, and profits are significantly lower. Ideally, a mechan-
ical trading system should be designed to take advantage of a situation in
which profits per trade are high and risk is low. Execution of a good system
therefore requires some degree of patience because these types of oppor-
tunities are limited.

Turning points in price trends are often preceded by a divergence in the
oscillator, so it is a good idea to combine signals from extreme oscillator
readings with some kind of MA crossover. This won't result in a perfect indi-
cator, but it might help to filter out some of the whipsaws.

Guidelines for Appraising Results

When the simulated results of a mechanical system are being reviewed, there
is a natural tendency to look at the bottom line to see which system would
have generated the most profits. However, top results do not always indicate
the best system. There reasons for this are as follows:

© It is possible that most, or all, of the profit was generated by one signal.
If so, this would place lower odds on the system’s generating good prof
its in the future since it would lack consistency. An example of an incon-
sistent system is shown in Table 29-1, which represents signals generated
by a 10-day MA crossover of an oscillator that was constructed by dividing
a 30-day MA bya 40-day MA (a form of moving average convergence diver-
gence, or MACD). The market being monitored was Hong Kong during
the 1987-1988 period. The system would have gained nearly 1200 points,

Automated Trading Systems 547

—————— _Overbought- oversold

Extremely Moderately Slightly

fe per trade

Risk per trade

-

Opportunities

Figure 29-4 Relationship between profits and risk per trade, based on opportunities. (From
Perry Kaufman, New Commodity Trading Systems, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York,
1987.)

compared to a buy-hold approach, which would have lost 800 points.
However, this excellent gain would have actually resulted in a loss had it
not been for the fact that a prescient short sell signal occurred just before
the 1987 crash.
* Another consideration involves the identification of the worst string of
losses (the largest drawdown). After all, it is no good having a system that
generates a large profit over the long term if you don’t have sufficient cap-
ital to ride out the worst period. There are two things to look for in this
respect: the string of losing signals and the maximum amount lost dur-
ing these adverse periods.
Asystem that generates huge profits but requires a significant number of
trades is less likely to be successful in the real world than is a system based
on a moderate number of trades. This is true because the more trades
that are executed, the greater the potential for slippage through illiquidity
and so on. More transactions also require more time and involve greater
commission costs and so forth.



Table 29-1 Hang Seng 3-Month Perpetual 30/40 Oscillator Performance, 1987-1988

a
>
io)

Profit or loss

Cumulative

Current trade

Dollars

Percent

Percent Points

Points

Price

Trade

Date

ann
SRSASSARSG ARS SS
Gt anandesSeagaca wii
Core OHM HAMM
PPA BAS RR SAR AS
SSASaenewroarsn N®
EOSCoONna
BES RSRASESER BES
SreER BH aoa AOA GH
TPO PR RRR BRAS AS
eeooocoecscqqoooooco
eoescsoe

SSSSRAAAAHARARAR
SHH ANDO KH KH OG
Sastesae
RVSoRWISRRAasae
NT O19 2 NAAR A
SOMMOKMNMOODh agg tt
naw mt cx
Pere reeeeerr.
Sraenratdn nnn”
eee eee nen ene
eco ecoe
essssess
SES SSSSSSS22822
SHENSASHnSHAaSAN
DMN D ~

REAP ZS SSSR ATES
Ty RTT
BESSSSSSSSSSESE
BosHoaod rN +
BESSESLSSRSISEN
Reo em bo bo ee eo he
SRG SESPEGESEIERS
HaAgAAASaS AA RAAA
BOeonn © 2
GOGH OOROO DOOD OD
~>>SS Sd SSSA SKN
SRSRTHsARSSSSss
SPSS SAAS SSSSSS

& Be
BD gio ton
= io) ~~
= N
J t

3
2 =
sf, 85
gee ge
beg, 8:
Rez Bek
ceicrer
gem me §
ges ys
PaRP ant
= J
gs 8
Brogne
2 3 a
~ “—
« 2
zfs:
Boe hs
wey SASS
Fee
sasess
ges p28
PRoRRAR

18.58%

Total gain or loss

Source: Pring Market Review/MetaStock.

Automated Trading Systems 549

The Best Signals Go
with the Trend

In virtually every situation the best signals invariably occur in the direction
of the main trend. It is easy to pick out the direction of the primary trend
in hindsight, of course, but in the real world we have to use some kind of
objective approach to determine the direction of the main trend.

One idea might be to calculate a 12-month MA and to use the position
of the price relative to the average as a basis for determining the primary
trend. The trading system would be based on daily and weekly data and
would be acted upon on the long side only when the index was above the
average; short signals would be instigated when it was below.

There are two drawbacks to this approach. First, the market itself may be
in a long-term trading range in which MA crossovers do not correctly iden-
tify the main trend. Second, the first bear market rally quite often occurs
while the price is above its 12month MA. In effect, the buy signal associ-
ated with that rally would be operating against the main trend. By and large,
though, most markets trend, and this approach will filter out a lot of the
countercyclical moves.

An alternative is to use a long-term momentum series, such as the monthly
know sure thing (KST), calculated along the lines discussed in Chapter 12.
When the KST is rising and the price is above its 12-month MA, a bull mar-
ket environment is indicated, and all trades would be made from the long
side. When the KST is falling and the price is above its 12-month MA, the
chances are that the primary trend is in the process of peaking; no positions
would be instigated. If you already had some exposure, the topping-out
action of the KST would indicate that some profits should be taken, but total
liquidation of the position would probably be better achieved at the time
of a negative MA crossover. A trade would be activated only when the KST
and the price, vis-a-vis its MA, were in a consistent mode. For example, when

the KST peaks out and the market itself falls below its 12-month MA, a bear
market environment is indicated and only trades on the short side should
be initiated. If you do not have access to the KST the MACD, using an
18/20/9 combination on monthly data, is a close substitute.
