
The Real-Time Experiment

172
r

I

,
Closing

I*

12/6/85

DM

E

Gold

.,

2.5115
202.10
1.4425
322.30

h.
6,1985
% Change
from 11122

SBrP 500
U.S. T-Bonds
Eurodollar
Crude Oil
Japanese Bonds

+2.1
.5
-1.5
-1.4

-

I

12/6/85

% Change
from 11/22

212.02
832%
92.33
28.74
99.21

+ 5.2
+ 3.7
+ .3
- 7.0
+ 4.7

Closing

QUANTUM FUND EQUITY
Net Asset Value Per Share
Change from 11/22/85

$867,000,000
$5,841
3.0%

+

Portfolio Structure (inmillions of dollars)
Net
Change
(2)

Investment
from
Positions ( 1 ) Long Short 11/22
Stocks
US Stocks 724, (72)
+ 71
US Index
Futures
368
+ 242
Foreign
Stocks
271
+20
Bonds (3)

Net
Change
(21

Net Currency
from
Exposure (6j
Long Short i 1/22
DM-related
729
+ 61
Japanese Yen
826
-1
Pound Sterling
(119)
-32
US Dollar
(569)
-2
Other
Currencies
33
-7

us Gvt.

Short
Term (4)
Long
Term
Japanese
(5)

Commodities
Oil
Gold

90

- 15

66;

- 808

300

- 54
(150)

+ 64

ingly influenced by the validity of those concepts. To keep
a detailed account of my investment activities beyond this point
would take us too far afield from the subject of the experiment,
namely, predicting the future of the Imperial Circle. I shall
continue my periodic diary but it will serve the purpose of
control and not of formulating a prediction. In other words, I
wish to "freeze" my expectations about the future of the Imperial

The Real-Time Experiment

172

Dee. 6,1985

% Change
from 11/22

Closing
12/6/85

DM
rY

E
Gold

+ 2.1

2.5115
202.10
1.4425
322.30

Closing
12/6/85

S&P500
U.S. T-Bonds
Eurodollar
Crude Oil
Japanese Bonds

- .5

- 1.5
- 1.4

QUANTUM FUND EQUITY

I

212.02
83%~
92.33
28.74
99.21

% Change
from 11/22

+ 5.2
+ 3.7

+ .3
- 7.0
+4.7

$867,000,000

Portfolio Structure (ia millions of dollars)
Net
Change
(2)

(21

Investment
from
Positions (1) Long Short 11/22
Stocks
US Stocks 724 (72)
+71
US Index
Futures 368
+242
Foreign
271
+ 20
Stocks
Bonds (3)
US Gvt.
Short
Term (4)
90
- 15
Long
Term
661
- 308
Japanese
(5)

Commodities
Oil
Gold

Net
Change
Net Currency
from
Exposure (6)
Long Short 11/22
DM-related
729
+ 61
Japanese Yen
826
-1
Pound Sterling
(119)
-32
US Dollar
(569)
-2
Other
Currencies
33
-7

- 54

300
(150)

+64

ingly influenced by the validity of those concepts. To keep
a detailed account of my investment activities beyond this point
would take us too far afield from the subject of the experiment,
namely, predicting the future of the Imperial Circle. I shall
continue my periodic diary but it will serve the purpose of
control and not of formulating a prediction. In other words, I
wish to "freeze" my expectations about the future of the Imperial

Phase 1:August 1985-December 1985

173

Circle at the present time and submit it to the test of events.
Needless to say, I shalt continue changing my portfolio as I see
fit.
I have about as firm a conviction about the shape of things to
come as I shall ever hgve, as witnessed by the level of market
exposure I am willing t'o assume. At the beginning of the experiment 1 said that my crygtal ball about the longer term outlook was
rather cloudy. The experiment has brought about a remarkable
transformation: I now have a relatively clear vision of the future
and that vision differs significantly from the admittedly tentative
views I started with. I regarded the Imperial Circle as a temporary
expedient whose internal contmdictions were bOu~dto render .it
unsustainable, and my presumption was that the problems that
the Imperial Circle had managed to keep at bay would resurface
with renewed vigor after its disintegration. Specifically, the Imperial Circle constituteil an artificial extension of the period of
credit expansion with the U.S.government acting as "borrower of
last resort." When the Imperial Circle ceased to attract capital
from abroad in ever-inbreasing quantities, the last engine of economic stimulation would be extinguished, and the contraction of
credit would create an'untenable situation. Without a significant
expansion of money supply the burden of debt would become
unbearable; with a significant expansion, the dollar would go into
a free fall.
I am now beginning to discern the outlines of awther temporary solution that may succeed in unwinding the excesses of the
Imperial Circle without plunging us into a vicious circle. The
solution consists of switching from fiscal to monetary stimulation
in the United States and controlling the descent of the dollar
through international cooperation. The new constellation is almost the exact opposite of the Imperial Circle: a weaker dollar
and a subdued economy are accompanied by lower budget and
trade deficits and, most important, by lower interest rates. With
the help of a weaker dollar, prices are going to rise somewhat
faster than previously, rendering the change in real interest rates
all the more pronounced. Declining real interest rates, together
with a possible pickup in exports, will replace the budget deficit
as the main driving force in the economy. Rising prices will help
to counteract the erosion of collateral values and prevent a selfreinforcing, deflationary process from taking hold. At the same
time, the coordination of economic policies will keep the decline
of the dollar within bounds, thereby eliminating the possibility of

174

'

I

The Real-Time Experiment

a self-reinforcing inflationary process. The outcome would be a
greater degree of stability than we have experienced since the
breakdown of Bretton Woods.
Using the notation adopted earlier, we can depict the key relationship in the newly emerging state of affairs as follows:

The picture is much simpler than that of the Imperial Circle beexchange rates are stabilized. The extent to which interest
rates will decline depends on the amount of stimulation that will
be necessary to keep the economy from sliding into a recession.
Although the new constellation is almost the exact opposite of
the Imperial Circle, there is one essential difference between
them. The new constellation is the deliberate outcome of a concerted economic policy, whereas the Imperial Circle was the unintended consequence of conflicting economic policies. The
Imperial Circle was self-reinforcing until it became excessive and
ripe for a reversal; the reversal would also become self-reinforcing
unless it were deliberately controlled. The mechanism of control
is the management of exchange rates in the first instance and the
coordination of monetary and fiscal policies in the second.
It is the emergence of a concerted economic policy that has
caused me to change my expectations in the course of the experiment. I was aware of the possibility of such a policy emerging and
I stressed the difference between the first and the second Reagan
administrations. During the three months of the experiment, there
occurred several historic events that converted a mere possibility
into a historical reality: the Group of Five meeting, the Baker
speech in Seoul, the Grarnm-Rudman amendment and the summit
meeting in Geneva.
What makes the emergence of the new economic direction so
fascinating is that the actual policy measures of which it will be
made up have not even been formulated. The Group of Five meeting was merely a commitment to follow a coordinated exchange
rate policy, not an agreement on what that policy is; the Baker
Plan for international debt is certainly not a plan but merely the
announcement of a need for a plan; the summit meeting may mark
a new departure in relations between the superpowers, but it pro-

Phase 1:August 1985-December 1985

175

duced no concrete results; and the fate of the Gramm-Rudman
amendment is still uncertain at the time of writing.
The actual policies are yet to be formulated. How far they will
reach will depend partly, on the farsightedness of the policymakers but mainly on the pressure of necessity. Necessity may be
defined in this context as the need to preserve the integrity of the
financial and trading sy tems, or, in other words, to forestall a
collapse in credit and to eep protectionism at bay. The definition
is rather cavalier: it does not rule out individual defaults or particular instances of trade restraint; the crucial issue is that neither

k

Success is far from assured. Past experience is not encouraging.
A somewhat similar set of circumstances led to the collapse of
both credit and international trade in the 1930s. But exactly because the memory of the: 1930s is still so vivid, the prospect that
we shall avoid similar mistakes is rather favorable. There is general agreement on some policy objectives: a controlled descent of
the dollar and a concerted reduction in interest rates. There is less
agreement on other points: how to reduce the U.S. budget deficit
and how to stimulate the economies of the debtor countries. It is
difficult to obtain concerted action even on the generally agreed
objectives. For instance; Japan was obliged to raise interest rates
because the United States was unable to resolve the issue of the
budget deficit in time. How can one have any c d d e n c e that
appropriate action will be taken in those areas where even the
agreement on objectives is missing?
Clearly, the situation is far from riskless, and, as we shall see,
the risks are the greatest in the short term. It is exa~tlybe,'-3use
the risks are so great, and their severity is recognized, that one
can have a fair degree of confidence that the necessary measures
will be forthcoming. I am not the only one to think so: the financial markets have endorsed the new policy departure in no uncertain fashion. The rise in bond and stock prices is helpful in two
ways: it encourages the authorities to pursue the course on which
they have embarked, and it enhances the chances of success. For
instance, the strength of the bond market enlarges the Federal
Reserve's freedom of action in lowering interest rates. We are
dealing with a reflexive process where the direction of economic
policy and the direction of the financial markets mutually reinforce each other.
It is the response of the financial markets that has given me the

176
t

The Real-Time Experiment

courage to take on such a large market exposure. It will be recalled
that in the case of currencies when the change in trend was still
uncertain I was much more tentative and when the market moved
against me I was a hair's breadth away from cutting back my
position. In fact, the real-time experiment was instrumental in
helping me to hang in there because seeing my ideas clearly formulated strengthened my convictions. My success in the marketplace has reinforced my confidence in my ability to predict the
course of events even further. 1985 is shaping up as a recordbreaking year for Quantum Fund: a more than 100%appreciation
within a year is heady stuff. I have to be careful. Using the concept
of reflexivity to predict the -future course of events is itself a reflexive process, and a high degree of success is often the precursor
to a severe setback. It is clear from the experiment that my perceptions are partial and subject to correction by events. If I begin to
lay store on my longer term expectations-and what is worse, go
public with them-I may be setting myself up for a great fall. It is
a danger I intend to guard against. It will be interesting to see,
when we control the experiment, what will have remained of my
current game plan.
Actually, it is less dangerous to cany a large market exposure
at the present juncture than to predict the eventual outcome of
the policies that are now being formulated. The mere fact that
there is an attempt to take charge of the world economy is sufficient to give the financial markets a boost and, even if the hopes
are going to be disappointed, it will take time for the failure to
become evident; thus the attempt at a concerted policy should be
sufficient to sustain the present rally for a while. The eventual
outcome is quite another matter. There can be no assurance that
the market's expectations will be fulfilled. I must beware not to
allow my confidence in a bull market to affect my judgment about
the real world. I have become so involved in the market that I find
it difficult to maintain perspective.
I shall try to assess the future of the Imperial Circle in two
different ways: one is to identify the "thesis" that the current
market rally incorporates and evaluate its chances of success; the
other is to locate the present moment within the theoretical
framework of credit expansion and contraction that I have been
trying to formulate. Both approaches employ the concept of reflexivity, but the first one sticks closely to the reflexivity inherent
in financial markets while the second seeks to explore the reflex-

Phase 1 :August 1985-December 1985

177

ive connection betweep credit and collateral values. Needless to
say, I am on much surer grounds with the first approach.
I believe the market has come around to the view that the economy is fundamentally,weak and inflation nonexistent. A brief
rally in cyclical stockslin early summer has petered out and the
highs reached then have still not been surpassed. That rally has
been based on the mistaken expectation of an imminent pickup
in the economy, and it was very narrow: other segments of the
stock market were declining while the cyclicals rose. It was followed by a general market decline that was cushioned by takeover
and stock buy-back activity. Commodities also made new lows
and have been lagging Sn the current recovery. Metals, in particular, have acted very poorly in relation to currencies.
The recent stock market rally is much more broadly based than
the earlier flurry in cyclicals; it follows on the heels of a bond
market rally and it was preceded by a decline in the dollar. Obviously the markets are discounting a decline in the economy.
Whether it will deteri~ratefurther is an open question. Economists are almost unanimous in ruling out a recession, but the
stock and bond markets are acting as though it were an accomplished fact: stock prices are rising because investors are "looking
across the valley." It is possible that the slowdown of the past
year served as the equivalent of a recession; alternatively, there is
some further weakness to come. Either way, the sequence of
events is highly unusual and investors have beedaken by surprise: none of the technical indicators that normally signal a significant upturn in the stock market has been present. The
November 27 lead article in the Wall Street Journal entitled
"Strange Rally" has highlighted this fact.
Every recession since the end of the Second World War has
been preceded by the Federal Reserve tightening the money
supply, causing an inverted yield curve to appear at some point
along the line. An inverted yield curve preceded the rally in
the summer of 1982, but we have not seen an inverted yield
curve since. The explanation for the current sequence of
events has to be sought elsewhere. That is where the second
approach using my hypothesis about the credit cycle comes in
handy.
It will be recalled that I envision a reflexive relationship between the act of lending and the value of the collateral that serves
as security for the loans. Net new lending acts as a stimulant that

178

The Real-Time Experiment

enhances the borrowers' ability to service their debt. As the
amount of debt outstanding grows, an increasing portion of new
lending goes to service outstanding debt and credit has to grow
exponentially to maintain its stimulating effect. Eventually the
growth of credit has to slow down with a negative effect on collateral values. If the collateral has been fully utilized, the decline
in collateral values precipitates further liquidation of credit, giving rise to a typical boomlbust sequence.
Using this model, I contend that the postwar period of credit
expansion has run its course and we are now in a period of credit
contraction as far as the real economy is concerned. All previous
postwar recessions occurred during the expiillsiontuy phase: that
is why they had to be induced by tight money. We are now in the
contractionary phase where a slowdown need not be induced: in
the absence of new stimulants, such as a growing budget deficit,
the erosion of collateral values will do the job.
The trouble is that real life is not as simple as the model I have
been working with. In particular, the transition from credit expansion to credit contraction does not occur at a single point of time
because it would precipitate an implosion that the authorities are
determined to prevent. Official intervention complicates matters.
The turning point does not occur at a single moment of time, but
different segments of the credit structure follow different timetables. To locate our position in the credit cycle, it is necessary to
disaggregate the process and consider the main elements of credit
separately.
This approach yields 1982 as the turning point for the heavily
indebted countries, 1984 as the turning point for U.S. financial
institutions, and 1986 as the turning poi& for the U.S. budget
deficit. The contraction of credit in less developed countries has
probably reached its peak in 1984; the adjustment process is
largely responsible for the oversupply of basic commodities. The
adjustment process by U.S. banks and savings and loan institutions has only recently begun to make its effect felt on collateral
values in real estate, land, shipping, and the oil industry. The
reduction in the budget deficit has not yet taken effect and it is to
be expected that it will be fully compensated for by a reduction
in interest rates. Two more important pieces need to be fitted into
the jigsaw puzzle: mergermania and consumer spending.
Leveraged buyouts and other manifestations of mergermania
are great users of credit but they tend to produce a corresponding

Phase 1:August 1985-December 1985

179

amount of liquid assets. Superficially, they seem to be expansionary but in fact they fit into the declining phase of the credit cycle:
they increase the total amount of debt without stimulating the
economy. Cash flow is, used to service debt rather than to purchase physical assets; t$e disposal of assets adds to the downward
pressure on collateral dalues; and the sale of junk bonds tends to
steepen the yield curve: the net effect on the economy is depressing rather than stimulafing.
Consumer spending is the great unknown. Consumer indebtedness has been rising steadily over the years, and repayment
terms have been extended to a point where it is hard to see
how they can be extended cny further. Until recently, houses
could be bought with a 5% down payment and auto loans could
be repaid over five years. Delinquencies in consumer loans have
risen ominously in the course of 1985, but the simultaneous
decline in interest rates and the dollar should alleviate the
situation. Will these ,developments merely serve to contain
the delinquency problem, or will they stimulate new demand?
That is the crucial question on which the near-term outlook
hinges.
If consumer spending remains sluggish, the bull market in
bonds and stocks may have considerable staying power; in fact,
we could have one of the great bull markets of all times. A pickup
in the domestic savings rate would offset the reduction in the
inflow of foreign capital allowing interest rates to dgcline in spite
of the decline in the dollar. The stock market would benefit from
both developments. Lower interest rates would enhance the value
of a given level of earnings, and the lower dollar would enhance
the level of earnings by mitigating pricing pressures from imports.
In a sluggish economy the cost of labor would remain depressed.
Threatened by adverse economic conditions and corporate takeovers, managements have redeployed assets and reduced overhead expenses; as conditions improve, the benefits flow directly
down to the bottom line. As interest rates decline, there would be
one last rush of corporate takeovers and leveraged buyouts, in the
course of wh'ch exaggerated prices may be paid; but recent events
make past a quisitions more viable and deals that may have been
unsound w en consummated are now looking healthier. Eventually the hise in stock prices should render leveraged buyouts
uneconomic, and merger activity should peter out. That would be
a very p'ositive development for the real economy because it

1

180
4

4

The Real-Time Experiment

would enhance the attraction of investing in physical assets stimulating not only demand but also supply. Should we reach that
point, our economy would be healthier than it has been for some
time. The boom may eventually get out of hand and set us up for
a great crash, but share prices would have to rise a great deal
before we reach that point. It is an argument for buying stocks
now.
On the other hand, if consumer spending does pick up under
the impetus of lower interest rates, the boom in financial markets
will be short-lived and the real economy is likely to follow the
stop-go pattern familiar from the British example. With inadequate domestic savings and d o a e s t i ~iaveshnent, the excess of
both credit and consumption would have to be met from abroad
and we would be back in the situation that prevailed at the end
of the Imperial Circle. Either we raise interest rates, restarting the
Imperial Circle and choking off the domestic economy, or we
print money, setting in motion a vicious circle in the opposite
direction.
Reality is likely to fall between these extremes, but that is not
saying much because the extremes open up an almost infinite range of possibilities. I am no better qualified to predict consumer behavior than I was at the beginning of the experiment.
All I can do is evaluate the consequences of the various alternatives.
It can be seen that a period of subdued consumer spending
could do much to correct the last two major areas of excess credit.
Mergermania would run out of steam as the stock market rises
and the overindebtedness of consumers would be corrected as the
savings rate rises and lenders tighter1 their criteria. M e r a while,
conditions would-be ripe for more balanced growth.
When past excesses are being corrected it is always a period of
maximum risk. That is the case now. There have already been a
number of minor catastrophes: the EPIC debacle has been followed by others in the real estate lending arena; the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and the Farm Credit System have gone public with their woes; the International Tin
Council has been unable to meet its obligations, tin trading on the
London Metal Exchange has been suspended, and many metal
traders are going out of business; the largest Japanese shipping
company has gone broke; just now the Singapore Stock Exchange
has had to close for a few days; and there are obviously other
