
2000), Corporate Income Taxes in the Bush Years (September 2004). The top 250 companies in the U.S.,
while growing profits substantially, have consistently been shown to pay a fraction of the actual corporate tax
rate throughout the 1980s, ’90s, and today, due to breaks for depreciation, stock options, research, etc.
Berkshire, however, has averaged a 30% effective tax rate (net earnings before taxes, divided by the taxes
paid currently) since 1986—offsetting Buffett’s personal tax benefits. Regardless, Buffett’s taxes are
irrelevant to whether he is entitled to criticize supply-side policies.
61. Robert Sobel, Salomon Brothers 1910–1985, Advancing to Leadership, Salomon Brothers, Inc., 1986.
62. In other words, current partners were paid a premium above their invested capital by Phibro, in which
retired partners who had already withdrawn their capital did not share.
63. Anthony Bianco, “The King of Wall Street—How Salomon Brothers Rose to the Top—And How It
Wields Its Power,” BusinessWeek, December 5, 1985.
64. In the “Night of the Long Knives,” June 30–July 2, 1934, Hitler executed at least eighty-five perceived
enemies of his regime and arrested a thousand others.
65. James Sterngold, “Too Far, Too Fast: Salomon Brothers’ John Gutfreund,” New York Times, January 10,
1988.
66. Paul Keers, “The Last Waltz: He had the power, she craved the position. Life was a ball until he had to
resign in disgrace and an era ended,” Toronto Star, September 1, 1991.
67. Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996, who
did not identify the executive giving this description.
68. Paul Keers, “The Last Waltz” Carol Vogel, “Susan Gutfreund: High Finances, High Living,” New York
Times, January 10, 1988; David Michaels, “The Nutcracker Suit,” Manhattan, Inc., December 1984; John
Taylor, “Hard to Be Rich: The Rise and Wobble of the Gutfreunds,” New York, January 11, 1988.
69. As Mrs. Bavardage.
70. Paul Keers, “The Last Waltz” Cathy Horyn, “The Rise and Fall of John Gutfreund; For the Salomon
Bros. Ex-Head, a High Profile at Work & Play,” Washington Post, August 19, 1991.
71. Robert Sobel, Salomon Brothers 1910–1985, Advancing to Leadership.
72. The combative, powerful banker Bruce Wasserstein, a merger specialist, was supposedly going to run the
firm. Gutfreund and his key lieutenants knew they would be instantly replaced by Wasserstein. And
Perelman as the largest shareholder might scare clients away.
73. Salomon bought the Minorco block itself at $38, a 19% premium to the stock’s $32 market price. It then
offered Buffett the stock at the same price. The premium was typical for similar deals at the time (which
were also criticized). The stock conveyed 12% voting power in the firm. Perelman offered $42 and said he
might raise his stake to 25%.
74. Salomon made a number of missteps. It took on a buyout of TVX Broadcast Group that ultimately failed,
muffed a leveraged buyout of Southland Corporation, and wound up holding the bag on a problematic Grand
Union buyout. After five unsuccessful years, Salomon exited the merchant-banking business in 1992.
75. Sarah Bartlett, “Salomon’s Risky New Frontier,” New York Times, March 7, 1989.
76. Buffett viewed his investment in Salomon as being like a bond. If he had wonderful stock ideas like
GEICO or American Express, he would not be looking at bond equivalents and would not have done this
deal.

77. Interview with John Gutfreund.
78. Interviews with John Gutfreund, Donald Feuerstein. Feuerstein’s son went to school with one of
Perelman’s children. He knew Perelman was observant and parlayed for a critical delay past the holiday.
79. According to Graham and Dodd, preferred stocks marry the least attractive features of equity and debt.
“As a class,” they wrote, “preferred shares are distinctly more vulnerable to adverse developments than are
bonds.” Benjamin Graham and David L. Dodd, Security Analysis, Principles and Teaching. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1934, Chapter 26. Preferreds are often described as “bonds with a kicker,” combining the
safety of a bond with the upside of a stock. However, as Graham and Dodd note, this is not really correct. If
a company gets in trouble, preferreds lack an enforceable claim to the interest and principal. When things go
well, unlike a common stock, the investor has no right to the company’s profits. Speaking at the University of
Florida in 1998, Buffett said, “The test of a senior security is whether you are getting an above-average
return, after tax, and feel certain of getting your principal back.” Here, the preference to the common was
meaningless.
80. Beginning October 31, 1995, in five installments over four years, it was mandatory to either convert into
Salomon stock or “put” it back to the company for cash. Perelman offered to beat Buffett’s deal—and
Gutfreund and several other managers told the board they would quit. He offered a conversion price of $42,
much more attractive from Salomon’s point of view. He would have owned only 10.9% of Salomon,
compared to Buffett’s 12%.
81. If a potential buyer for his block of convertible preferred appeared, Buffett was obliged to offer Salomon
first refusal. Even if it did not buy back the shares, he was prohibited from selling his entire block to any one
purchaser. Berkshire also agreed to limit its investment in Salomon to no more than 20% for seven years.
82. Michael Lewis, Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street. New York: W. W. Norton,
1989.
83. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair.
Chapter 47
1. Berkshire Hathaway letter to shareholders, 1990; Michael Lewis, “The Temptation of St. Warren,” New
Republic, February 17, 1992.
2. At the University of Notre Dame, spring 1991. Cited in Linda Grant, “The $4-Billion Regular Guy: Junk
Bonds, No. Greenmail, Never. Warren Buffett Invests Money the Old-Fashioned Way,” Los Angeles Times,
April 7, 1991.
3. In “How to Tame the Casino Economy,” Washington Post, December 7, 1986, Buffett advocated a 100%
confiscatory tax on profits from the sale of stocks or derivative instruments that the holder has owned for less
than a year.
4. Linda Grant, “The $4-Billion Regular Guy.” Buffett hosannaed Gutfreund in his shareholder letters as
well.
5. The principal conflicts inherent in Salomon’s business were the undisclosed bid-ask spread that Buffett had
objected to while working for his father’s firm in Omaha, the conflict between proprietary trades for the
firm’s account alongside customer trades, the investment banking business built off equity research stock
ratings, and the arbitrage department, which could trade on the firm’s merger deals. As a board member who
made Berkshire’s investment decisions, Buffett says he either recused himself from discussions involving
deals or did not invest on information he had, yet his board membership did create the appearance of a
conflict of interest.

6. The Standard & Poor’s 500 index was used as a proxy for the market.
7. Bertie would never make this bet. Since childhood, Warren had beaten her at every game they ever
played; never once had he let her win. She would have known that he would eat a potato chip just so she
would have had to pay up.
8. Letter from Warren E. Buffett to the Honorable John Dingell, U.S. House of Representatives, March 5,
1982.
9. In the interest of brevity, the history of portfolio insurance has been shortened considerably. The rout
began as the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate over Labor Day weekend 1987. Over the next month,
the market wavered and showed signs that investors were nervous. On October 6, the Dow broke a one-day
record when it fell 91.55 points. Interest rates continued to climb. The Dow dropped another 108 points on
Friday, October 16. Professional money managers spent the weekend pondering. On Black Monday, October
19, many stocks failed to open at all in the early hours of trading and the Dow fell a record-breaking 508
points. The exact cause of the crash remains in dispute. Program trading and equity index futures accelerated
the decline, but economic factors, military tensions, comments by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan
about the dollar, a slowing economy, and other factors have been blamed.
10. Interviews with Ed Anderson, Bill and Ruth Scott, Marshall Weinberg, Fred Stanback, Tom Knapp.
11. Interview with Walter Scott Jr.
12. In this case, the way to be hedged would be to short a broad group or index of stocks.
13. This account is based on both Doris’s and Warren’s versions of the story.
14. James Sterngold, “Too Far, Too Fast: Salomon Brothers’ John Gutfreund,” New York Times, January 10,
1988.
15. Salomon supplied its clients’ debt needs along all points of the maturity ladder. For a bond shop to
eliminate its commercial paper department was a baffling decision.
16. Four past option grants to Gutfreund were about to expire worthless and a fifth would have yielded only a
trivial gain. The revised exercise price reaped Gutfreund an estimated $3 million. The impact of swapping all
stock options for new options affected 2.9% of outstanding shares. Salomon’s 1987 proxy did not disclose the
repricing and instead contained an additional $4.5 million or 3.4% stock-option grant (Graef Crystal, “The
Bad Seed,” Financial World, October 15, 1991).
17. Interview with Bob Zeller.
18. Ibid. Zeller says that Buffett represented the shareholders’ interests on the compensation committee with
integrity, while trying to determine which employees genuinely deserved reward.
19. John Taylor, “Hard to Be Rich: The Rise and Wobble of the Gutfreunds,” New York, January 11, 1988.
20. Interviews with John Gutfreund, Gedale Horowitz.
21. Interview with Tom Strauss.
22. While technically the terms of the preferred stock didn’t work that way, if Buffett wanted to, he could
have found a way to get out.
23. Carol Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune, April 11, 1988. Buffett stated these
rumors were false in the article.

24. Katharine Graham letter to the members of the Buffett Group, December 14, 1987. She added a personal
note to Warren’s copy: “Here is what I sent out. Hope it is ok and I don’t get lynched.”
25. Investors use different periods to estimate cash flows—from ten years to forever (“perpetuity”)—as well
as different interest rates. Buffett’s margin of safety, however, was big enough to essentially eliminate the
differences in methods; his view was that debating such precision mattered less than applying a big haircut.
The key assumption is what growth rate the business is assumed to have—and for how long.
26. Robert L. Rose, “We Should All Have an Audience This Receptive Once in Our Lives,” Wall Street
Journal, May 25, 1988.
27. Or 14,172,500 KO shares costing $593 million at an average price of $41.81 (or $5.23 split adjusted for
the three 2-for-1 stock splits that occurred between 1988 and 2007). All shares and prices are adjusted for
subsequent stock splits.
28. Interview with Walter Schloss.
29. At that point, KO’s market value represented 21% of the total market capitalization of Berkshire
Hathaway—by far the biggest bet, in dollar terms, that Buffett had ever made on a single stock. Yet in
percentage terms, this fit his past pattern.
30. Interview with Howie Buffett.
31. Michael Lewis, Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street. New York: W. W. Norton,
1989.
32. BRK received a 9.25% coupon from the Champion preferred, above the going rate of 7%, and raised debt
at 5.5% to fund this $300 million purchase. Champion called the preferred early, but Berkshire was able to
convert its shares prior to the call and sell them back to the company at a small discount. Berkshire booked a
19% after-tax capital gain over the six years it held Champion.
33. Linda Sandler, “Heard on the Street: Buffett’s Special Role Lands Him Deals Other Holders Can’t Get,”
Wall Street Journal, August 14, 1989.
34. From an interview with a friend who said this to Munger.
35. Speech at Terry College of Business, the University of Georgia, July 2001.
36. Interview with John Macfarlane.
37. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair; Michael Lewis, Liar’s Poker.
38. Many contracts required posting of collateral or margin, but this did not compensate for the risk of
mismarking in the model.
39. Buffett and Munger, 1999 Berkshire Hathaway annual shareholder meeting.
40. Salomon held on for eight years. Phibro sold its share in the JV in 1998. Alan A. Block, “Reflections on
resource expropriation and capital flight in the Confederation,” Crime, Law and Social Change, October
2003.
41. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital Management. New
York: Random House, 2000.
42. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.

43. Meriwether characteristically exempted himself from this lucrative deal.
44. Report to the Salomon Inc. Compensation & Employee Benefits Committee, “Securities Segment
Proposed 1990, Compensation for Current Managing Directors.”
45. This pay deal was still one-sided; the arbs could only break even or win. Buffett’s partnership had
exposed him to unlimited liability to share in losses if he performed poorly—i.e., his incentives were truly
aligned with his partners.
46. Michael Siconolfi, “These Days, Biggest Paychecks on Wall Street Don’t Go to Chiefs,” Wall Street
Journal, March 26, 1991.
47. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
48. Using different terms. The casino/restaurant analogy was Buffett’s. Even if the customer businesses had
become profitable, they would have demanded even larger amounts of capital in later years, despite bigger
scale and market share, and it is questionable whether their returns would ever have satisfied Buffett.
49. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
Chapter 48
1. Michael Lewis, Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street. New York: W. W. Norton,
1989.
2. Feuerstein had worked in several senior roles at the SEC, including acting as counsel on Texas Gulf Sulfur,
a landmark insider-trading case.
3. Interview with Donald Feuerstein and many others, who confirmed his role and the POD nickname.
4. Interviews with Donald Feuerstein, Tom Strauss, Deryck Maughan, Bill McIntosh, John Macfarlane, Zach
Snow, Eric Rosenfeld.
5. Interview with Bill McIntosh.
6. Interview with John Macfarlane.
7. Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996, quoting
Eric Rosenfeld.
8. Lowenstein, Buffett, quoting John McDonough.
9. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
10. Interview with Donald Feuerstein.
11. Feuerstein went back into the conference room after talking to Munger and repeated the “thumbsucking” comment to another lawyer, Zach Snow, without further context. He did not seem to have grasped
its significance, according to Snow in an interview. Feuerstein says Munger said, “Warren and I do that all
the time.” Whatever the wording, neither Feuerstein nor Buffett took alarm at Munger’s remark.
12. Interview with Gerald Corrigan.
13. Feuerstein had had breakfast with one director, Gedale Horowitz, and told him much the same story,
slightly more informatively, on the morning of August 8. But Horowitz says he also felt misled.

14. Carol Loomis, “Warren Buffett’s Wild Ride at Salomon,” Fortune, October 27, 1997.
15. Munger’s later statement that he dragged this out of Feuerstein differs from Feuerstein’s recollection.
Both agree that Munger was given a clear description. There is no question that Buffett and Munger’s overall
interpretation of the actions of both Feuerstein and Gutfreund grew harsher as more information came to
light.
16. Statement of Salomon Inc., submitted in conjunction with the Testimony of Warren E. Buffett, Chairman
and CEO of Salomon, before the Securities Subcommittee, Committee of Banking, Housing and Urban
Affairs, U.S. Senate, September 10, 1991.
17. Mercury Asset Management (an affiliate of S.G. Warburg) and the Quantum Fund. When the Federal
Reserve contacted Salomon, it was initially because S.G. Warburg had bid in its own name as a primary
dealer (Statement of Salomon Inc., September 10, 1991).
18. Charles T. Munger testimony before U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, “In the Matter of Certain
Treasury Notes and Other Government Securities,” File No. HO-2513, February 6, 1992.
19. Ibid.
20. Michael Siconolfi, Constance Mitchell, Tom Herman, Michael R. Sesit, David Wessel, “The Big Squeeze:
Salomon’s Admission of T-Note Infractions Gives Market a Jolt—Firm’s Share of One Auction May Have
Reached 85%; Investigations Under Way—How Much Did Bosses Know?” Wall Street Journal, August 12,
1991.
21. Buffett later said Wachtell, Lipton shared some blame, noting that Wachtell declared effective on August
8 a shelf registration for $5 billion of medium-term notes using a prospectus that was “purporting to state all
material facts about Salomon” as of that date but contained no reference to Mozer’s activities or
management’s inaction. “If this relaxed position was one that Wachtell, Lipton was conveying to the
government and the public through official filings, it is not unlikely that they were conveying something
similar to John, although I don’t know what,” Buffett said.
22. Interview with John Macfarlane.
23. Interview with Bob Denham, who discovered this when he moved into Feuerstein’s old office.
24. Charles T. Munger testimony before U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, “In the Matter of Certain
Treasury Notes and Other Government Securities,” File No. HO-2513, February 6, 1992.
25. If its lenders failed to renew the firm’s loans, Salomon would be forced to liquidate its assets almost
overnight. In such a fire sale, assets would sell for a fraction of their carrying value. The apparently invincible
balance sheet of Salomon would melt into bankruptcy’s black hole immediately.
26. Interview with Bill McIntosh.
27. Interviews with Donald Feuerstein, John Macfarlane.
28. Mozer didn’t report an existing net “long,” “when-issued” position in Treasury bonds that put it over the
limit, and he also submitted another false bid in the name of Tiger Management Company.
29. Mozer denied intentionally manipulating the market. He was suspected of “repo-ing out” the bonds by
borrowing cash from customers with the bonds as collateral and making verbal side agreements with these
customers that they would not relend the bonds to anyone. That froze the supply of bonds, squeezing the
short-sellers. Suspicions of price-fixing dogged Salomon long afterward. There was little doubt that Mozer
and his customers had cornered the bonds and created a squeeze. According to Eric Rosenfeld, Salomon’s
own arb desk was short Treasuries and got burned.

30. Constance Mitchell, “Market Mayhem: Salomon’s ‘Squeeze’ in May Auction Left Many Players
Reeling—In St. Louis, One Bond Arb Saw $400,000 Vanish and His Job Go with It—From Confidence to
Panic,” Wall Street Journal, October 31, 1991.
31. Feuerstein didn’t find this out right away, even though it was known internally. He blames this omission
for his failure to press for a more thorough investigation of the squeeze. Several people, including
Meriwether, apparently knew about the “Tiger dinner” (named after one of the hedge-fund customers).
However, the “Tiger dinner” did not prove collusion.
32. Interview with John Gutfreund.
33. Or whatever the price was; this is Buffett’s general recollection.
34. While this was taking place, Salomon filed a shelf registration statement in connection with a $5 billion
senior debt offering, which the directors signed. The filing of a registration statement under these
circumstances potentially put the firm in violation of securities laws.
35. Some thought the squeeze may have been simply a matter of timing to make a bet that the Fed was about
to ease interest rates, according to Eric Rosenfeld, rather than defiance of the Treasury.
36. Various viewpoints within the firm are drawn from interviews with a number of the principals.
37. Interviews with Donald Feuerstein, Zachary Snow. Feuerstein says he happened to be taking his son on a
college visit at Cornell University that day and was “furious” when he found out later what happened.
38. Interview with Donald Feuerstein. Feuerstein referred to his failure to influence Gutfreund as the result of
Gutfreund’s yessing him to death, saying, “It is difficult to have an argument with someone who purports to
agree with you” (Donald M. Feuerstein letter to William F. May, Charles T. Munger, Robert G. Zeller, and
Simon M. Lorne, Munger, Tolles & Olson, January 31, 1993).
39. Interview with Zach Snow. Snow says that the dream haunted him long afterward. Feuerstein does not
recall this incident but says that if something like this happened it did not come across this way to him.
40. Philip Howard, Gutfreund’s lawyer, speaking to Ron Insana on CNBC Inside Opinion, April 20, 1995.
41. John Gutfreund speaking to Ron Insana, CNBC Inside Opinion, April 20, 1995.
42. The auctions of December 27, 1990 (4-year notes), February 7, 1991 (the so-called “billion-dollar
practical joke”), and February 21, 1991 (5-year notes) contained false bids. The April 25, 1991, auction
included a bid in excess of the amount authorized by a customer. In the May 22, 1991 (2-year-notes) auction,
Salomon (Mozer) failed to report a net “long” position to the government, as required, which fueled
suspicions of a cover-up of market manipulation, but proof of market manipulation was never found.
43. Interview with Zach Snow, who also testified to this under oath in 1994.
44. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
45. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
46. Even though he was Mozer’s boss, Meriwether did not have the authority to fire him; one managing
director could not fire another. Only Gutfreund could do that.
47. Interview with Bill McIntosh.
48. Interviews with John Macfarlane, Deryck Maughan.

49. McIntosh, by his own admission, had been no fan of Gutfreund’s prior to this event.
50. Interview with Bill McIntosh.
51. Spread-widening of ten to twenty basis points only attracted more sellers. As the afternoon wore on, the
traders widened the spread until finally they were offering only ninety cents on the dollar for the notes. The
price implied a reasonably high probability of default.
52. The firm would still do business as an “agent,” which meant it would buy only if it had another buyer in
