
Investment Objectives

Figure 7.22 Put Ratio Spread Theta vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration: July 25/30 1-to-2 Put Ratio Spread
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
Because of their asymmetrical risk-reward properties—limited risk in
one direction and unlimited risk in another—and their short vega/positive
theta characteristics, ratio spreads can be especially suited to situations
that favor limited movement in the direction of the short strike with declining volatility and the passage of time. Both declining volatility and
the time decay work to expand the value of a ratio spread. In addition, the
passage of time and/or declining implied volatility cause the delta of the
ratio spread to “grow” in favor of the trader—the delta of the call ratio
spread becomes more positive; the delta of the put ratio spread becomes
more negative.
When considering a ratio spread, traders should look for situations
that favor the above scenario. Some typical market conditions conducive
to slow, limited, directional movement with the possibility of declining
implied volatility are the following:
• Contratrend moves
— The oversold bounce
— The overbought correction
• Trend decelerations
— Rally into congestion and resistance
— Decline into congestion and support

207

208

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

• Special situations
— Postmeltdown
— Postmeltup
• Volatility skew plays
— Implied volatility differential

Contratrend Moves
When the market is trending, it will occasionally pause and pull back as
it corrects from temporary overbought or oversold conditions. These contratrend moves tend to be muted because they usually are accompanied by
lower volumes as they trade back into support or resistance levels that
contain the magnitude of the move. As the market retraces, time will pass
and implied volatility may decline as movement in the underlying price
contracts; these factors play into the strengths of the ratio spread. If the
trend suddenly resumes, the risk is limited to the amount, if any, invested
in the spread. Figures 7.23 and 7.24 are examples of contratrend moves.

Downtrend

Resistance
Contratrend Bounce

Support
Trend Resumption

Figure 7.23 Oversold Bounce
Resistance

Uptrend

Support

Figure 7.24 Overbought Correction

Contratrend Correction

Investment Objectives

Figure 7.23 is an example of a bullish contratrend move known as an oversold bounce; Figure 7.24 is an example of a bearish contratrend move known
as an overbought correction.

Trend Deceleration
When the market is trending, occasionally it will enter areas of previous price congestion. Price movement usually slows when this occurs because past inventory levels are approached and momentum traders look to
take profits. Once again, slowing price movement, the passage of time, and
declining implied volatility can occur in these zones, making them attractive for ratio spread strategies. Figures 7.25 and 7.26 below are examples of
reentry into previous areas of price congestion. Figure 7.25 is an example
of a bullish rally into a previous congestion zone; Figure 7.26 is an example
of a bearish decline into a previous congestion zone.

Reentry

Previous Congestion Zone

Figure 7.25 Rally into Congestion Zone

Reentry

Previous Congestion Zone

Figure 7.26 Decline into Congestion Zone

Special Situations
Meltdowns and meltups usually are news driven—either bad news or
good news—and the underlying stock explodes to the downside or the upside
with implied volatility increasing sharply. Bottom picking in meltdowns or
top picking in meltups can be a dangerous business; these types of contrarian
plays are risky because traders are going against a very powerful trend. But

209

210

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

if they get it right, it can be a very lucrative trade. If a correction does occur, it
usually is muted because price moves contratrend. Implied volatility usually
backs off when this occurs and, again, this plays into the strengths of the ratio
spread. In addition, if the trend resumes, risk is limited to initial investment.

Volatility Skew Plays
Occasionally market forces will create large implied volatility differentials between strike prices, which make “buy-low-volatility-strike, sell-highvolatility-strike” ratio spread strategies attractive. One could purchase an
option at the lower implied volatility and sell a ratioed amount of options
at the higher volatility. If the volatility normalizes, the trade may become
profitable.
Warning: Implied volatility differentials in and of themselves usually are not
sufficient reason to initiate a ratio spread. These trades should be incorporated into
market views that are optimal for ratio spreads—limited underlying movement,
passage of time, and declining implied volatility.

STRATEGY SELECTION
Once a trader determines that conditions favorable to a ratio spread
exist, she needs to evaluate the following factors:
• Direction of the trend
• Support and resistance levels
• Congestion areas or zones
• Projected time of slow movement and/or declining volatility

Direction of Trend
Obviously, direction is important because ratio spreads do have a directional bias. Call ratio spreads are used to trade a market with a bullish
bias, and put ratio spreads are used to trade a market with a bearish bias.
The market’s trend bias must be incorporated into strike selection.

Support and Resistance Levels
Support and resistance levels need to be defined for two reasons. They
identify areas where price movement is likely to decelerate; this is important for strike selection. Support and resistance levels are also important
because they are used to identify breakout levels for risk management, as
will be seen in the following section, “Trade Management.”

Congestion Areas or Zones
As with support and resistance levels, congestion areas or zones identify price levels at which the market is likely to decelerate and mark time

Strategy Selection

as the market works its way through previously important price levels.
When the market leaves these zones, it is likely that price movement will
accelerate, which is an important factor in risk management.

Projected Time of Slow Movement
and/or Declining Volatility
It is important for the trader to have a forecast of how long the slowed
price movement and/or declining volatility phase will last, to select the
expiration cycle of his ratio spread.
• Strike Selection
A forecast/knowledge of support and resistance levels and congestion
zones is needed for strike selection. Selecting strikes for a ratio spread is
similar to selecting strikes for a one-winged butterfly position. The difference is that, unlike the long at-the-money butterfly, the ratio spread usually
has a directional bias. As with the long butterfly, the point of maximum
profitability for the position is at the short strike of the structure, which
should be located at one’s price target. It is important that this level be
backstopped by a support or resistance level or congestion zone to slow
or stop the price movement of the underlying as it approaches the short
strike. If the underlying moves through the short strike—upward in the
case of the call ratio spread and downward in the case of the put ratio
spread—there is open-ended risk.
For example, in Figure 7.27 the underlying is moving sideways in a
range between 97.50 (support) and 102.50 (resistance). In this case, establishing a 97.50/102.50 1-to-2 call ratio spread when the underlying is near
support would seem to be an appropriate strike selection. In Figure 7.28
the underlying is declining from 105.00 toward strong 95.00 support. In
this case, establishing a 95.00/105.00 1-to-2 put ratio spread when the
underlying is near resistance would seem to be an appropriate strike
selection.

102.50

–2

100.00

97.50

Figure 7.27 Call Ratio Spread Strike Selection

+1

211

212

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

110.00

105.00

+1

100.00

95.00

–2

Figure 7.28 Put Ratio Spread Strike Selection

• Expiry Selection
To select the expiration month, a forecast of projected time of slow price
movement and/or declining implied volatility is necessary. If a trader estimates that this behavior will persist for one month, then she would want
to use options with an expiration cycle that mirrors the forecast. When in
doubt, the trader should use the expiration cycle that expires before the
projected end of the slow period.

TRADE MANAGEMENT
Ratio spreads have a high-risk profile. Again, like the one-winged
butterfly, there is not an outside “wing option” that kicks in to limit risk if
the short strikes are penetrated. Risk is open-ended, and for that reason,
ratio spreads must be managed with an iron fist. Important questions to
consider:
• Should the trader even consider ratio spreads?
• What is the most efficient way to take profits?
• What if the short strikes are threatened?
• What if the market moves down or up through the long strike?
• How should the trader manage risk or take losses?

Should the Trader Even Consider Ratio Spreads?
Ratio spreads have open-ended risk. Not only is there risk that the market will move through the short strikes and leave the trader long in a falling market or short in a rising market, there is also the danger of event risk.

Trade Management

Event risk occurs when a large, market-moving event causes the underlying
in which the trader has a ratio spread to gap through her short strikes, leaving no chance to exit the trade or manage risk and exposing the trader to
large losses. If her capital base is modest, or she can’t live with the idea of
overnight risk, then this spread is not for her. The trader needs to retreat to
the long butterfly or condor strategy to trade decelerating price movement
and/or declining implied volatility situations.

What Is the Most Efficient Way to Take Profits?
Ratio spreads will punish the greedy and undisciplined trader. As
with the long butterfly and condor, the properly positioned ratio spread
has positive time decay and the value of the position theoretically will
increase in value every day. The temptation to try to get “one more day”
of time decay out of this position can be a trader’s undoing. This type
of greedy behavior with a long butterfly or condor is not the end of the
world, because they are limited-risk positions. The ratio spread, however,
is not a limited-risk position, and getting greedy when red flags are flying
can lead to disaster. It is vitally important to have an ironclad risk management plan in place—and to stick to it. “He who fights and runs away,
will live to fight another day” is the proper mindset for ratio spreaders.
Here are some important tips:
• Take Partial Profits
Take partial profits occasionally by scaling out of the trade. For example, if an investor’s position consists of ten call ratio spreads (say, long
10 at-the-money calls and short 20 out-of-the-money calls), he should not
be afraid to take some money off the table from time to time. He can slowly
scale out of the position as it goes in his favor. This action takes profits and
limits remaining risk.
• Watch Market Action
Remember the reason the investor got into this trade in the first place:
He had a market forecast of weak directional price action over a period of
time and/or declining implied volatility. If the underlying stock or index in
which he has his position starts to behave as though this trend may end,
he should get out.

What If the Short Strikes Are Threatened?
When the underlying price moves toward the short strike of a ratio
spread it is a two-edged sword. It is moving toward the area of maximum
profitability, but it is also moving toward the area of maximum—and
unlimited—risk. This can be unnerving for the trader as the stakes begin
to rise. When this occurs, there are some evasive maneuvers that can be
employed. The spread can be “capped” and turned into a limited-risk
butterfly—at additional cost of course—or the short strike can be “rolled”
away from the underlying price to give the trader more breathing room.

213

214

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

These rolls can be on a one-to-one basis, which again will add additional
cost, or on a ratioed basis, which may add additional costs and will add
additional ultimate risk.

Example 1
An investor has on a 100/105 1-to-2 call ratio spread, and the underlying has moved up near 105.00, which is also an important resistance level.
This movement is what he had forecast, and he expects the underlying
price to continue to hover around the 105.00 area, but the risk is making
him nervous. He decides to purchase an additional call at the 110 strike and
convert his call ratio spread into a long butterfly that will still profit from
the underlying hovering around 105.00, but will limit risk to the upside if
the underlying price continues higher. Figures 7.29 and 7.30 illustrate this
procedure.

Calls

Strike

ⴙ1

100

ⴚ2

105

Puts

Figure 7.29 Existing 1-to-2 100/105 Call Ratio Spread

Calls

Strike

ⴙ1

100

ⴚ2

105

ⴙ1

110

Puts

Figure 7.30 Purchase of an Additional 110 Call to Convert to a Long
Butterfly

The result in Figure 7.30 is a long 100/105/110 call butterfly. The long
call butterfly will still profit from the underlying price hovering around
the 105.00 level, but upside risk is now capped—at the additional cost of
the 100 call.

Example 2
The investor has on a 95/100 1-to-2 put ratio spread, and the underlying has moved down near 95.00, which is also an important support level.
This movement is what he had forecast, but it happened a little faster than

Trade Management

he expected. He still believes that the 95.00 support level will hold, but the
risk is making him nervous. He decides to “roll” his short 95 puts down to
the 90 strike to give himself a little extra breathing room. Figures 7.31, 7.32,
and 7.33 illustrate this procedure.

Calls

Strike

Puts

95

ⴚ2

100

ⴙ1

Figure 7.31 Existing 95/100 1-to-2 Put Ratio Spread

Calls

Strike

Puts

90

ⴚ2

95
100

ⴚ2

ⴙ2

ⴙ1

Figure 7.32 Rolling Short 95 Puts Down to the 90 Strike

Calls

Strike

Puts

90

ⴚ2

95
100

ⴙ1

Figure 7.33 Resulting 90/100 1-to-2 Put Ratio Spread

The result in Figure 7.33 is a 90/100 1-to-2 put ratio spread. Purchasing
the 90/95 put spread rolls the position into a 90/100 1-to-2 put ratio spread.
This rolls the area of risk down below the 90.00 area, giving the position
extra breathing room and profit potential. Of course, this adds to the cost of
the position, which raises the upside risk if the underlying were to rally.

Example 3
An investor has on a 100/105 1-to-2 call ratio spread, and the underlying has moved up near 105.00, which is also an important resistance level.

215

216

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

This movement is what he had forecast, but the risk is making him nervous. He decides to roll his short options to a higher strike, but he doesn’t
want to invest any additional money, so he decides to use another ratio
spread. Figures 7.34, 7.35, and 7.36 illustrate this procedure.

Calls

Strike

ⴙ1

100

ⴚ2

105

Puts

Figure 7.34 Existing 100/105 1-to-2 Call Ratio Spread

Calls

Strike

ⴙ1

100

ⴙ2 ⴚ2

105

ⴚ4

110

Puts

Figure 7.35 Rolling Short 105 Calls Up to the 110 Strike

Calls

Strike

ⴙ1

100

Puts

105
ⴚ4

110

Figure 7.36 Resulting 100/110 1-to-4 Call Ratio Spread

The result in Figure 7.36 is a 100/110 1-to-4 call ratio spread. By executing two 105/110 1-to-2 call ratio spreads, the trader has rolled the
short 105 calls up to the 110 level, giving the position breathing room and
additional profit potential and moving the area of risk higher. Because
the roll was executed with a ratio spread, the additional cost is minimal.
However, the ratio has now increased from 1 to 2 to 1 to 4, so the ultimate
risk to the upside has been doubled.

Trade Management

What If the Market Moves Down or Up Through
the Long Strike?
If the underlying price moves against the forecast direction, risk is limited to the initial cost of the ratio spread, if any. The trader will need to
evaluate whether the amount of the initial investment is significant enough
to warrant using a stop-loss. If the ratio spread was executed for a credit,
there actually will be profit potential in an adverse market movement.
Because time generally works in favor of a ratio spread, there may be a
case for keeping the position even if the market moves opposite the forecast direction.
For example, suppose the trader had forecast a slow, upward directional move into a strong resistance level with declining implied volatility, and had executed a 1-to-2 call ratio spread for “even money” (neither
a debit nor credit). Then, opposite of his forecast, the underlying starts
to decline. Because there is no risk in the position to the downside, he
can continue to hold for a possible rebound and fulfillment of his original
forecast at a later date. If this occurs, some time will have passed, and all
else being equal, the spread will perform even better. See Figure 7.37 for
an illustration.

Resistance

Forecast Movement

Reentry

Actual Movement

Figure 7.37 Incorrect Forecast Reinitiated

How Should the Trader Manage Risk or Take Losses?
His forecast was for a slow, directional move toward a target area.
Hopefully, the target area is capped by a resistance level or a congestion
zone above the current underlying price (in the case of an upward move)
or floored by a support or congestion zone below the current underlying
price (in the case of a downward move). As mentioned in “Investment
Objectives,” these boundaries are very important not only for structuring
the ratio spread, but for risk management purposes as well. If they are
penetrated, or if the underlying price begins to move with a greater velocity and in greater magnitudes than the trader had forecast, it is time for him
to look for the exit because his forecast is incorrect.

217

218

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

Support and resistance levels are wonderful tools for risk management because they provide “lines in the sand” that, if crossed, are a call to
action. The position will either need to be modified, as in the section above
about short strikes, or exited completely. The investor cannot play mind
games with this type of position and must act immediately, as shown in
Figure 7.38.

Actual Movement
Resistance
Action Required!!

Forecast Movement

Incorrect Forecast, Upside Breakout
Threatens Call Ratio Spread

Figure 7.38 Breakout of Trading Range to the Upside

Figure 7.38 shows that the underlying price has moved sharply through
the resistance level the trader was counting on to cap upward movement.
Obviously, his forecast is incorrect, resistance has been breached, and he
must take action. The position must be modified or exited.
In Figure 7.39, the underlying price has moved sharply through the
support level the trader was counting on to act as a floor for downward
movement. Obviously, his forecast is incorrect, support has been broken,
and he must take action. The position must be modified or exited.

Incorrect Forecast, Downside Breakout
Threatens Put Ratio Spread

Forecast Movement

Action Required!!
Actual Movement
Support

Figure 7.39 Breakout of Trading Range to the Downside

Chapter 7 Exercise

CHAPTER 7 EXERCISE
1. Because ratio spreads are net short of options, will they generally be
long or short vega and positive or negative theta?
2. If one is projecting a mild correction where the underlying stock
will trade lower for a time, which would be used: a call ratio
spread or a put ratio spread?
3. A call ratio spread can be viewed as a ________ _________ _______
with an extra short call(s) at the upper strike or a ______ _______
_______ with a short call at the upper strike.
4. A put ratio spread can be viewed as a _______ ______ ______ with an
extra short put(s) at the lower strike or a _____ ______ ______ with a
short put at the lower strike.
5. Calculate the delta of the 95/100 1-to-2 call ratio spread with the
options having the following deltas:
95 strike call delta ⫽ 0.50
100 strike call delta ⫽ 0.35
6. With a ratio spread, the gamma quickly becomes (positive)
(negative) as the underlying price moves to the short strike, or
as implied volatility rises.
7. Declining volatility and time decay work to expand the value of a
ratio spread. True or false?
8. Does a call ratio spread have limited or unlimited risk on the
upside?
9. What is the formula to determine the maximum profit of a ratio put
spread?
10. Is it a call or a put ratio spread that can be used to take advantage
of a contratrend recovery or a bounce, where the market has been
declining with rising implied volatility?

Chapter 7 Exercise Answer Key
1. Short, positive
2. Put ratio spread
3. Bull call spread, long call butterfly
4. Bear put spread, long put butterfly
5. (0.50 ⫻ 1) ⫹ (0.35 ⫻ ⫺2) ⫽ ⫺0.20
6. Negative
7. True

219

220

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

8. Unlimited
9. K2 ⫺ K1 ⫹ credit received or ⫺ debit incurred when initiating
the position
10. Call

CHAPTER 7 QUIZ
1. When the underlying price moves toward the short strike of a
ratio spread, one can choose to either roll the position away from
the strike or turn it into a _________ spread to limit or eliminate
risk.
2. If an investor increases his call ratio spread from a 1 to 2 to a 1 to 4,
the risk to the upside will _____________ .
3. An investor has on the 85/90 ratio put spread. He purchases the
80/85 put spread. This rolls the position into a __________________ .
4. The passage of time and declining implied volatility results in
the delta of the put ratio spread becoming (more positive) (more
negative).
5. If a trader anticipates a slow, upward directional move into a strong
resistance level with declining implied volatility, he might choose to
put on a 1-to-2 ______ ______ spread.
6. Support and resistance levels and ___________ _________ are needed
for strike selection.
7. Support and resistance levels need to be determined because they
identify areas where price movement is likely to decelerate; they are
used to identify ________ levels for risk management.
8. When initiating ratio spreads, in the case of large implied
volatility differentials between strike prices, would one purchase
an option with the lower or the higher implied volatility and
would one sell a greater number of options with the lower or the
higher volatility?
9. If one initiated a call ratio spread for a debit, what is one’s maximum
