The Complete

TurtleTrader
The Legend
The Lessons
The Results

Michael W. Covel

For Jake
Home plate collisions and winning are all that matter

“Every morning in Africa a gazelle wakes up. It knows it must run
faster than the fastest lion or it will be killed. Every morning a lion
wakes up. It knows it must run faster than the slowest gazelle or it
will starve to death. It doesn’t matter whether you are a lion or a
gazelle. When the sun comes up, you better start running.”
African proverb

Contents
Epigraph

iii

Preface
Acknowledgments

vii
xiii

1 Nurture versus Nature

1

2 Prince of the Pit

9

3 The Turtles

29

4 The Philosophy

51

5 The Rules

67

6 In the Womb

99

7 Who Got What to Trade

113

8 Game Over

129

9 Out on Their Own

135

10 Dennis Comes Back to the Game

145

11 Seizing Opportunity

153

12 Failure Is a Choice

167

13 Second-Generation Turtles

173

14 Model Greatness

187

Appendix I
Appendix II
Appendix III
Appendix IV
Endnotes
Index
About the Author

191
197
199
203
227
239
249

Other Books by Michael W. Covel
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

Preface
“Trading was more teachable than I ever imagined. Even though
I was the only one who thought it was teachable . . . it was teachable beyond my wildest imagination.”
Richard Dennis

This is the story of how a group of ragtag students, many with no Wall
Street experience, were trained to be millionaire traders. Think of
Donald Trump’s show The Apprentice, played out in the real world
with real money and real hiring and ﬁring. However, these apprentices
were thrown into the ﬁre and challenged to make money almost immediately, with millions at stake. They weren’t trying to sell ice cream
on the streets of New York City. They were trading stocks, bonds, currencies, oil, and dozens of other markets to make millions.
This story blows the roof off the conventional Wall Street success
image so carefully crafted in popular culture: prestige, connections,
and no place at the table for the little guy to beat the market (and beating the market is no small task). Legendary investor Benjamin Graham
always said that analysts and fund managers as a whole could not beat
the market because in a signiﬁcant sense they were the market. On top
of that, the academic community has argued for decades about efﬁcient markets, once again implying there is no way to beat market
averages.
Yet making big money, beating the market, is doable if you don’t
follow the herd, if you think outside the box. People do have a chance
to win in the market game, but he or she needs the right rules and
attitude to play by. And those right rules and attitude collide head-on
with basic human nature.
This real-life apprentice story would still be buried had I not randomly picked up the July 1994 issue of Financial World magazine,

viii

Preface

featuring the article “Wall Street’s Top Players.” On the cover was
famed money manager George Soros playing chess. Soros had made
$1.1 billion for the year. The article listed the top one hundred paid
players on Wall Street for 1993, where they lived, how much they
made, and in general how they made it. Soros was ﬁrst. Julian Robertson was second, at $500 million. Bruce Kovner was ﬁfth, at $200 million. Henry Kravis of KKR was eleventh at $56 million. Famed traders
Louis Bacon and Monroe Trout were on the list, too.
The rankings (and earnings) provided a crystal-clear landscape of
who was making “Master of the Universe” money. Here were, without
a doubt, the top players in the “game.” Unexpectedly, one of them just
happened to be living and working outside Richmond, Virginia, two
hours from my home.
Twenty-ﬁfth on the list was R. Jerry Parker, Jr., of Chesapeake
Capital—and he had just made $35 million. Parker was not yet
forty years old. His brief biography described him as a former pupil of
Richard Dennis (who?) and noted that he was trained to be a “Turtle”
(what?). Parker was described as a then twenty-ﬁve-year-old accountant
who had attended Dennis’s school in 1983 to learn his “trend-tracking
system.” The article also said he was a disciple of Martin Zweig (who?),
who just happened to be thirty-third on the highest-paid list that year.
At that moment the name “Dennis” was neither more nor less important than “Zweig,” but the implication was that these two men had
made Parker extremely rich.
I studied that list intently, and Parker appeared to be the only one in
the top hundred advertised as having been “trained.” For someone like
myself, looking for ways to try and earn that kind of money, his biography was immediate inspiration, even if there were no real speciﬁcs.
Here was a man who bragged that he was a product of the “Virginia
boondocks,” loved country music, and preferred to keep as far away
from Wall Street as possible. This was no typical moneymaking story—
that much I knew.
The common wisdom that the only way you could ﬁnd success was
by working in eighty-story steel-and-glass towers in New York, London,
Hong Kong, or Dubai was clearly dead wrong. Jerry Parker’s ofﬁce
was absolutely in middle of nowhere, thirty miles outside Richmond
in Manakin-Sabot, Virginia. Soon after reading the magazine, I drove

Preface

ix

down to see his ofﬁce, noting its lack of pretense, and sat in the parking
lot thinking, “You have got to be kidding me. This is where he makes
all that money?”
Malcolm Gladwell famously said, “There can be as much value in
the blink of an eye as in months of rational analysis.” Seeing Parker’s
country ofﬁce was an electrical impulse for me, permanently dispelling
the importance of location. But I knew nothing else at the time about
Jerry Parker other than what was in that 1994 issue of Financial World.
Were there more of these students? How did they become students?
What were they taught? And who was this man Dennis who had taught
Parker and others?
Richard Dennis was an iconoclast, a wildcatting Chicago trader not
afﬁliated with a major investment bank or Fortune 500 ﬁrm. As the
“locals” were fond of saying on Chicago trading ﬂoors, Dennis “bet his
left nut.” In 1983, by the time he was thirty-seven, he’d made hundreds
of millions of dollars out of an initial grubstake of a few hundred. Dennis had done it on his own terms in less than ﬁfteen years, with no formal training or guidance from anyone. He took calculated risks
leveraging up huge amounts of money. If he liked a trade, he took all
of it he could get. He lived the markets as a “betting” business.
Dennis ﬁgured out how to proﬁt in the real world from an understanding of behavioral ﬁnance decades before Nobel prizes were
handed out to professors preaching theory. His competitors could never
get a handle on his consistent ability to exploit irrational market behavior throughout all types of markets. His understanding of probabilities
and payoffs was freakish.
Dennis simply marched to a different drum. He eschewed publicity
about his net worth even though the press speculated about it extensively. “I ﬁnd that kind of gauche,” said Dennis.1 Perhaps he was reticent to focus on his wealth because what he really wanted to prove was
that his earning skills were nothing special. He felt anyone could learn
how to trade if taught properly.
His partner, William Eckhardt, disagreed, and their debate resulted
in an experiment with a group of would-be apprentice traders recruited
during 1983 and 1984 for two trading “classes.” That “Turtle” name? It
was simply the nickname Dennis used for his students. He had been on
a trip to Singapore and visited a turtle-breeding farm. A huge vat of

x

Preface

squirming turtles inspired him to say, “We are going to grow traders just
like they grow turtles in Singapore.”
After Dennis and Eckhardt taught novices like Jerry Parker how to
make millions and the “school” closed, the experiment morphed into
word-of-mouth legend over the years supported by few hard facts.
The National Enquirer version of the story was captured in 1989 by a
Wall Street Journal headline, “Can the skills of successful trading be
learned? Or are they innate, some sort of sixth sense a lucky few are
born with?”
Since the 1980s are long past, many might wonder if the Turtles’
story still has relevance. It has more relevance than ever. The philosophy and rules Dennis taught his students, for example, are similar to
the trading strategy employed by numerous billion-dollar-plus hedge
funds. True, the typical stock-tip chaser glued daily to CNBC has not
heard this story, but the players on Wall Street, the ones who make the
real money, know.
The inside story has not been told to a wider audience until now
because Richard Dennis is not a household name today, and because
so much has happened on Wall Street since 1983. After the experiment
ended, the characters, both teachers and Turtles, went their separate
ways and an important human experiment fell through the cracks,
even though what took place is as signiﬁcant today as then.
The effort to get the real story out there started to gain momentum
in 2004, when I was invited to visit Legg Mason’s headquarters in Baltimore following the release of my ﬁrst book, Trend Following. After
lunch, I found myself in a classroom on the top ﬂoor with Bill Miller,
the fund manager of the $18 billion Legg Mason Value Trust fund
(LMVTX). Beating the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index for ﬁfteen
years straight put him in a similar league as Warren Buffett. Miller, like
Dennis, had taken extraordinary calculated risks and more often than
not been proven right.2 On this day he was lecturing a roomful of eager
trainees.
Out of the blue, Miller invited me to the lectern to address his class.
The ﬁrst questions, however, came straight from Miller and Michael
Mauboussin (Legg Mason’s chief investment strategist). They were,
“Tell us about Richard Dennis and the Turtles.” At that moment, I
realized that if these two Wall Street pros wanted to know more about

Preface

xi

Dennis, his experiment, and the Turtles, it was clear a much larger
audience would want to hear the story.
However, as someone not there in 1983, I knew the task of telling
a complete story from an objective vantage, with so many competing
characters and competing agendas, was going to be a serious challenge.
Getting those who lived the experience to talk, coupled with sleuthlike research to corroborate everything, was the only way to make this
story really come alive. That said, behind the scenes the soap opera of
those Turtles who worked hard to prevent this book’s publication is a
saga in itself.
Still, the biggest problem with a story like this is that most people
don’t want to actually understand how the real pros make big money.
They want the road to riches to be effortless. Look at the collective
public fascination with Jim Cramer—a man who is the polar opposite
of Richard Dennis and Jerry Parker. Cramer is no doubt intelligent, but
tuning into his extremely popular Mad Money TV show is like watching a trafﬁc accident. There is a live studio audience that hoots and
hollers at Cramer’s fundamentally driven buy signals and wild propsmashing antics. In one word: bullshit.
That said, a lot of people, many highly educated, believe that
Cramer’s way is the way to get rich. Instead of employing a statistical
thinking toward market decisions, the general public keeps investing
based on impulsive “feelings,” letting an assortment of emotional biases rule their lives. In the end, to their detriment, people are always
risk-adverse toward gains, but risk-seeking toward losses. They are
stuck.
The average newbie investor’s method for success is not pretty. He
gets in because his friends are doing it. Then the news media start up
the stories of little guys doing well during a bull market. They all start
to “invest” by picking stocks with “low” prices. As the market roars in
their favor, thoughts of crashes never enter their mind (“With all the
money in there, it could never go down!”). They never see their own
slaughter coming, even though their market bubble is never different
from past ones.
The media tell us that average investors now supposedly understand
the concept of risk, yet worrying about possibilities while ignoring
probabilities is at epidemic levels.3 People gamble away fortunes on

xii

Preface

money-losing hunches or double down when logic says to fold. At the
end of a lifetime they are never any closer to learning how to do it right.
But outside of the herd there are the special few, who have the uncanny knack for knowing when to buy and sell, combined with an uncanny knack to properly assess risk.4
Richard Dennis mastered that uncanny knack by his early twenties.
Unlike the general public wedded to their “feelings” to make decisions
Dennis used mathematical tools to calculate risk and used it to his advantage. What he learned and what he taught students never resembled Jim Cramer barking stock tips. More important, Dennis proved
that his ability to make money in the markets was not luck. His students, mostly novices, made millions for him and themselves.
What was the real story, and how did the Turtles learn their craft?
What trading rules were they taught, and how can an average trader or
investor use those insights today in his portfolio? What happened to
them after the experiment, in the ensuing years? Finding the answers
to those questions, with and without Dennis and his students’ cooperation, has kept me passionately curious since 1994.
I am not alone in that curiosity. As author Steve Gabriel wrote on
Yahoo! Finance recently, “The experiment has already been done that
shows that we can all learn to trade for a living if we want to. That is
why the ‘Turtles’ matter.” The Turtles are an answer to the age-old
question of nature versus nurture, the living proof of the single most
famous Wall Street school for making money.

Acknowledgments
“Do not speak to me of rules. This is war! This is not a game
of cricket!”
Colonel Saito,
from the movie The Bridge on the River Kwai

Justin Vandergrift assisted in bringing the Turtle trading rules to life,
and also developed many of the accompanying charts. Celia Straus
served as editor extraordinaire for the life of the project. Justin and
Celia’s value as sounding boards can’t be stated strongly enough. A
special thanks goes out to Shaun Jordan for ﬁnding me “access” and to
Art Collins for all of his invaluable insights. Sara Sia, Tricia Lucero,
and Maria Scinto provided help along the way. The following people
also made signiﬁcant contributions that allowed this book to come
to life:
Mark Abraham, Salem Abraham, Jody Arlington, Christian Baha,
Randy Bolen, Peter Borish, Ken Boyle, Sarah Brown, William Brubaker, Lindsay Campbell, Michael Carr, Michael Cavallo, Eva
Cheung, Rebecca Clear, Jerome Covel, Johanna Covel, Jonathan Craven, Gary DeMoss, Sam DeNardo, Jim DiMaria, Adam Elend, Elizabeth Ellen, Charles Faulkner, Ethan Friedman, Michael Gibbons,
Jeffrey Gordon, Roman Gregorig, Christian Halper, Martin Hare, Esmond Harmsworth, Larry Hite, Grace Hung, Wither Hurley, Ken
Jakubzak, Ajay Jani, Erle Keefer, Peter Kline, Jeffrey Kopiwoda, Eric
Laing, Charles Le Beau, Eleanor Lee, Jeff Marks, Howard Lindzon,
Michael Martin, Michael Mauboussin, Bill Miller, Brian Mixon,
Archie Moore, Robert Moss, Jerry Mullins, Robert Pardo, Jerry Parker,
T. Boone Pickens, Paul Rabar, Barry Ritholtz, Chris Roberts, James O.
Rohrbach, Tom Rollinger, Jay Rosser, Bradley Rotter, Mike Rundle,
George Rush, Jack Schwager, Paul Scrivens, Ed Seykota, Tom Shanks,

xiv

Acknowledgments

Michael Shannon, Mark Shore, Barry Sims, Aaron Smith, Peter
Sparber, Bob Spear, Celia Straus, Randall Sullivan, Gisete Tay, Irve
Towers, John Valentine, David Wachtel, Sol Waksman, Robert Webb,
Herschel Weingrod, Joel Westbrook, Paul Wigdor, Thomas C. Willis,
and Thomas R. Willis.
Throughout TurtleTrader I have sourced material extensively. Material not sourced (i.e. assorted Turtle quotations and comments) was
direct from interviews conducted speciﬁcally for this book.

1
Nurture versus Nature
“Give me a dozen healthy infants and my own speciﬁc world to
bring them up in, and I’ll guarantee to take any one at random
and train him to become any type of specialist I might select—
doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant, chef and yes, even beggar and
thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities,
vocations, and race of his ancestors.”
John B. Watson,
early twentieth-century American psychologist

In the early 1980s, when Chicago’s reigning trader king, Richard Dennis, decided to conduct his real-life social experiment, Wall Street was
heating up. The stock market was at the start of a huge bull market.
On the world stage, Iraq had invaded Iran. Lotus Development
had released Lotus 1-2-3, and Microsoft had put their new word processing program (“Word”) on the market. President Reagan, much
to the liberally minded Dennis’s chagrin, declared it “The Year of the
Bible.”
In order for Dennis to ﬁnd his special breed of student guinea
pigs, he circumvented conventional recruitment methods. His ﬁrm,
C&D Commodities, budgeted $15,000 for classiﬁed ads in the Wall
Street Journal, Barron’s, and the International Herald Tribune seeking
trainees during late fall 1983 and 1984. Avid job seekers saw this:

Richard J. Dennis
of C&D Commodities
is accepting applications for the position of
Commodity Futures Trader
to expand his established group of traders.

2

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Mr. Dennis and his associates will train a small
group of applicants in his proprietary trading con­
cepts. Successful candidates will then trade solely
for Mr. Dennis: they will not be allowed to trade fu­
tures for themselves or others. Traders will be paid
a percentage of their trading proﬁts, and will be al­
lowed a small draw. Prior experience in trading will
be considered, but is not necessary. Applicants should
send a brief resume with one sentence giving their
reasons for applying to:
C&D Commodities
141 W. Jackson, Suite 2313
Chicago, IL 60604
Attn: Dale Dellutri
Applications must be received by October 1, 1984.
No telephone calls will be accepted.

Lost in the back pages of national dailies, the ad attracted surprisingly few respondents when you consider what Dennis was offering.
But then, people don’t usually expect the road to riches to be in plain
sight.
The ad invited anyone to join one of Chicago’s most successful trading ﬁrms, making “experience” optional. It was as if the Washington
Redskins had advertised open positions regardless of age, weight, or
football experience.
Perhaps most stunning was that C&D Commodities was going to
teach proprietary trading concepts. This was unheard of at the time
(and still is today), since great moneymaking trading systems were always kept under lock and key.
Dennis’s recruitment process took place long before the chainreaction ﬂow of Craig’s List ads that attract in thousands of résumés
within hours for any job. However, it was 1983, and reaching out to
touch the world with the ﬂick of a blog post was not yet reality.
Potential students who were ultimately hired recall being stunned.
“This can’t be what I think it is” was a common refrain. It was, unbe-

Nurture versus Nature

3

lievably, an invitation to learn at the feet of Chicago’s greatest living
trader and then use his money to trade and take a piece of the proﬁts.
One of the greatest educational opportunities of the century garnered
responses ranging from a sentence written on a coconut to the mundane “I think I can make money for you.” Let’s face it, guessing what
would make a wealthy, reclusive, and eccentric trader take notice of
you in order to get to the next step—a face-to-face interview—had no
precedent.
This casting of a wide net was all part of Dennis’s plan to resolve his
decade-long nature-versus-nurture debate with his partner William
Eckhardt. Dennis believed that his ability to trade was not a natural
gift. He looked at the markets as being like Monopoly. He saw strategies, rules, odds, and numbers as objective and learnable.
In Dennis’s book, everything about the markets was teachable, starting with his very ﬁrst prerequisite: a proper view of money. He didn’t
think about money as merely a means to go buy stuff at the mall, the
way most people do. He thought of money as a way to keep score. He
could just as easily have used pebbles to keep count. His emotional attachment to dollars and cents appeared nonexistent.
Dennis would say, in effect, “If I make $5,000, then I can bet more
and potentially make $25,000. And if I make $25,000, I can bet that
again to get to $250,000. Once there, I can bet even more and get to a
million.” He thought in terms of leverage. That was teachable in his
book, as well.
On the other hand, William Eckhardt was solidly rooted in the nature camp (“either you’re born with trading skills or you’re not”). Dennis explained the debate, “My partner Bill has been a friend since high
school. We have had philosophical disagreements about everything
you could imagine. One of these arguments was whether the skills of a
successful trader could be reduced to a set of rules. That was my point
of view. Or whether there was something ineffable, mystical, subjective, or intuitive that made someone a good trader. This argument had
been going on for a long time, and I guess I was getting a little frustrated with idle speculation. Finally, I said, ‘Here is a way we can deﬁnitely resolve this argument. Let’s hire and train people and see what
happens.’ He agreed. It was an intellectual experiment.” 1
Even though Eckhardt did not believe traders could be nurtured,

4

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

he had faith in the underdog. He knew plenty of multimillionaires
who had started trading with inherited wealth and bombed. Eckhardt
saw them lose it all because they didn’t feel the pain when they were
losing: “You’re much better off going into the market on a shoestring,
feeling that you can’t afford to lose. I’d rather bet on somebody starting
out with a few thousand dollars than on somebody who came in with
millions.” 2
The ramiﬁcations of Dennis and Eckhardt’s intellectual experiment
opened a Pandora’s box of opinions and biases. Measuring and judging
people by their IQ board scores, LSAT, GPA, degrees, or whatever
other metric, is the way most of society operates. Yet if an IQ measure
or test score was the only ticket needed for success, then all smart people would be loaded, which is obviously not the case.
Stephen Jay Gould, the late great American paleontologist, evolutionary biologist, and historian of science, was always quick to eschew
society’s misconceptions about intelligence: “We like to think of America as a land with generally egalitarian traditions, a nation conceived in
liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.” 3
However, Gould saw America slipping toward measures and ratios as a
sole means of predicting life success and was appalled at the increasing
predilection of Americans to use a hereditarian interpretation of IQ as
a limiting tool.4
Dennis, like Gould, was not about to be taken in by a hereditary
interpretation of IQ. His aim was to implant his mental software into
the brains of his students, and then place them into his controlled environment to see how they would react and perform.
That someone of Dennis’s stature and success would be so determined to prove nurture over nature that he would teach his proprietary
trading methods to others was extraordinary. Certainly his partner was
surprised that he was willing to put so much of his own money in the
hands of amateurs.
With a dark beard and sideburns and a receding hairline, William
Eckhardt bore an uncanny resemblance to Lenin and cut a sinewy,
energetic ﬁgure, the polar opposite of the over-six-foot-tall rotund Dennis. Of the two, he was the true mathematician, with a master’s in
mathematics from the University of Chicago and four years of doctoral
research in mathematical logic. But for the purpose of their nature-
