
Discipline
A friend of mine used to have a dog-training business. Occasionally a
prospective client would call her and say, “I want to train my dog to
come when called, but I do not want to train it to sit or lie down.” And
she’d answer, “Training a dog to come off-leash is one of the hardest
things to teach; you must do a lot of obedience training first. What
you’re saying sounds like, ‘I want my dog be a neurosurgeon, but I do
not want it to go to high school.’”
Many new traders expect to sit in front of their screens and make
easy money day-trading. They skip high school and head straight for
neurosurgery.
Discipline is necessary for success in most endeavors, but especially
in the markets because they have no external controls. You have to
watch yourself because no one else will, except for the margin clerk.
You may put on the stupidest and self-destructive trades, but as long as
you have enough money in your account, no one will stop you. No one
will say hold on, wait, think what you’re doing! Your broker will repeat
your order to confirm he got it right. Once your order hits the market,
other traders will scramble for the privilege of taking your money.
Most fields of human endeavor have rules, yardsticks, and professional bodies to enforce discipline. No matter how independent you
feel, there is always some agency looking over your shoulder. If a doctor in private practice starts writing too many prescriptions for painkillers, he’ll soon hear from the health department. Markets impose no
restrictions, as long as you have enough equity. Adding to losing positions is similar to overprescribing narcotics, but nobody will stop you.
As a matter of fact, other market participants want you to be undisci-

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

63

plined and impulsive. That makes it easier for them to get your money.
Your defense against self-destructiveness is discipline. You have to set
up your own rules and follow them in order to prevent self-sabotage.
Discipline means designing, testing, and following your trading system. It means learning to enter and exit in response to predefined signals rather than jumping in and out on a whim. It means doing the
right thing, not the easy thing. And the first challenge on the road to
disciplined trading involves setting up a record-keeping system.

Record-Keeping
Good traders keep good records. They keep them not just for their
accountants but as tools of learning and discipline. If you do not have
good records, how can you measure your performance, rate your
progress, and learn from your mistakes? Those who do not learn from
the past are doomed to repeat it.
When you decide to become a trader, you sign up for an expensive
course. By the time you figure out the game, its cost may equal that of
a college education, only most students never graduate—they drop out
and get nothing for their money except for memories of a few wild rides.
Whenever you decide to improve your performance in any area of
life, record keeping helps. If you want to become a better runner, keeping records of your speeds is essential for designing better workouts.
If money is a problem, keeping and reviewing records of all expenditures is certain to uncover wasteful tendencies. Keeping scrupulous records turns a spotlight on a problem and allows you to improve.
Becoming a good trader means taking several courses—psychology,
technical analysis, and money management. Each course requires its
own set of records. You’ll have to score high on all three in order to
graduate.
Your first essential record is a spreadsheet of all your trades. You have
to keep track of entries and exits, slippage and commissions, as well
as profits and losses. Chapter 5, “Method—Technical Analysis” on trading channels will teach you to rate the quality of every trade, allowing
you to compare performance across different markets and conditions.
Another essential record shows the balance in your account at the
end of each month. Plot it on a chart, creating an equity curve whose
angle will tell you whether you are in gear with the market. The goal
is a steady uptrend, punctuated by shallow declines. If your curve
slopes down, it shows you’re not in tune with the markets and must

64

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

reduce the size of your trades. A jagged equity curve tends to be a sign
of impulsive trading.
Your trading diary is the third essential record. Whenever you enter
a trade, print out the charts that prompted you to buy or sell. Paste
them on the left page of a large notebook and write a few words
explaining why you bought or sold, stating your profit objective and a
stop. When you close out that trade, print out the charts again, paste
them on the right page and write what you’ve learned from the completed trade.
These records are essential for all traders, and we will return to them
later in Chapter 8, “The Organized Trader.” A shoebox crammed with
confirmation slips does not qualify as a record-keeping system. Too
many records? Not enough time? Want to skip high school and dive
into neurosurgery? Traders fail because of impatience and lack of discipline. Good records set you apart from the market crowd and put
you on the road to success.

Training for Battle
How much training you need depends on the job you want. If you
want to be a janitor, an hour of training might do. Just learn to attach
a mop to the right end of the broomstick and find a pail without holes.
If, on the other hand, you want to fly an airplane or do surgery, you’ll
have to learn a great deal more. Trading is closer to flying a plane than
to mopping a floor, meaning you’ll need to invest a lot of time and
energy in mastering this craft.
Society mandates extensive training for pilots and doctors because
their errors are so deadly. As a trader, you are free to be financially
deadly to yourself—society does not care, because your loss is someone else’s gain. Flying and medicine have standards and yardsticks, as
well as professional bodies to enforce them. In trading, you have to set
up your own rules and be your own enforcer.
Pilots and doctors learn from instructors who impose discipline on
them through tests and evaluations. Private traders have no external
system for learning, testing, or discipline. Our job is hard because we
must learn on our own, develop discipline, and test ourselves again
and again in the markets.
When we look at training for pilots and doctors, three features stand
out. They are the gradual assumption of responsibility, constant evalu-

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

65

ations, and training until actions become automatic. Let us see whether
we can apply them to trading.
1. The Gradual Assumption of Responsibility A flying school doesn’t
put a beginner into a pilot’s seat on his first day. A medical student is
lucky if he is allowed to take a patient’s temperature on his first day in
the hospital. His superiors double-check him before he can advance to
the next, slightly higher level of responsibility.
How does this compare to the education of a new trader?
There is nothing gradual about it. Most people start out on an impulse, after hearing a hot tip or a rumor of someone making money. A
beginner has some cash burning a hole in his pocket. He gets a broker’s name out of a newspaper, FedExes him a check, and enters his
first trade. Now he is starting to learn! When do they close this market?
What is a gap opening? How come the market is up and my stock is
down?
A “sink or swim” approach does not work in complex enterprises,
such as flying or trading. It is exciting to jump in, but excitement is
not what good traders are after. If you do not have a specific trading plan,
you’re better off taking your money to Vegas. The outcome will be the
same, but at least there they’ll throw in some free drinks.
If you are serious about learning to trade, start with a relatively small
account and set a goal of learning to trade rather than making a lot of
money in a hurry. Keep a trading diary and put a performance grade
on every trade.
2. Constant Evaluations and Ratings The progress of a flying cadet
or a medical student is measured by hundreds of tests. Teachers constantly rate knowledge, skills, and decision-making ability. A student
with good results is given more responsibility, but if his performance
slips, he has to study more and take more tests.
Do traders go through a similar process?
As long as you have money in your account, you can make impulsive trades, trying to weasel your way out of a hole. You can throw
confirmation slips into a shoebox, and give them to your accountant at
tax time. No one can force you to look at your test results, unless you
do it yourself.
The market tests us all the time, but only a few pay attention. It gives
a performance grade to every trade and posts those ratings, but few

66

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

people know where to look them up. Another highly objective test is
our equity curve. If you trade several markets, you can take this test in
every one of them, as well as in your account as a whole. Do most of
us take this test? No. Pilots and doctors must answer to their licensing
bodies, but traders sneak out of class because no one takes attendance
and their internal discipline is weak. Meanwhile, tests are a key part of
trading discipline, essential for your victory in the markets. Keeping
and reviewing records, as outlined later in this book, puts you a mile
ahead of undisciplined competitors.
3. Training until Actions Become Automatic During one of my
finals in medical school I was sent to examine a patient in a half-empty
room. Suddenly I heard a noise from behind the curtain. I looked, and
there was another patient—dying. “No pulse,” I yelled to another student, and together we put the man on the floor. I began pumping his
chest, while the other fellow gave him mouth to mouth, one forced
breath for four chest pumps. Neither of us could run for help, but
someone opened the door and saw us. A reanimation team raced in,
zapped the man with a defibrillator and pulled him out.
I never had to revive anyone before, but it worked the first time
because I had five years of training. When the time came to act, I didn’t
have to think. The point of training is to make actions automatic, allowing us to concentrate on strategy.
What will you do if your stock jumps five points in your favor? Five
points against you? What if your future goes limit up? Limit down? If you
have to stop and think while you’re in a trade, you’re dead. You need
to spend time preparing trading plans and deciding in advance what
you will do when the market does any imaginable thing. Play those scenarios in your head, use your computer, and get yourself to the point
where you do not have to ruminate about what to do if the market jumps.
The mature trader arrives at a stage where most trading actions have
become nearly automatic. This gives you the freedom to think about
strategy. You think about what you want to achieve, and less about tactics of how to achieve it. To reach that point, you need to trade for a
long time. The longer you trade and the more trades you put on, the
more you’ll learn. Trade a small size while learning and put on many
trades. Remember, the first item on the agenda for a beginner is to
learn how to trade, not to make money. Once you’ve learned to trade,
money will follow.

C H A P T E R
F I V E

METHOD—
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

W

ill this stock rise or fall? Should you go long or short? Traders reach
for a multitude of tools to find answers to these questions. Many tie
themselves into knots trying to choose between pattern recognition, computerized indicators, artificial intelligence, or even astrology for some desperate souls.
No one can learn all the analytic methods, just as no one can master
every field of medicine. A physician cannot become a specialist in heart
surgery, obstetrics, and psychiatry. No trader can know everything about
the markets. You have to find a niche that attracts you and specialize in it.
Markets emit huge volumes of information. Our tools help organize
these flows into a manageable form. It is important to select analytic tools
and techniques that make sense to you, put them together into a coherent
system, and focus on money management. When we make our trading
decisions at the right edge of the chart, we deal with probabilities, not certainties. If you want certainty, go to the middle of the chart and try to find
a broker who will accept your orders.
This chapter on technical analysis shows how one trader goes about
analyzing markets. Use it as a model for choosing your favorite tools,
rather than following it slavishly. Test any method you like on your own
data because only personal testing will convert information into knowledge and make these methods your own.
Many concepts in this book are illustrated with charts. I selected them
from a broad range of markets—stocks as well as futures. Technical analysis is a universal language, even though the accents differ. You can apply
what you’ve learned from the chart of IBM to silver or Japanese yen. I trade
mostly in the United States, but have used the same methods in Germany,
67

68

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Russia, Singapore, and Australia. Knowing the language of technical analysis enables you to read any market in the world.
Analysis is hard, but trading is much harder. Charts reflect what has
happened. Indicators reveal the balance of power between bulls and
bears. Analysis is not an end in itself, unless you get a job as an analyst
for a company. Our job as traders is to make decisions to buy, sell, or
stand aside on the basis of our analysis.
After reviewing each chart, you need to go to its hard right edge and
decide whether to bet on bulls, bet on bears, or stand aside. You must
follow up chart analysis by establishing profit targets, setting stops, and
applying money management rules.

BASIC CHARTING
A trade is a bet on a price change. You can make money buying low and
selling high or shorting high and covering low. Prices are central to our
enterprise, yet few traders stop to think what prices are. What exactly are
we trying to analyze?
Financial markets consist of huge crowds of people who meet on the
floor of an exchange, on the phone, or via the Internet. We can divide
them into three groups: buyers, sellers, and undecided traders. Buyers
want to buy as cheaply as possible. Sellers want to sell as expensively as
possible. They could take forever to negotiate, but feel pressure from
undecided traders. They have to act quickly, before some undecided
trader makes up his mind, jumps into the game, and takes away their bargain. Undecided traders are the force that speeds up trading. They are true
market participants, as long as they watch the market and have the money
to trade it. Each deal is struck in the midst of the market crowd, putting
pressure on both buyers and sellers. This is why each trade represents the
current emotional state of the entire market crowd.
Price is a consensus of value of all market participants expressed in
action at the moment of the trade.
Many traders have no clear idea what they are trying to analyze. Balance
sheets of companies? Pronouncements of the Federal Reserve? Weather
reports from soybean-growing states? The cosmic vibrations of Gann theory? Every chart serves as an ongoing poll of the market. Each tick represents a momentary consensus of value of all market participants. High and
low prices, the height of every bar, the angle of every trendline, the duration of every pattern reflect aspects of crowd behavior. Recognizing these
patterns can help us decide when to bet on bulls or bears.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

69

During an election campaign pollsters call thousands of people asking
how they’ll vote. Well-designed polls have predictive value, which is why
politicians pay for them. Financial markets run on a two-party system—bulls
and bears, with a huge silent majority of undecided traders who may throw
their weight to either party. Technical analysis is a poll of market participants. If bulls are on top, we should cover shorts and go long. If bears are
stronger, we should go short. If an election is too close to call, a wise trader
stands aside. Standing aside is a legitimate market position and the only one
in which you can’t lose money.
Individual behavior is difficult to predict. Crowds are much more primitive and their behavior more repetitive and predictable. Our job is not to
argue with the crowd, telling it what’s rational or irrational. We need to
identify crowd behavior and decide how likely it is to continue. If the
trend is up and we find that the crowd is growing more optimistic, we
should trade that market from the long side. When we find that the crowd
is becoming less optimistic, it is time to sell. If the crowd seems confused,
we should stand aside and wait for the market to make up its mind.

The Meaning of Prices
Highs and lows, opening and closing prices, intraday swings and weekly
ranges reflect crowd behavior. Our charts, indicators, and technical tools are
windows into the mass psychology of the markets. You have to be clear
about what you are studying if you want to get closer to the truth.
Many market participants have backgrounds in science and engineering
and are often tempted to apply the principles of physics. For example, they
may try to filter out the noise of a trading range to obtain a clear signal of
a trend. Those methods can help, but they cannot be converted into automatic trading systems because the markets are not physical processes. They
are reflections of crowd psychology, which follows different, less precise
laws. In physics, if you calculate everything, you’ll predict where a process
will take you. Not so in the markets, where a crowd can always throw you
a curve. Here you have to act within this atmosphere of uncertainty, which
is why you must protect yourself with good money management.
The Open The opening price, the first price of the day, is marked on a
bar chart by a tick pointing to the left. An opening price reflects the influx
of overnight orders. Who placed those orders? A dentist who read a tip in
a magazine after dinner, a teacher whose broker touted a trade but who
needed his wife’s permission to buy, a financial officer of a slow-moving

70

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

institution who sat in a meeting all day waiting for his idea to be approved
by a committee. They are the people who place orders before the open.
Opening prices reflect opinions of less informed market participants.
When outsiders buy or sell, who takes the opposite side of their trades?
Market professionals step in to help, only they do not run a charity. If floor
traders see more buy orders coming in, they open the market higher, forcing outsiders to overpay. The pros go short, so that the slightest dip makes
them money. If the crowd is fearful before the opening and sell orders predominate, the floor opens the market very low. They acquire their goods
on the cheap, so that the slightest bounce earns them short-term profits.
The opening price establishes the first balance of the day between outsiders and insiders, amateurs and professionals. If you are a short-term
trader, pay attention to the opening range—the high and the low of the
first 15 to 30 minutes of trading. Most opening ranges are followed by
breakouts, which are important because they show who is taking control
of the market. Several intraday trading systems are based on following
opening range breakouts.
One of the best opportunities to enter a trade occurs when the market gaps
at the open in the direction opposite your intended trade. Suppose you analyze a market at night and your system tells you to buy a stock. A piece of
bad news hits the market overnight, sell orders come in, and that stock opens
sharply lower. Once prices stabilize within the opening range, if you are still
bullish and that range is above your planned stop-loss point, place your buy
order a few ticks above the high of the opening range, with a stop below.
You may pick up good merchandise on sale!
The High Why do prices go up? The standard answer—more buyers
than sellers—makes no sense because for every trade there is a buyer and
a seller. The market goes up when buyers have more money and are more
enthusiastic than sellers.
Buyers make money when prices go up. Each uptick adds to their profits. They feel flushed with success, keep buying, call friends and tell them
to buy—this thing is going up! Eventually, prices rise to a level where bulls
have no more money to spare and some start taking profits. Bears see the
market as overpriced and hit it with sales. The market stalls, turns, and
begins to fall, leaving behind the high point of the day. That point marks
the greatest power of bulls for that day.
The high of every bar reflects the maximum power of bulls during that
bar. It shows how high bulls could lift the market during that time period.
The high of a daily bar reflects the maximum power of bulls during that

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

71

day, the high of a weekly bar shows the maximum power of bulls during
that week, and the high of a five-minute bar shows their maximum power
in those five minutes.
The Low Bears make money when prices fall, with each downtick making money for short sellers. As prices slide, bulls become more and more
skittish. They cut back their buying and step aside, figuring they’ll be able
to pick up what they want cheaper at a later time. When buyers pull in
their horns, it becomes easier for bears to push prices lower, and the
decline continues.
It takes money to sell stocks short, and a fall in prices slows down when
bears start running low on money. Bullish bargain hunters appear on the
scene. Experienced traders recognize what’s happening and start covering
shorts and going long. Prices rally from their lows, leaving behind the low
mark—the lowest tick of the day.
The low point of each bar reflects the maximum power of bears during
that bar. The lowest point of a daily bar reflects the maximum power of
bears during that day, the low point of a weekly bar shows the maximum
power of bears during that week, and the low of a five-minute bar shows
the maximum power of bears during those five minutes. Several years ago
I designed an indicator, called Elder-ray, for tracking the relative power of
bulls and bears by measuring how far the high and the low of each bar
get away from the average price.
The Close The closing price is marked on a bar chart by a tick pointing
to the right. It reflects the final consensus of value for the day. This is the
price at which most people look in their daily newspapers. It is especially
important in the futures markets, because the settlement of trading
accounts depends on it.
Professional traders monitor markets throughout the day. Early in the
day they take advantage of opening prices, selling high openings and
buying low openings, and then unwinding those positions. Their normal
mode of operations is to fade—trade against—market extremes and for the
return to normalcy. When prices reach a new high and stall, professionals
sell, nudging the market down. When prices stabilize after a fall, they buy,
helping the market rally.
The waves of buying and selling by amateurs that hit the market at the
opening usually subside as the day goes on. Outsiders have done what
they planned to do, and near the closing time the market is dominated by
professional traders.
