
Triumphalism and the Decline of Foreign Economic Rivals
In the late 1990s, before the 2000 peak in the stock markets, most other countries seemed to be imitating the Western economic system. Communist China
has been embracing market forces since the late 1970s. Increasing tolerance of
free markets in the Soviet Union culminated with the breakup of that nation
in 1991 into smaller, market-oriented states. The world seemed to be swinging our way, and therefore it started to seem only natural that the U.S. stock
market should be most highly valued in the world.
These political events unfolded gradually after the bull market began in
1982. And the years after the start of the bull market witnessed the decline in
the Japanese market after 1989, the prolonged economic slump in Japan, and
the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98, which coincided roughly with the dramatic burst of the U.S. stock market into uncharted territory at the beginning
of the new millennium. These foreign events might have been viewed as bad
for the U.S. stock market—as the harbinger of bad things to come here—but
instead they were seen by many as the weakening of major rivals. The relation
between the United States and its economic rivals was often described in the
media as a competition in which there can only be one winner, as in a sports
event. The weakening of a rival was thus viewed simplistically as good news.

Cultural and Political Changes Favoring Business Success
The soaring of the stock market during 1982–2000 was accompanied by a
significant rise in materialistic values. A Roper‑Starch questionnaire given to

44

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

survey participants in both 1975 and 1994 asked, “When you think of the good
life—the life you’d like to have, which of the things on this list, if any, are part
of that good life, as far as you personally are concerned?” In 1975, 38% picked
the option “a lot of money,” whereas in 1994, fully 63% picked that option.5
Such feelings transformed our culture into one that reveres the successful
businessperson as much as or even more than the accomplished scientist, artist, or revolutionary. The idea that investing in stocks is a road to quick riches
developed a certain appeal to born‑again materialists.
Stay-at-home mothers, who devote their lives to their families, become
less admired, and this is part of the reason women joined the work force in
increasing numbers. This then also increased the availability of credit and
home financing—starting around the 1970s, mortgage lenders began to count
the spouse’s income in qualifying a mortgage, expanding available mortgage
credit. This helped propel home prices.
A decline in crime rates also, on the flip side, encouraged materialistic
values by making people feel more secure, less worried that they would be
robbed or physically harmed. In the United States, the rate of property crimes
per 1,000 people fell 49% between 1993 and 2003, and the rate of violent
crimes per 1,000 people fell 55%.6 One could then more comfortably flaunt
wealth, and so wealth became more attractive. Living in an ostentatious
home was now more appealing. Fear of terrorism increased, but terrorists
did not seem to strike wealthy people preferentially, and generally not in
their homes. The declining crime rates in the U.S. made a capitalist lifestyle
seem a better model for the entire world.
Note that materialistic values do not by themselves have any logical bearing on the level of the stock market. Whether or not people are materialistic,
it is still reasonable to expect them to save for the future and to seek out the
best vehicles for their savings. But it is plausible that such feelings would
influence their demand for stocks, which have long held out at least the possibility of amassing substantial riches quickly. Moreover, such feelings have an
unmistakable political impact, which in turn affects the success of corporate
investments.

A Republican Congress and Capital Gains Tax Cuts
When Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980, so too was a Republican Senate,
the first since 1948. In 1994, both houses became Republican (though with a
Democratic president, just as happened again in 2014). Sensing the changed
public attitudes that had elected them, these lawmakers were much more probusiness than their Democratic predecessors had been. This change in Congress
boosted public confidence in the stock market because of a variety of controls
that the legislature can exert over corporate profits and investor returns.

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

45

Consider taxation. No sooner had the Republican Congress been seated in
1995 than proposals to cut the capital gains tax became prominent. In 1997,
the top capital gains tax rate was cut from 28% to 20%. As soon as this cut was
enacted, Congress talked of cutting rates further. A 1999 tax bill would have
cut capital gains taxes still further, but President Clinton vetoed it.
Anticipation of possible future capital gains tax cuts can have a favorable
impact on the stock market, even when tax rates actually remain unchanged.
From 1994 to 1997, investors were widely advised to hold on to their long-term
capital gains, not to realize them, until after the capital gains tax cut. This had
a strengthening effect on the market. At the time of the 1997 capital gains tax
cut, there was fear that investors who had been waiting to sell would do so
and bring the market down, as had apparently happened after capital gains
tax cuts in 1978 and 1980. But this did not happen in 1997. Of course, many
investors must have thought there could be an even more favorable capital
gains tax rate in their future, and if so, there would have been no reason to
sell right after the 1997 cut took effect.
It is likely that the general atmosphere of public talk of future capital
gains tax cuts, of possible indexing of capital gains taxes to inflation, and of
analogous tax cuts (for example, estate tax cuts) had created among investors
a reluctance to sell their appreciated stocks. If capital gains tax rates may be
cut sharply in the future, why sell when the rates are as high as 20%? Having
been advised by experts to wait and see about capital gains tax cuts, many
investors could be expected to defer sales of appreciated assets until they were
more clearly at a historic low in capital gains tax rates. Such an atmosphere
of holding, not folding, naturally placed upward pressure on stock prices.

The Baby Boom and Its Perceived Effects on the Markets
Following World War II, a substantial increase in the birth rate took place in
the United States. Peacetime prosperity encouraged those who had postponed
families because of the depression and the war to have children. There were
also postwar birth rate increases in the United Kingdom, France, and Japan,
but they were not as protracted or strong as that in the United States, no doubt
at least in part because the economies of those nations were in such disarray
after the war. Then, around 1966, the growth of U.S. and world population
showed a dramatic decline, one that continues to this day. This decline was
unusual, if not unique, by historical standards: it did not occur because of famine or war, but rather because of an endogenous decline in the fertility rate.7
Advances in birth control technology (the pill was invented in 1959 and
became widely available by the mid‑1960s in the United States and many other
countries) and social changes that accepted the legality of contraception and
abortion were instrumental in lowering the rate of population growth, as were

46

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

growing urbanization and advances in education and economic aspiration
levels. The Baby Boom and the subsequent Baby Bust have created a looming
social security crisis in many countries of the world: they understood then
that when the Boomers grew old and finally retired, the number of young
working people available to support the elderly population would decline
worldwide (as today we see it has indeed begun to do).8
The Baby Boom in the United States was marked by very high birth rates
during the years 1946–66, and so there were, at the peak of the market in 2000,
an unusually large number of people between the ages of 35 and 55. Two theories suggested then that the presence of so many middle‑aged people ought
to boost the stock market. One theory justified the high price‑earnings ratios
we saw in the Millennium Boom as the result of those Boomers competing
against one another to buy stocks to save for their eventual retirement and
bidding share prices up relative to the earnings they generate. According to
the other theory, spending on current goods and services boosts stock prices,
through a generalized positive effect on the economy: high expenditures mean
high profits for companies.
These simple Baby Boom stories were just a bit too simple. For one thing,
they neglected to consider when the Baby Boom should affect the stock
market. Maybe the effect of the Baby Boom was already factored into stock
prices by investors even before 1982. They also neglected such factors as the
emergence of new capitalist economies worldwide and their demand, in
another twenty years, for U.S. stocks. The theory that the Baby Boom drove
the market up owing to Boomers’ demand for goods would seem to imply
that the market was high because earnings were high; it would not explain
the high price‑earnings ratios that were reached at the peak of the market.
If life‑cycle savings patterns (the first effect) alone were to be the dominant
force in the markets for savings vehicles, there would tend to be strong correlations in price behavior across alternative asset classes, and strong correlations
over time between asset prices and demographics. When the most numerous generation feels they need to save, they would tend to bid up all savings
vehicles: stocks, bonds, and real estate. When the most numerous generation
feels they need to draw down their savings, their selling would tend to force
down the prices of all these vehicles. But when one looks at long‑term data on
stocks, bonds, and real estate, one finds that there has in fact been relatively
little relation between their real values.9
Another theory that was popular in the 1990s as to why Boomers may
have had a positive impact on the market is that the Boomers, who have no
memory of the Great Depression of the 1930s or of World War II, have less
anxiety about the market and the world. There is indeed some evidence that
shared experiences in formative years leave a mark forever on a generation’s
attitudes.10 Over the course of the bull market since 1982, Boomers have

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

47

gradually replaced as prime investors those who were teens or young adults
during the depression and the war.
Although there is no doubt at least some truth to these theories of the
Baby Boom’s effects on the stock market, it may be public perceptions of
the Baby Boom and its presumed effects that were most responsible for
the surge in the market. The impact of the Baby Boom was one of the most
talked‑about issues relating to both the stock market and the housing market, and all this talk in and of itself had the potential to affect stock market
value. People believed that the Baby Boom represented an important source of
strength for the markets, and they did not see this strength faltering any time
soon. These public perceptions contributed to a feeling that there was a good
reason for the market to be high and a confidence that it would stay that way
for some time. Congratulating themselves on their cleverness in understanding and betting on these population trends in their stock market investments,
many investors failed to appreciate just how common their thinking really
was. Their perceptions fueled continuing upward spirals in market valuations.
The most prominent exponent of the Baby Boom theory of the stock market
and the housing market was Harry S. Dent. He began with a 1992 book titled
The Great Boom Ahead: Your Comprehensive Guide to Personal and Business Profit
in the New Era of Prosperity, which was so successful that he wrote several
sequels. His 1998 book, The Roaring 2000s: Building the Wealth & Lifestyle You
Desire in the Greatest Boom in History, was on the New York Times best‑seller list
for four weeks in 1998. His 1999 book, The Roaring 2000s Investor: Strategies for
the Life You Want, was ranked in 1999 within the top 100 in sales among all
books, according to Amazon.com. This book predicted that the stock market
would continue to boom until 2009, when the number of people who are 46
will start to decline, and then the market would drop.
Dent’s success with the Baby Boom theme during the bull market predictably spawned a number of imitators—all extolling the wonderful opportunities to get rich from the Baby Boom’s effects on investments—with titles like
Boomernomics: The Future of Your Money in the Upcoming Generational Warfare
by William Sterling and Stephen Waite (1998) and Boom, Bust & Echo: How to
Profit from the Coming Demographic Shift by David K. Foot and Daniel Stoffman
(1996). Discussions of the Baby Boom and its effects on the markets were
everywhere, and their general tone was that the Boom was good for the stock
market and would continue to be for years to come.

An Expansion in Media Reporting of Business News
The first all‑news television network, the Cable News Network (CNN),
appeared in 1980 and gradually grew, with viewership boosted by such
events as the Gulf War in 1991 and the O. J. Simpson trial in 1995—stories

48

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

that fueled great demand for uninterrupted coverage. The public acquired
the habit of watching the news on television throughout the day (and night),
not simply at the dinner hour. CNN was followed by the business networks.
The Financial News Network, founded in 1983, was later absorbed into
CNBC. Then CNNfn and Bloomberg Television appeared. Together, these
networks produced an uninterrupted stream of financial news, much of it
devoted to the stock market. So pervasive was their influence that traditional
brokerage firms found it necessary to keep CNBC running in the lower
corners of their brokers’ computer screens. So many clients would call to
ask about something they had just heard on the networks that brokers (who
were supposed to be too busy working to watch television!) began to seem
behind the curve.
Not merely the scope, but also the nature, of business reporting changed
in those years. According to a study by Richard Parker, a senior fellow at
Harvard University’s Shorenstein Center, newspapers in the last two decades
of the twentieth century gradually transformed their formerly staid business
sections into enhanced “Money” sections, which dispensed useful tips about
personal investing. Articles about individual corporations that used to be
written as if they would be of interest only to those involved in the industry
or the corporations themselves were then written with a slant toward profit
opportunities for individual investors; these articles regularly included analysts’ opinions of the implications of the news for investors.11
According to a 2004 study by James Hamilton there had been a gradual
decline over the preceding several decades in the “hard news” content of the
U.S. television evening news in favor of news that is either of story quality
or of immediate use to the viewer. Hamilton attributed this change to the
increasing competitiveness of the news media business, and competitive
advantage increasingly depends on maintaining marginal customers who
are less interested in depth of understanding.12 News about investing tips
naturally prospers in such an environment.
Enhanced reporting of investing options led to increased demand for stocks,
just as advertisements for a consumer product make people more familiar
with the product, remind them of the option to buy, and ultimately motivate
them to buy. Most advertising is really not the presentation of important facts
about a product but merely a reminder of the product and its image. Given
the heightened media coverage of investments, a stock market boom should
come as no greater surprise than increased sales of the latest sports utility
vehicle after a major ad campaign.
As further evidence that the media growth was boosting the stock market,
we now know that after the peak in the market in 2000, business reporting
took a major hit in reaction to declining public interest. Hip business magazines like Red Herring, the Industry Standard, and others went out of business.

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

49

Viewership of major business television networks also took a hit. Sales of
business books fell sharply after 2000.
Attention to the stock market by surviving newspapers also declined after
2000. According to a Lexis-Nexis search, the number of articles mentioning the
stock market in major U.S. newspapers more than tripled from 1990 to 1998,
buoyed for a while by news about various financial scandals. But by 2004, the
number had fallen by more than 50% from the peak.

Analysts’ Increasingly Optimistic Forecasts
According to data from Zacks Investment Research about analysts’ recommendations on some 6,000 companies, only 1.0% of recommendations were
“sells” in late 1999 (while 69.5% were “buys” and 29.9% were “holds”). This
situation stood in striking contrast to that indicated by previous data. Ten
years earlier, the percentage of sells, at 9.1%, was nine times higher.13
Analysts were especially reluctant to make sell recommendations near the
peak of the stock market for a couple of reasons. One reason often given for
this reluctance is that a sell recommendation might have incurred the wrath of
the company involved, and companies could retaliate by refusing to talk with
analysts whom they viewed as submitting negative reports, excluding them
from information sessions, and not offering them access to key executives as
they prepared earnings forecasts. This situation, occurring in the lead-up to
the peak of the market, represented a fundamental change in the culture of
the investment industry and in the tacit understanding that recommendations
are as objective as the analyst can make them.
Another reason that many analysts were reluctant to issue sell recommendations was that an increasing number of them were employed by firms
that underwrote securities, and these firms did not want their analysts to do
anything that might jeopardize this lucrative side of the business. Analysts
affiliated with investment banks gave significantly more favorable recommendations on firms for which their employer was the co‑ or lead underwriter
than did unaffiliated analysts, even though their earnings forecasts usually
were not stronger.14
Those who knew the ropes realized that hold recommendations were
more like the sell recommendations of earlier years. In 1999 James Grant, a
well‑known market commentator, wrote, “Honesty was never a profit center
on Wall Street, but the brokers used to keep up appearances. Now they have
stopped pretending. More than ever, securities research, as it is called, is a
branch of sales. Investor, beware.”15
Analysts’ recommendations were transformed by something analogous
to grade inflation in our schools: C used to be an average grade, yet now it
is considered as bordering on failure. Many of us know that such inflation

50

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

happens, and we try to correct for it when interpreting our children’s grades.
Similarly, in the stock market we factor inflation into analysts’ recommendations. But not everyone was able to make adequate corrections for analysts’
newly hyperbolic language, and so the general effect of their changed standards was to encourage the higher valuation of stocks.
Moreover, it was not just a change in the units of measurement that infected
analysts’ reports. Even their quantitative forecasts of earnings growth showed
an upward bias. According to a study by Steven Sharpe of the Federal Reserve
Board, analysts’ expectations of growth in the S&P 500 earnings per share
exceeded actual growth in nineteen of the twenty-one years between 1979 and
1999. The average difference between the projected and actual growth rate
of earnings was 9 percentage points. The analysts breezed through both the
steep recession of 1980–81 and the recession of 1990–91, making forecasts of
earnings growth in the 10% range.16 Since Sharpe’s study, analysts failed to
predict the magnitude of the sharp drop in earnings around 2001.
This bias in analysts’ forecasts was a characteristic of their one‑year forecasts; they were usually more sober in predicting the next earnings announcement just before it was released. Analysts tended to comply with firms’ wishes
to see positive earnings surprises each quarter, by issuing estimates that fell
slightly short of the actual number. Then firms, just before making earnings
announcements, talked with analysts whose forecasts were on the high side,
urging them down, while neglecting to talk with analysts whose forecasts were
on the low side, thereby creating a downward bias in the average earnings
forecast without being blatantly untruthful.17 Casual evaluation of analysts’
forecasts by clients would most naturally take the form of comparing the latest
earnings announcement with the latest forecast, and therefore analysts did
not sharply overestimate earnings just before they were announced, which
would have been an obvious embarrassment to them.
Analysts’ upward bias came to the fore when predicting the vague, un­­
differentiated future, not immediate quarterly or yearly outcomes. And it was
expectations for the vague, undifferentiated future, even far beyond one‑year
forecasts, that lay behind the high market valuations we saw at the peak of
the millennium stock market. According to another study by Steven Sharpe, a
1 percentage point difference in analysts’ industry-forecasted earnings growth
caused a 5–8% boost in the industry’s price-earnings ratio. Thus, Sharpe concluded that the rise in analysts’ long-term growth expectations would “appear
to have been a key factor driving equity market valuations skyward during
the latter half of the 1990s.”18
Analysts had few worries about being uniformly optimistic regarding the
distant future; they apparently concluded that such generalized optimism was
simply good for business. Certainly they perceived that their fellow analysts
were demonstrating such long‑run optimism, and there was, after all, safety
