
As I said before, the market never stops dead and reverses. It always takes time for all the sellers or all the
buyers to be 'mopped up', and it is this constant whipsawing which creates the sideways congestion price
zones that we often see after an extended trend move, higher or lower. This is where price support and
resistance become so powerful, and which are also a key element of VPA.
The moral here is not to act immediately as soon as a signal appears. Any signal is merely a warning sign of an
impending change and we do have to be patient. When a shower of rain stops, it doesn't stop suddenly, it
gradually peters out, then stops. When you spill something, and have to mop it up with some absorbent paper,
the 'first pass' collects most of the spill, but it takes a 'second pass' to complete the job. This is the market. It is a
sponge. It takes time to complete the mopping up operation, before it is ready to turn.
I hope I have made the point! Please be patient and wait. The reversal will come, but not instantly from one
signal on one candle.

Principle No 3 : It’s All Relative
The analysis of volume is all relative and I only came to this conclusion once I stopped obsessing about my
volume feed. When I first started I became obsessed with trying to understand every aspect of my volume feed.
Where did it come from? How was the data collected? Was it accurate? How did it compare to other feeds? And
was there something better that would give me more accurate signals, and so on. This debate continues to this
day in the many trading forums with discussions centred around the provenance of the data.
After spending many months trying to compare feeds and back test, I soon realised that there was NOTHING to
be gained from worrying about minor imperfections or discrepancies. As I wrote earlier, trading and VPA is an
art, not a science. Data feeds will vary from broker to broker and platform to platform thereby creating slightly
different candle patterns. If you compare a chart from one broker with another of the same instrument and time
frame, then the chances are you will have two different candlesticks. And the reason for this is very
straightforward. It is because the close of the candle will depend on a variety of things, not least the clock speed
on your computer, where you are in the world, and at what time during the session the closing price is triggered.
They all vary.
Data feeds are complex in how they calculate and present the data to you on the screen. They all come from
different sources, and are managed in different ways. Even those from the cash markets will vary, spot forex
feeds even more so. But, it’s really not a big issue for one simple reason.
Volume is all relative, so it makes no difference as long as you are using the same feed all the time. This is
what months of work proved to me.
This is why I lose patience with traders who say that tick data as a proxy for volume is only 90% accurate. So
what? For all I care, it can be 70% accurate or 80% accurate. I am not interested in the 'accuracy'. All I am
interested in is consistency. As long as the feed is consistent, then that's fine, because I am comparing my
volume bar on my feed with previous volume bars, on my feed ! I am not comparing it with someone else's
feed. I admit it did take time before it dawned on me that this common sense approach was perfectly valid.
Therefore, please don't waste as much time as I did. Volume is all relative because we are constantly
comparing one volume bar with another, and judging whether this is high, low or average with what has gone
before. If the data is imperfect, then it makes no difference whatsoever, as I am comparing imperfect data with
imperfect data.
The same argument applies to tick data in the spot forex market. I do accept it is imperfect again, but we are
only comparing one bar with another, and provided it is displaying activity, that's fine. It's an imperfect world and
one we have to live and trade in. The free tick volume feed on a simple MT4 platform works perfectly – trust me.
I've used it for years and make money every day using it. Furthermore it is provided, for free, by the broker.

Principle No 4 : Practise Makes Perfect
It takes time to become proficient in any skill, but once learnt is never forgotten. The trading techniques you will
learn in this book work in all time frames, and are equally valid, whether you are a speculator or investor. As an
investor you may be looking for a buy and hold over months, so will be considering the longer term charts of
days and weeks, much like Richard Ney for example. Alternatively, you may be an intra day scalping trader
using VPA on tick charts or fast time charts. So, take your time and don't be impatient. It is worth the time and

effort you invest, and after a few weeks or months you will be surprised at how quickly you can suddenly start to
interpret and forecast every twist and turn in the market.

Principle No 5 : Technical Analysis
VPA is only part of the story. We always use a variety of other techniques to confirm the picture and provide
additional validation. The most important of these are support and resistance, for the reasons that I outlined in
Principle No 2. This is where the market is pausing and executing its 'mopping up' operations, before reversing.
Alternatively, it may simply be a pause point in a longer term trend, which will then be validated by our volume
analysis. A breakout from one of these regions of consolidation, coupled with volume, is always a strong signal.
Trends are equally important, as are price pattern analysis, all part of the art form which is technical analysis.

Principle No 6 : Validation or Anomaly
In using VPA as our analytical approach, we are only ever looking for two things.
Whether the price has been validated by the volume, or whether there is an anomaly with the price. If the price
is validated then that confirms a continuation of the price behaviour. By contrast if there is an anomaly, then this
is sending a signal of a potential change. These are the only things we are constantly searching for in VPA.
Validation or anomaly. Nothing else. And here are some examples of validation based on single bars, before
moving onto multiple bars and actual chart examples.

Examples Of Validation

Fig 4.10 Wide Spread Candle, High Volume
In the example in Fig 4.10 of a wide spread up candle with small wicks to top and bottom, the associated
volume is well above average, so the volume is validating the price action.
In this case we have a market which is bullish, and has risen strongly in the trading session closing just below
the high of the session. If this is a valid move then we would expect to see the effort required to push the market

higher, reflected in the volume.
Remember, this is also Wyckoff's third law of effort vs. result. It takes effort for the market to rise and also takes
effort for the market to fall, so if there has been a large change in price in the session, then we expect to see this
validated by a well above average volume bar. Which we have. Therefore, in this case the volume validates the
price. And from this we can assume two things. First, that the price move is genuine, and has not been
manipulated by the market makers, and second, that for the time being, the market is bullish, and until we see
an anomaly signalled, then we can continue to maintain any long position that we may have in the market.

Fig 4.11 Narrow Spread Candle, Low Volume
Fig 4.11 is an example of a narrow spread candle accompanied by low volume. In this case the price has risen,
but only marginally higher, and the spread of the candle is therefore very narrow. The wicks to the top and
bottom are once again small. The associated volume is well below average, and again the question that we
have to ask ourselves is simple. Is the volume validating the price action, and the answer once again is yes.
And the reason is again because of effort and result. In this case the market has only risen in price by a small
amount, and therefore we would expect to see this reflected in the volume, which should also be low. After all, if
effort and result validate one another, the effort required to move the market a few points higher (the result),
should only warrant a small amount of effort (the volume). So once again, we have a true picture with the
volume validating the price. Now let's look at these two examples again, but this time as anomalies.

Examples Of Anomalies

Fig 4.12 Wide Spread Candle, Low Volume
In Fig 4.12 we have our first anomaly which can be explained as follows. It is clear we have a wide spread up
candle, and if we follow Wyckoff's third rule then this result, should be matched by an equal amount of effort.
What we have instead is a big result, from little effort. This is an anomaly. After all for a wide spread up candle,
we would expect to see a high volume bar, but here we have a low volume bar. Immediately the alarm bells
start ringing, since something is not right here.
One question to ask is why do we have low volume when we should expect to see high volume. Is this a trap up
move by the markets, or the market makers? Quite possibly, and this is where you can begin to see the power of
such simple analysis. In one price bar, we can immediately see that something is wrong. There is an anomaly,
because if this were a genuine move higher, then the buyers would be supporting the move higher with a high
volume bar. Instead there is a low volume bar.
If we were in a long position in the market and this appeared, we would immediately start to question what is
happening. For example, why has this anomaly appeared? Is it an early warning of a possible trap? This is a
pattern which often occurs at the start of trading in equity markets. What is happening here is that the market
makers are trying to 'feel out' the sentiment in the market. The above could be from a one minute chart for
example. The market opens, then the price is pushed higher to test interest in the market from the buyers. If
there is little or no buying interest, as here, then the price will be marked back down, with further price testing.
Remember from earlier in the book, that the futures index markets will have already been trading overnight on
Globex, giving the market makers a clear idea of bullish or bearish sentiment. All that is needed is to test out the
price level at which to pitch the price for the opening few minutes. Not only is this done for the main index, but
also for each individual stock. It is extraordinary how easy this is to see, and is instantly visible with volume.
This is why I cannot understand the attraction of price action trading. Without volume a PAT trader would have
no idea. All they would see is a wide spread up candle and assume the market was bullish.
This is very easy to prove and all we need to do is to watch a couple of charts from the opening bell. Choose

the main index, and a couple of stocks. The anomaly will appear time and time again. The market makers are
testing the levels of buying and selling interest, before setting the tone for the session, with an eye on any news
releases due in the morning, which can always be used to further manipulate the markets, and never allowing
‘a serious crisis go to waste’ (Rahm Emanuel). After all, if they were buying into the market, then this would be
reflected in a high volume bar.
The volume bar is signalling that the market is NOT joining in this price action, and there is a reason. In this
case it's the market makers in equities testing the levels of buying and selling, and therefore not committing into
the move, until they are sure buyers will come into the market at this price level.
The same scenario could equally apply in the forex market.
A fundamental item of news is released, and the market makers see an opportunity to take stops out of the
market. The price jumps on the news, but the associated volume is low. Now let’s look at another example of an
anomaly.

Fig 4.13 Narrow Spread Candle, Low Volume
Once again this is a clear signal of a potential trap. The move higher is NOT a genuine move but a fake move,
designed to suck traders into weak positions, and also take out stops, before reversing sharply and moving in
the opposite direction. This is why VPA is so powerful and once you have learnt this skill will wonder why you
never discovered it before. Volume and price together reveal the truth behind market behaviour in all its glory.
In the example shown in Fig 4.13 we can see a narrow spread candle with high volume which, once again, is
another anomaly.
As we saw earlier in Fig 4.11, a small increase in the price (result), should only require a small increase in

volume (effort), but this is not the case here.
The small price increase has been generated by a huge amount of volume, so clearly something is wrong.
Generally, we would expect to see this height of volume bar, accompany a wide spread candle with the volume
driving the price higher. But, in this case the high volume has only resulted in a very small rise in the price.
There is only one conclusion we can draw. The market is starting to look weak, and is typical of a candle
pattern that starts to develop at the top of a bullish trend, or the bottom of a bearish trend.
For example in an established bullish trend the market opens, and starts to rise a little, but the buyers (longs)
are now starting to take their profits, as they have been in this trend for while and feel that this is the right time to
close out. However, as these positions are closed out, more eager buyers come in, (as most traders and
investors always buy at the top of markets), but the price never rises as the longs continue to liquidate and take
their profits, before more buyers come in, and the cycle repeats throughout the session.
What is actually happening is that the market has reached a price at which further effort does not result in higher
prices, as each wave of new buyers is met with longs selling out at this level and taking their profits, 'off the
table'. So there is no sustained move higher in price.
In other words, what this combination of price and volume is revealing is weakness in the market. If we were to
imagine a profile of the volume bar in terms of selling and buying volumes, the buyers would just outweigh the
sellers, reflecting the narrow price spread.
This is akin to driving up an icy hill which is gradually increasing in steepness. At the start we can still move
higher, but gradually as we try to move up the hill we have to increase the power, eventually getting to a stage
where we are on full power and standing still, as the wheels spin on the ice. Perhaps not a perfect analogy, but
one which I hope makes the point and cements this idea in place. In our car analogy, we are now stationary,
halfway up the hill, engine on full power, wheels spinning and going nowhere! What happens next is we start
sliding backwards, gaining momentum as we go and mirrors what happened in the price action described. The
market reached a point where no matter how much more effort is applied, is now resistant to higher prices, and
the sellers are knocking back the buying.
The reverse, also happens after a trend run lower. In this case, it is the selling which is absorbed by the buying,
and once again signals a potential reversal point as the market runs out of steam. After all, if the selling had
followed through, then we would have seen a wide spread down candle, and not a narrow spread candle.
Now this candle and volume relationship also raises another much deeper question, and here we go back to
the insiders, and the market makers.
If we return to our bullish example again, with the narrow spread candle and the high volume, the question we
might reasonably ask, is 'who is actually selling here?' Is it the investors and speculators, exiting the market
after the trend run higher, or is it another group perhaps? Maybe it is the insiders and the market makers ? Who
is it more likely to be? After all, we know that most investors and traders tend to buy at the top when in fact they
should be selling, and sell at the bottom when they should be buying. Something which the specialists and
market makers are well aware of in the psychology and make up of most traders and investors.
They also know this group is easy to frighten out of the market. Generally, they get in far too late after a bullish
trend has been in place for some time, and only jump in when they feel it is safe, having watched the market
move higher and higher, regretting the decision not to enter much earlier. As the late Christopher Browne once
said ‘The time to buy stocks is when they are on sale, and not when they are high priced because everyone
wants to own them. This sentiment applies to any instrument or market. Buying when ‘on sale’ is always at the
bottom of a trend, and not at a top!
'Missing an opportunity' is a classic trader (and investor) fear. The trader waits and waits before finally jumping
in, just at the point when the market is turning and they should be thinking of getting out. This is what the
insiders, specialists, market makers and big operators bank on, trader fear. Remember, they see both sides of
the market from their unique and privileged positions.
Back to the question! The specialists have driven prices higher, but the market is now struggling at this level.
They are selling to the market to clear their warehouse, but the buyers are not there in sufficient numbers to

move the price higher, as it is constantly knocked back by longer term traders, selling out and taking their profits
off the table. The specialists continue selling into the buying, but the volume of buyers is too small, in contrast to
the number of sellers, to move the price significantly higher, as each attempt to push the market higher is hit
with more selling, which in turn is replenished with more buyers.
What is actually taking place here is a battle. The first sign of a real struggle, with the specialists struggling to
clear their warehouse before moving the market lower, and fast. The market is not receptive to higher prices, but
the specialists cannot move the market lower until they are ready, and so the battle continues. I explain this in
much greater detail later in the book. They maintain the price at the current level attracting more buyers in, who
are hoping to jump into the trend and take some easy profits, but the sellers keep selling, preventing any real
rise in price.
This is one of the many classic relationships to look for on your charts. As I have said many times before, this
could be on a fast tick chart, or a slow time chart. The signal is the same. It is an early warning that the market is
weak and struggling at this level, and therefore you should either be taking any profit off the table, if you have an
existing position, or, preparing to take a position on any reversal in trend.
Moreover, it is important to remember that just as a candle can have a different significance, depending on
where it appears in the trend, the same is true with VPA.
When an anomaly occurs, and we will start looking at actual chart examples, the first point of reference is
always where we are in the trend, which will also depend on the time frame. However, this is one of the many
beauties of this type of trading analysis. For example, on a 5 minute chart, a trend might be considered as one
lasting an hour, or perhaps even two hours. Whereas on a daily chart, a trend could last for weeks or even
months. Therefore, when we talk about a trend, it is important to understand the context of a trend. A trend is
always relative to the time frame we are are trading. Some traders only consider a trend to be valid if it is over
days, weeks and months, the super cycles if you like.
However, I don’t subscribe to this view. To me a trend on a 1 minute or a 5 minute chart is just as valid. It is a
price trend, which may be a short term pull back in a longer term trend, or it may be confirming the longer term
trend. It makes no difference. All that matters is that the trend, is a trend in price. The price has moved the same
way for some period of time, in that time frame.
Just remember. VPA applied to a 5 minute chart will yield just as many profitable and low risk trades as on a
longer term daily or weekly chart. The analysis is the same.
The point I am making here is this – whenever we see an anomaly which sets the alarm bell ringing, the first
step is to establish were we are in any trend. In other words, we get our bearings first. For example, are we at a
possible bottom, where perhaps the market has been selling off for some time, but is now looking at a major
reversal?
Or perhaps we are half way up or down a trend, and we are merely observing a minor pull back or reversal in
the longer term trend. Deciding where we are in the trend, is where we bring in some of our other analytical
tools which then help to complement VPA and gives us the 'triangulation' we need.
In judging where we are in the trend, and potential reversal points, we will always be looking at support and
resistance, candle patterns, individual candles, and trend lines. All of this will help to give us our 'bearings' and
help to identify where we are in the price action on the chart. A perspective if you like, and a framework against
which to judge the significance of our analysis of volume and price.

Multiple Candle Examples
I now want to explain how we use VPA with multiple candles and volume, as opposed to single candles. The
approach is identical as we are only ever looking for two things. Is the volume confirming the price action, or is
this an anomaly?

Fig 4.14 Multiple Bar Validation In Up Trend
In the first example in Fig 4.14 we have a bullish trend developing in a rising market, and what is obvious is that
rising prices are accompanied by rising volume.
This is exactly what we would expect to see and furthermore having multiple volume bars also gives us a
benchmark history, against which to judge future volume bars.
If we were watching this price action live, this is what we would see happening on our chart. The first candle
forms, a narrow spread up candle with low volume, which is fine. The volume validates the price, no anomaly
here. The second candle then begins to form, and on close inspection we note that the spread of this is wider
than the first, and based on Wyckoff's rule, we expect to see greater volume that on the first bar, which is indeed
the case. So the up trend is valid, the volume has validated the price on both candles.
By the time the third candle starts to form, and closes with a spread which is wider than both the first and the
second, we should expect a volume bar which reflects Wyckoff's third law of effort vs result. The third law which
states we have increased the result (price spread is wider than before) which should be matched by increased
effort (volume should be higher than on the previous candle) – and so it is. Therefore, once again, the price
action on the candle has been validated by the volume. But, in addition to that simple observation, the three
candles themselves are now validating the price trend.
In other words, the price over the three bars has moved higher, developed into a trend, and the volume is rising
and NOW validating the trend itself. After all, just as effort vs result applies to one candle, it also applies to a
'trend' which in this case consists of three candles. Therefore, if the price is moving higher in the trend, then
according to Wyckoff's third law, we should expect to see rising volume as well. And this is the case.
The point is this. Effort vs result, applies not only to the individual candles we looked at earlier, but also to the
trends which start to build once we put the candles together. In other words we have two levels of validation (or
anomaly).
