
Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.18

75

RRG of 10 Economic Sectors (GICS Level I) of S&P 500 Index

been available on the Bloomberg terminal since January 2011. So how are
they going to help, and who are they going to help?
Relative Rotation Graphs

The picture in Figure 2.16 shows only a snapshot of the last observations of all
sectors, similar to the ranking on JdK RS-Ratio we saw in Table 2.2. In order
to get a clearer picture and to put things into perspective, some historical data
needs to be added to the graph. This is shown in Figure 2.18.
This picture shows the 10 economic sectors according to the Global
Industry Classiﬁcation System (GICS) level I of the S&P 500 universe. In
this case, however, three weeks of history have been added to every sector,
creating a “trail” that makes it possible to gauge the direction and the pace of
the movement. Depending on the number of elements displayed in the scatter
plot, trails can be longer or shorter. With a lot of elements displayed, long tails
will make the graph look like spaghetti and make it more or less unreadable.

76
FIGURE 2.19

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
RRG of S&P Energy Sector on a Daily Basis Showing Rotation in Positive

Territory

Try to ﬁnd a balance between the number of elements and the length of the
tails. If you want to study the rotation of individual elements over a longer
time period, it’s best to show just one or two elements with a long tail (see
Figure 2.19). If you want to see the relative interaction of all elements in the
universe, then show all elements with a shorter tail. Relative Rotation Graphs
(RRGs) are primarily a visualization tool. The biggest advantage of this type
of visualization is that it shows the user the relative positions of all elements
in a universe, not only against a benchmark but also vis-à-vis each other in
one picture—the big picture in one picture, so to speak. In this way RRGs
serve as a monitoring tool that investors can use to monitor their universe
or their portfolio and determine whether their holdings are still on track to
outperform their benchmark.
Anyone who is interested in the relative performance and positioning
of elements in a universe can beneﬁt from the RRG. A universe can be a
number of sector indices compared to the broader market index, a number

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

77

of individual equities against a market (sector) index, but also a number of
asset class indices (equities, bonds, real estate, etc.), or even a set of currencies
vis-à-vis each other.
Let’s start with an example of an equity portfolio manager who has to beat
the S&P 500 index. As he realizes that his sector weightings will have a big impact on the overall performance of his portfolio, he checks the relative strength
of the various sector indices against the S&P 500 index on a regular basis. He
wants to be overweight in sectors with a strong relative strength and underweight in sectors with a weak relative strength vis-à-vis the broader market.
Instead of browsing through all the different sectors with a relative
strength chart against the S&P 500, he could start with a look at a Relative Rotation Graph, similar to the one shown in Figure 2.18, which shows
the 10 economic sectors of the S&P 500 index against the S&P 500 index.
At one glance we can see that Energy is the leading sector and that
Financials just entered the top-right quadrant and looks likely to continue
higher on the JdK RS-Ratio scale. Overweight or long positions in these two
sectors make sense. The Industrials sector is inside the top-right quadrant,
but shows little momentum, and Information Technology is just inside the
bottom-right quadrant, but also displays hardly any movement over the past
three weeks. Sectors, or elements in a universe, that move very close to the
benchmark are unlikely to generate a strong out- or underperformance as they
move in line with the benchmark. In a large universe, and therefore a crowded
Relative Rotation Graph, one can safely ignore the elements that are moving
in a small circle around the benchmark. Concentrate on the elements that are
moving on the outskirts of the diagram: this is where the real moves take place.
It is also quickly apparent that Materials and Consumer Discretionary are
heading toward the bottom-left quadrant and very likely to arrive there soon.
So these are sectors to keep an eye on, and if overweight or long positions still
exist, it is time to start reducing them.
In negative territory, the bottom-left quadrant, we ﬁnd Utilities, Health
Care, Consumer Staples, and Telecom Services. The latter three are without
doubt candidates for underweight or short positions.
Utilities need some extra examination as over the past three weeks relative
momentum has been picking up rapidly. When this happens at low (or high)
JdK RS-Ratio levels, it can happen that the pickup of relative momentum is
a temporary thing and that a rotation takes place at levels < 100 (or > 100)
on the JdK RS-Ratio scale, that is, without crossing to the right or the left
of the diagram. This means that the security is still leading but it took some
time to consolidate its prior outperformance. An example of such a rotation
is seen in Figure 2.19.

78

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

The use of RRG as described above is a good way to monitor the current
holdings in a portfolio and provides a quick visual check of whether the overand underweightings for speciﬁc sectors are still valid and justiﬁable.
RRG can also be used for pair-trade idea generation. The most obvious
strategy is to be or to go long the sectors or elements that are crossing into
or have just crossed into the top-right quadrant, and to be or to go short
on the sectors or elements that are crossing or have just crossed into the
bottom-left quadrant. These moves are considered to bear the least amount of
risk, as the relative moves of the sectors at hand have already been conﬁrmed.
In the top-right quadrant are the sectors that are showing positive relative
strength (high JdK RS-Ratio) with a positive relative momentum (high JdK
RS-Momentum), indicating that relative strength is still getting stronger. The
bottom-left quadrant are the sectors that are showing weak relative strength
with relative momentum accelerating to the downside, indicating that relative
strength is still getting weaker. An example of such a strategy is shown in
Figure 2.20.
FIGURE 2.20

RRG of Energy and Utilities with a 17-Week Trail

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.21

79

Bar Charts of Energy and Utilities with RS Line

This RRG shows only two sectors of the S&P universe with a 17-week
trail. At the beginning of the trail (the most recent point of the series is the
bigger square marker with the label on top and therefore the beginning is
the opposite end) the Energy sector (S5ENRS) had just entered the top-right
quadrant and could be expected to show further outperformance versus the
S&P 500 index. At the same time the Utilities sector was on the verge of
crossing into the bottom-left quadrant and therefore very likely to show an
underperformance versus the S&P 500 going forward. The idea to be captured
here is to overweight or go long the Energy sector and underweight or go
short the Utilities sector. When looking at a RRG, conclusions like this are
easily reached and do not require browsing through numerous charts. To get
a better grasp of how the paths of these two trails translate back to a “normal”
RS-line on a traditional chart, see Figure 2.21.
The top pane shows the weekly bar chart of the Energy sector, the middle
pane shows the weekly bar chart of the Utilities sector, and the bottom pane
is the RS line of Energy versus Utilities. The dashed vertical line shows the
date mark of the beginning of the trail in the RRG in Figure 2.19.
At the beginning of the trail (11/5/2010) the Energy index traded at
465.12 and the Utilities at 162.54. At the end of the trail (2/25/11) Energy
was at 577.37, a 24.1 percent gain, while Utilities were at 160.58, a 1.2 percent
decline. This results in a 25.3 percent outperformance of Energy over Utilities
in this period. As the trigger in this case was the entry of the top-right and

80
FIGURE 2.22

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
RRG of Financials and Telecom Services with a 14-Week Trail

the bottom-left quadrant this can be seen as a relatively “safe” strategy as the
JdK RS-Ratio line at that time is conﬁrmed above the 100-level.
As the calculation of the JdK RS-Ratio line involves the use of moving
averages, by deﬁnition some lag is introduced. This means that sectors have
already gone through a decent move before entering into the top-right or the
bottom-left quadrant. More adventurous or more aggressive investors could
therefore also look for sectors in, or very close to, the top-left and bottom-right
quadrants for trading opportunities, assuming that a rotation will continue
in the expected direction. Such an example is shown in Figure 2.22.
At the beginning of the trail the Financials sector is still in the bottomleft quadrant but heading toward, and nearly in, the top-left quadrant. The
Telecom Services sector at the same time is well inside the bottom-right
quadrant and heading for the bottom-left quadrant. Assuming a continuation
of the rotation, investors or traders could start going long or overweight on
Financials and short or underweight on Telecom Services.
In Figure 2.23 the 14-period trail is displayed in a regular chart containing
the weekly bar chart of Financials in the top pane, Telecom Services in the

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.23

81

Bar Charts of Financials and Telecom Services with RS Line

middle pane, and the RS line of Financials to Telecoms in the bottom pane.
The dashed vertical line marks the beginning of the trails in the RRG in
Figure 2.22.
At the beginning of the trail (12/3/2010) Financials were trading at
203.97 and Telecom Services at 122.75. At the ends of the trail so far
(2/25/2011), Financials were at 225.73 and Telecom Services at 124.84.
This represents a gain of 10.3 percent for Financials and 1.7 percent for Telecom Services, that is, an outperformance of 8.6 percent at a point in time
when Financials have just pushed into the top-right quadrant while Telecom
Services are heading deeper into the bottom-left quadrant. The relative trend
is therefore fully intact and may be expected to continue.
This type of analysis and idea generation using RRGs can be used in
a lot of different markets, on a lot of different levels, and in all timeframes.
Strategists and investment committees, for example, can use Relative Rotation
Graphs to help determine dynamic asset allocations using a universe of indices
representing various asset classes vis-à-vis some portfolio benchmark. Such an
example is shown in Figure 2.24.
This RRG shows a number of asset class indices (all total return and all
in local currency) against a three-month cash (deposit) index.
SBWGL: Citigroup World Government Bond Index all maturities Local
NDDLWI: MSCI World Index Daily Net TR Local

82
FIGURE 2.24

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
X RRG of Asset Classes against a Cash Index

G250GLLC: GPR 250 Property Shares Index World Local
DJUBSTR: Dow Jones UBS Commodity TR
HFRXGL: HFRX Global Hedge Fund Index
The RRG shows that “risk assets” are still very strong, with high readings
on the JdK RS-Ratio scale, but they are all losing relative momentum, with
declining JdK RS-Momentum values, while bonds are picking up relative
momentum. So far at this stage risk assets are still leading but as all are in the
bottom-right quadrant, a close eye should be kept on any further deterioration
that could warrant a shift of money out of risk assets into nonrisk assets (i.e.,
bonds and deposits). Of course, an RRG showing regional equity indices
against the MSCI world equity index can then give clues as to which regions
to prefer over others for the money that still remains invested in equity
markets, assuming allocation to equities will not go down to zero. Another
step down the decision tree can then be to draw an RRG of sector indices
against the regional benchmark to determine which sectors to prefer, and
so forth.

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

83

Conclusion

The application of Relative Strength analysis through the use of RRGs can
aid investors at every level of the decision tree, from asset allocation to selection of individual equities. Usually the more active traders will use shorter
timeframes, while longer-term-oriented market participants will want to use
weekly or even monthly timeframes. Fixed-income investors can use RRGs
to determine which type (government or corporate), region, or credit-level to
pick, and at which part of the curve. Forex traders can use an RRG showing
a number of currencies against a base currency to generate trade ideas. All
this can even be done on an intraday basis, for example, hourly or in 10minute periods. If you are connected to a real-time feed, this will generate
a very dynamic picture, showing real-time rotation during the course of the
trading day.
Although RRGs are primarily used as a visualization tool, that does not
rule out using this method for more quantitative and rule-based approaches
to markets. We are conducting further research into these possibilities and are
actively designing trading strategies and tailor-made visualizations for various
types of clients.

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis: Effective Tools
and Strategies for Trading and Investing
by Paul Ciana
Copyright © 2011 Paul Ciana

CHAPTER 3

Applying Seasonality
and Erlanger Studies
Philip B. Erlanger, CMT
Phil Erlanger Research

Seasonality is a very unique indicator. It is a measure derived from historical
price action extrapolated into the future. This means that its signals are known
ahead of time—in many cases, substantially ahead of time.
All ﬁnancial instruments have some seasonal tendencies. These tendencies
are derived from a plethora of fundamental factors, known and unknown,
that recur at speciﬁc time periods. A seasonal cycle is a representation of the
directional tendencies of a security or index at speciﬁc times. In the following
discussion, the focus is on seasonal cycles based on the calendar year.
All the thin lines in Figure 3.1 look like random streams of data. They
are, in fact, the component years of a 15-year history of a stock superimposed
one on top of another. The result looks more like spaghetti than anything that
could be useful for investors. However, through the magic of compositing
algorithms, those thin lines turn into one line (the thick one) that represents
15 years of action, aligned with the calendar year. Once this little miracle
is achieved, reams of statistical data are made visible, which makes the
application of seasonal analysis effective. The ﬁrst portion of this chapter
explores this in detail.

85

86
FIGURE 3.1

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Component Years That Comprise a Seasonal Cycle

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

Testing for a Valid Seasonal Cycle

The act of compositing historical data to create seasonal cycles is a process
that has been used for decades, going back at least as far as the cycles work
pioneered by Edward R. Dewey that formally began in 1941.
Seasonal cycles are cycles that tend to move in similar fashions at speciﬁc
times. They reﬂect fundamental factors that may or may not be known,
but they occur at regular intervals relative to the calendar year. This is an
extraordinary statement, because the fundamental proof of such seasonal
factors has been elusive. Moreover, given that the economic factors that affect
individual stocks, industries, and the overall economy are diverse, disparate,
and nonlinear, the identiﬁcation of seasonal factors seems problematic. How
do you know that a seasonal cycle exists if you can’t see why it exists? Taking
a composite of data as shown in Figure 3.1 is an insufﬁcient process. One
can make a great-looking seasonal cycle out of random data, but there is no
reliability as that cycle is projected into the future—that is, it is invalid.
The truth about seasonal cycles is that the validity of the seasonal pattern
can vary greatly from one security to another. Moreover, a great-looking seasonal cycle can be made from random data. Simply compositing the data into
a cycle as displayed in Figure 3.1 is no guarantee that any seasonal inﬂuence
is being measured. Phil Erlanger Research has introduced the concept of validating seasonal cycles through the process of testing exogenous datasets. This
process is called the Cycle-R.
The idea behind validating a seasonal cycle is simple. Seasonal cycles
are valid if they reﬂect a meaningful seasonal inﬂuence. The rub is that,

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.2

87

Typical Seasonal Cycle

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

for some stocks, there are no meaningful seasonal inﬂuences. Cycle-R is a
statistical correlation between seasonal cycles of a particular security derived
from exogenous portions of that security’s historical price data.
In Figure 3.2, a seasonal cycle has been created from a typical period
of historical data that spans the most recent complete 15 years of price data
for Starbucks (SBUX). This cycle was created on New Year’s Day, January 1,
2010. In its standard form, it is etched in stone for the entire year of 2010
(there is an optimized form that will be discussed later in this chapter). The
unique nature of this indicator is that it is plotted so far in advance. But is
this a valid seasonal cycle? Is there a true seasonal inﬂuence being measured
by this pattern?
In Figure 3.3 there are additional lines plotted around the seasonal cycle.
These additional lines are themselves seasonal cycles. The thin seasonal cycle is
derived from the ﬁrst half of the 15-year period. The thicker additional line is
a seasonal cycle derived from the second half of the 15-year period. Both these
additional seasonal cycles are therefore derived from exogenous data—totally
separate portions of the security’s historical price action. The Cycle-R is the
correlation between these two seasonal cycles. Correlation statistics are simple
to read. Ranging from –1 to 1, a value of 1 is a perfect correlation, a value
of 0 is no correlation, and –1 is a perfectly inverse correlation. If the two
seasonal cycles derived from exogenous data are signiﬁcantly correlated, then
there must be some measure of true seasonality that exists throughout the
data set. For Starbucks in the 15 years prior to 2010, the Cycle-R statistic
is 0.76—a high degree of correlation and, therefore, proof that the seasonal
cycle is a valid one.

88
FIGURE 3.3

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Testing for the Validity of the Seasonal Cycle

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

As it turned out, Starbucks did move through 2010 in a fairly close
pattern to its seasonal cycle. The lows in the seasonal cycle of late January and
late August were closely matched to the lows in the actual price action (see
Figure 3.4). The weak period suggested by the seasonal cycle spanned from
late June through late August, and this turned out to be the weakest period
for Starbucks in 2010.
It is important to note that seasonal cycles do not cause movements in
price action. The cycle simply reﬂects tendencies that are often a product of
fundamental inﬂuences applied at regular intervals or speciﬁc time periods.
There is always a possibility that other exogenous factors can come into play
and swamp the inﬂuence of regular seasonal factors. Therefore, it is important
to measure how well a stock is following its seasonal cycle over time. Figure
3.4 includes an additional statistic called 2010 R. This is another correlation
statistic that measures how well the current year’s price action (in this case,
2010) is tracking a security’s seasonal cycle. In the case of Starbucks in 2010,
the correlation is a high 0.80, which indicates that the stock has closely
followed its seasonal cycle. This statistic is updated throughout the entire
calendar year on a daily basis.

Optimizing for Greater Validity
The determination of a Cycle-R statistic as a test of validity can be adjusted
by limiting the look-back period. In Figure 3.3 we used the standard lookback length of 15 years (although a shorter timeframe can also be used).
The same test of validity can be performed on any look-back period from

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.4

89

Key Turning Points in Starbucks Seasonal Cycle

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

as long as 15 years or as short as only two years. A two-year sample is not
particularly reliable because of the short time span, but the Erlanger Chart
Room program (powered by Bloomberg) can execute the Cycle-R process on
any user-selected look-back range of 15 years or less. Of the possible set of
look-back periods, slightly different seasonal cycles are created, each with its
own particular Cycle-R statistic as a test of validity.
The key to optimizing the seasonal cycle is to select the look-back period that maximizes the Cycle-R statistic. The largest Cycle-R statistic is so
measured because the exogenous seasonal cycles are most closely correlated,
thereby yielding the most valid seasonal cycle.
In Figure 3.5, American Express is shown with its standard seasonal cycle
derived from a span of the prior 15 years. The Cycle-R test for validity is
respectable with a value of 0.54. The key point to this pattern is that the
seasonal cycle suggests that the high period for the year occurs in late August,
and that the strength in price remains near its high at year’s end.

90
FIGURE 3.5

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
American Express Standard Seasonal Cycle

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

In Figure 3.6, American Express is shown with its optimized seasonal
cycle derived from a smaller span of the prior ﬁve years. This seasonal cycle
represents a much more “local” seasonal pattern. It is entirely possible that
seasonal factors can change as fundamentals change, or be transitory on
a multiyear scale, again as fundamentals change. For example, for American
Express, a ﬁnancial company, a change in taxation could shift seasonal factors.
The Cycle-R test for validity is now a value of 0.66—a more valid statistic
than generated by the standard correlation test over the span of the prior 15
years. Note that in the optimized seasonal cycle, the pattern suggests that the
high period for the year occurs in late April/early May, and that the strength
falls off at year’s end. Remember that both seasonal cycles were constructed
on January 1, 2010, and therefore the actual price action of 2010 is not a
factor in their shape. The 2010 peak in price for American Express occurred
in late April, and though price rallied in December, it fell off considerably,
even as the overall stock market rose to higher reaction highs.
