
scrambled to learn more and managed to keep a half step ahead of
humiliation. I was impressionable, as Dash Riprock delighted in pointing
out, and that was a great weakness in the hands of shifty Salomon
traders. But in my educating myself it proved to be a great strength. I
had the ability to imitate. It enabled me to get inside the brain of
another person. To learn how to make smart noises about money, I
studied the two best Salomon salesmen I knew: Dash Riprock himself and
a man
on the forty-first floor of Salomon New York whom I shall call, at his
request, Alexander. My training amounted to absorbing and synthesizing
their attitudes and skills. Lucky for me, they turned out to be two of the
best bond men in the business.
Dash and Alexander were as opposite as individuals as their respective
choice of pseudonyms suggests, and their respective skills differed also.
Dash did what most salesmen did, only better. He kept his nose pressed
up against the green screens on which the market in U.S. government
bonds was trading and looked for small discrepancies in price. To anyone
but a born bond salesman (they do exist), his daily routine was painfully
dull. There are several hundred different U.S. government bonds, ranging
in maturity from a few months to thirty years. Dash knew what their
prices should be, which large investors owned which bonds, and who was
the weak hand iri the market. If a price was off by an eighth of 1
percent, he'd pile half a dozen institutional investors into a trade to
make that eighth of 1 percent. He called his technique nips for blips,
blips being the little green numbers that represent bond prices on the
screens. I never learned what nips meant, but the expression became a
pun as an increasing number of Dash's customers were Japanese. Tens of
billions of dollars worth of U.S. government bonds passed through his
phone in a year, en route from the U.S. government to Japan. Dash was
doing his patriotic bit to fund the U.S. trade deficit. Salomon took a tiny
slice out of each trade. Dash expected at the end of each year to be
paid a tiny slice of Salomon's cut.
Alexander was unique, the closest thing I met to a master of the
markets, which, I'm now convinced, no man really is. He was twentyseven, two years older than I, and had been with Salomon Brothers for
two years when I arrived. He had grown up trading a portfolio of
securities. He recalls making a killing in the stock market while in the

seventh grade. At the age of nineteen he lost ninety-seven thousand
dollars on U.S. treasury bill futures. He was not, in other words, a normal
child. Once he learned to ride his gains and cut his losses, he never
looked back. What he lost in t-bills, he made back several times over in
gold futures.
Alexander knew how to exploit the world's financial market. What's
more, as a salesman he knew how to sound as if he knew how to exploit
the world's financial markets, and he had the same effect on other men
in our little world as sirens have on sailors. Within months after he
moved from London and onto the forty-first floor in New York, he had
been discovered by a handful of managing directors who wanted to know
what to do with their own money. You'd have thought they'd be
comfortable making their own investment decisions, but they weren't.
Each day they'd ask Alexander for advice. To get it, however, they had
to stand in line behind Alexander's clients and me. Alexander was a
salesman, but like all the very best salesmen, he had the instincts of a
trader. For all intents and purposes he was a trader. His customers-and
his bosses-simply did whatever he told them to.
Alexander had a knack for interpreting events around him. The most
impressive aspect of this was its speed. When news broke, he seemed to
have already planned his response. He trusted his nose completely. If he
had a flaw, it was that he lacked the ability to question his own
immediate reactions. He saw the markets as a tightly woven web. Yank on
one filament in the web, and the other filaments had to move, too. He
therefore traded in all markets. The bonds, currencies, and stocks of
France,* Germany, the United States, Japan, Canada, and Britain; the
markets in oil, precious metals, and bulk commodities-all interested him.
The luckiest thing that happened to me during the period I spent at
Salomon Brothers was having Alexander take me into his confidence. We
met when I replaced him in London. For two years prior to my arrival, he
had worked for Stu Willicker and beside Dash Riprock. When we met, he
was returning to New York, to be a bond salesman on the forty-first
floor. There was no reason for him to watch over me. Except for the
mango tea which he required me to smuggle in bulk to him from Paris,
there was nothing in it for him. It was a genuinely selfless act, which I
recount only because at the time it seemed so incredible. It was as if he
had bought shares in my future and were determined to make the trade

come right. We spoke at least three times each day and as often as
twenty. The conversations during the first few months consisted of his
talking and my asking questions.
My job was a matter of learning to think and sound like a money spinner.
Thinking and sounding like Alexander were the next best thing
*One of Alexander's financial heroics found its distorted way to the
center of Tom V>/o\fe's Bonfire of the Vanities Wolfe describes his
protagonist, Sherman McCoy, getting himself in trouble with the goldbacked French government bonds, the so-called Giscard bonds It was
Alexander who had first discovered the Giscard was mispnced, and far
from getting himself in trouble he made many millions of dollars
exploiting the mispncing
to being genuinely talented, which I wasn't. So I listened to the master
and repeated what I heard, as in kung fu. It reminded me of learning a
foreign language. It all seems strange at first. Then, one day, you catch
yourself thinking in the language. Suddenly words you never realized you
knew are at your disposal. Finally you dream in the language. It seems
odd now to think of dreaming of moneymaking schemes. But it didn't
seem terribly out of the ordinary when I woke up one morning thinking
that there was an arbitrage available in Japanese bond futures. That
morning I looked into the Japanese market, saw that it was indeed the
case, and wondered why I had dreamed of it, since I couldn't recall
having ever spoken of the subject. Gobbledygook to you, perhaps. A
second language to me.
Many of the trades that Alexander suggested followed one of two
patterns. First, when all investors were doing the same thing, he would
actively seek to do the opposite. The word stockbrokers use for this
approach is contrarian. Everyone wants to be one, but no one is, for the
sad reason that most investors are scared of looking foolish. Investors
do not fear losing money as much as they fear solitude, by which I mean
taking risks that others avoid. When they are caught losing money alone,
they have no excuse for their mistake, and most investors, like most
people, need excuses. They are, strangely enough, happy to stand on the
edge of a precipice as long as they are joined by a few thousand others.
But when a market is widely regarded to be in a bad way, even if the
problems are illusory, many investors get out.
A good example of this was the crisis at the U.S. Farm Credit

Corporation. It looked for a moment as if Farm Credit might go bankrupt.
Investors stampeded out of Farm Credit bonds because having been
warned of the possibility of accident, they couldn't be seen in the
vicinity without endangering their reputations. In an age when failure
isn't allowed, when the U.S. government had rescued firms as remote
from the national interest as Chrysler and the Continental Illinois Bank,
there was no chance the government would allow the Farm Credit bank to
default. The thought of not bailing out an eighty-billion-dollar institution
that lent money to America's distressed farmers was absurd.
Institutional investors knew this. That is the point. The people selling
Farm Credit bonds for less than they were worth weren't necessarily
stupid. They simply could not be seen holding them. Since Alexander
wasn't constrained by appearances, he sought to exploit people who
were. (The occupational hazard of his role was an ugly elitism; you begin
to think everyone else is stupid.)
The second pattern to Alexander's thought was that in the event of a
major dislocation, such as a stock market crash, a natural disaster, the
breakdown of OPEC's production agreements, he would look away from
the initial focus of investor interest and seek secondary and tertiary
effects.
Remember Chernobyl? When news broke that the Soviet nuclear reactor
had exploded, Alexander called. Only minutes before, confirmation of
the disaster had blipped across our Quotron machines, yet Alexander
had already bought the equivalent of two supertankers of crude oil. The
focus of investor attention was on the New York Stock Exchange, he
said. In particular it was on any company involved in nuclear power. The
stocks of those companies were plummeting. Never mind that, he said. He
had just purchased, on behalf of his clients, oil futures. Instantly in his
mind less supply of nuclear power equaled more demand for oil, and he
was right. His investors made a large killing. Mine made a small killing.
Minutes after I had persuaded a few clients to buy some oil, Alexander
called back.
"Buy potatoes," he said. "Gotta hop. "Then he hung up.
Of course. A cloud of fallout would threaten European food and water
supplies, including the potato crop, placing a premium on uncon-taminated
American substitutes. Perhaps a few folks other than potato farmers
think of the price of potatoes in America minutes after the explosion of

a nuclear reactor in Russian, but I have never met them.
But Chernobyl and oil are a comparatively straightforward example.
There was a game we played called What if? All sorts of complications
can be introduced into What if? Imagine, for example, you are an
institutional investor managing several billion dollars. What if there is a
massive earthquake in Tokyo? Tokyo is reduced to rubble. Investors in
Japan panic. They are selling yen and trying to get their money out of the
Japanese stock market. What do you do?
Well, along the lines of pattern number one, what Alexander would do is
put money into Japan on the assumption that since everyone was trying
to get out, there must be some bargains. He would buy precisely those
securities in Japan that appeared the least desirable to others. First,
the stocks of Japanese insurance companies. The world would probably
assume that ordinary insurance companies had a great deal of exposure,
when in fact, the risk resides mainly with Western insurers and with a
special Japanese earthquake insurance company that's been socking away
premiums for decades. The shares of ordinary insurers would be cheap.
Then Alexander would buy a couple of hundred million dollars' worth of
Japanese government bonds. With the economy in temporary disrepair,
the government would lower interest rates to encourage rebuilding and
simply order the banks to lend at those rates. Japanese banks would
comply as usual with their government's request. Lower interest rates
would mean higher bond prices.
Also, the short-term panic could well be overshadowed by the long-term
repatriation of Japanese capital. Japanese companies have massive sums
invested in Europe and America. Eventually they would withdraw those
investments, turn inward, lick their wounds, repair their factories, and
bolster their stock. What would that mean?
Well, to Alexander, it would suggest buying yen. The Japanese would buy
yen, selling their dollars, francs, marks, and pounds to do so. The yen
would appreciate not just because the Japanese were buying it but
because foreign speculators would eventually see the Japanese buying it
and rush to join them. If the yen collapsed immediately after the quake,
it would only further encourage Alexander, who sought always to do the
unexpected, that his idea was a good one. On the other hand, if the yen
rose, he might sell it.
Each day Alexander called and explained something new. After several

months of struggling I began to catch on. When Alexander hung up, I
would call three or four investors and simply parrot what Alexander had
just said. They would think me, if not a genius, then at least astute. On
the basis of what I told them, they put money on the line. They made
handsome profits, just like the investors to whom Alexander spoke. Soon
they were calling me. Before long they wouldn't speak to anyone else but
me. That would do whatever I, meaning Alexander, told them to do. This
would soon prove very valuable.
While Alexander taught me an attitude toward markets, Dash showed me
style. Much of our time was spent on the telephone. By style, I mean
phone technique. Dash had a lot of phone technique. He placed his social
calls to clients in the upright seated position. He placed his sales calls
hunkered over, head under his desk. He used the space beneath his desk
as a kind of soundproof booth. His taste for privacy had been
acquired as a geek, when lie didn't want the seasoned salespeople to
overhear the stupid things he was telling his customers.
Now it was habit. I could tell when Dash was about to sell a few hundred
million dollars of government bonds because his torso would jackknife in
his chair so that his chest was almost in his lap and his head went into
the sound booth. Just before consummating the trade, he'd plug his
empty ear with a finger on his free hand and speak rapidly in a low voice.
(One of his customers nicknamed him the Whispering Dash.) Then
suddenly, he'd pop up, hit the silencer button on his receiver, and shout
into the hoot, "Hey, New York . . . New York . . . you're done on October
ninety-two to September ninety-threes, one hundred by one hundred
ten ... yeah, one hundred million by one hundred ten million." Whenever he
emerged from the tuck position without having sold bonds, I knew he had
been talking to his mother. It wasn't cool to talk to your mother on the
trading floor.
I was only as conscious of miming Dash's movements on the phone and
the trading floor as a child who acquires the mannerisms of a parent. I
had no other point of reference. I, too, soon found myself jackknifed in
my chair, twirling pencils in the corner of my mouth, plugging my ear with
my fingers, talking too fast and quietly for my customers to follow, and
generally looking much like Dash. A phenomenon, in fact, swept across the
trading floor as more and more geeks came on board: Small units of
inexperienced people adopted the gestures and habits of their most

successful members. As our unit grew from five to ten, it began to look
more and more like Dash Riprock.
Dash was Dash. Alexander was Alexander. I was a fraud, a composite of
traits I felt rightfully belonged to these two. In my defense I can say
only that I was a very good fraud. Also, that I had one useful quality
possessed by neither of my teachers: a detachment from the business
and the firm. It comes, I suppose, from getting your job at a fund raiser
at St. James's Palace or perhaps from having another source of income
(I was a journalist at nights and on weekends while I was at Salomon
Brothers). Anyway, it is extremely helpful in a young career because it
leaves you fearless. I had the same advantage of recklessness as a driver
in a traffic jam with a rent-a-car. The worst anyone could do to my renta-career was take it away, and though I did not actively court that fate,
the thought of losing my job didn't trouble me as much as it troubled
lifers such as, say, Dash Riprock. That is not to say I did not
care; I cared immensely. I thrived on praise more than most and thus
sought to please. But I was willing to take greater risks than if I had felt
deeply proprietary about niy career. I was, for instance, willing to
disobey my superiors, and that caused them to sit up and take notice far
more quickly than if I had been a good soldier.
Guided by Alexander and Dash, I was equipped with sound money-making
schemes, a persuasive sales voice, and the right trading floor look;
business followed quickly, if haphazardly. A few small investors came to
me in the manner of my unlucky German. I was able to persuade them to
borrow large sums of money and speculate.
With all the noise that is made about the danger of junk bonds and the
leveraging of American industry, it is a wonder that more attention is not
paid to the daily leveraging that occurs within investors' portfolios. Say
I wanted my customer to buy thirty million dollars' worth of AT&T
bonds. Even if he had no cash at his disposal, he could pledge the AT&T
bonds as collateral and borrow the money from Salomon Brothers to buy
the bonds. We were genuinely a full-service casino-a customer didn't
even need money to gamble in our house. This meant that even customers
with small sums of money could be made to do large pieces of business.
Since I had no large investors yet wanted to do big business and hear my
name praised over the hoot and holler, I became adept at leveraging.

Success bred success. Pretty soon Salomon management was leading me
to the clients of other salespeople, in hopes that with larger customers I
could do gargantuan pieces of business. By June 1986, six months into
the job, I was plugged into several of the largest pools of money in
Europe. On the other end of my telephone at my peak (when I left
Salomon) the investors controlled, collectively, about fifty billion dollars.
They were quick, aware, flexible, and rich. I had my own little fullservice casino up and running, and it would, at its best, generate about
ten million dollars a year in risk-free revenues for Salomon Brothers. We
were told that each seat on the trading floor cost six hundred thousand
dollars. If that was true, my business alone was generating more than
nine million dollars in profits a year. I gradually ceased to worry about
how much business I would do, for I was doing far more than I would
ever be paid for.
I soon had customers in London, Paris, Geneva, Zurich, Monte Carlo,
Madrid, Sydney, Minneapolis, and Palm Beach. I was perceived
within Salomon Brothers to be talking to the smartest money in the
market apart from a few New York fund managers. With a good moneyspinning idea I might be able to shuffle half a billion dollars or so around,
by, for example, moving it out of the American stock market and into the
German bond market. The markets in the long run are no doubt driven by
fundamental economic laws-if the United States runs a persistent trade
deficit, the dollar will eventually plummet-but in the short run money
flows less rationally. Fear and, to a lesser extent, greed are what make
money move. In watching the money move around, I began to anticipate
its next move and maneuver a few of my fifty billion dollars in front of
the next wave.
I was, in short, doing pretty well. I stopped feeling like a geek the
moment Salomon traders started asking my advice. And sometime in the
middle of 1986, more by luck than by skill, I ceased to be a geek. I
became a normal, established Salomon salesman. There was no one event
that marked the change. I knew I was no longer a geek only because
people stopped calling me geek and started calling me Michael, which I
preferred. There is a difference between this, though, and being called
Big Swinging Dick. A Big Swinging Dick, I was not. The journey from
useless geek to Michael took about six months. The journey from Michael
to Big Swinging Dick happened almost immediately thereafter and was

occasioned by a single sale.
There was a phenomenon known at Salomon as a priority. A priority was a
huge number of bonds or stocks that had to be sold, either because
selling them would make us rich or because not selling them would make
us poor. When Texaco teetered on the brink of bankruptcy, for example,
Salomon Brothers owned about one hundred million dollars' worth of
bonds in the company. There was a real danger that these bonds would
become worthless. Unless sold to customers, they could cost Salomon a
great deal of money. Sold to customers, of course, they would cost the
customers a great deal of money. That, it was decided, was the best
thing to do. Texaco bonds therefore became a priority for the Salomon
sales force.
One of the biggest priorities during my stay at Salomon was eighty-six
million dollars' worth of bonds in the property development company
called Olympia & York. From mid-Ma}? to mid-August of 1986 the Biggest
Swinging Dicks in the Salomon Brothers system did their best to sell
these bonds and failed. Our failure was an embarrassment to
everyone from President Tom Strauss to the lowest geek in London.
One day Alexander and I were speaking on the phone. He had tried to
sell the O&Ys and failed. But he genuinely believed they had merit. O&Y
bonds were an unusual priority because they were owned not by a
Salomon Brothers trader but by the single large Arab investor who
ignored the blacklist and dealt with us. The Arab was desperate to sell
the Olympia & Yorks, and not particularly knowledgeable about them, and
would probably sell them cheaply.
Second, attitudes toward bonds are subject to change for reasons not
much more substantial than attitudes toward the length of women's
skirts. Simply because no one wanted the O&Ys now didn't mean that no
one would want them three months from row. O&Ys were a special case,
because they were collateralized by a Manhattan skyscraper owned by
Olympia & York rather than by the full faith and credit of the company.
Many institutional investors hadn't the expertise to evaluate real estate
values. But as more bonds were backed by real estate, institutional
investors were learning.
Of course, Salomon Brothers could simply have bought the Olympia &
Yorks for itself. But Salomon was not a long-term investor, and the
thought of having eighty-six million dollars on the trading books for

months, even years if the worst case happened and no one ever bought
the bonds from us, didn't delight our management. So we salesmen were
searching for another buyer, and the stakes were high. The Arab
investor had offered to buy another large block of bonds if and when we
rid him of the Olympia & Yorks. The combination of that and the
transfer of the Olympia & York bonds from the Arab to the next owner
could net the firm as much as two million dollars.
Now there was no one I trusted in quite the same way I trusted
Alexander, so I decided to share my secret with him. My secret was that
I knew a man who'd buy the Olympia & York bonds. I had known how to
sell the Olympia & York bonds for a month but, remembering my
experience with AT&Ts, kept the information to myself. The investor I
had in mind, a Frenchman, wouldn't want to hold them for long-only long
enough for other investors to forget they'd ever turned them down.
Then he'd sell them.
Alexander helped me to persuade myself that if I went about selling the
bonds in the right way, if I extracted promises from senior management
that my customer would not get scalped, then everyone could win.
Salomon would make a lot of money. My customer would make a little
money (which, for a customer, was grand). And I would be a hero. If
there was a single lesson I took away from Salomon Brothers, it is that
rarely do all parties win. The nature of the game is zero sum. A dollar out
of my customer's pocket was a dollar in ours, and vice versa. But this was
an unusual case. (I had to remind myself even as I sold the bonds. You
see, part of selling bonds for Salomon was persuading yourself that a bad
idea for Salomon was a good idea for a customer.) If management would
promise to make the Olympia & Yorks a sales priority several months
hence and remove them from my customer's portfolio at a profit (i.e.,
stick someone else's customer with them), then maybe we brave few
could win. Alexander did the impossible every day, and talking to him
occasionally made me feel I, too, could do the impossible: sell a priority
and keep my customer happy.
I walked across the London trading floor and spoke with the trader
responsible for Olympia & York bonds. He sat next to the man
responsible for the AT&Ts. He said, of course, that he'd promise to keep
my customer happy. "Canyon really sell them, though?" hesaid. "Really?
Really?" In his shifty eyes there was a mixture of disbelief that the
