Sheldon Natenbere

OPTION
VOLATILITY

NG

Advanced Trading

Strategies and Techniques

McGraw-Hill

New York San Francisco Washington, D.C. Auckland Bogota
Caracas Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
Montreal New Delhi San Juan Singapore

Sydney Tokyo Toronto


© 1994, Richard D. Irwin, a Times Mirror Higher Education Group, Inc.
company

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored ina retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, elec-
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the publisher and the authors.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the
author and the publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional advice.

ISBN 1-55738-486-X

Printed in the United States of America

BB

22 21 20 19 18 17

CB/TAQ/BIS

McGraw-Hill 2
A Disiston of The McGraw-Hill Compantes


To Paul, for convincing me to become an options trader;
To Hen and Jerry, for their financial help when | needed it;

To Eddie, who encouraged me to finish the book and
get off the computer so he could do his homework;

And most of all to Leona, for her support and encouragement.


¢ Table of Contents +

Preface to the First Edition
Preface to the Second Edition

1%

The Language of Options
Contract Specifications
Exercise and Assignment
Market Integrity
Margin Requirements
Settlement Procedures

e2¢

Elementary Strategies
Simple Buy and Sell Strategies
Risk/Reward Characteristics
Combination Strategies
Constructing an Expiration Graph

o3%

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models
Expected Return
Theoretical Value
A Word on Models
A Simple Approach
Exercise Price
Time to Expiration
Price of the Underlying
Interest Rates
Dividends
Volatility

oon pe

13
13
16
19
23

35
36
37
39
40
46
46
47
47
48
49


vi Table of Contents

oat

Volatility 51
Random Walks and Normal Distributions 51
Mean and Standard Deviation 56
Underlying Price as the Mean of a Distribution 60
Volatility as a Standard Deviation 60
Lognormal Distributions 61
Daily and Weekly Standard Deviations 65
Volatility and Observed Price Changes 67
A Note on Interest Rate Products 68
Types of Volatilities 69
eo 5%

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 81
76%

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 95
The Delta 99
The Gamma 103
The Theta 111
The Vega or Kappa 113
The Rho 116
Summary 118
e7%

Introduction to Spreading 127
What Is a Spread? 127
Why Spread? 132
Spreading as a Risk Management Tool 133
eB

Volatility Spreads 137
Backspread (also referred to as a ratio backspread or long ratio spread) 138
Ratio Vertical Spread (also referred to as a ratio spread, short ratio spread,

vertical spread, or front spread) 139
Straddle 141

Strangle 143


Table of Contents vii

Butterfly 145
Time Spread (also referred to as a calendar spread or horizontal spread) 148
The Effect of Changing Interest Rates and Dividends 154
Diagonal Spreads 157
Other Variations 157
Spread Sensitivities 159
Choosing an Appropriate Strategy 161
Adjustments 168
Entering a Spread Order 169
79%

Risk Considerations 173
Choosing the Best Spread 173
Practical Considerations 181
How Much Margin for Error? 187
Dividends and Interest 188
What Is a Good Spread? 192
Adjustments 193
A Question of Style 195
Liquidity 196
#104

Bull and Bear Spreads 199
Naked Positions 199
Bull and Bear Ratio Spreads 199
Bull and Bear Butterflies and Time Spreads 201
Vertical Spreads 202
#11 %

Option Arbitrage 213
Synthetic Positions , 213
Conversions and Reversals 217
Arbitrage Risk 223
Boxes 228
Jelly Rolls 231
Using Synthetics in Volatility Spreads 233

Trading without Theoretical Values 235


vitt

124%
Early Exercise of American Options
Futures Options
Stock Options
The Effect of Early Exercise on Trading Strategies

e134

Hedging with Options
Protective Calls and Puts
Covered Writes
Fences
Complex Hedging Strategies
Portfolio Insurance

© 144%
Volatility Revisited
Some Volatility Characteristics
Volatility Forecasting
A Practical Approach
Some Thoughts on Implied Volatility

e154
Stock Index Futures and Options
What Is an Index?
Calculating an Index
Replicating an Index
Stock Index Futures
Index Arbitrage
Index Options
Biases in the Index Market

+ 16%

Intermarket Spreading
An Intermarket Hedge
Volatility Relationships
Intermarket Volatility Spreads
Options on Spreads

Table of Contents

241
241
243
250

257
258
260
263
205
268

273
273
279
282
290

301
301
302
304
305
309
313
326

331
335
336
339
351


Table of Contents ix

17%

Position Analysis 353
Some Simple Examples 353
Graphing a Position 358
A Complex Position 367
Futures Option Positions 372

Models and the Real World 385
Markets Are Frictionless 386
Interest Rates Are Constant over the Life of an Option 388
Volatility Is Constant over the Life of the Option 390
Trading Is Continuous 304
Volatility Is Independent of the Price of the Underlying Contract 399

Over small periods of time the percent price changes in an underlying
contract are normally distributed, resulting in a lognormal distribution

of underlying prices at expiration 400
Skewness and Kurtosis 402
Volatility Skews 405
A Final Thought 416
“ Appendix A *

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 419
* Appendix B +

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 431
Option Pricing Models 431
Normal Distributions 439
Volatility Calculations 442
The Extreme Value Method 443
The Exponential and Natural Logarithm Functions 446
Appendix C +

Characteristics of Volatility Spreads 449

* Appendix D #
What’s the Right Strategy? 451


x Table of Contents

“+ Appendix E +

Synthetic and Arbitrage Relationships 453
Arbitrage Values for European Options (no early exercise permitted) 455
Other Useful Relationships: 456

> Appendix F

Recommended Reading 457
Elementary Books 457
Intermediate Books 459
Advanced Books 461

“ Index + 463


« Preface to the First Edition +

Within the last decade trading options has increased at an explosive rate. Not only have
traditional market participants, speculators, hedgers, and arbitrageurs all become ac-
tively involved in option markets, but the number of individual floor traders willing to
risk their own capital in these markets has grown dramatically. Yet the trader entering
an option market for the first time may find that his initial efforts are less than totally
successful. Indeed, the learning period in options during which a trader gains full
confidence in his ability to survive and thrive under all types of market conditions may
require many months or even years of trading experience. Unfortunately, the great
majority of traders do not survive this learning period. The usual characteristics of
options, the subleties of the marketplace, and the unforseen risks, all seem to conspire
against the inexperienced trader and eventually lead to his demise.

Much of the pain experienced by a new trader could be avoided if the trader were
better prepared for the realities of option trading. Unfortunately, existing option litera-
ture has tended to take either a highly theoretical approach best suited to an academic
environment, or a simplistic approach presenting options as just another way of trading
stocks or commodities. Neither approach is likely to meet the needs of the serious trader.
The former approach is not only mathematically beyond the capabilities of most traders,
but relies heavily on theoretical assumptions which are too often violated in the real
world. The latter approach cannot possibly prepare a serious trader for the wide variety
of strategies with which he must be familiar, nor with the very real risks to which he
will be exposed.

This book was written with the hope of filling the void in the traditional option
literature by combining theory and real-world practice. Moreover, it was written
Primarily with the serious trader in mind. This includes traders whose firms are actively
Involved in option markets, either by choice or by necessity, or individual traders who
wish to make the most of the opportunities offered by options. This is not meant to
discourage those who are casually or peripherally involved in options markets from
Teading this book. Additional insight into any subject is always worthwhile. But
understanding options requires substantial effort. The serious trader, because his
livelihood often depends on this understanding, wil! usually be more willing to invest
the time and energy required to attain this goal.

; In preparing the reader for the option marketplace, the author has tried to combine
an iMtuitive approach to option theory with a discussion of the real-life problems with
Which he will be confronted. Of course, the reader who is comfortable with mathemat-
Ics is in no way discouraged from delving more deeply into the theory of option pricing

xt


xii Preface

in many of the excellent academic presentations of the subject. But the important point
is that such a rigorous opproach is not necessary for success in option trading. Indeed,
the great majority of successful option traders have never even looked at a mathematical
presentation of option theory. Nor would many of them be capable of understanding
the complex mathematics if they did.

Much of the presentation in this book will necessarily be colored by the author’s
personal experiences as a floor trader. Sophisticated hedging strategies, such as portfolio
insurance, and complex intermarket spreading strategies are touched upon only briefly,
if at all. Yet the principles of option evaluation which enable a floor trader to successfully
participate in an option market are the same principles which will enable any participant
to make the best use of options, regardless of the reasons for entering the market.
Additionally, the author is able to place special emphasis on a lesson which floor traders
quickly learn but which casual traders too often forget. Without a very healthy respect
for the risks of option trading and a full understanding of risk management techniques,
today’s profits can quickly turn into tomorrow’s losses.

Because of the more recent introduction of listed options on futures contracts and
the increased interest in these markets, the author has tended to concentrate the
examples in the text on these options. However, the principles which lead to success
in futures options are equally valid in commodity, stock, and index option markets.

The core material in this book was developed in classes taught by the author to
traders at the Chicago Board of Trade. In expanding the material into book form the
author has tried to draw on a wide variety of other sources. Foremost among these are
the many floor traders who offered their comments and criticisms. In addition, special
thanks go to Greg Monroe of the Chicago Board of Trade Education Department and
Mark Rzepczynski of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange Research Department for their
comments on the text, and to David Isbister of Monetary Investments International for
preparation of some of the values used in the tables.

Finally, my thanks to the staff at Probus Publishing for their encouragement,
patience, and assistance in dealing with a first time author.

Sheldon Natenberg
Chicago

ay


+ Preface to the Second Edition +

In 1986, when I first discussed with Probus Publishing the idea of an option book for
professional traders, there was considerable doubt as to whether there would be
sufficient interest to justify publication of such a book. After all, how many professional
option traders are there? To everyone’s (pleasant) surprise, when the book came out not
only did it turn out that a large number of professionals were purchasing the book, but
many non-professionals also seemed to be very interested in this approach.

The revised edition is no different in its focus. The new material is likely to be of
greatest interest to the serious option trader. While the material may also be of interest
to the non-professional, it is the professional, whose livelihood depends on a complete
understanding of options, who will be most willing to spend the time required to master
the material.

In the new edition J have tried to incorporate the comments and suggestions which
traders have made concerning the first edition. Some of the more important additions:

Expanded coverage of stock options—When I sat down to write the first edition
the emphasis was on commodity options. This was primarily a marketing decision. At
the time there were several books available on stock options, but hardly any commodity
options. However, with the success of the first edition, and at the suggestion of many
friends at the CBOE, I felt it would be worthwhile giving stock options equal emphasis.

More on volatility—Given its importance, a second chapter on volatility has been
added with more detailed discussion of volatility characteristics and considerations.

A chapter on stock index futures and options—These markets have become so

important, and are so interconnected, that some discussion is mandatory in any book
on options. While one chapter cannot possibly cover every aspect of index markets, I
have tried to touch on how these markets differ from traditional option markets, and
the effect of these differences on trading strategies.
___ A discussion of intermarket spreading—Much of the most sophisticated trading
involves spreading options in one underlying market against options in a different
underlying market. I have included a discussion on the relationship between similar
underlying markets, and the methods traders use to construct spreads when a relation-
ship appears to be mispriced.

A more detailed discussion of volatility skews—This is probably the one area about
Which I am most often asked, the tendency of different exercise prices to trade at
different implied volatilities. I have tried to include a discussion of this phenomenon,
and several methods by which traders deal with this problem.

xiii


xiv Preface

I have also deleted two appendicies:

A guide to software—New software is being introduced so quickly that it did not
seem practical to include a list of vendors and products as | did in the first edition. Nor
am I familiar with every piece of software available, so it would be unfair to those
vendors who have good products but whom I might inadvertantly omit. The best way
for traders to choose software is to talk to other traders and to read some of the industry
periodicals to find out what programs are being used to evaluate options.

Historical volatilities—When the first edition came out I suspected that some new
traders might not have access to any volatility data, so I included some historical
volatility graphs for selected futures contracts. Now, however, volatility data in some
form is available to almost all option traders so I did not feel that volatility charts, which
would quickly become outdated, would be worth including.

As in the first edition, I make no claims to being a theoretician, and this book is not
intended to take the place of a good book on option theory. But theory is only important
as a means to an end—the actual trading of options in the marketplace. Whatever theory
is in the book, | have tried to present in non-technical language. For a more complete
discussion of option pricing theory, the reader can consult any of the advanced books
to be found in Appendix F.

Nor is it my intention to make decisions for the reader or to tell the reader how to
trade. There are many ways to trade successfully in an option market. Regardless of a
trader’s own style, without a complete familiarity with the necessary tools, and a
proficiency in their use, it is almost impossible to be successful in options. I have tried
to explain what these tools are, how they work, and the variety of ways in which traders
use them to make decisions that fit their own individual needs and trading styles. In
doing so, I have attempted, as much as possible, to avoid contaminating the reader with
my own personal preferences and prejudices.

In a sense, nothing in either this or the first edition of Option Volatility and Pricing
Strategies is new. All the theory, trading strategies, and risk management considera-
tions, are familiar to experienced traders in one form or another. My goal has been to
put all this material together and present it in an orderly, easily understandable format
which I hope will form a solid foundation upon which an aspiring option trader can
build a successful career.

This book is a result not only of my efforts, but of the efforts of the many traders
who were kind enough to read this material and offer their comments and suggestions.
Without their help I could not hope to cover all the important aspects of options. To all
of them, and to the editors at Probus Publishing Company, who displayed patience
above and beyond the call of duty, I offer my thanks and enduring gratitude.

Sheldon Natenberg
Chicago
June 1994


Ye 1 &

The Language of Options

Every option market brings together traders and investors with different expectations
and goals. Some enter the market with an opinion on which direction prices will move.
Some intend to use options to protect existing positions against adverse price move-
ment. Some hope to take advantage of price discrepancies between similar or related
products. Some act as middlemen, buying and selling as an accommodation to other
market participants and hoping to profit from the difference between the bid and ask
rice.

, Even though expectations and goals differ, every trader’s education must begin
with an introduction to the terminology of option trading, and to the rules and
regulations which govern trading activity. Without a facility in the language of options,
a trader will find it impossible to communicate his desire to buy or sell in the
marketplace. Without a clear understanding of the terms of an option contract, and his
rights and responsibilities under that contract, a trader cannot hope to make the best
use of options, nor will he be prepared for the very real risks of trading,

CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS

Options are of two types. A call option is the right to buy or take a long position in a
given asset (typically a security, commodity, index, or futures contract) at a fixed price
on or before a specified date. A put optionis the right to sell or take a short position in
a given asset.

Note the difference between an option and a futures contract. A futures contract
Tequires delivery at a fixed price. The buyer and seller of a futures contract both have
obligations which they must meet. The seller must make delivery and the buyer must
take delivery of the asset. The buyer ofan option, however, has a choice. He can choose
to take delivery (a call) or make delivery (a put). If the buyer of an option chooses to
either make or take delivery, the seller of the option is obligated to take the other side.
In option trading all rights lie with the buyer and all obligations with the seller.

The asset to be bought or sold under the terms of the option is the underlying asset
Or, More simply, the underlying. The exercise price, or strike price, is the price at which
the underlying will be delivered should the holder of an option choose to exercise his

Tight to buy or sell. The date after which the option may no longer be exercised is the
expiration date.


2 Chapter I

If an option is purchased directly from a bank or other dealer, the quantity of the
underlying to be delivered, the exercise price, and the expiration date can all be tailored
to meet the buyer’s individual requirements. If the option is purchased on an exchange,
the quantity of the underlying to be delivered, as well as the exercise price and
expiration date, are predetermined by the exchange.!

As an example of an exchange traded option, the buyer of a crude oil October 21
call on the New York Mercantile Exchange has the right to take a long position in one
October crude oil futures contract for 1,000 barrels of crude oil (the underlying), at a
price of $21 per barrel (the exercise price), on or before October expiration (the
expiration date). The buyer of a General Electric March 80 put on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange has the right to take a short position in 100 shares of General Electric
stock (the underlying) at a price of $80 per share (the exercise price}, on or before March
expiration (the expiration date).

Since stock has no expiration date, the underlying asset for a stock option is simply
some number of shares in the underlying stock. In the case of futures options, however,
the situation can be somewhat confusing, since a futures contract has a limited life span.
The underlying asset for an option on a futures contract is usually the futures month
identical to the expiration month of the option. The underlying asset for a crude oil
October 21 call on the NYMEX is one October crude oil futures contract. The
underlying asset fora Treasury Bond June 96 put on the Chicago Board of Trade is one
June Treasury Bond futures contract.

Some futures exchanges also list serial options, whereby options with different
expiration dates have identical underlying futures contracts. When there is no futures
contract with the same expiration month as the option, the underlying contract for that
option is the nearest futures contract after the expiration of the option. For example,
the underlying for a December Deutschemark option on the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange is one December Deutschemark futures contract. With no October or
November futures contract available, the underlying for an October or November
Deutschemark option is also one December futures contract. December is the nearest
futures month after the expiration of October and November options.

Expiration dates for exchange traded contracts are not uniform, but are set by each
individual exchange. The expiration date for stock options in the United States is usually
the third Saturday after the third Friday of the expiration month. For options on futures
contracts, however, the expiration need not coincide with the delivery month specified
in the option contract. In some cases the exact expiration date for a futures option can
predate the delivery month of the underlying futures contract by several weeks. A crude
oil option on the NYMEX will typically expire the first Saturday of the preceding month,
so that an October option will actually expire the first Saturday in September.
