
Obvious, isn’t it? Well, look around you and see how many suppos-
edly sophisticated investors gct themselves crossed up on this matter of
what price-earnings ratio to use in considering how far ahead a stock is
actually discounting future growth. This is particularly true if a change
has been taking place in the background of the company being studied.
Let us now consider the ABC Company instead of the XYZ Corpora-
tion. The two companies are almost exactly alike except that the ABC


132 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Company is much younger. Only in the last two years has its funda-
mental excellence been appreciated by the financial cormmiunity to the
point that its shares, too, are now selling at twice the price-earnings ratio
of the average Dow Jones stock. It seems almost impossible for many
investors to realize, in the case ofa stock that in the past has not sold at
a comparably high price-earnings ratio, that the price-earnings ratio at
which it is now selling may be a reflection of its intrinsic quality and
not an unreasonable discounting of further growth.

What is important here is thoroughly understanding the nature of
the company, with particular reference to what it may be expected to
do some years from now. If the earning spurt that lies ahead is a one-
time matter, and the nature of the company is not such that compara-
ble new sources of earning growth will be developed when the present
one is fully exploited, that is quite a different situation. Then the high
price-carnings ratio does discount future earnings. This is because, when
the present spurt is over, the stock will settle back to the same selling
price in relation to its earnings as run-of-the-mill shares. However, if the
company is deliberately and consistently developing new sources of
earning power, and if the industry is one promising to afford equal
growth spurts in the future, the price-earnings ratio five or ten years in
the future is rather sure to be as much above that of the average stock
as it is today. Stocks of this type will frequently be found to be dis-
counting the future much less than many investors believe. This is why
some of the stocks that at first glance appear highest priced may, upon
analysis, be the biggest bargains.

5. Don’t quibble over eighths and quarters.

I have used fictitious examples in attempting to make clear various other
matters. This time I will use an actual example. A little over twenty years
ago, a gentleman who in most respects has demonstrated a high order of
investment ability wanted to buy one hundred shares of a stock listed on
the New York Stock Exchange. On the day he decided to buy, the stock
closed at 35’4. On the following day it sold repeatedly at that price. But
this gentleman would not pay 351%. He decided he might as well save fifty
dollars. He put his order in at 35. He refused to raise it. The stock never
again sold at 35. Today, almost twenty-five years later, the stock appears to
have a particularly bright future. As a result of the stock dividends and splits
that have occurred in the intervening years, it is now selling at over 500.


Five Don’ts for Investors 133

In other words, in an attempt to save fifty dollars, this investor failed
to make at least $46,500. Furthermore, there is no question that this
investor would have made the $46,500, because he still has other shares
of this same company which he bought at even lower figures. Since
$46,500 is about 930 times 50, this means that our investor would have
had to save his fifty dollars 930 times just to break even. Obviously, fol-
lowing a course of action with this kind of odds against it borders on
financial lunacy.

This particular example is by no means an extreme one. I purposely
selected a stock which for a number of years was more of a market lag-
gard than a market leader. If our investor had picked any one of perhaps
fifty other growth stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange, mis-
sing $3500 worth of such stock in order to save $50 would have cost a
great deal more than the $46,500.

Por the small investor wanting to buy only a few hundred shares of
a stock, the rule is very simple. If the stock seems the right one and the
price seems reasonably attractive at current levels, buy “at the market.”
The extra eighth, or quarter, or half point that may be paid is insignifi-
cant compared to the profit that will be missed if the stock is not
obtained. Should the stock not have this sort of long-range potential, I
believe the investor should not have decided to buy it in the first place.

For the larger investor, wanting perhaps many thousands of shares,
the problem is not quite as simple. For all but a very small minority of
stocks, the available supply is usually sufficiently limited that an attempt
to buy at the market even half of this desired amount could well cause
a sizable advance in quotations. This sudden price rise might, in turn,
produce two further effects, both tending to make accumulating a block
of this stock even more difficult. The price spurt by itself might be
enough to arouse the interest and competition of other buyers. It might
also cause some of those who have been planning to sell to hold their
shares off the market with the hope that the rise might continue. What
then should a large buyer do to meet this situation?

He should go to his broker or securities dealer. He should disclose
to him exactly how much stock he desires to buy. He should tell the
broker to pick up as much stock as possible but authorize him to pass
up small offerings if buying them would arouse many competitive bids.
Most important, he should give his broker a completely free hand on
price up to a point somewhat above the most recent sale. How much
above should be decided in consultation with the broker or dealer after


134 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

taking into account such factors as the size of the block desired, the nor-
mal activity of the sharcs, how cager the investor may be for the hold-
ing, and any other special factors that might be involved.

The investor may feel he does not have a broker or dealer upon
whom he may rely as having sufficient judgment or discretion to han-
dle something of this sort. If so, he should proceed forthwith to find a
broker or dealer in whom such confidence can be placed. After all,
doing exactly this sort of thing is the primary function of a broker or
the trading department of a securities dealer.


9

Five More Don’ts
for Investors

1. Don’t overstress diversification.

No investment principle is more widely acclaimed than diversification.
(Some cynics have hinted that this is because the concept 1s so simple
that even stock brokers can understand it!) Be that as it may, there is very
little chance of the average investor being influenced to practice insuf-
ficient diversification. The horrors of what can happen to those who
“put all their eggs in one basket” are too constantly being expounded.

Too few people, however, give sufficient thought to the evils of the
other extreme. This is the disadvantage of having eggs in so many bas-
kets that a lot of the eggs do not end up in really attractive baskets, and
it is impossible to keep watching all the baskets after the eggs get put
into them. For example, among investors with common stock holdings
having a market value of a quarter to a half million dollars, the percent-
age who own twenty-five or more different stocks is appalling. It is not
this number of twenty-five or more which itself is appalling. Rather it
is that in the great majority of instances only a small percentage of such
holdings is in attractive stocks about which the investor or his advisor
has a high degree of knowledge. Investors have been so oversold on
diversification that fear of having too many eggs in one basket has
caused them to put far too little into companies they thoroughly know
and far too much in othcrs about which they know nothing at all. It
never seems to occur to them, much less to their advisors, that buying a
company without having sufficient knowledge of it may be even more
dangerous than having inadequate diversification.


136 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

How much diversification is really necessary and how much is dan-
gerous? It is somewhat like infantrymen stacking rifles. A rifleman can-
not get as firm a stack by balancing two rifles as he can by using five
or six properly placed. However, he can get just as secure a stack with
five as he could with fifty. In this matter of diversification, however,
there is one big difference between stacking rifles and common stocks.
With rifles, the number needed for a firm stack does not usually
depend on the kind of rifle used. With stocks, the nature of the stock
itself has a tremendous amount to do with the amount of diversifica-
tion actually needed.

Some companies, such as most of the major chemical manufactur-
ers, have a considerable degree of diversification within the company
itself. While all of their products may be classified as chemicals, many of
these chemicals may have most of the attributes found in products from
completely different industries. Some may have completely different
manufacturing problems. They may be sold against different competi-
tion to different types of customers. Furthermore at times when only
one type of chemical is involved, the customer group may be such a
broad section of industry that a considerable element of internal diver-
sification may still be present.

The breadth and depth of a company’s management personnel—
that is, how far a company has progressed away from one-man manage-
ment—are also important factors in deciding how much diversification
protection is intrinsically needed. Finally, holdings in highly cyclical
industries—that is, those that fluctuate sharply with changes in the state
of the business cycle—also inherently require being balanced by some-
what greater diversification than do shares in lines less subject to this
type of intermittent fluctuation.

This difference between the amount of internal diversification
found in stocks makes it impossible to set down hard and fast rules as to
the minimum amount of diversification the average investor requires for
optimum results. The relationship between the industries involved will
also be a factor. For example, an investor with ten stocks in equal
amounts, but eight of them bank stocks, may have completely inade-
quate diversification. In contrast, the same investor with each of his ten
stocks in a completely different industry may have far more diversifica-
tion than he really needs.

Recognizing, therefore, that each case is different and that no pre-
cise rules can be laid down, the following is suggested as a rough guide


Five More Don’ts for Investors 137

to what might be considered as minimum diversification needs for all but
the very smallest type of investor:

A. All investments might be confined solely to the large entrenched
type of properly selected growth stock, of which Dow, Du Pont, and
TBM have already been mentioned as typical examples. In this event, the
investor might have a minimum goal of five such stocks in all. This
means that he would not invest over 20 per cent of his total original
commitment in any one of these stocks. It does not mean that should
one grow more rapidly than the rest, so that ten years later he found
40 per cent of his total market value in one stock, he should in any sense
disturb such a holding. This assumes, of course, that he has gotten to
know his holding and the future continues to look at least as bright for
these stocks as has the recent past.

An investor using this guide of 20 per cent of his original invest-
ment for each company should see that there is no more than a mod-
erate amount of overlapping, if any, between the product lines of his five
companies. Thus, for example, if Dow were onc of his five companies
there would seem to me to be no reason why Du Pont might not be
another. There are relatively few places where the product lines of these
two companies overlap or compete. If he were to have Dow and some
other company closer to Dow in its fields of activity, his purchase might
still be a wise one provided he had sufficient reason for making it.
Having these two stocks in similar lines of activity might prove very
profitable over the years. However, in such an instance the investor
should keep in mind that his diversification is essentially inadequate, and
therefore he should be alert for troubles which might affect the indus-
try involved.

B. Some or all of his investments might fall into the category of
stocks about midway between the young growth companies with their
high degree of risk and the institutional type of investment described
above. These would be companies with a good management team rather
than one-man management. They would be companies doing a volume
of business somewhere between fifteen and one hundred million dollars
a year and rather well entrenched in their industries. At least two of such
companies should be considered as necessary to balance each single
company of the A type. In other words, if only companies in this B
group were involved, an investor might start out with 10 per cent of his
available funds in each. This would make a total of ten stocks in all.
However, companies in this general classification can vary considerably


138 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

among themselves as to their degree of risk. It might be prudent to con-
sider those with the greater inherent risk as candidates for 8 per cent of
original investment, rather than 10 per cent. In any event, looking to
each stack of this class as a candidate for 8 to 10 per cent of total orig-
inal investment—in contrast to’20 per cent for the A group—should
again provide the framework for adequate minimum diversification.

Companies of this B group are usually somewhat harder for the
investor to recognize than those of the A or institutional type. There-
fore it might be worthwhile to furnish a brief description of one or two
such companies which I have had the opportunity to observe rather
closely and which could be considered typical examples.

Let us see what I said about such companies in the original edition
and how they appear today. The first B company to which I referred
was P.R. Mallory. I said:

“PR. Mallory & Co., Inc., enjoys a surprising degree of internal
diversification. Its principal products are components for the electronic
and electrical industries, special metals, and batteries. For its more
important product lines it is a major factor in the respective industries,
and in a few of them it is the largest producer. Many of its product lines,
such as electronic components and special metals, serve some of the
most rapidly growing segments of American industry, giving indications
that Mallory’s growth should continue. In ten years sales have increased
almost four-fold to a volume of about $80,000,000 in 1957, with about
one-third of this increase resulting from carefully planned outside acqui-
sitions and about two-thirds from internal growth.

“Profit margins over this period have been a bit lower than would
normally be considered satisfactory for a company of this B group, but
part of this is attributable to above-average expenditures on research.
More significantly, steps have been taken which are beginning to show
indications of important improvement in this factor. Management has
demonstrated considerable ingenuity under a dynamic president, and
in recent years has been increasing importantly in depth. Mallory
shares enjoyed about a five-fold increase in value during the ten-year
period of 1946 to 1956, frequently selling around fifteen times current
earnings.

“Perhaps investment-wise one of the most important factors about
Mallory lies not within the company itsclf but in its anticipated one-
third interest in the Mallory-Sharon Metals Corporation. This company


Five More Don’ts for Investors 139

is being planned as a combination of the Mallory-Sharon Titanium
Corporation—half of which is owned by P. R. Mallory & Co., and
which has already proved to be an interesting venture for Mallory—and
National Distillers’ operations in the raw-material stages of the same
industry. This new company gives’ indication of being one of the
lowest-cost integrated titanium producers and as such should play a
major role in the probable growth of this young industry. Meanwhile
the corporation in 1958 is expected to start its first commercially sig-
nificant zirconium product and has within its organization considerable
know-how in other commercially new “wonder metals” such as tanta-
lum and columbium. This partially owned company gives indications of
becoming a world leader in not onc but a series of metals that promise
to play a growing part in the atomic, chemical, and guided-missile age
of tomorrow. As such it could be an asset of tremendous dollar signifi-
cance to increase the growth that appears inherent in Mallory itself.”

If I were writing these words today, slightly over two years later, I
would write them somewhat differently. I would tone down moderate-
ly my enthusiasm for the possible contributions of the one-third owned
Mallory-Sharon Metals Corporation. | think everything | said two years
ago could still occur. However, particularly so far as titanium is con-
cerned, I believe it may take longer to find and develop sizable markets
for this metal than had seemed to be the case two years ago.

On the other hand, I would be inclined to strengthen my words for
the Mallory company itself by about the degree I would weaken them
for its affiliate. The trend I mentioned of increasing management in
depth has progressed importantly during this period. While Mallory, as
a component supplier to the durable goods industry, is in a line of busi-
ness that is bound to feel the ravages of any major general slide, the
management showed unusual adroitness in adjusting to 1958 conditions
and held earnings to $1.89 per share against the all-time peak of $2.06
the year before. Earnings came back fast in 1959 and promise to make
new records for the full year somewhere around $2.75 per share. Fur-
thermore these earnings are being established in the face of decreasing
but still heavy costs for certain of the newer divisions. This showing
gives promise that if general economic conditions remain reasonably
prosperous significant further growth in profits will be seen in 1960.

Mallory stock is one of the few examples cited in this book that to
date has done worse rather than better than the market as a whole.


140 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Although I suspect this company has been more successful than some of
its competitors in meeting Japanese competition in the electronic com-
ponents phases of its business, this threat may be a reason for the rela-
tively poor market action. Another reason may be lack of interest by
much of the financial community in a business that is not easily classi-
fied in one industry or another, but cuts across several. This may change
in time, particularly as awareness grows that its miniature battery lines
are not so far removed from some glamorous growth fields, for they
should grow with the steady trend toward miniaturization in electronics.
At any rate, this stock which was at 35 when the first edition was writ-
ten, after allowing for two 2 per cent stock dividends since, is now sell-
ing at 37%.

Now let us see what I said about the other B group example I
discussed in the original edition:

“The Beryllium Corporation is another good example of a group
B investment. The corporate title of this company has a young-company
implication that causes uninformed people to assume that the stock
carries with it a greater degree of risk than may actually exist. A low-
cost producer, it is the only integrated company making master alloys
of beryllium copper and beryllium aluminum and also operating a fab-
ricating plant in which the master alloy is turned into rod, bar, strip,
extrusions, etc., and, in the case of tools, into finished products. Sales
have increased about six times during the ten-year period ending in
1957 to a total of approximately $16,000,000. A growing percentage of
these sales is to electronic, computing machine, and other industries
promising rapid growth in the years ahead. With important new uses
such as beryllium copper dies just beginning to be of sales importance,
it would seem that the good growth rate of the past ten years may be
just an indication of what is to come. This would tend to justify the
price-earnings ratio of around 20 at which this stock has frequently
sold in the past five years.

“Indicating that this growth may continue for many years to come,
the Rand Corporation, brilliant research arm of the Air Force owned
by the government, has been quoted in the press as predicting an
important future in the 1960's for the as yet almost non-existent field
of beryllium metal as a structural material. The Rand Corporation,
among other things correctly foretold, shortly after the war, the devel-
opment in titanium.


Five More Don’ts for Investors 141

“More immediate than any eventual market that may develop for
beryllium as a structural material, 1958 should see this company bring
into volume production another brand-new product. This is beryllium
metal for atomic purposes. This product, being made in a completely
separate plant from the older master-alloy lines, is under long-term con-
tract to the Atomic Energy Commission. It gives indications of having
a big future in the nuclear industry where demand will probably occur
from both government and private industry sources, Management is
alert. In fact, this company qualifies rather favorably under our fifteen
points in regard to all aspects but one, where the deficiency is realized
and steps have already been started to correct it.”

As in the case of Mallory, the past two years have brought both plus-
es and minuses to the picture I portrayed at that time. However, the favor-
able developments seem to have by far outweighed the unfavorable, as
should be the case if a company is to prove the right sort of investment.
On the unfavorable side, the prospects for beryllium copper dies, men-
tioned two years before, appear to have lost much of their luster and the
long-term growth curve of the entire alloy end of the business may be
somewhat less brisk than indicated in that description. Meanwhile,
nuclear demand for beryllium metal over the next few years appears to be
somewhat less now than it did then. However, possibly far outbalancing
this, there are steadily increasing signs that there may be a most dramatic
growth in the demand for beryllium metal for many types of airborne pur-
poses. The start of this demand is already here. It is appearing in so many
places and for so many different kinds of products that no one is safe in pre-
dicting what its limitations may be. This may not prove quite as favorable
as might otherwise be judged, for it may make the field so attractive as to
bring threats of a major competitive technological breakthrough from
some company not now in the field. Ilowever, fortunately, the company
may have made major strides in strengthening itself in the only one of our
fifteen points where it had been weak. This was in its research activities.
