
2

Kevin Landis interview on CNN In the Money, November 5, 1999, 11 A.M.
eastern standard time. If Landis’s own record is any indication, focusing on
“the things that you know” is not “all you really need to do” to pick stocks
successfully. From the end of 1999 through the end of 2002, Landis’s fund
(full of technology companies that he claimed to know “firsthand” from his
base in Silicon Valley) lost 73.2% of its value, an even worse pounding than
the average technology fund suffered over that period.

Commentary on Chapter 5

127

of Enron, Global Crossing, and WorldCom—many of whom put nearly
all their retirement assets in their own company’s stock, only to be
wiped out—learned that insiders often possess only the illusion of
knowledge, not the real thing.
Psychologists led by Baruch Fischhoff of Carnegie Mellon University have documented a disturbing fact: becoming more familiar with a
subject does not significantly reduce people’s tendency to exaggerate
how much they actually know about it.3 That’s why “investing in what
you know” can be so dangerous; the more you know going in, the less
likely you are to probe a stock for weaknesses. This pernicious form of
overconfidence is called “home bias,” or the habit of sticking to what is
already familiar:
•
•

•

Individual investors own three times more shares in their local
phone company than in all other phone companies combined.
The typical mutual fund owns stocks whose headquarters are 115
miles closer to the fund’s main office than the average U.S. company is.
401(k) investors keep between 25% and 30% of their retirement
assets in the stock of their own company.4

In short, familiarity breeds complacency. On the TV news, isn’t it
always the neighbor or the best friend or the parent of the criminal who
says in a shocked voice, “He was such a nice guy”? That’s because
whenever we are too close to someone or something, we take our
beliefs for granted, instead of questioning them as we do when we confront something more remote. The more familiar a stock is, the more
likely it is to turn a defensive investor into a lazy one who thinks there’s
no need to do any homework. Don’t let that happen to you.

3

Sarah Lichtenstein and Baruch Fischhoff, “Do Those Who Know More
Also Know More about How Much They Know?” Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, vol. 20, no. 2, December, 1977, pp. 159–183.
4
See Gur Huberman, “Familiarity Breeds Investment”; Joshua D. Coval and
Tobias J. Moskowitz, “The Geography of Investment”; and Gur Huberman
and Paul Sengmuller, “Company Stock in 401(k) Plans,” all available at
http://papers.ssrn.com.

128

Commentary on Chapter 5

CA N YO U R O L L YO U R OW N ?
Fortunately, for a defensive investor who is willing to do the required
homework for assembling a stock portfolio, this is the Golden Age:
Never before in financial history has owning stocks been so cheap
and convenient.5
Do it yourself. Through specialized online brokerages like www.
sharebuilder.com, www.foliofn.com, and www.buyandhold.com, you
can buy stocks automatically even if you have very little cash to spare.
These websites charge as little as $4 for each periodic purchase of
any of the thousands of U.S. stocks they make available. You can
invest every week or every month, reinvest the dividends, and even
trickle your money into stocks through electronic withdrawals from
your bank account or direct deposit from your paycheck. Sharebuilder
charges more to sell than to buy—reminding you, like a little whack
across the nose with a rolled-up newspaper, that rapid selling is an
investing no-no—while FolioFN offers an excellent tax-tracking tool.
Unlike traditional brokers or mutual funds that won’t let you in the door
for less than $2,000 or $3,000, these online firms have no minimum
account balances and are tailor-made for beginning investors who want
to put fledgling portfolios on autopilot. To be sure, a transaction fee of
$4 takes a monstrous 8% bite out of a $50 monthly investment—but if
that’s all the money you can spare, then these microinvesting sites are
the only game in town for building a diversified portfolio.
You can also buy individual stocks straight from the issuing companies. In 1994, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission loosened the handcuffs it had long ago clamped onto the direct sale of
stocks to the public. Hundreds of companies responded by creating
Internet-based programs allowing investors to buy shares without
going through a broker. Some helpful online sources of information on
buying stocks directly include www.dripcentral.com, www.netstock
direct.com (an affiliate of Sharebuilder), and www.stockpower.com.

5

According to finance professor Charles Jones of Columbia Business
School, the cost of a small, one-way trade (either a buy or a sell) in a New
York Stock Exchange–listed stock dropped from about 1.25% in Graham’s
day to about 0.25% in 2000. For institutions like mutual funds, those costs
are actually higher. (See Charles M. Jones, “A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs,” at http://papers.ssrn.com.)

Commentary on Chapter 5

129

You may often incur a variety of nuisance fees that can exceed $25
per year. Even so, direct-stock purchase programs are usually cheaper
than stockbrokers.
Be warned, however, that buying stocks in tiny increments for years
on end can set off big tax headaches. If you are not prepared to keep
a permanent and exhaustively detailed record of your purchases, do
not buy in the first place. Finally, don’t invest in only one stock—or even
just a handful of different stocks. Unless you are not willing to spread
your bets, you shouldn’t bet at all. Graham’s guideline of owning
between 10 and 30 stocks remains a good starting point for investors
who want to pick their own stocks, but you must make sure that you
are not overexposed to one industry.6 (For more on how to pick the
individual stocks that will make up your portfolio, see pp. 114–115
and Chapters 11, 14, and 15.)
If, after you set up such an online autopilot portfolio, you find yourself trading more than twice a year—or spending more than an hour or
two per month, total, on your investments—then something has gone
badly wrong. Do not let the ease and up-to-the-minute feel of the Internet seduce you into becoming a speculator. A defensive investor
runs—and wins—the race by sitting still.
Get some help. A defensive investor can also own stocks through
a discount broker, a financial planner, or a full-service stockbroker. At a
discount brokerage, you’ll need to do most of the stock-picking work
yourself; Graham’s guidelines will help you create a core portfolio
requiring minimal maintenance and offering maximal odds of a steady
return. On the other hand, if you cannot spare the time or summon the
interest to do it yourself, there’s no reason to feel any shame in hiring
someone to pick stocks or mutual funds for you. But there’s one
responsibility that you must never delegate. You, and no one but you,
must investigate (before you hand over your money) whether an
adviser is trustworthy and charges reasonable fees. (For more pointers, see Chapter 10.)
Farm it out. Mutual funds are the ultimate way for a defensive
investor to capture the upside of stock ownership without the down-

6

To help determine whether the stocks you own are sufficiently diversified
across different industrial sectors, you can use the free “Instant X-Ray” function at www.morningstar.com or consult the sector information (Global
Industry Classification Standard) at www.standardandpoors.com.

130

Commentary on Chapter 5

side of having to police your own portfolio. At relatively low cost, you
can buy a high degree of diversification and convenience—letting a
professional pick and watch the stocks for you. In their finest form—
index portfolios—mutual funds can require virtually no monitoring or
maintenance whatsoever. Index funds are a kind of Rip Van Winkle
investment that is highly unlikely to cause any suffering or surprises
even if, like Washington Irving’s lazy farmer, you fall asleep for 20
years. They are a defensive investor’s dream come true. For more
detail, see Chapter 9.
FI LLI NG I N TH E POTHOLE S
As the financial markets heave and crash their way up and down day
after day, the defensive investor can take control of the chaos. Your
very refusal to be active, your renunciation of any pretended ability to
predict the future, can become your most powerful weapons. By putting every investment decision on autopilot, you drop any self-delusion
that you know where stocks are headed, and you take away the
market’s power to upset you no matter how bizarrely it bounces.
As Graham notes, “dollar-cost averaging” enables you to put a fixed
amount of money into an investment at regular intervals. Every week,
month, or calendar quarter, you buy more—whether the markets have
gone (or are about to go) up, down, or sideways. Any major mutual fund
company or brokerage firm can automatically and safely transfer the
money electronically for you, so you never have to write a check or feel
the conscious pang of payment. It’s all out of sight, out of mind.
The ideal way to dollar-cost average is into a portfolio of index
funds, which own every stock or bond worth having. That way, you
renounce not only the guessing game of where the market is going
but which sectors of the market—and which particular stocks or bonds
within them—will do the best.
Let’s say you can spare $500 a month. By owning and dollar-cost
averaging into just three index funds—$300 into one that holds the
total U.S. stock market, $100 into one that holds foreign stocks, and
$100 into one that holds U.S. bonds—you can ensure that you own
almost every investment on the planet that’s worth owning.7 Every

7

For more on the rationale for keeping a portion of your portfolio in foreign
stocks, see pp. 186–187.

Commentary on Chapter 5

131

month, like clockwork, you buy more. If the market has dropped, your
preset amount goes further, buying you more shares than the month
before. If the market has gone up, then your money buys you fewer
shares. By putting your portfolio on permanent autopilot this way, you
prevent yourself from either flinging money at the market just when it is
seems most alluring (and is actually most dangerous) or refusing to
buy more after a market crash has made investments truly cheaper
(but seemingly more “risky”).
According to Ibbotson Associates, the leading financial research
firm, if you had invested $12,000 in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock
index at the beginning of September 1929, 10 years later you would
have had only $7,223 left. But if you had started with a paltry $100
and simply invested another $100 every single month, then by August
1939, your money would have grown to $15,571! That’s the power of
disciplined buying—even in the face of the Great Depression and the
worst bear market of all time.8
Figure 5-1 shows the magic of dollar-cost averaging in a more recent bear market.
Best of all, once you build a permanent autopilot portfolio with
index funds as its heart and core, you’ll be able to answer every market question with the most powerful response a defensive investor
could ever have: “I don’t know and I don’t care.” If someone asks
whether bonds will outperform stocks, just answer, “I don’t know and I
don’t care”—after all, you’re automatically buying both. Will health-care
stocks make high-tech stocks look sick? “I don’t know and I don’t
care”—you’re a permanent owner of both. What’s the next Microsoft?
“I don’t know and I don’t care”—as soon as it’s big enough to own,
your index fund will have it, and you’ll go along for the ride. Will foreign
stocks beat U.S. stocks next year? “I don’t know and I don’t care”—if
they do, you’ll capture that gain; if they don’t, you’ll get to buy more at
lower prices.
By enabling you to say “I don’t know and I don’t care,” a permanent
autopilot portfolio liberates you from the feeling that you need to forecast what the financial markets are about to do—and the illusion that

8

Source: spreadsheet data provided courtesy of Ibbotson Associates.
Although it was not possible for retail investors to buy the entire S & P 500
index until 1976, the example nevertheless proves the power of buying more
when stock prices go down.

132

Commentary on Chapter 5

FIGURE 5-1

Every Little Bit Helps

$4
,6
04
.5
3

6,000

4,000

$3
,1
00
.0
0

5,000

87
9.
82

2,000

14
69
.2
5

3,000

1,000

Dec-02

Oct-02

Jun-02

Aug-02

Apr-02

Feb-02

Dec-01

Oct-01

Aug-01

Jun-01

Apr-01

Feb-01

Dec-00

Oct-00

Aug-00

Jun-00

Apr-00

Feb-00

Dec-99

0

Cumulative value of $100 invested monthly in Vanguard 500 Index Fund
Monthly closing price, Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index

From the end of 1999 through the end of 2002, the S & P 500-stock average fell
relentlessly. But if you had opened an index-fund account with a $3,000 minimum investment and added $100 every month, your total outlay of $6,600
would have lost 30.2%—considerably less than the 41.3% plunge in the market.
Better yet, your steady buying at lower prices would build the base for an explosive recovery when the market rebounds.
Source: The Vanguard Group

anyone else can. The knowledge of how little you can know about the
future, coupled with the acceptance of your ignorance, is a defensive
investor’s most powerful weapon.

CHAPTER 6

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising
Investor: Negative Approach

The “aggressive” investor should start from the same base as the

defensive investor, namely, a division of his funds between highgrade bonds and high-grade common stocks bought at reasonable
prices.* He will be prepared to branch out into other kinds of security commitments, but in each case he will want a well-reasoned
justification for the departure. There is a difficulty in discussing
this topic in orderly fashion, because there is no single or ideal pattern for aggressive operations. The field of choice is wide; the selection should depend not only on the individual’s competence and
equipment but perhaps equally well upon his interests and preferences.
The most useful generalizations for the enterprising investor are
of a negative sort. Let him leave high-grade preferred stocks to corporate buyers. Let him also avoid inferior types of bonds and preferred stocks unless they can be bought at bargain levels—which
means ordinarily at prices at least 30% under par for high-coupon

* Here Graham has made a slip of the tongue. After insisting in Chapter 1
that the definition of an “enterprising” investor depends not on the amount
of risk you seek, but the amount of work you are willing to put in, Graham
falls back on the conventional notion that enterprising investors are more
“aggressive.” The rest of the chapter, however, makes clear that Graham
stands by his original definition. (The great British economist John Maynard
Keynes appears to have been the first to use the term “enterprise” as a synonym for analytical investment.)
133

134

The Intelligent Investor

issues, and much less for the lower coupons.* He will let someone
else buy foreign-government bond issues, even though the yield
may be attractive. He will also be wary of all kinds of new issues,
including convertible bonds and preferreds that seem quite tempting and common stocks with excellent earnings confined to the
recent past.
For standard bond investments the aggressive investor would
do well to follow the pattern suggested to his defensive confrere,
and make his choice between high-grade taxable issues, which can
now be selected to yield about 71⁄4%, and good-quality tax-free
bonds, which yield up to 5.30% on longer maturities.†

Second-Grade Bonds and Preferred Stocks
Since in late-1971 it is possible to find first-rate corporate bonds
to yield 71⁄4%, and even more, it would not make much sense to buy
second-grade issues merely for the higher return they offer. In fact
corporations with relatively poor credit standing have found it virtually impossible to sell “straight bonds”—i.e., nonconvertibles—
to the public in the past two years. Hence their debt financing has
been done by the sale of convertible bonds (or bonds with warrants
attached), which place them in a separate category. It follows that
virtually all the nonconvertible bonds of inferior rating represent
older issues which are selling at a large discount. Thus they offer
the possibility of a substantial gain in principal value under favorable future conditions—which would mean here a combination of
an improved credit rating for the company and lower general
interest rates.

* “High-coupon issues” are corporate bonds paying above-average interest
rates (in today’s markets, at least 8%) or preferred stocks paying large dividend yields (10% or more). If a company must pay high rates of interest in
order to borrow money, that is a fundamental signal that it is risky. For more
on high-yield or “junk” bonds, see pp. 145–147.
† As of early 2003, the equivalent yields are roughly 5.1% on high-grade
corporate bonds and 4.7% on 20-year tax-free municipal bonds. To update these yields, see www.bondsonline.com/asp/news/composites/html or
www.bloomberg.com/markets/rates.html and www.bloomberg.com/markets/
psamuni.html.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: Negative Approach

135

But even in the matter of price discounts and resultant chance of
principal gain, the second-grade bonds are in competition with better issues. Some of the well-entrenched obligations with “oldstyle” coupon rates (21⁄2% to 4%) sold at about 50 cents on the dollar
in 1970. Examples: American Telephone & Telegraph 25⁄8s, due 1986
sold at 51; Atchison Topeka & Santa Fe RR 4s, due 1995, sold at 51;
McGraw-Hill 37⁄8s, due 1992, sold at 501⁄2.
Hence under conditions of late-1971 the enterprising investors
can probably get from good-grade bonds selling at a large discount
all that he should reasonably desire in the form of both income and
chance of appreciation.
Throughout this book we refer to the possibility that any welldefined and protracted market situation of the past may return in
the future. Hence we should consider what policy the aggressive
investor might have to choose in the bond field if prices and yields
of high-grade issues should return to former normals. For this reason we shall reprint here our observations on that point made in
the 1965 edition, when high-grade bonds yielded only 41⁄2%.
Something should be said now about investing in second-grade
issues, which can readily be found to yield any specified return up
to 8% or more. The main difference between first- and secondgrade bonds is usually found in the number of times the interest
charges have been covered by earnings. Example: In early 1964
Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific 5% income debenture
bonds, at 68, yielded 7.35%. But the total interest charges of the
road, before income taxes, were earned only 1.5 times in 1963,
against our requirement of 5 times for a well-protected railroad
issue.1
Many investors buy securities of this kind because they “need
income” and cannot get along with the meager return offered by
top-grade issues. Experience clearly shows that it is unwise to buy
a bond or a preferred which lacks adequate safety merely because
the yield is attractive.* (Here the word “merely” implies that the
issue is not selling at a large discount and thus does not offer an
opportunity for a substantial gain in principal value.) Where such
securities are bought at full prices—that is, not many points under

* For a recent example that painfully reinforces Graham’s point, see p. 146
below.

136

The Intelligent Investor

100 *—the chances are very great that at some future time the
holder will see much lower quotations. For when bad business
comes, or just a bad market, issues of this kind prove highly susceptible to severe sinking spells; often interest or dividends are
suspended or at least endangered, and frequently there is a pronounced price weakness even though the operating results are not
at all bad.
As a specific illustration of this characteristic of second-quality
senior issues, let us summarize the price behavior of a group of ten
railroad income bonds in 1946–47. These comprise all of those which
sold at 96 or more in 1946, their high prices averaging 1021⁄2. By the
following year the group had registered low prices averaging only
68, a loss of one-third of the market value in a very short time.
Peculiarly enough, the railroads of the country were showing
much better earnings in 1947 than in 1946; hence the drastic price
decline ran counter to the business picture and was a reflection of
the selloff in the general market. But it should be pointed out that
the shrinkage in these income bonds was proportionately larger
than that in the common stocks in the Dow Jones industrial list
(about 23%). Obviously the purchaser of these bonds at a cost
above 100 could not have expected to participate to any extent in a
further rise in the securities market. The only attractive feature was
the income yield, averaging about 4.25% (against 2.50% for firstgrade bonds, an advantage of 1.75% in annual income). Yet the
sequel showed all too soon and too plainly that for the minor
advantage in annual income the buyer of these second-grade
bonds was risking the loss of a substantial part of his principal.
The above example permits us to pay our respects to the popular fallacy that goes under the sobriquet of a “businessman’s
investment.” That involves the purchase of a security showing a
larger yield than is obtainable on a high-grade issue and carrying
a correspondingly greater risk. It is bad business to accept an

* Bond prices are quoted in percentages of “par value,” or 100. A bond
priced at “85” is selling at 85% of its principal value; a bond originally
offered for $10,000, but now selling at 85, will cost $8,500. When bonds
sell below 100, they are called “discount” bonds; above 100, they become
“premium” bonds.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: Negative Approach

137

acknowledged possibility of a loss of principal in exchange for a
mere 1 or 2% of additional yearly income. If you are willing to
assume some risk you should be certain that you can realize a
really substantial gain in principal value if things go well. Hence a
second-grade 5.5 or 6% bond selling at par is almost always a bad
purchase. The same issue at 70 might make more sense—and if you
are patient you will probably be able to buy it at that level.
Second-grade bonds and preferred stocks possess two contradictory attributes which the intelligent investor must bear clearly
in mind. Nearly all suffer severe sinking spells in bad markets. On
the other hand, a large proportion recover their position when
favorable conditions return, and these ultimately “work out all
right.” This is true even of (cumulative) preferred stocks that fail to
pay dividends for many years. There were a number of such issues
in the early 1940s, as a consequence of the long depression of the
1930s. During the postwar boom period of 1945–1947 many of
these large accumulations were paid off either in cash or in new
securities, and the principal was often discharged as well. As a
result, large profits were made by people who, a few years previously, had bought these issues when they were friendless and sold
at low prices.2
It may well be true that, in an overall accounting, the higher
yields obtainable on second-grade senior issues will prove to have
offset those principal losses that were irrecoverable. In other
words, an investor who bought all such issues at their offering
prices might conceivably fare as well, in the long run, as one who
limited himself to first-quality securities; or even somewhat better.3
But for practical purposes the question is largely irrelevant.
Regardless of the outcome, the buyer of second-grade issues at full
prices will be worried and discommoded when their price declines
precipitately. Furthermore, he cannot buy enough issues to assure
an “average” result, nor is he in a position to set aside a portion of
his larger income to offset or “amortize” those principal losses
which prove to be permanent. Finally, it is mere common sense to
abstain from buying securities at around 100 if long experience
indicates that they can probably be bought at 70 or less in the next
weak market.
