
Currency Economics

61

would mean that the US dollar proceeds would now be worth less sterling when translated.
Seasoned international investors are of course well aware of such considerations, but however basic the example it is worth restating. Currency risk is not always a consideration of
international investors, but it should be if they are concerned with the total return of their
portfolio.
Returning to our accounting identity, let’s consider an example, in this case the US in the
second half of 2001. In social and human terms, the tragic events of September 11, 2001 caused
tremendous grief and sorrow. They also had substantial economic impact, though that of course
was not the immediate consideration. Using the accounting identity for economic adjustment,
let’s try and get a better idea of what was happening in the US at that time. Recapping the
identity:
S−I = X−M
A UK investor looking at the US economy during the ﬁrst half of 2001 saw that the US
continued to run signiﬁcant trade deﬁcits. In other words, the right-hand side of the equation
was substantially negative (to the tune of around USD160 billion). Equally, our investor would
be able to assume that the left-hand side of the equation was also negative. At the time, the
US was still running budget surpluses, so the combination of (Sp + Sg ) was positive, meaning
that the culprit for the trade deﬁcit was booming investment. This also reﬂected booming
inward investment, more than offsetting the massive trade deﬁcit. As a result, the US dollar
rose substantially during the ﬁrst half of 2001.
From July 2001 however things changed. Market participants began to question the ability
of the Federal Reserve under Chairman Alan Greenspan to engineer the economic recovery
miracle that everyone had been hoping for. Declining domestic demand in the US meant
declining import demand. In terms of the accounting identity, this meant that M was declining
relative to X , in turn reducing the trade deﬁcit. This is indeed what we saw during the second
half of the year, even before September 11. The US trade deﬁcit shrunk from over USD30
billion a month to around 25 billion, a decline of over 16%. On the left-hand side of the
accounting identity, as M fell relative to X on the right-hand side, so I declined relative to
S. Lower domestic investment would surely be reﬂective of lower inward investment. Again,
this is exactly what happened in practice. Domestic corporate investment was already falling
sharply. In line with that, inward investment fell sharply. The improvement in the trade deﬁcit
was not a sign of economic improvement, but rather a reﬂection of a fall in import demand.
As one might expect, the other side of the equation shows a fall in investment growth.
Such information could potentially be very useful for our investor. The immediate assumption is that a reduced trade deﬁcit should be good for a currency, but this is not necessarily so.
Indeed, in this case the fall in the trade deﬁcit was due to a fall in import and domestic demand.
It was a sign of economic weakness. Moreover, lower domestic investment also meant lower
inward investment. In practice, this meant that inward investment fell below the level of the
trade deﬁcit. As a result, the dollar fell across the board. Sterling rose against the US dollar. If
our investor had analysed the situation using the accounting identity, they may have been able
to hedge that exposure to a rise in sterling against the US dollar, thus avoiding a currency loss
to the portfolio’s total return.
The purpose of both of these examples has been to show how currency market practitioners can use a key tool of currency economics, the standard accounting identity of economic
adjustment, to manage their currency risk.

62

Currency Strategy

2.2.2 The J-Curve
This is a particularly useful concept because it deals with that frustrating delay between the
change in the exchange rate and the adjustment to the economy. Equally, it deals with both
trade and capital ﬂows. Suppose international investors have been buying the equity and ﬁxed
income securities of an emerging market economy such as Korea. For some reason, those
investors “lose conﬁdence” in the Korean economic story and as a result the Korean won.
What does that mean? In practice it means that international investors all try to sell at the same
time. However, if investors all try and sell at the same time, chances are their orders will not
be ﬁlled. The Korean won will fall like a stone, but on very little actual volume.
Classic economic theory suggests that a fall in the nominal exchange rate should lead to a
reduction in the current account deﬁcit by making imports more expensive and exports cheaper.
However, this assumes that the transmission mechanism from the exchange rate to export and
import prices is immediate. We know however that this is not the case. Corporations tend to
take a wait-and-see attitude in times of market distress, delaying major price changes until
ﬁnancial and economic conditions become clearer. In economist jargon, as we saw in the
monetary approach to exchange rates, prices are “sticky”. Thus, in our example the Korean
won may fall without any immediate beneﬁt to the trade and current account balances. This is
not completely a hypothetical example because this is exactly what we saw during the Asian
currency crisis of 1997–98. Then, a crisis in Thailand focused investor concerns on much of
the rest of Asia, triggering a general loss of conﬁdence in Asian assets and currencies. Asian
currencies collapsed but on far smaller volumes than the extent of their declines might have
suggested. The Korean won collapsed along with the Thai baht, Indonesian rupiah, Philippine
peso and at least initially the Malaysian ringgit. Despite this, there was no immediate reduction
of Asian trade and current account deﬁcits. Analysts of the Asian crisis will no doubt suggest
that other factors were also at work, notably the high importer content within Asian exports.
While this was undoubtedly the case, it does not detract from the fact that there was a clear
and marked delay between the exchange rate move and the adjustment to the trade balance.
For whatever reasons, Korean corporations delayed their price increases.
We can also see this at work from the angle of the exchange rate rather than the trade balance.
As an exchange rate appreciates, it causes exports to become more expensive in the currency
to which these exports are going and imports from that country to become cheaper. The initial
reaction in the trade balance is not negative however. As the exchange rate appreciates, it causes
export prices to rise and import prices to fall. This in turn causes the value of exports to rise
vs. imports, thus the initial reaction in the J-curve is that the trade balance actually improves.
While this is happening, however, the impact of higher export prices reduces demand for those
exports, causing falling export volumes. In turn, falling export volumes eventually lead to a
fall in the value of exports and thus to a deterioration in the trade balance. The delay between
the fall in export volumes and export values and the subsequent impact on the exchange rate
is reﬂected by the concept of the J-curve. That delay factor varies between exchange rates
depending on speciﬁc export price sensitivity to changes in the exchange rate.

Example
The J-curve delay in the dollar–yen exchange rate has traditionally been two to three years. In
other words, it has usually taken two to three years between a major move in this exchange rate
and a subsequent reaction in Japan’s trade and current account balances. The delay can vary
even within the same exchange rate depending on the predictability of the exchange rate move.

Currency Economics

63

For instance, during 1993–1995, the dollar–yen exchange rate fell consistently amid market
concerns that the US administration was trying to devalue the US dollar deliberately as a trade
ploy to bring Japan to the negotiating table on opening up their economy to US exports. Yen
exchange rate appreciation caused a real economic shock to Japan’s economy. Japanese export
values rose initially as the value of the yen rose. While the higher value of the Japanese yen
pushed Japanese export prices higher, theoretically Japanese manufacturers would be reluctant
to pass that price rise on for fear that US consumers would not tolerate it and that as a result
they would lose signiﬁcant sales and market share. Indeed, they tried to keep price increases
limited as much as possible, sacriﬁcing margin for sales and market share. Eventually, however,
they had to pass on some of the price rise to offset declining export volumes. The result was
of course that trend appreciation of the Japanese yen led to a signiﬁcant decline in Japan’s
current account surplus, but only from 1995 to 1996, some two to three years after the yen
appreciation had begun. Similarly, the yen trended lower from the end of 1995 to mid-1998 in
response to the deterioration in the current account balance, eventually to the point whereby it
caused renewed recovery in that current account balance, providing at least part of the reason
for the yen’s dramatic recovery against the US dollar in August and September of 1998.
2.2.3 The Real Effective Exchange Rate
As noted in Chapter 1, the REER is the trade-weighted exchange rate (NEER) adjusted for
inﬂation. It is viewed as a good indicator of medium- to long-term currency valuation. If we look
at the Russian and Turkish crises, we see beforehand that the Russian rouble and Turkish lira
were around 50–60% overvalued on a REER basis. This provides extremely useful information
in that it actually suggests that the rouble and the lira will have to experience signiﬁcant real
exchange rate depreciations to restore equilibrium. That’s the good news. The bad news is that
it does not tell you when that signiﬁcant real — and therefore nominal — depreciation will take
place. In both cases, the rouble and the lira were overvalued for two to three years before the
inevitable happened.
However, there are important clues as to when that REER appreciation may be about to
end. Such REER appreciation usually causes signiﬁcant trade and current account balance
deterioration. The fact that this does not have an immediate reaction in the exchange rate
conﬁrms not only the existence of the J-curve but also the presence of signiﬁcant capital
inﬂows. Such inﬂows can offset a widening trade deﬁcit for a period of time, but eventually
are not able to. When they reverse, or rather when they just stop, the exchange rate comes
under ever increasing pressure until such time as it collapses to restore equilibrium. This
process can also work equally well with real depreciations. From the end of 1995 to mid1998 the Japanese yen experienced an increasing REER depreciation. Capital outﬂows offset
an increasingly improving current account balance until such time as they could no longer
do so, whereupon the Japanese yen rallied signiﬁcantly, resulting in one of the most dramatic
collapses in the dollar–yen exchange rate — or any exchange rate — in history. REER valuation
and the external balance are both cause and effect. It takes a REER depreciation of a currency
to narrow signiﬁcantly a large external imbalance. That said, an excessive REER appreciation
can cause that imbalance in the ﬁrst place.

2.3 SUMMARY
In sum, the aim of establishing an analytical discipline called currency economics is to adopt
an integrated approach to exchange rate analysis, pooling those existing strengths of classical

64

Currency Strategy

economics together with newer ideas based on capital ﬂows into a combined framework which
seeks to analyse exchange rates right across the spectrum of short-, medium- and long-term
exchange rate views. The ﬁeld of currency economics also seeks to differentiate between shortterm cyclical factors such as monetary and ﬁscal policy and long-term structural factors such
as persistent trends in the current account balance, REER valuation and PPP, in affecting the
exchange rate. Currency economics seeks to make the economic analysis of exchange rates
more relevant to short-term exchange rate moves, particularly in its attempt to focus on the
capital account and capital ﬂows. In doing so, it provides better exchange rate forecasting
results than is the case with the traditional exchange rate models. However, the delay to the
adjustment mechanism that bedevils the attempt by classical economic analysis to forecast
exchange rates is also present within currency economics. For a truly real-time, market-based
focus on forecasting exchange rates, we have to turn to analytical disciplines that are speciﬁcally
targeted at short-term exchange rate moves, such as ﬂow and technical analysis.

3
Flow:
Tracking the Animal Spirits
Within ﬁnancial circles, it has become commonplace to talk about the importance of “ﬂow”
in forecasting exchange rates. International organizations and academic bodies now publish
an increasing number of research papers on capital ﬂow and how it affects economic policies.
For instance, the IMF publishes its quarterly review of Emerging Market Financing, looking
at trends over the quarter in equity, ﬁxed income and foreign exchange ﬂows, syndicated and
ofﬁcial loans and direct investment. Looking at a slightly different time frame, several bank
research departments now use intraday ﬂow in the ﬁxed income and foreign exchange markets
to predict short-term exchange rate moves.
All of this marks a major departure from the previous orthodoxy. As we looked at in the ﬁrst
two chapters, the traditional exchange rate models are based on several important assumptions,
including the view that markets are essentially rational, that information is perfect (i.e. available
to everyone, all of the time) and that divergences from fundamental equilibrium levels will
eventually be eliminated. Because of this, it was also assumed until quite recently that there
was little point in studying ﬁnancial market “ﬂow”. If a price is the result of all available
information at one time, and if all information is equally available to all concerned within
the ﬁnancial markets, ﬂow information cannot add any value or have any price effect as that
information is already known. Moreover, economic fundamentals will dictate over time that
capital ﬂows so as to eliminate fundamental imbalances and price over- or undervaluation.
In sum, the economists deemed themselves as being in full control of what they appeared to
perceive as the rather unseemly elements of the ﬁnancial markets, i.e. the actual participants.
Economics was the “cause” and capital ﬂow the “effect”.
Some within the economic community diverged somewhat from this polar view, notably
one John Maynard Keynes, who coined the term “the animal spirits”, referring to the stock
market and the way in which economic theory and ﬁnancial market prices interacted. More
recently, perhaps within the last decade, there has been a fundamental realization within the
economic community, albeit perhaps a grudging one, that capital ﬂow can be both cause and
effect in its relationship with economics, that it is just as likely to change as to be changed by
economic fundamentals.
In short, there has been a realization that the efﬁcient market hypothesis, which has long
dominated economic theory, is itself ﬂawed. While we looked at this issue brieﬂy in Chapters 1
and 2, it is important here to examine its speciﬁc ﬂaws given the context of how capital
ﬂows can affect price. To recap, an efﬁcient market is one where all relevant market information
is known to market participants, who act rationally in accordance with economic fundamentals
to quickly eliminate any divergences from fundamental equilibrium. This idea is ultimately
ﬂawed for the following reasons:

r Information is perfect — As we saw in Chapters 1 and 2, this is a nonsense. There are consistent inefﬁciencies in information availability and usage.
@Team-FLY

66

Currency Strategy

r Markets are efﬁcient — If ﬁnancial markets were fully efﬁcient, there would be no such thing
as a sustained divergence from fundamental equilibrium.

r Market participants are inherently rational — Rationality is itself inherently a subjective
term, as is fundamental equilibrium.

r Market imbalances are eliminated and prices return to fundamental equilibrium — The reality is rather different. A host of academic papers have looked at the issue of exchange rate
valuation and generally found that the traditional exchange rate models have had poor results,
leading some to conclude exchange rates are not determined by economic fundamentals over
the short term.1
Efﬁcient market theory essentially suggests that it is impossible to make excess returns in exchange rate markets because efﬁcient markets should eliminate proﬁtable opportunities before
investors are able to capture them. Empirical evidence suggests this is simply not the case.
Investors have been able to make consistently good excess returns in the currency markets over
time. Some would see this as being due to market inefﬁciency, while others see it as being due
more practically to good trading technique, as in any ﬁnancial market. Information is imperfect,
market participants are not necessarily rational in the sense the theory demands and ultimately
markets are frequently inefﬁcient. For these very reasons, analysts and investors can indeed recognize and capture proﬁtable opportunities. The fact that some achieve better results than others
is explained simply by the fact that some are better analysts, traders or investors than others.
The subject of this chapter deals speciﬁcally with the concept of “ﬂow”, and therefore
it is the inefﬁciency of market information that we are interested in here. If we accept that
market information is imperfect, that not all information is available to all at the same time
and therefore that the price does not reﬂect all information, then we must try and determine
two things:

r What speciﬁc types of information are “in the price” at any one time?
r What types of information are important for price movement on a sustained basis?
It is probably best to look at these two issues as one. In the real world of a foreign exchange
dealing room in London or New York, prices are indeed affected by the types of information that
economic theory might expect, such as macroeconomic data, speciﬁc trends in microeconomic
performance and so forth. However, to provide liquidity for customers and also to make a
trading proﬁt for themselves, currency dealers have to trade, irrespective of whether there have
been changes in economic fundamentals. Hence, currency interbank dealers, who make up
the majority of currency market participants — interbank dealing makes up around 65% of
all spot transactions — seek out other types of information, perhaps more suited to their ultra
short-term time horizon. Technical analysis is one of these, and we shall look at this fascinating
discipline in Chapter 4. In addition, currency dealers look at a bank’s “order book”, at the book
containing all the bank’s customer orders in an attempt to gauge prevailing market “sentiment”
towards speciﬁc exchange rates. The sum of those orders may give a very useful indication of
how speciﬁc client types feel about speciﬁc currencies. Note that this is not in any way trying
to gauge speciﬁc client orders in order to trade ahead of those (“front-running”). Rather, it is
achieving an understanding of how the client base as a whole views certain exchange rates.
1
Readers who are interested in pursuing this further should look at Kenneth Froot and Kenneth Rogoff, Perspectives on PPP and
Long-Run Real Exchange Rates, NBER Working Paper 4952, 1994; Rudiger Dornbusch, Real Exchange Rates and Macroeconomics,
NBER Working Paper 2775, 1988; Jeffrey Frankel and Andrew Rose, A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates,
NBER Working Paper 4865, 1994.

Flow

67

People talk about “the market” in a rather abstract sense in terms of market sentiment towards
a speciﬁc asset or currency. However real this term may be to the user, it is still excessively
vague. Far more useful for our purposes is to look at trends in actual transactions or the sum
of orders that have been put in the market for the dealer to execute when the price hits the
order level. The sum of orders or actual transactions of a major commercial or investment bank
can be a far more accurate and representative gauge of “the market”. There have been several
important papers about this very subject, notably one by Evans and Lyons (1999),2 which
looked at the principle of “order ﬂow”, as being a key determinant of short-term exchange
rate ﬂuctuations. Another by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (Osler, 2000)3 looked at
the same issue. Both focus on the idea that there is information surrounding actual currency
transactions and orders to be transacted which can not only explain exchange rate movements,
but also be helpful in forecasting future exchange rate moves — something which would be
impossible if the efﬁcient market hypothesis were correct.
The Evans and Lyons paper found that order ﬂow accounted for about two-thirds of daily
variation in the US dollar–Deutschmark exchange rate over the time studied. The main cause of
the exchange rate variation was shifts in private capital ﬂows. Interestingly, these shifts appeared
to take place in the absence of major changes in economic information. Such private capital ﬂow
shifts can happen as a result of changes in investor risk tolerance, liquidity, portfolio balancing
needs, hedging needs and so forth. In other words, they can happen for microeconomic as
well as macroeconomic reasons, reasons that are due to the speciﬁcs of the investor’s own
risk tolerance proﬁle and attitude to the market. The trade exchange rate models are not really
designed to take account of such factors, and thus it would appear others are needed that are
able to do so.
If exchange rates can be affected by the speciﬁcs of an individual investor’s risk tolerance
proﬁle — something we know intuitively, but have now seen proven empirically — then such
models need to track not fundamental equilibrium but the actions of the investors concerned.
At a broader level, the idea that we need to track the sum of investor behaviour and intentions
has sprung the school of thought known as behavioural ﬁnance. This ﬁeld seeks to examine
how and why investor “herding” takes place, how to anticipate it and ﬁnally how to anticipate
reversion to fundamental mean. More narrowly, models have been developed to track the sum
of client orders and transactions. These actions are compared to exchange rate prices on a realtime, live basis. If there is a good correlation between the sum of client orders and transactions
and those exchange rate prices, then one effectively has a model which can not only track the
relationship between the two, but also forecast future exchange rates based on those actions.
This intellectual shift in favour of behavioural ﬁnance has happened in part because of the
need to ﬁnd models that are more appropriate to market needs and also to try and explain how
market “sentiment” or “psychology” can affect prices. In addition, major trends within ﬁnance
itself have also provided support for the view that the “behaviour” of ﬁnancial markets needs
to be studied, that capital ﬂows are not just “effect” but can also be the “cause” of market
movement. These trends can broadly be divided into two main ones. Firstly, as barriers to
capital have been pulled down over the last 30 years, the size of those ﬂows and therefore their
effect on the global economy has grown exponentially. Today, we more or less take for granted
2
For more on this see Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons, Order ﬂow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
Economy, August 1999; or Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons, Why order ﬂow explains exchange rates, Journal of Political
Economy, November 2001.
3
Carol L. Osler, Currency Orders and Exchange Rate Dynamics: Explaining the Success of Technical Analysis, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Report No. 125, April 2001.
