
Managing your positions
A key to successful trading is knowing how much you’re going to trade and
when you’re going to get out of your position. Sure, day traders are always
going to close out at the end of the day — or they wouldn’t be day traders —
but they also need to cut their losses and take their profits as they occur
during the day. Specifically, they need to determine the size of the trade and
the maximum profit or loss:
✓ Determining what portion of their money they risk for any particular
trade: Traders rarely place all their money on one trade. That’s a good
way to lose it! Instead, they trade just some of their money, keeping the
rest to make other trades as new opportunities in the market present
themselves. If any one trade fails, the trader still has money to place
new trades. Some traders divide their money into fixed proportions, and
others determine how much money to trade based on the expected risk
and expected return of the security they’re trading. Careful money management helps a trader stay in the game longer, and the longer a trader
stays in, the better the chance of making good money. Chapter 6 has
more information on money-management strategies.
✓ Protecting their funds by using stop and limit orders: Stop and limit
orders are placed with the brokerage firm and kick in whenever the
security reaches a predetermined price level. If the security starts to
fall in price more than the trader likes — bam! — it’s sold, and no more
losses will occur on that trade. The trader doesn’t agonize over the
decision or second-guess herself. Instead, she just moves on to the next
trade, putting her money to work on a trade that’s likely to be better.

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
Day traders make a lot of trades, and a lot of those trades are going to be
losers. The key is to have more winners than losers. By limiting the amount of
losses, the trader makes it easier for the gains to be big enough to generate
more than enough money to make up for the losers.

Focusing your attention
Day traders are often undone by stress and emotion. Keeping a steady eye on
what’s happening in the market is hard when you’re looking at screens all day
and working alone. But as a trader, you have to be able to concentrate on the
market and stick to your trading system, staying as calm and rational as possible.
Day traders who do well have support systems in place. They are able to
close their positions and spend the rest of the day on other activities. They
do something to get rid of their excess energy and clear their minds, such as
running or yoga or meditation. They understand that their ability to maintain
a clear mind when the market is open is crucial.
Traders sometimes think of the market itself, or everyone else who is trading,
as the enemy. The real enemies are emotions: doubt, fear, greed, and hope.
Those four feelings keep traders from concentrating on the market and sticking to their systems.
One of the frustrations of trading is that some days offer more opportunities
to trade than you have time or money to trade. On these days, good trades get
away from you because you simply don’t have the resources to take advantage
of every opportunity you see. That’s why having a plan and concentrating on
what works for you are so important.

Identifying the Personality Traits of
Successful Day Traders
Successful traders are a special breed. They can be blunt and crude, because
they act fast against a market that has absolutely no consideration for them.
For all their rough exterior, they maintain strict discipline about how they
approach their trading day and what they do during market hours.
The discipline begins with a plan for how to start the day, including reviews
of news events and trading patterns. It includes keeping track of trades made
during the day, to help the trader figure out what works and why. And it
depends on cutting losses as they occur, reaping all profits that appear,

15

16

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
and refining a set of trading rules so that tomorrow will be even better. No,
this strategy isn’t as much fun as just jumping in and placing orders, but it’s
more likely to lead to success.
Not everyone can be a day trader, nor should everyone try it. In this section,
I cover some of the traits that the best day traders possess.

Independence
For the most part, day traders work by themselves. Computers and monitors
are relatively inexpensive, high-speed Internet connectivity is easier to get,
and many brokerage firms cater to the needs of traders who are working by
themselves — all of which leaves the day trader at home, alone, stuck in a
room with nothing but the computer screen for company. Being alone all day
may be boring and make it hard to concentrate. Some people can’t handle it.
But other traders thrive on being alone all day, because it brings out their
best qualities. They know that their trading depends on them alone, not on
anyone else. The trader has sole responsibility when something goes wrong,
but he also gets to keep all the spoils. He can make his own decisions about
what works and what doesn’t, with no pesky boss or annoying corporate
drone telling him what he needs to do today.
If the idea of being in charge of your own business and your own trading
account is exciting, then day trading may be a good career option for you.
What if you want to trade but don’t want to work by yourself? Consider going
to work for a brokerage firm, a hedge fund, a mutual fund, or a commodities
company. These businesses need traders to manage their own money, and
they usually have large numbers of people working together on their trading
desks to share ideas, cheer each other on, and give each other support when
things go wrong.
No matter how independent you are, your trading will benefit if you have
friends and family to offer you support and encouragement. That network can
help you better manage the emotional aspects of trading. Besides, celebrating
your success is more fun with someone else!

Quick-wittedness
Day trading is a game of minutes. An hour may as well be a decade when the
markets are moving fast. And that means a day trader can’t be deliberative or
panicky. When it’s time to buy or sell, it’s time to buy or sell, period.

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
Many investors prefer to spend hours doing a careful study of a security and
markets before committing money. Some of these people are enormously successful. Warren Buffett, the CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, amassed $54 billion
from his careful investing style, money that he is giving to charity. But Buffett
and people like him are not traders.
Traders have to have enough trust in their system and enough experience in
the markets to act quickly when they see a buy or sell opportunity. Many brokerage firms offer their clients demonstration accounts or backtesting services that enable traders to work with their system before committing actual
dollars, helping them learn to recognize market patterns that signal potential
profits.
A trader with a great system who isn’t quick on the mouse button has
another option: automating trades. Many brokerage firms offer software that
executes trades automatically whenever certain market conditions occur. For
many traders, automatic trades are a perfect way to take the emotion out of
a trading strategy. Others dislike this type of trading, because it takes some
of the fun out of the job. And let’s face it, successful traders find the whole
­process to be a good time.

Decisiveness
Day traders have to move quickly, so they also have to be able to make
decisions quickly. You can’t wait until tomorrow to see how the charts play
out before committing capital. If you see an opportunity, you have to go
with it. Now.
But what if the decision is a bad one? Well, of course some decisions are
going to be bad. That’s the risk of making any kind of an investment, and
without risk, there is no return. Anyone playing around in the markets has to
accept that.
But two good day-trading practices help limit the effects of making a bad
decision. The first is the use of stop and limit orders, which automatically
close out losing positions. The second is closing out all positions at the end
of every day, which lets you start fresh the next day.
If you have some downside protection in place, you’re more psychologically
prepared to make the decisions you need to make in order to earn a profit.
And if you’re one of those people who has a hard time making a decision, day
trading probably isn’t right for you.

17

18

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Seeing What Day Trading Is Not
So much mythology surrounds day trading: Day traders lose money. Day
traders make money. Day traders are insane. Day traders are cold and rational.
Day trading is easy. Day trading is a direct path to alcoholism and ruin.
In this section, I bust a few day trading myths. Someone has to do it, right?
You find both good news and bad news in this section, so read it through to
get some perspective on what, exactly, you can expect from day trading.

It’s not investing
While swing traders hold positions for a few days, maybe even a few weeks,
and investors hold their stakes for the long term, with some looking to hang
onto their securities for decades and maybe even hand them down to their
children, day traders never hold a position for more than a day.
Day trading is most definitely not investing. Day traders perform an important function to the capital markets because they force the price changes that
bring the supply and demand of the market into balance. Day trading, however, doesn’t create new sources of funding for companies and governments.
It doesn’t generate long-term growth.
Just because day trading isn’t investing doesn’t mean day traders don’t have
investments elsewhere. Many day traders withdraw their trading capital on a
regular basis to put into investments, helping them build a long-term portfolio
for their retirement or for other ventures they may want to take on. Still,
because investing and trading have different mindsets, chances are the trader
will have someone else manage this money.

It’s not gambling
One of the biggest knocks on day trading is that it’s just another form of gambling. And as everyone knows, or should know, in gambling, the odds always
favor the house. That’s not the case with day trading, however. Consider
these points:
✓ In day trading, the odds are even in many markets. The options and
futures markets, for example, are zero-sum markets with as many winners as losers, but those markets also include people looking to hedge
risk and who thus have lower profit expectations than do day traders.

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
✓ The stock market has the potential for more winning trades than
losing trades, especially over the long run. For this reason, the stock
market isn’t a zero-sum market, like options and futures markets. In the
stock market, the odds are ever so slightly in the trader’s favor.
In all markets, the prepared and disciplined trader can do better than the frantic, naïve trader. That’s not the case when gambling, because no matter how
prepared the gambler is, the casino has the upper hand.
People with gambling problems sometimes turn to day trading as a socially
acceptable way to feed their addiction. If you know you have a gambling problem or suspect you are at risk, taking up day trading is probably not a good
idea for you. Day traders who are closet gamblers tend to make bad trades
and have trouble setting limits and closing out at the end of the day. They turn
the odds against themselves. Chapter 4 has some information on the line
between day trading and gambling.

It’s not dangerous — if you use
risk capital
A lot of day traders lose money, and some lose everything that they start with.
Others don’t lose all of their trading capital; they just decide that there are
better uses of their time and better ways to make money. (For more on day
trading success rates, head to the later section “Looking at Success Rates.”)
A responsible trader works with risk capital, which is money that she can
afford to lose. She uses stop and limit orders to minimize her losses, and
she always closes out at the end of the day. She understands the risks and
rewards of trading, and that keeps her sane.
Many day trading strategies rely on leverage, which is the use of borrowed
money to increase potential returns. Leverage carries the risk of the trader
losing more money than is in his account. However, brokerage firms, which
don’t want that to happen, will probably close a leveraged account that’s in
danger of going under. That’s good, because it limits your potential loss.

It’s not easy
Along with the relatively low rate of success, day trading is really stressful.
Concentrating on the markets and knowing that real money is at stake takes
a lot of energy. The profit amounts on any one trade are likely to be small,
which means you have to be persistent and keep placing trades until the end
of the day.

19

20

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Some traders can’t handle the stress. Some get bored. Some get frustrated.
And some can’t believe that they can make a living doing something that
they love.

Looking at Success Rates
Given the participation of day traders in securities markets, researchers
are always trying to figure out whether they make money. And the answers
aren’t good.
Yes, most day traders fail — about 80 percent in the first year, as I note earlier. But so do a large percentage of people who start new businesses or enter
other occupations. That’s why I’ve combed through several different reports
and databases to show how well people do in other fields. (My sources
are Realty Times; Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean; American College of Sports
Medicine; ACT; Ohio State University; and the National Center for Education
Statistics.)
Field

First-Year Failure Rate

Real estate sales

86%

Day trading

80%

Training for a marathon

70%

College enrollment

33%

Restaurants

26%

Teaching

13%

If you understand the risks and keep them in perspective, you’ll be better
able to handle the slings and arrows of misfortune on the way to your goal.
Day trading is difficult, but it’s not impossible. You can improve your chances
of success by taking the time to prepare and by having enough money to fund
your initial trading account. During the first year, you’ll want to handle trading
losses and still be able to pay your rent and buy your groceries. Knowing that
you can cover your basic expenses will give you more confidence, and that
can help your performance.

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader

Negative numbers: The data on day-trading
success rates
Here I review some of the literature to show you
the current state of day trading success rates.
Note that they are low. Few people who take
up day trading succeed, in part because few
people who take it up are prepared. And even
many of the prepared traders fail. (Much of the
research covers performance in the late 1990s,
when day trading became wildly popular. It
grew along with the commercial Internet, and it
fell out of favor when the Internet bubble burst.
The data is old, but it’s the best we have.)
✓ Do Individual Day Traders Make Money?
Evidence from Taiwan: This paper, written in
2004 by Brad Barber, Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane
Liu, and Terrance Odean (and available at
http://faculty.haas.­berkeley.
edu/odean/papers/Day%20
Traders/Day%20Trade%20040330.
pdf) found that only 20 percent of day traders in Taiwan tracked between 1995 and 1999
made money in any six-month period, after
considering transaction costs. Median profits, net of costs, were $4,200 (USD) for any
six-month period, although the best traders
showed semi-annual profits of $33,000. The
study also found that those who placed the
most trades made the most money, possibly
because they were the most experienced
traders in the group. This paper is one of the
most cited on the subject because it remains
the gold standard.
✓ Report of the Day Trading Project Group:
In 1999, the North American Securities
Administrators Association, which

­represents state and provincial securities
regulators in the United States, Canada,
and Mexico, researched day trading so
that its members could provide appropriate oversight. The report does not include
performance data. However, it cites several
cases in which brokerage firms were sanctioned by regulators for misrepresenting
their clients’ performance numbers, including one firm that had no clients with profits.
✓ Trading Profits of SOES Bandits: Paul
Schultz and Jeffrey Harris looked into the
profits made by the so-called SOES bandits, day traders who took advantage of
loopholes that existed in NASDAQ’s Small
Order Entry System in the 1990s. These
people were the first day traders. Did they
make money? The authors looked at a few
weeks of trade data from two different
firms. What they found was that about a
third of all round-trip trades (buying and
then later selling the same security) lost
money before commissions. Only a quarter
of the round-trip trades had a profit of $250
or more before commissions. The 69 traders in the study made anywhere from one to
312 round-trip trades per week. They had an
average weekly profit after commission of
$1,690; however, almost half of the traders,
34 of them, lost money in an average week.
You can see the abstract at http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=137949. The full
article is available through many libraries.

21

22

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Although day trading is tough, many day traders can’t imagine doing anything else. The simple fact is that a lot of occupations are difficult ways to
make a living, and yet they are right for some people. Every career has its
advantages and disadvantages, and day trading is no different.
When you finish this book, you should have a good sense of whether or not
day trading is right for you. If you realize that it’s the career you have been
searching for, you can find lots of good ideas in the coming chapters for how
to set up your day-trading business and plenty of advice on how to increase
your chances of success.
If you find that maybe day trading isn’t right for you, I hope you get some
ideas that can help you manage your long-term investments better. After all,
the attention to price movements, timing, and risk that is critical to a day
trader’s success can help any investor improve his returns. What’s not to
like about that?

Chapter 2

Planning to Succeed
As a Day Trader
In This Chapter
▶ Organizing your business
▶ Planning trades to start your day
▶ Making short-term and long-term choices

D

ay trading is sometimes presented as a profitable hobby. Anyone who
buys a day-trading DVD course via infomercial can make money easily
in just a few hours a week, right? Well, no. Day trading is a job. It can be a
full-time job or a part-time job, but it requires the same commitment to
working regular hours and the same dedication to learning a craft and
honing skills as any other job.
The best traders have plans for their business and for their trades. They
know in advance how they want to trade and what they expect to do when
they face the market. They may, at times, find themselves deviating from
their plans, due to luck or circumstance or changing markets, but in those
cases, they understand why they’re trying something else.
Trading comes in many flavors, and many of those who call themselves
day traders are actually doing other things with their money. If you know
in advance what you want to do, not only will you be less likely to panic or
follow fads, but you’ll also be in a better position to take advantage of
opportunities in a way that suits your personality, trading skills, and goals.
And that’s why this entire chapter is devoted to planning.

Failing to plan is planning to fail. And if you can’t remember that right now,
don’t worry. I repeat it several times in this book.

24

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Planning Your Trading Business
The day trader is an entrepreneur who has started a small business that
trades in securities in hopes of making a return. You can get your business
off to a good start if you have a plan for what you want to do and how you’re
going to do it. With a plan, you know what your goals are and what you need
to do to achieve them.
You can find a lot of sample business plans in books and on the Internet,
but most of them are not appropriate for a trader. A typical business plan is
designed to not only guide the business but also to attract outside financing.
Unless you’re going to take in partners or borrow money from an outside
source, your day trading business plan is only for you. No executive
summary and no pages of projections needed.
So what do you need instead? How about a list of your goals and a plan for
what you’ll trade, what your hours will be, what equipment you’ll need, and
how much to invest in the business? The following sections have the details.

Setting your goals
The first thing you need in your plan is a list of your goals, both short term
and long term. Here is a sample list of key questions to get you started:
✓ Where do you want to be with your career and your life in the next
three months, six months, nine months, year, three years, five years,
and ten years?
✓ How many days a year do you want to trade?
✓ What do you need to know to trade better?
✓ How much do you want to make?
✓ What will you do with your profits?
✓ How will you reward yourself when you hit your goals?
Be as specific as possible when you think about what you want to do with
your trading business and don’t worry if your business goals overlap with
your personal goals. When you are in business for yourself, the two often mix.
You may be tempted to say, “I want to make as much money as I possibly can,”
and forget the rest, but “as much as I can” isn’t a quantifiable goal. If you don’t
know that you’ve reached your goal, how can you go on to set new ones? And
if you don’t meet your goal, how will you know how to make changes?

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

Finding volatility
You can day trade so many different securities and derivatives! Sure, you
want to trade anything that makes money for you, but what on earth is that?
Each market has its own nuances, so if you flit from futures to forex (foreign
exchange), you may be courting disaster. But if you know what markets you
want to trade, you have a better sense of what research services you need,
what ongoing training you may want to consider, and how to evaluate your
performance.
Chapter 3 covers different asset classes in great detail and discusses how you
may use them. For now, the little cheat sheet in Table 2-1 lists asset classes
that are most popular with day traders. Think about your chosen markets
in the same way: What do you want to trade, where will you trade it, what is
the risk and return, and what are some of the characteristics that make this
market attractive to you?
