124 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Now imagine that you’re watching this stock without knowledge of the
investment advisor’s recommendation. The steps that you’d likely see the
price of XYZ shares take during the course of a week or two include:
1. XYZ breaking out of its trading range and rallying on high volume
2. XYZ pulling back on low volume
3. High-volume buying of XYZ resuming as the price falls near $19
This type of market activity is what technicians wait for. You will see this
scenario play out over and over again, both in individual stocks, in exchangetraded funds and in the general market indexes. Chapter 9 covers this
technique in more detail, but for now, know that it is a textbook example of a
trading-range breakout defined by the following:
✓ A high-volume breakout after a long period of range-bound trading
✓ A low-volume pullback
✓ High-volume rally to new highs
If you were interested in this stock, you may have taken a position. In fact,
given this setup, the three logical places where a technician takes a
position are
✓ At the breakout: Buy as soon as the stock trades through the resistance
at the upper end of the trading range.
✓ At the pullback: Buy immediately as the stock begins trading higher
after the low-volume pullback.
✓ At the double top: When the stock retraces the move from the pullback
to its high price, it’s called a double top. Buy when the stock makes a
new high for the move.
Of these three alternatives, our favorite is the middle one, because buying at
the pullback is a relatively low-risk, high-reward trade. Our least favorite is the
last one, trading the double top as the stock makes a new high, because it is
the riskiest of the three alternatives. Both the breakout and the pullback trades
are covered in much more detail, including example charts, in Chapter 9.
As long as technical analysis helps you get a good entry price on your trade
and keep your losses small, you’ll have a powerful trading tool at your disposal.

Chapter 8: Reading the Tea Leaves: Does Technical Analysis Work?

Understanding where you’re headed
Technical analysis helps you find out where in the ups and downs of the
market buyers took action in the past. If you have a hint where buyers have
stepped in before, you can reasonably expect that they will do so again in the
future. When they do as you expect, you need to be able to trade on that
information profitably.
If they don’t do as you expect, you may have to bust your trade, and yet
you’ve still discovered a great deal of valuable information. You hope that
the price you pay for that knowledge isn’t too great, but you nevertheless
know more than you did before. You know that the last wave of buying
exhausts demand, and thus you need to begin looking for further evidence of
a reversal.
You don’t have to adhere to arguments that technical analysis is a good
forecasting tool merely to recognize that it’s a useful trading tool.

Answering the Detractors
A few arguments against technical analysis actually make some sense, but
an entire category of lame complaints also exists. For example, some people
lamely argue that no technicians have been successful over the long run and
that no technician has mustered the stature or success of illustrious market
moguls like Warren Buffet, Benjamin Graham, or Peter Lynch.
As if to further this argument, they point to some infamous technician who
blew up his portfolio in a spectacular fashion. Then a few years later, they
harp on another well-known technician who made a boneheaded call, and
then it happened again, and therefore technical analysis is useless.
The impulse to counter these arguments with a list of high-profile fundamental
analysts who also blew client portfolios, however, is misguided. Even a litany
of disasters wouldn’t disprove the usefulness of fundamental analysis any
more than a list of high-profile successes proves that fundamental analysis is
the only way to make money in stocks. Why, then, should anyone accept that
either proves technical analysis is useless?

125

126 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
In fact, many successful technicians have long, profitable trading careers.
While most toil in self-imposed obscurity, some are prominent and outspoken.
For example, John W. Henry, who owns the Boston Red Sox, made his fortune
as a trend-following technician, but missed the mark in the volatility of the
market in 2006 and 2007, so he lost most of his clients. Additional examples
include Ed Seykota, a trader with 35 years experience and one of the original
Market Wizards, and Bill Dunn of Dunn Capital Management, Inc. This is just a
tiny sample of the many successful independent traders and fund managers
who employ technical analysis tools to make trading decisions. But they do
not always read the tea leaves correctly, as we saw with John W. Henry. It’s
an art — not an exact science.
A related argument about a chart-reading challenge that no technician has
ever attempted (or would even consider) works like this: The technical
analyst is given one half of a price chart with all identifying information
removed. From that information, the technician is supposed to tell whether
the stock’s price was higher or lower at any point in the second half of the
chart.
Of course, nobody ever claims the prize for having accomplished this feat,
and that, therefore, is supposed to be proof that no technician ever has
enough confidence in technical analysis to even try. Accomplished technicians
aren’t any better at telling the future than a haruspex or tarot-card reader —
and neither, for that matter, are fundamental analysts. Technical analysis is
not fortune-telling, it’s simply a trading tool.

Walking randomly
The Random Walk Theory has nothing to do with hiking without a map, but
instead, is an academic theory that says stock prices are completely random.
What happened to a stock yesterday has nothing to do with what happens to
its price tomorrow.
Furthermore, this theory claims that the market is so efficient that consistently
outperforming broad-based market indexes is impossible. In other words,
any edge that you may gain from fundamental analysis, technical analysis, or
tea leaves is useless and expensive. After all, transaction costs far outweigh
any performance improvement that your analysis provides.
Armed with computer models and reams of study results, academic experts
cling to these efficient-market hypotheses as gospel. Several challenges
oppose their argument. No less an authority than the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York published a study showing that using support and resistance levels
(see Chapter 9) improved trading results for several firms. Additionally,
articles published in the Journal of Finance suggest that trading based on

Chapter 8: Reading the Tea Leaves: Does Technical Analysis Work?
moving averages and head and shoulder reversal patterns outperformed the
market averages. Reversal patterns are discussed in Chapter 9, and moving
averages are discussed in Chapter 11.
So do you think this is proof that technical analysis is effective all the time? Of
course not. But it casts doubt about the validity of the Random Walk Theory,
especially the part that technical analysis cannot be used to consistently
improve results compared to the market averages.
Debating these arguments to a logical conclusion is nearly impossible. Even
when you use technical analysis successfully, random walkers claim your
performance is the result of random chance — nothing more than good luck.
Don’t believe them. Instead, believe that luck favors the prepared mind.

Trading signals known to all
Anyone who cares to look can see exactly the same patterns and has access
to the same indicators as every other trader. There is nothing new under the
sun — or in the markets.
Although some traders create proprietary indicators to gain a trading edge,
many more use well-known off-the-shelf trading tools. The patterns and
indicators described in Chapters 9, 10, and 11 are all well known. Some are
freely available on the Internet for anyone to use. Thus, if everyone sees the
same thing, how can you use those trading signals profitably? The question is
perfectly legitimate.
Although everyone sees the same patterns and the same indicators, this
equality is a strength rather than a weakness. Technical analysis gives you
insight into what future actions you can expect from your fellow market
participants. With practice, you can use that information to construct a
consistently profitable trading plan.
After you become familiar with traditional patterns and indicators, you can
incorporate your experience and market knowledge into your trading plans
and thus come to an understanding about when to use specific tools and when
results are meaningless. From these plans, you can find out when a trading
signal works and when it fails. You can make trades based on indicators and
patterns that help and ignore the rest.
Many widely known indicators and trading patterns exist, but personally, we
use only a handful of the simplest ones. Your results will differ from ours.
You may trade in a different time frame than we do, or you may choose a
different set of tools altogether. As long as your tools improve your trading,
continue using them.

127

128 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Telling Fortunes or Planning Trades
Cutting to the chase, you probably guessed by now that you’re never going
to foretell the future with technical analysis. Technical analysis, instead, is
simply a useful trading tool.
Successful trading does not mean that you have to be right all the time or
even half the time. You don’t have to tell the future. Technical analysis is an
excellent tool for managing your money, controlling your losses, and enabling
your profits to run (see Chapter 12 for more money management information).
Even people who base their trades on fundamental factors can use chart
analysis to help them time market entry and exit points and gauge price
volatility and risk. Using technical analysis successfully means
✓ Being patient
✓ Finding out how to identify and use a small number of patterns and
indicators
✓ Becoming proficient at finding these patterns and profitably trading on
them
✓ Adding methodically to your tool kit to improve your trading results
Remember that no method is foolproof. Nothing ever ensures successful
trades 100 percent of the time. But technical analysis is an excellent tool for
improving your trading results.

Chapter 9

Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
In This Chapter
▶ Creating a bar chart
▶ Deciphering simple visual patterns
▶ Distinguishing between trends and trading ranges
▶ Pinpointing transitions from trading range to trend

S

tock charts come in many flavors. Some prominent ones include
point-and-figure charts, candlestick charts, and the ever-popular bar
charts, which are used throughout this book.
Bar charts are easy to create, interpret, and maintain. Furthermore, charting
tools and analysis techniques for bar charts apply to stocks, bonds, options,
indexes, and futures, and are applicable across any time frame in which you
may want to trade. In addition, most chart patterns work for long (buy first,
sell later) and short (sell first, buy later) trades.
This chapter shows you how to draw price charts for a single stock, for an
index such as the S&P 500 or NASDAQ Composite, or for an exchange-traded
fund, and recognize simple single-day trading patterns. In addition, you find
out how to identify trends and trading ranges and how to look for key
transition points that often lead to good trading opportunities. Charting is a
visual methodology, so you’ll find many example charts used throughout this
chapter. Examine them carefully. You’ll want to quickly identify the patterns
we describe here when evaluating charts for your own trading.

Creating a Price Chart
Traders used to create their charts by hand. Today, however, many charting
alternatives and options are available, including easy-to-use computer
software and easily accessible Internet sites, both of which are discussed
in Chapter 4. You may, of course, still want to create charts by hand; that’s
something we encourage you to do — at least for a little while. Making
your own charts is easy, a great way to discover charting concepts, and an
excellent way of getting a feel for the markets.

130 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
A chart of stock prices shares characteristics with other charts with which
you’re probably familiar. These kinds of charts typically are made up of two
axes; the horizontal axis represents time, and the vertical axis represents
price. One unusual feature of a stock chart is that its vertical axis, the price
axis, usually is shown on the right, as in Figure 9-1. The most current prices
are shown on the right-hand side of the chart, and so are the newest trading
signals. You always trade while those signals are on the right edge of a chart,
so having the price axis closest to the most crucial part of the chart makes
sense.

Price

Figure 9-1:
Axes of a
daily price
chart.

Time

Creating a single price bar
Regardless of whether your chart is an intraday chart (showing fluctuations
throughout a trading day) or a chart of daily or weekly prices, the format of
the price bar is the same. Each bar represents the results for a single trading
period. On a chart that provides daily information, for example, each bar
represents the results for a single trading day.
Most stock-price bar charts show four important prices on each bar:
✓ Open: The price recorded for the first trade
✓ High: The highest price trade during the trading period

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
✓ Low: The lowest price trade during the trading period
✓ Close: The price recorded for the last trade
By convention, a daily bar chart shows trades for the standard New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) trading day — from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. — but some
charting packages include optional after-hours results (prices from trades
that occur after the market closes) as part of each daily bar. Likewise, some
charting packages omit the opening prices on intraday charts. The opening
price on an intraday chart (almost) always is the same as the closing price
for the previous bar, so omitting it is of little consequence. However, omitting
the opening price on daily, weekly, and monthly charts diminishes the
usefulness of the chart, so avoid charts that don’t provide all four prices.
Figure 9-2 shows a single price bar. The full range of prices traded throughout
the period is shown by the vertical bar. The opening price is shown as a
small line on the left-hand side of the bar, and the closing price is shown by a
similar line on the right-hand side of the bar.

High
Close

Figure 9-2:
A single Open
price bar.
Low

This identical format is used for all time periods. For example, an intraday
chart may use 1-minute bars, where each bar spans all the prices for your
stock that occur during trades over a full minute. Common time frames for
stock price charts are
✓ 1-minute bars: Each bar represents one minute of trading.
✓ 5-minute bars: Each bar represents five minutes of trading.
✓ 10-minute bars: Each bar represents ten minutes of trading.
✓ 15-minute bars: Each bar represents 15 minutes of trading.
✓ 60-minute bars: Each bar represents 60 minutes of trading.
✓ Daily bars: Each bar represents one full day of trading.

131

132 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
✓ Weekly bars: Each bar represents one week of trading.
✓ Monthly bars: Each bar represents one full month of trading.
In our own trading, we typically monitor weekly charts, daily charts,
one or two intraday charts, and either 60-minute bars for stocks and
exchange-traded funds or 5-minute bars for indexes. We cover our chart
selection and methodology more fully in Chapter 13.

Measuring volume
In addition to prices, bar charts often show the volume, or the number of
shares traded during the given time period represented by each bar. On a
daily chart, trading volume shows the total number of shares traded
throughout the day. By convention, the volume is shown as a separate bar
graph and usually is shown directly underneath the price chart. Figure 9-3
shows an example.
Volume (the number of shares sold) is used as a confirming indicator. In other
words, if a price bar shows bullish activity (which is discussed later in the
section on “Identifying Simple Single-Day Patterns”), that bullishness is
confirmed by a higher-than-average trading volume. However, that bullish
indication may diminish if trading volume is lower than average.
Volume also is used to gauge institutional participation in a stock. Significant
trading volume often signals that large institutional investors — mutual
funds, pension funds, insurance companies, hedge funds, and others — are
placing orders to buy or sell a stock. When prices rise and volume is strong,
you usually can infer that institutions are accumulating positions in the
stock. The reverse also is true. When prices fall and trading volume is high,
large institutions may be liquidating positions, which is considered a bearish
development.
Low-volume price changes are less meaningful, at least from a technical
perspective, than high-volume changes. That’s why technicians say, “Volume
confirms price.”

Coloring charts
Displaying price and volume bars in color is common on charts. When using
color, be sure to use contrasting colors so you can distinguish up days from
down days. One prominent charting package, for example, defaults to green
for up days and red for down days. A prominent Internet site defaults to
black for up days and red for down. Most charting services enable you to
configure colors to suit yourself.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
Price Bars

Figure 9-3:
A daily chart
shows price
and volume.

Volume

Identifying Simple Single-Day Patterns
The goal of chart reading is determining whether buyers or sellers are in
control of the price. In a bull market, stockowners may be willing to sell, but
only if they can coax higher prices from buyers. In a bear market, buyers
are able to negotiate a better price when sellers are more eager to sell than
buyers are to buy.
You’re trying to infer the market’s underlying psychology by looking at the
history of price movements. Inferring that as prices rise, buyers are more
interested in buying than sellers are in selling is a fair observation. In a rising
market, buyers must continue bidding prices higher to convince sellers to part
with their shares. Rising prices attract additional buyers, who must continue
to bid prices higher to convince even more reluctant sellers to part with their
shares.

Single-bar patterns
The most bullish thing that a market can do is go higher. Although technicians
typically view each bar within the context of its neighboring bars, each
individual bar has something to tell the careful observer. Figure 9-4, for
example, shows a bullish single-bar pattern.

133

134 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
12

11
Figure 9-4:
A single
bullish bar.

10

In the example in the figure, buyers bid prices higher throughout the day.
The opening price of $10 also is the lowest trade for the day. The daily range
shown on the bar is $2, and the stock closed at $12, the high for the day.
If you’re keeping score (and as a trader, believe us, you are), the bulls gained
ground and clearly are ahead for the day. Bears holding short positions
were hurt where it hurts the most — in their pocketbooks. A trader takes a
short position by borrowing shares of stock and selling them in the hope of
making money if the stock price falls. This trade loses money if the stock’s
price rises. The mechanics of selling short are described in Chapter 14. The
example in Figure 9-4 shows the stock opening at the extreme low and closing
at its extreme high, but the pattern nevertheless is just as bullish when the
stock opens near its low and then closes near its high.
Figure 9-5 shows a bearish single-bar pattern. The stock opened at $11.75;
traded to $12, the high for the day; fell to $10, the daily low; and then closed
at $10.25. The stock doesn’t have to close at the low for the day for it to be
bearish. Closing near the low is good enough.

12

11
Figure 9-5:
A single
bearish bar.

10

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
These single-day patterns are helpful to the trader who’s trying to understand
the underpinnings of the markets. Whether these patterns present a trading
opportunity depends on the stock’s recent history and whether its trading
volume confirms the pattern (see the earlier section on “Measuring volume”).
We give you several examples later in this chapter, in the section “Searching
for Transitions,” where a bullish single-bar pattern triggers a buy signal.

Reversal patterns
A reversal bar is another single-bar pattern that shows a stock opening and
closing at the same end of its trading range. Figure 9-6 shows a bullish single-bar
reversal where the stock opens at the high, trades lower through part of the
day, and by the close, the stock regains all its losses and closes at its highest
intraday price.

12

11
Figure 9-6:
A bullish
reversal
pattern.

10

During the early part of the trading sessions depicted in the bullish reversal
pattern, buyers were willing to buy only if sellers lowered their offering
(asking) prices. By the end of the day, the tide had turned and roles were
reversed, with sellers willing to sell but only at higher prices. This situation is
another win for the bulls, because they were able to stop the price slide and
recover all the intraday losses.
Figure 9-7 shows a bearish reversal pattern. In this case, the stock opens at
$10.25, rallies during the day to $12, but closes at the $10 low.
Reversal patterns often represent a powerful single-bar trading pattern.
Whenever a bullish reversal bar is preceded by several periods of falling
prices, for example, its pattern often represents a buying opportunity. On the
other hand, when a bearish reversal bar is preceded by a rising trend, it may
be a signal to close a long position or initiate a short position. Selling short is
described in Chapter 14.

135

136 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
12

11
Figure 9-7:
A bearish
reversal
pattern.

10

Not all price bars, however, present specific trading opportunities. Some
bars are neutral by themselves, but add to a stock’s history when viewed
in context. Through charts, you can use a stock’s visual historical record to
develop your trading plan, as you’ll see in the following sections.
