
 Usually a Bull Flag will show several consolidation periods. I enter in only during the first and second consolidation periods. Third and higher consolidation periods are risky because the price has probably been very extended in a way that indicates that the buyers will soon be losing their control. Let’s study an example in Figure 7.4 below of a Bull Flag on RIGL on August 30, 2016. 

 Figure 7.4 - Example of Bull Flag formation with two consolidation periods on RIGL. 

 This is an example of two Bull Flag Patterns. It is normally hard to catch the first Bull Flag, and you will probably miss it, but your scanner should alert you to it so that you can be ready for the next Bull Flag. Figure 7.5 that follows is an example from my scanner in this time period: 

 Figure 7.5 - Example of my intraday Bull Flag Strategy. 

 As you can see, my scanner showed RIGL at 12:36:15 p.m. As soon as I saw that, I realized that there was also a very high relative volume of trading (120 times the normal trading volume), which made this a perfect setup for day trading. I waited for the first consolidation period to finish and, as soon as the stock started to move toward its high for the day, I jumped into the trade. My stop loss was the breakdown of the consolidation period. I marked my exit and entry on Figure 7.6 below. 

 Figure 7.6 - Entry, stop and exit of a Bull Flag Strategy on RIGL. 

 You can see the Bull Flag Pattern on any short time frame: 1-minute, 2-minute and 5-minute charts. Now let’s take a look at Figure 7.7, a 2-minute chart for OPTT on June 1, 2016. As you can see, the stock had a powerful Bull Flag right at the Open, followed by a consolidation period. As soon as the first consolidation period was completed, another small Bull Flag formed. The volume of shares traded is significantly higher after consolidation, which is a confirmation for a long entry. 

 You can also see another Bull Flag in the OPTT 2-minute chart followed by another consolidation period. As shown below in Figure 7.7, after the second consolidation period, the volume of shares traded was significantly higher, a confirmation for another long entry. I don’t trade more than two Bull Flags in a stock and, as you can see in this chart, the stock started to sell off after the third Bull Flag (at around $7). Aside from the strategy, did you notice that OPTT moved from $1.50 to almost $7 in just 35 minutes? This kind of move can be expected from low float under $10 stocks. 

 Figure 7.7 - Screenshot showing three consolidation periods in OPTT. Note the volume increases after each consolidation period. 

 To summarize my trading strategy: 

 When I see a stock surging up (either on my scanner or when advised by someone in our chatroom), I patiently wait until the consolidation period. I do not jump into the trade right away (you will recall that is the dangerous act of “chasing the stock”). 
 I watch the stock during the consolidation period. I choose my share size and stop and exit strategy. 
 As soon as prices are moving over the high of the consolidation candlesticks, I enter the trade. My stop loss is the break below the consolidation periods. 
 I sell half of my position and take a profit on the way up. I bring my stop loss from the low of the consolidation to my entry price (break-even). 
 I sell my remaining positions as soon as my target hits or I sense that the price is losing steam and the sellers are gaining control of the price action. 

 The Bull Flag is essentially an ABCD Pattern that will happen more often on low float stocks. However, in a Bull Flag Strategy for stocks under $10, many traders buy only at or near the breakout (opposite to the ABCD Pattern for medium float stocks). The reason for this is because moves in low float stocks are fast and they will fade away very quickly. Therefore, Bull Flag is more or less a Momentum and Scalping Strategy . Scalpers buy when a stock is running. They rarely like to buy during consolidation (during that waiting and holding phase). These types of stocks usually drop quickly and brutally so it is important to jump in only when there is a confirmation of breakout. Waiting for the stock to break the top of a consolidation area is a way of reducing your risk and exposure time in low float stocks. Instead of buying and holding and waiting, which increases exposure time, scalpers just wait for the breakout and then send their order. Get in, scalp, and get out quickly. That’s the philosophy of momentum scalpers: 

 Get in at the breakout 
 Take your profit 
 Get out of the way 

 The Bull Flag Pattern is found within an uptrend in a stock. The Bull Flag is a long-based strategy. You should not short a Bull Flag. I personally don’t trade much momentum. It is a risky strategy and beginners should be very careful trading these. If you choose to, trade only in a small size and only after sufficient practice in simulators. You will also need a super-fast execution system for scalping.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Strategies 3 and 4: Reversal Trading 

 Top and Bottom Reversals are two other trading strategies that day traders love using because they have very defined entry and exit points. In this section, I’m going to explain how to find reversal setups using scanners, how to use indecision or Doji candlesticks to take an entry, how to understand where to set your stops and your profit targets, and how to trail your winners. 

 If you are part of our chatroom, you will hear me say time and time again that what goes up, must come down. Don’t chase the trade if it is too extended . The inverse is also true. What goes down will definitely come back up to some extent. When a stock starts to sell off significantly, there are two reasons behind it: 

 Institutional traders and hedge funds have started selling their large position to the public market and the stock price is tanking. 
 Traders have started short selling a stock because of some bad fundamental news, but they will have to cover their shorts sooner or later. That is where you wait for an entry. When short sellers are trying to cover their shorts, the stock will reverse quickly, that is called a “short squeeze”. You want to ride that. 

 I’m going to illustrate this strategy with a few examples so that you can see exactly what to look for. Figure 7.8 below is an example of what it looks like to find a stock that has sold off really hard right after the market opens. Moves like this are extremely hard to catch for the short side, because when you find the stock, it is already too late to enter the short selling trade. But please, remember the mantra: what goes up, must come down . Therefore, you have the option of waiting for a reversal opportunity. 

 Figure 7.8 - Example of a Reversal Strategy on EBS. 

 Each Reversal Strategy has four important elements: 

 At least five candlesticks on a 5-minute chart moving upward or downward. 
 The stock will have an extreme 5-minute RSI indicator (Relative Strength Index). An RSI above 90 or below 10 will pique my interest. The RSI, developed initially by famous technical analyst Welles Wilder, Jr., is an indicator that compares the magnitude of recent gains and losses in price over a period of time to measure the speed and change of price movement. The RSI values range from 0 to 100. Traders in Reversal Strategies use RSI values to identify overbought or oversold conditions and to find buy or sell signals. For example, RSI readings above 90 indicate overbought conditions and RSI readings below 10 indicate oversold conditions. If you want to learn more about the RSI indicator, you can do a Google search or ask me in the chatroom. Your trading platform or scanner software calculates RSI automatically for you. 

 These two elements demonstrate that a stock is really stretched out, and you must pay close attention to your scanner for all of these data points. I have configured my scanner to highlight RSIs lower than 20 and higher than 80 so I can very quickly recognize them. You must simultaneously look for a certain RSI level and a certain number of consecutive candles. 

 The stock is being traded at or near an important intraday support or resistance level. For details of how to find support or resistance levels, please read my commentary that follows for support or resistance trading. I only take reversal trades when the price is near a significant support level (for Bottom Reversal) or a significant resistance level (for Top Reversal). 
 When the trend is coming to an end, usually indecision candles, such as a spinning top or Doji, form. That is when you need to be ready. 

 In reversal trading, you are looking for one of the indecision candlesticks that we reviewed in Chapter 6. They are an indication that the trend may soon change. A Doji is a candle that has a wick longer than its body. You can see a picture of a bearish Doji in Figure 7.9 below. It has that long upper wick that some would call a top tail and that others would call a shooting star. This candle tells you four things: the open price, the close price, the high of that period and the low of that period. So, when you have a candle with a top tail, you know that at some point during that candle period the price moved up, was unable to hold at that level, and was then sold off. It depicts a bit of a battle taking place between the buyers and the sellers in which the buyers lost their push up. It is a good indication that the sellers may soon control the price and will push that price down. 

 The same is true about a bullish Doji. You can also see a picture of a bullish Doji in Figure 7.9 below. It has that long lower wick that some would call a bottom tail and others would call a hammer. When you have a hammer candle with a bottom tail, you know that at some point during that candle period the price moved down, was unable to hold at those low levels, and was bought up. This indicates a battle between the buyers and the sellers in which the sellers lost their push down. It is a good indication that the buyers may now gain control of the price and push that price up. 

 Figure 7.9 - Top Reversal Strategy with an indecision s hooting star candlestick formed as a sign of entry. 

 In reversal trading, you look for either Doji or indecision candlesticks. They are an indication that the trend may soon change. In Reversal Strategies, you are looking for a clear confirmation that the pattern is beginning to reverse. What you definitely don’t want is to be on the wrong side of a reversal trade, or, as we call it, “ catching a falling knife ”. It doesn’t sound like a good idea in real life and it's not a good idea in trading. It means that when a stock is selling off badly (the falling knife), you don’t want to buy on the assumption that it should bounce. If the stocks are dropping, you want to wait for the confirmation of the reversal. This will usually be (1) the formation of a Doji or indecision candle and (2) the first 1-minute or the first 5-minute candle to reach a new high near an important intraday support level. That is my entry point. I set my stop at the low of the previous candlestick or at the loss of the support level. 

 In reversal trading, it is best that the RSI be at the extremes (above 90, below 10). Once you find that, you must then look for an actual entry near a strong intraday support (for Bottom Reversal) or resistance level (for Top Reversal). As mentioned, an entry for me is going to be either the first 1-minute or the first 5-minute candle to reach a new high (for Bottom Reversal) or to make a new low (for Top Reversal) and only when the price is being traded near an important intraday support or resistance level. 

 Figure 7.10 - Bottom Reversal Strategy with an indecision hammer candlestick formed as a sign of entry. 

 In a Bottom Reversal, when you’ve had a long run of consecutive candles making new lows, the first candle that makes the new high near an important support level is very significant. That’s my entry point. There are times when I’ll use the 1-minute chart, but typically I’ll wait for the 5-minute chart because it is a much better confirmation. The 5-minute chart is cleaner. The first 5-minute candle to make a new high near an intraday support level is the point at which I enter the reversal, with a stop at the low of the day. 

 Once you’re in one of these trades, your exit indicators are quite simple. I take profit when the price reaches a moving average (either 9 EMA, 20 EMA or VWAP) or reaches another important intraday level. 

 In a Bottom Reversal, if the stock pops up and then suddenly moves back down, I stop out for a loss. If I jump in long, buying stock and hoping the price will go higher, and instead the price ends up just going sideways, it’s a sign that I am probably going to see a consolidation for another move down, and that is an indication that the price is probably going to continue to drop. If I get in and I hold for a few minutes and the price stays flat, I get out, no matter what happens after that. I may be wrong, but I don’t like to expose my account to the unknown. I need to be in the right setup, and if it is not ready yet, I’m out. If I get into the profit zone, I can start adjusting my stop, first to break-even, and then to the low of the last 5-minute candle. I will then keep adjusting my stop as I move up. 

 In Reversal Strategies, one of the main tasks of a trader is to watch stocks that are running up or down, while simultaneously identifying possible support or resistance levels and areas that could provide a good reversal opportunity on daily charts. This allows you to resist being impulsive and rushing into the trade. Instead, you wait for the areas of stagnation. You take your time and watch the trade develop and wait for the reversal to begin. 

 Bottom Reversal 

 This beautiful illustration that follows in Figure 7.11 is on Emergent BioSolutions Inc. (ticker: EBS) and shows a perfect reversal that I found using my stock scanners. An indecision candlestick at the bottom of the downtrend signifies a potential reversal, and, as you can see, right after that is a big swing back up. I took this trade right after seeing an indecision Doji, and kept my stop at the low of that indecision candlestick. When EBS hit my scanner, I quickly changed my chart to a daily one and found important nearby support and resistance levels of $27.36 and $28. As mentioned previously, to learn how to find support and resistance levels, please read further along in this chapter. 

 Figure 7.11 - Example of a Reversal Strategy on EBS. 

 The most significant advantage to Reversal Strategies is that they overcome the difficulty of anticipating when stocks will make major moves. You will probably miss the moment when the stock starts to sell off, and you won’t have time to sell short the stock for profit, but you can always prepare for the reversal trade. 

 Another example of a Bottom Reversal Strategy is in Figure 7.12 that follows: 

 Figure 7.12 - Example of a Bottom Reversal Strategy on ALR. 

 I found Alere Inc. (ticker: ALR) on June 27, 2016 at 10:57 a.m. using my Trade Ideas real time Bottom Reversal scanner. See the image below in Figure 7.13: 

 Figure 7.13 - Example of my Trade Ideas real time Bottom Reversal scanner showing ALR with seven consecutive downward candlesticks. 

 My scanner, at 10:57 a.m., showed me that ALR had seven consecutive candles to the downside, a relatively low float (80 million shares) and a relative volume of 1.21, which meant it was trading higher than usual. I actually did not take this trade because I missed my entry, but I wanted to show you what overall trading strategies look like for Bottom Reversals. If you look again at the above Figure 7.12, the screenshot of ALR’s daily chart, you will see a significant intraday level of support at $40.67. The price reversed at that level with higher than usual trading volume. Please note that no indecision candlestick formed in this reversal. Instead, the reversal was indicated by a strong bullish candlestick (marked on the above Figure 7.12). At times, a reversal happens so fast that indecision candlesticks will not form. Therefore, it is important to observe the price action near significant intraday levels, and to of course confirm the reversal with an indication of higher than usual trading volume. 

 When you’re looking at reversals, you want to ensure that you only trade in the extremes. The example you just saw was a stock that had made an extreme move to the downside before that move was reversed. A stock that has been selling off slowly all day long is usually not suitable for a reversal. That stock may be a good candidate for a Moving Average Trend trade (explained in the pages to come). You want to find stocks that are really stretched out to the downside or, for short selling, really stretched out to the upside, in a short period of time, and with high volume at the reversal point. You want to see that large extension, which means that you should look for considerable volume at the reversal point (such as the ALR Bottom Reversal in the above example from my scanner that is marked as Figure 7.13). Once you find that, you then must look for a couple of key indicators that will suggest that the price may be about to turn, and that is when you then take the position. I’ve said it many times: what goes up, must come down. Oftentimes these stocks will give up days’ and weeks’ or years’ worth of price gain in just a matter of minutes. It is very critical to be able to correctly time the reversal. 

 I’ll say it again: the key to your success with Top and Bottom Reversals is trading the extremes at or near a significant daily support or resistance level. How do I quantify these extremes? These are a few of the things that I look for: 

 An extreme RSI above 90 or below 10 will pique my interest. 
 A very high volume of shares being traded. Volume is usually increasing with the direction of price action and is at its maximum at the point of reversal. 
 Finally, more than five consecutive candles ending with an indecision candle or a Doji is definitely going to catch my attention. These candles usually demonstrate that sellers are losing their control while buyers are becoming more powerful, and that indicates the end of a trend. As you saw in the previous ALR example (Figures 7.12 and 7.13), sometimes reversals happen without an indecision candlestick. In those cases, you should look for strong reversal candlesticks – a bullish body for Bottom Reversals and a bearish body for Top Reversals. 

 I will add a caveat to this final point: there will be times when you will have between five and ten consecutive candles without much price action. They may be drifting down slowly, but not quickly enough for you to sense that it is a good reversal. You must look for a combination of these indicators all occurring at the same time. Never sell short just because the prices are too high. You should never argue with the crowd’s decision, even if it doesn’t make sense to you. You do not have to run with the crowd - but you should not run against it. 

 Utilizing all of these different factors will recreate the strategy that has been successful for me because of its attractive profit-to-loss ratio. Your profit-to-loss ratio is your average winners versus your average losers. Many new traders end up trading with a very poor profit-to-loss ratio because they sell their winners too soon and they hold their losers too long. This is an extremely common habit among new traders. The Reversal Strategy, however, lends itself to having a larger profit-to-loss ratio for new traders. 

 To summarize my trading strategy for the Bottom Reversal Strategy: 

 I set up a scanner to flag stocks with four or more consecutive candlesticks going downward in an extreme manner. When I see a stock hit my scanner, I quickly review the volume and daily levels of support or resistance near the stock to see if it will be a good candidate for a reversal trade or not. 
 I wait for confirmation of a Bottom Reversal Strategy: (1) formation of a bullish Doji or indecision candle or, instead, a very bullish candlestick, (2) the stock is being traded at or near a significant intraday support level, and (3) the RSI must be lower than 10. 
 When I see the stock make a new 1-minute or 5-minute high, I buy the stock. 
 My stop loss is the low of the previous red candlestick or the low of the day. 
 My profit target is either (1) the next level of support, or (2) VWAP (Volume Weighted Average Price, described later in this chapter) or 9 EMA or 20 EMA moving averages (whichever is closer), or (3) the stock makes a new 5-minute low, which means that the buyers are exhausted and the sellers are once again gaining control. 

 Top Reversal 

 As discussed before, a Top Reversal is similar to a Bottom Reversal, but on a short selling side. Let’s take a look at Bed Bath & Beyond Inc. (ticker: BBBY) as it traded on June 23, 2016. My scanner, displayed in Figure 7.14 below, showed BBBY going up at 10:18 a.m. with six consecutive candles. It had a relative volume of almost 21.60, which meant it was trading significantly higher than usual (remember, we retail traders look for unusual trading volumes). 

 Figure 7.14 - Example of my Top Reversal real time scanner for BBBY. 

 I took this trade and made a good profit on it. I quickly reviewed the daily chart and found a significant resistance level at $44.40. I decided to see if I could get a good short entry near that level. A nice Doji around that level formed so I decided to take the trade. I shorted 800 shares at $44.10 when a new 5-minute candlestick was made, with my stop being the break of the high of the last 5-minute candlestick, which was also a new high of the day, as I have marked on Figure 7.15 below. I covered my shorts at VWAP near $43.10 for an $800 profit when the stock reached the VWAP. 
