
5

For the sake of simplicity, this example assumes that stocks rose instantaneously.

Commentary on Chapter 4

105

W H Y N OT 1 0 0 % S TO C K S ?
Graham advises you never to have more than 75% of your total
assets in stocks. But is putting all your money into the stock
market inadvisable for everyone? For a tiny minority of investors,
a 100%-stock portfolio may make sense. You are one of them
if you:
• have set aside enough cash to support your family for at least
one year
• will be investing steadily for at least 20 years to come
• survived the bear market that began in 2000
• did not sell stocks during the bear market that began in 2000
• bought more stocks during the bear market that began in
2000
• have read Chapter 8 in this book and implemented a formal
plan to control your own investing behavior.
Unless you can honestly pass all these tests, you have no
business putting all your money in stocks. Anyone who panicked
in the last bear market is going to panic in the next one—and will
regret having no cushion of cash and bonds.

drive yourself crazy, and not so seldom that your targets will get out
of whack. I suggest that you rebalance every six months, no more
and no less, on easy-to-remember dates like New Year’s and the
Fourth of July.
The beauty of this periodic rebalancing is that it forces you to base
your investing decisions on a simple, objective standard—Do I now
own more of this asset than my plan calls for?—instead of the sheer
guesswork of where interest rates are heading or whether you think
the Dow is about to drop dead. Some mutual-fund companies, including T. Rowe Price, may soon introduce services that will automatically
rebalance your 401(k) portfolio to your preset targets, so you will
never need to make an active decision.

106

Commentary on Chapter 4

THE INS AND OUTS OF INCOME INVESTING
In Graham’s day, bond investors faced two basic choices: Taxable or
tax-free? Short-term or long-term? Today there is a third: Bonds or
bond funds?
Taxable or tax-free? Unless you’re in the lowest tax bracket,6 you
should buy only tax-free (municipal) bonds outside your retirement
accounts. Otherwise too much of your bond income will end up in the
hands of the IRS. The only place to own taxable bonds is inside your
401(k) or another sheltered account, where you will owe no current
tax on their income—and where municipal bonds have no place, since
their tax advantage goes to waste.7
Short-term or long-term? Bonds and interest rates teeter on
opposite ends of a seesaw: If interest rates rise, bond prices fall—
although a short-term bond falls far less than a long-term bond. On the
other hand, if interest rates fall, bond prices rise—and a long-term
bond will outperform shorter ones.8 You can split the difference simply

6

For the 2003 tax year, the bottom Federal tax bracket is for single people
earning less than $28,400 or married people (filing jointly) earning less than
$47,450.
7
Two good online calculators that will help you compare the after-tax income of municipal and taxable bonds can be found at www.investinginbonds.
com/cgi-bin/calculator.pl and www.lebenthal.com/index_infocenter.html. To
decide if a “muni” is right for you, find the “taxable equivalent yield” generated by these calculators, then compare that number to the yield currently
available on Treasury bonds (http://money.cnn.com/markets/bondcenter/ or
www.bloomberg.com/markets/C13.html). If the yield on Treasury bonds is
higher than the taxable equivalent yield, munis are not for you. In any case,
be warned that municipal bonds and funds produce lower income, and
more price fluctuation, than most taxable bonds. Also, the alternative minimum tax, which now hits many middle-income Americans, can negate the
advantages of municipal bonds.
8
For an excellent introduction to bond investing, see http://flagship.van
guard.com/web/planret/AdvicePTIBInvestmentsInvestingInBonds.html#Inter
estRates. For an even simpler explanation of bonds, see http://money.cnn.
com/pf/101/lessons/7/. A “laddered” portfolio, holding bonds across a range
of maturities, is another way of hedging interest-rate risk.

Commentary on Chapter 4

107

by buying intermediate-term bonds maturing in five to 10 years—which
do not soar when their side of the seesaw rises, but do not slam into
the ground either. For most investors, intermediate bonds are the simplest choice, since they enable you to get out of the game of guessing
what interest rates will do.
Bonds or bond funds? Since bonds are generally sold in $10,000
lots and you need a bare minimum of 10 bonds to diversify away the
risk that any one of them might go bust, buying individual bonds
makes no sense unless you have at least $100,000 to invest. (The
only exception is bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury, since they’re protected against default by the full force of the American government.)
Bond funds offer cheap and easy diversification, along with the
convenience of monthly income, which you can reinvest right back into
the fund at current rates without paying a commission. For most
investors, bond funds beat individual bonds hands down (the main
exceptions are Treasury securities and some municipal bonds). Major
firms like Vanguard, Fidelity, Schwab, and T. Rowe Price offer a broad
menu of bond funds at low cost.9
The choices for bond investors have proliferated like rabbits, so
let’s update Graham’s list of what’s available. As of 2003, interest
rates have fallen so low that investors are starved for yield, but there
are ways of amplifying your interest income without taking on excessive risk.10 Figure 4-1 summarizes the pros and cons.
Now let’s look at a few types of bond investments that can fill special needs.
CAS H I S N OT TRAS H
How can you wring more income out of your cash? The intelligent
investor should consider moving out of bank certificates of deposit or
money-market accounts—which have offered meager returns lately—
into some of these cash alternatives:
Treasury securities, as obligations of the U.S. government, carry

9

For more information, see www.vanguard.com, www.fidelity.com, www.
schwab.com, and www.troweprice.com.
10
For an accessible online summary of bond investing, see www.aaii.com/
promo/20021118/bonds.shtml.

108

Commentary on Chapter 4

FIGURE 4-1 The Wide World of Bonds

Type

Maturity

Minimum
purchase

Risk of default

Risk if int
rates rise

Treasury bills

Less than one year

$1,000 (D)

Extremely low

Very low

Treasury notes

Between one and
10 years

$1,000 (D)

Extremely low

Moderate

Treasury bonds

More than 10 yrs

$1,000 (D)

Extremely low

High

Savings bonds

Up to 30 years

$25 (D)

Extremely low

Very low

Certificates of deposit

One month to 5 yrs

Usually $500

Very low; insured up to Low
$100,000

Money-market funds

397 days or less

Usually $2,500

Very low

Low

Mortgage debt

One to 30 yrs

$2,000–3,000 (F)

Generally moderate
but can be high

Moderate
high

Municipal bonds

One to 30 yrs or more

$5,000 (D);
Generally moderate
$2,000–$3,000 (F) but can be high

Moderate
high

Preferred stock

Indefinite

None

High

High-yield (“junk”) bonds

Seven to 20 yrs

$2,000–$3,000 (F) High

Moderate

Emerging-markets debt

Up to 30 yrs

$2,000–$3,000 (F) High

Moderate

High

Sources: Bankrate.com, Bloomberg, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Morningstar,
www.savingsbonds.gov

Notes: (D): purchased directly. (F): purchased through a mutual fund.
“Ease of sale before maturity” indicates how readily you can sell at a fair
price before maturity date; mutual funds typically offer better ease of sale
than individual bonds. Money-market funds are Federally insured up to
$100,000 if purchased at an FDIC-member bank, but otherwise carry only
an implicit pledge not to lose value. Federal income tax on savings bonds
is deferred until redemption or maturity. Municipal bonds are generally
exempt from state income tax only in the state where they were issued.

Commentary on Chapter 4

Risk if interest
rates rise

Ease of sale
before
maturity

Exempt from
most state
Exempt from
income
Federal
taxes?
income tax? Benchmark

109

Yield
12/31/2002

Very low

High

Y

N

90-day

1.2

Moderate

High

Y

N

5-year

2.7

10 year

3.8

High

High

Y

N

30-year

4.8

Very low

Low

Y

N

EE bond Series bought after
May 1995

4.2

Low

Low

N

N

1-year nat’l. avg.

1.5

Low

High

N

N

Taxable money market avg.

0.8

Moderate to
high

Moderate
to low

N

N

Lehman Bros. MBS Index

4.6

Moderate to
high

Moderate
to low

N

Y

National Long-Term Mutual
Fund avg.

4.3

High

Moderate
to low

N

N

None

Highly variable

Moderate

Low

N

N

Merrill Lynch High Yield
Index

11.9

Moderate

Low

N

N

Emerg. Mkts Bond fund avg. 8.8

virtually no credit risk—since, instead of defaulting on his debts, Uncle
Sam can just jack up taxes or print more money at will. Treasury bills
mature in four, 13, or 26 weeks. Because of their very short maturities,
T-bills barely get dented when rising interest rates knock down the
prices of other income investments; longer-term Treasury debt, however, suffers severely when interest rates rise. The interest income on
Treasury securities is generally free from state (but not Federal)
income tax. And, with $3.7 trillion in public hands, the market for Treasury debt is immense, so you can readily find a buyer if you need your
money back before maturity. You can buy Treasury bills, short-term
notes, and long-term bonds directly from the government, with no brokerage fees, at www.publicdebt.treas.gov. (For more on inflationprotected TIPS, see the commentary on Chapter 2.)
Savings bonds, unlike Treasuries, are not marketable; you cannot

110

Commentary on Chapter 4

sell them to another investor, and you’ll forfeit three months of interest
if you redeem them in less than five years. Thus they are suitable
mainly as “set-aside money” to meet a future spending need—a gift for
a religious ceremony that’s years away, or a jump start on putting your
newborn through Harvard. They come in denominations as low as
$25, making them ideal as gifts to grandchildren. For investors who
can confidently leave some cash untouched for years to come, inflation-protected “I-bonds” recently offered an attractive yield of around
4%. To learn more, see www.savingsbonds.gov.
M OV I N G B E YO N D U N C L E S A M
Mortgage securities. Pooled together from thousands of mortgages around the United States, these bonds are issued by agencies
like the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or the
Government National Mortgage Association (“Ginnie Mae”). However,
they are not backed by the U.S. Treasury, so they sell at higher yields to
reflect their greater risk. Mortgage bonds generally underperform when
interest rates fall and bomb when rates rise. (Over the long run, those
swings tend to even out and the higher average yields pay off.) Good
mortgage-bond funds are available from Vanguard, Fidelity, and Pimco.
But if a broker ever tries to sell you an individual mortgage bond or
“CMO,” tell him you are late for an appointment with your proctologist.
Annuities. These insurance-like investments enable you to defer current taxes and capture a stream of income after you retire. Fixed annuities
offer a set rate of return; variable ones provide a fluctuating return. But
what the defensive investor really needs to defend against here are the
hard-selling insurance agents, stockbrokers, and financial planners who
peddle annuities at rapaciously high costs. In most cases, the high
expenses of owning an annuity—including “surrender charges” that gnaw
away at your early withdrawals—will overwhelm its advantages. The few
good annuities are bought, not sold; if an annuity produces fat commissions for the seller, chances are it will produce meager results for the
buyer. Consider only those you can buy directly from providers with rockbottom costs like Ameritas, TIAA-CREF, and Vanguard.11

11

In general, variable annuities are not attractive for investors under the age
of 50 who expect to be in a high tax bracket during retirement or who have

Commentary on Chapter 4

111

Preferred stock. Preferred shares are a worst-of-both-worlds
investment. They are less secure than bonds, since they have only a
secondary claim on a company’s assets if it goes bankrupt. And they
offer less profit potential than common stocks do, since companies
typically “call” (or forcibly buy back) their preferred shares when interest rates drop or their credit rating improves. Unlike the interest payments on most of its bonds, an issuing company cannot deduct
preferred dividend payments from its corporate tax bill. Ask yourself: If
this company is healthy enough to deserve my investment, why is it
paying a fat dividend on its preferred stock instead of issuing bonds
and getting a tax break? The likely answer is that the company is not
healthy, the market for its bonds is glutted, and you should approach
its preferred shares as you would approach an unrefrigerated dead
fish.
Common stock. A visit to the stock screener at http://screen.
yahoo.com/stocks.html in early 2003 showed that 115 of the stocks in
the Standard & Poor’s 500 index had dividend yields of 3.0% or
greater. No intelligent investor, no matter how starved for yield, would
ever buy a stock for its dividend income alone; the company and its
businesses must be solid, and its stock price must be reasonable.
But, thanks to the bear market that began in 2000, some leading
stocks are now outyielding Treasury bonds. So even the most defensive investor should realize that selectively adding stocks to an allbond or mostly-bond portfolio can increase its income yield—and raise
its potential return.12

not already contributed the maximum to their existing 401(k) or IRA
accounts. Fixed annuities (with the notable exception of those from TIAACREF) can change their “guaranteed” rates and smack you with nasty surrender fees. For thorough and objective analysis of annuities, see two
superb articles by Walter Updegrave: “Income for Life,” Money, July, 2002,
pp. 89–96, and “Annuity Buyer’s Guide,” Money, November, 2002, pp.
104–110.
12
For more on the role of dividends in a portfolio, see Chapter 19.

CHAPTER 5

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

Investment Merits of Common Stocks
In our first edition (1949) we found it necessary at this point
to insert a long exposition of the case for including a substantial
common-stock component in all investment portfolios.* Common
stocks were generally viewed as highly speculative and therefore
unsafe; they had declined fairly substantially from the high levels
of 1946, but instead of attracting investors to them because of their
reasonable prices, this fall had had the opposite effect of undermining confidence in equity securities. We have commented on the
converse situation that has developed in the ensuing 20 years,
whereby the big advance in stock prices made them appear safe
and profitable investments at record high levels which might actually carry with them a considerable degree of risk.†
The argument we made for common stocks in 1949 turned on

* At the beginning of 1949, the average annual return produced by stocks
over the previous 20 years was 3.1%, versus 3.9% for long-term Treasury
bonds—meaning that $10,000 invested in stocks would have grown to
$18,415 over that period, while the same amount in bonds would have
turned into $21,494. Naturally enough, 1949 turned out to be a fabulous
time to buy stocks: Over the next decade, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock
index gained an average of 20.1% per year, one of the best long-term
returns in the history of the U.S. stock market.
† Graham’s earlier comments on this subject appear on pp. 19–20. Just
imagine what he would have thought about the stock market of the late
1990s, in which each new record-setting high was considered further
“proof” that stocks were the riskless way to wealth!
112

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

113

two main points. The first was that they had offered a considerable
degree of protection against the erosion of the investor’s dollar
caused by inflation, whereas bonds offered no protection at all. The
second advantage of common stocks lay in their higher average
return to investors over the years. This was produced both by an
average dividend income exceeding the yield on good bonds and
by an underlying tendency for market value to increase over the
years in consequence of the reinvestment of undistributed profits.
While these two advantages have been of major importance—
and have given common stocks a far better record than bonds
over the long-term past—we have consistently warned that these
benefits could be lost by the stock buyer if he pays too high a price
for his shares. This was clearly the case in 1929, and it took 25 years
for the market level to climb back to the ledge from which it
had abysmally fallen in 1929–1932.* Since 1957 common stocks
have once again, through their high prices, lost their traditional
advantage in dividend yield over bond interest rates.† It remains to

* The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at a then-record high of 381.17
on September 3, 1929. It did not close above that level until November 23,
1954—more than a quarter of a century later—when it hit 382.74. (When you
say you intend to own stocks “for the long run,” do you realize just how long
the long run can be—or that many investors who bought in 1929 were no
longer even alive by 1954?) However, for patient investors who reinvested
their income, stock returns were positive over this otherwise dismal period,
simply because dividend yields averaged more than 5.6% per year. According to professors Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton of London
Business School, if you had invested $1 in U.S. stocks in 1900 and spent
all your dividends, your stock portfolio would have grown to $198 by 2000.
But if you had reinvested all your dividends, your stock portfolio would have
been worth $16,797! Far from being an afterthought, dividends are the
greatest force in stock investing.
† Why do the “high prices” of stocks affect their dividend yields? A stock’s
yield is the ratio of its cash dividend to the price of one share of common
stock. If a company pays a $2 annual dividend when its stock price is $100
per share, its yield is 2%. But if the stock price doubles while the dividend
stays constant, the dividend yield will drop to 1%. In 1959, when the trend
Graham spotted in 1957 became noticeable to everyone, most Wall Street

114

The Intelligent Investor

be seen whether the inflation factor and the economic-growth factor will make up in the future for this significantly adverse development.
It should be evident to the reader that we have no enthusiasm
for common stocks in general at the 900 DJIA level of late 1971. For
reasons already given* we feel that the defensive investor cannot
afford to be without an appreciable proportion of common stocks
in his portfolio, even if he must regard them as the lesser of two
evils—the greater being the risks attached to an all-bond holding.

Rules for the Common-Stock Component
The selection of common stocks for the portfolio of the defensive
investor should be a relatively simple matter. Here we would suggest four rules to be followed:
1. There should be adequate though not excessive diversification. This might mean a minimum of ten different issues and a
maximum of about thirty.†
2. Each company selected should be large, prominent, and conservatively financed. Indefinite as these adjectives must be, their
general sense is clear. Observations on this point are added at the
end of the chapter.
3. Each company should have a long record of continuous dividend payments. (All the issues in the Dow Jones Industrial Aver-

pundits declared that it could not possibly last. Never before had stocks
yielded less than bonds; after all, since stocks are riskier than bonds, why
would anyone buy them at all unless they pay extra dividend income to compensate for their greater risk? The experts argued that bonds would outyield
stocks for a few months at most, and then things would revert to “normal.”
More than four decades later, the relationship has never been normal again;
the yield on stocks has (so far) continuously stayed below the yield on
bonds.
* See pp. 56–57 and 88–89.
† For another view of diversification, see the sidebar in the commentary on
Chapter 14 (p. 368).

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

115

age met this dividend requirement in 1971.) To be specific on this
point we would suggest the requirement of continuous dividend
payments beginning at least in 1950.*
4. The investor should impose some limit on the price he will
pay for an issue in relation to its average earnings over, say, the
past seven years. We suggest that this limit be set at 25 times such
average earnings, and not more than 20 times those of the last
twelve-month period. But such a restriction would eliminate
nearly all the strongest and most popular companies from the portfolio. In particular, it would ban virtually the entire category of
“growth stocks,” which have for some years past been the favorites
of both speculators and institutional investors. We must give our
reasons for proposing so drastic an exclusion.

Growth Stocks and the Defensive Investor
The term “growth stock” is applied to one which has increased
its per-share earnings in the past at well above the rate for common
stocks generally and is expected to continue to do so in the future.
(Some authorities would say that a true growth stock should be
expected at least to double its per-share earnings in ten years—i.e.,
to increase them at a compounded annual rate of over 7.1%.)†
Obviously stocks of this kind are attractive to buy and to own, provided the price paid is not excessive. The problem lies there, of

* Today’s defensive investor should probably insist on at least 10 years of
continuous dividend payments (which would eliminate from consideration
only one member of the Dow Jones Industrial Average—Microsoft—and
would still leave at least 317 stocks to choose from among the S & P 500
index). Even insisting on 20 years of uninterrupted dividend payments would
not be overly restrictive; according to Morgan Stanley, 255 companies in
the S & P 500 met that standard as of year-end 2002.
† The “Rule of 72” is a handy mental tool. To estimate the length of time an
amount of money takes to double, simply divide its assumed growth rate
into 72. At 6%, for instance, money will double in 12 years (72 divided by
6 = 12). At the 7.1% rate cited by Graham, a growth stock will double its
