
News
News can be divided into two types: the unexpected and the scheduled.
Unexpected news developments—whether political, economic, financial, or
just plain newsworthy—can exert a massive tug on the forex markets. As the
news itself is unexpected, sometimes, so too is the response. When the story
of the 2011 earthquake in Japan first broke, the yen should have plummeted.
On the contrary, the Japanese yen rose to a record high as investors bet that
Japanese insurance companies would need to repatriate massive amounts of
yen to fund the country’s rebuilding efforts. This theory was quickly
abandoned, however, and the yen sank. Less than a week later, the world’s
major central banks announced a (surprise) historic intervention on behalf of
the yen, and the yen immediately fell by 5% in a single trading session.

81

82

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?

Figure 3-17. USD/JPY: market response to 2011 earthquake

On the other hand, the release of most economic indicators takes place in
accordance with a fixed schedule—not the whims of statisticians. Given the
dozens of indicators that are released every day, it would be impossible for
the market to pay heed to all of them, especially since some are bound to be
contradictory. As for the handful that are deemed important, they will be
watched with bated breath. Investors will typically take up speculative
positions in advance of scheduled news releases and, immediately following,
it’s not uncommon for large price swings to occur as the implications of the
data are priced in. It matters not whether the data point was inherently good
or bad, but rather how it compared to expectations. For example, if US GDP
growth was measured at an amazing 5% but the consensus estimate was for
growth of 6%, the dollar could very well fall!
With both types of news, the market has a propensity to overshoot, hence the
expression, “Buy the rumor, sell the news.” The implication is that (forex)
market investors can get carried away, both before and after news releases. In
fact, overshooting is such a common phenomenon that economists have
incorporated it into exchange rate theory. Consider a central bank that cuts
interest rates, for example. In order to maintain short-term equilibrium, it
could be argued that it is in fact necessary for the spot rate to rise faster than
the forward rate. As prices rise over time (due to the interest rate cut), the
spot rate should slowly converge with the forward rate.

Correlations
Powerful correlations abound in the forex markets. As I explained in Chapter
2, the most precise correlations are in cross-rates. Since the dollar (and a
handful of other major currencies) tends to drive the forex markets, many

Forex for Beginners
cross-rates tend to move only insofar as to eliminate triangular arbitrage with
the US dollar. In other words, the THB/BRL rate is probably not fluctuating
independently because there is not enough direct transfer of Thai baht for
Brazilian real. In this case, understanding the THB/BRL rate is as simple as
obtaining quotes for the USD/BRL and USD/THB and simply calculating the
cross-rate.
There are also plenty of instances in which a comparatively unimportant
currency will take its cues from a related, more liquid currency. Or both
currencies might have similar fundamental profiles and move in tandem. The
Australian dollar and the New Zealand dollar are certainly correlated.
Emerging market currencies, especially those in the same region, tend to
mirror each other. The Mexican peso and the Brazilian real have come to
epitomize this kind of relationship, as seen in Figure 3-18.

Figure 3-18. Tight correlation between MXP and BRL

There are also correlations between the forex markets and other financial
markets. Sometimes, the USD/EUR will take its cues from equity markets,
which are a good proxy for investor risk appetite. So-called commodity
currencies may closely track prices for a specific commodity. The
performance of the South African rand, for instance, may mirror the price of
gold, while Australian dollar and Canadian dollar speculators have been
known to take their cues from a broad basket of commodity prices
(Figure 3-19).

83

84

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?

Figure 3-19. AUD/USD mirrors commodity prices

Risk-Driven Trading
Over the last decade, a trend toward risk-based speculation has taken shape.
For example, in the years leading up to the 2008 financial crisis, the carry
trade had begun to define the forex markets. Speculators bought highyielding currencies against low-yielding currencies and pocketed the interest
rate spread. In order for this trade to be profitable, however, the underlying
exchange rate needed to remain basically stable. That’s because extreme
fluctuations make carry trades too risky, and in the worst case scenario, they
can completely wipe out returns.
With the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the inception of the global credit
crisis, an opposing trend immediately took hold; investors flocked to the least
risky assets denominated in the lowest-yielding (and theoretically least risky)
currencies—the yen, franc, and dollar. When stability returned to the
financial markets, investors were quick to transfer funds out of these
proverbial safe havens and back into higher-yielding currencies. Whenever
there was a minor crisis and/or a sudden uptick in volatility, the movement of
funds went into reverse. This cause-and-effect relationship has persisted
today, as is depicted in Figure 3-20. Here, it can be seen that rising/spiking
(falling) volatility in the forex markets often precedes an appreciation
(depreciation) in the Japanese yen.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 3-20. Volatility fluctuations and JPY/USD

Conclusion
All of the theoretical and observed forces that I introduced in this chapter go
part of the way toward explaining the fluctuations in forex markets.
However, economists have yet to come up with a unified framework that
takes all of these variables into account. The literature is filled with
contradictions (as are the theories themselves) and studies of explanatory
power have yielded conflicting results.
That’s not altogether surprising. The forex markets are dynamic and
complex, and no one would expect a solitary variable to be capable of
explaining all fluctuations, both large and small. From my point of view, it’s
only necessary to be aware of the handful of factors that are dominating the
narrative at any given time, particular to the currency pair, time horizon, and
strategy that one has chosen.

85

CHAPTER

4
Forex
Analysis
An Introduction and Comparison
of Fundamental and Technical
Analysis
By this point, you should have a thorough understanding of the different
instruments and currencies that are available to you as a forex investor. You
should also be familiar with the dynamic forces that cause currencies to rise
and fall against one another over time. The logical next step, then, is to apply
this knowledge toward the development of both a personalized approach to
analyzing currencies and, ultimately, a trading strategy.

Analytical Schools of Thought
The distinction between so-called fundamental analysis and technical
analysis—which I alluded to in the introduction to this book—represents the
most important dividing line in forex strategy. Fundamental analysts concern
themselves with content while technical analysts focus primarily on charts.
Fundamental factors range from the economic to the financial to the political,
most of which were outlined in Chapter 3. Technicals refer to the patterns
inherent in price movements, some of which can be discerned visually and
others that are revealed only with the aid of computers.

88

Chapter 4 | Forex Analysis
This distinction can also be seen in terms of the external and the internal.
Fundamental analysts are partial to the former; they posit that fluctuations in
exchange rates are the result of phenomena that exist outside of the currency
markets. Their goal is to ascertain both the relationships that exist between
exchange rates and the complex macroeconomic forces that drive them.
Technical analysts, in contrast, operate entirely within the foreign exchange
market and view present exchange rates purely in terms of past rates, and
future rates in terms of present rates. They see the currency market as a selfcontained system and presume that all fluctuations are primarily the result of
patterned buying and selling. The broader factors that drive participants to
buy and sell are viewed as irrelevant or even unknowable.
For example, a fundamental analyst might observe that the euro is rising
against the US dollar and attribute this to changes in comparative inflation
and interest rates. A technical analyst, meanwhile, is content to merely
identify the uptrend in the EUR/USD. In constructing a strategy, the
fundamental analyst must apply his hypothesis to the future and develop a
forecast as to how changes in the fundamental variables that he has identified
will drive proportional changes in the EUR/USD. The technical analyst uses
both visual and quantitative analysis to determine if the trend is substantial,
and whether it is likely to continue.
Another crucial difference between the two types of analysis is the
corresponding time horizon that their practitioners typically adopt. Technical
analysts focus their microscopes on extremely short time intervals, from days
to hours to mere minutes. While technical analysts will concede the existence
of long-term price patterns, the majority operates solely within the realm of
the short term and effectively fit the profile of day traders. Fundamental
analysts prefer to see changes in prices unfolding over weeks, months, and
years. Macroeconomic and monetary variables tend to fluctuate in
accordance with long-term business cycles of 5–10 years, and exchange rates
are perceived to fluctuate accordingly.
In Chapters 5, 6, and 7, I will offer more concrete examples and strategies,
but for now, I simply want to clarify this distinction.

Trading vs. Investing
Fundamental analysis and technical analysis are not mutually exclusive, but
in fact are two sides of the same coin. A trend in prices can be seen in terms

Forex for Beginners
of past prices, or it can be seen in terms of external variables. The ultimate
goal of both types of analysis is to identify such trends, forecast their
direction, and profit from them.
In practice, forex traders tend to practice either technical or fundamental
analysis exclusively. This isn’t to say that technical analysts won’t have any
idea of what’s happening macroeconomically, or that fundamental analysts
can’t recognize that a long-term fundamental trend has been interrupted by a
short-term counter-trend. Rather, the point is that speculators in the forex
markets tend to fall very clearly on one side of the line that divides
fundamental analysis from technical analysis.
As I intimated in the introduction, most forex participants would call
themselves traders. They operate over very short time horizons. Positions
remain open for a few minutes or a few hours and span multiple days only on
rare occasions. They trade at very specific price points and have equally
specific profit goals and limits to the amount of losses that they will accept.
Positions are monitored constantly. Leverage of 10 times or greater is a de
facto requirement. They stay out of the market when there is a major news
release and are indifferent to the direction of a trend, as long as they are sure
that it exists. Above all, they are technical analysts. They spend hours
scrutinizing charts. The best traders memorize dozens of price formations
with obscure Japanese names. Trends are confirmed using a handful of
quantitative indicators, without any input from economic variables.
A small portion of forex participants fall under the heading of investors, with
a time horizon measured in weeks or months or longer. Only under extreme
circumstances would a position be opened and closed on the same day. Forex
investors have higher profit hurdles, measured in hundreds of PIPs. As a
result, they are also typically prepared to accept paper losses in the short
term. Positions are checked a couple times a day at most for the purpose of
fine-tuning strategy. Leverage is ultimately unnecessary, though it can be
employed on a modest scale if it’s consistent with one’s particular strategy.
Most importantly, investors are usually fundamental analysts. Forex
investors won’t blindly trade a trend unless they think that they have an idea
as to what’s causing it. Quantitative measurements of trend strength are less
important than identifying the financial economic variables that underlie said
trend.

89

90

Chapter 4 | Forex Analysis
You can see then that investors and traders are very different. The analytical
prisms through which they view the forex markets drive very different
approaches to trading.

Where Do You Fit In?
It seems silly to ask you to decide, once and for all, whether you are a trader
or an investor, especially because there is some synergy between the two. At
the same time, I think it’s important to determine which type of analysis you
find more attractive and, consequently, which approach to forex is most
appropriate for you.
For now, why not at least acknowledge your knee-jerk reaction? Did you
enjoy the discussion of the macroeconomic variables in Chapter 3? Are you
eager to untangle the fuzzy connections that exist between financial markets
and fundamental variables? Are you a big-picture thinker that likes to
theorize about how everything fits together? Simply, do you enjoy the study
of economics, reading economic reports, etc.? If so, then you are probably a
fundamental analyst.
On the other hand, perhaps you found the first half of Chapter 3 arcane and
boring. Did your eyes gloss over during the discussion of interest rate parity
and capital flows? Are you skeptical that the fundamental connections
between economic fundamentals and exchange rates can be discerned with
any accuracy, if they exist at all? Are you the kind of person that enjoys
looking for patterns in information sets? Do you have a quantitative mind? If
so, then you are probably a technical analyst.
One’s chosen approach to analysis must also be consistent with personality
and trading strategy. For example, are you attracted to the fast pace of the
forex markets, or are you more interested in watching trends slowly unfold?
Are you impulsive? Patient? Which currencies are you interested in trading?
What are your profit goals? Are you seeking a supplemental income or a
padded retirement account? What is your tolerance for risk? How much time
do you plan to devote to trading forex? Do you intend for it to be a hobby or
a full-time pursuit? How much equity capital are you prepared to commit?
You can work backwards from your answers to these questions to determine
which type of analysis is more suitable for you. If you have a few hours a
week, $5,000, and you are looking to diversify an existing financial portfolio,
you’re almost certainly an investor. If you intend to pour all of your savings

Forex for Beginners
into forex (which, incidentally, is not really advisable) and plan to spend
every night after work parked at your computer; if you would get bored by a
slow market and would call yourself impatient; if you are comfortable with
competition and attracted to leverage, then you are a trader.

Superior Efficacy of Fundamental Analysis
I am often asked the question, “Which type of analysis is better: technical
analysis or fundamental analysis?” As I explained in the introduction, I am
personally inclined toward fundamental analysis, due primarily to what I
believe is its superior efficacy. The fact of the matter is that there are
demonstrable and observable connections between exchange rates and
underlying economic data. Sometimes, these relationships are only obvious
in hindsight. Other times, they are plagued by contradictions and manifest
themselves in counterintuitive ways. They disappear frequently, and reappear
just as frequently.
However, exchange rates do not behave arbitrarily, appearances aside.
Significant movements are closely correlated with actual, perceived, or
expected changes in underlying fundamentals. Those who are able to
correctly discern these connections will be rewarded for their efforts, both
financially and intellectually.
Unlike technical analysis, fundamental analysis doesn’t become less
profitable when competition increases. If market dynamics are such that
rising interest rates are causing a currency to rise proportionately, this
relationship will not be undone if too many people are aware of it. On the
contrary, it will become even stronger. If too many traders detect the
emergence of a technical trend, on the other hand, it may be arbitraged away
before it can fully emerge.
That’s not to say that technical analysis can’t be profitable. On the contrary,
for a small minority of traders it can be tremendously profitable. From the
standpoint of its practitioners, its appeal lies in its economy (no pun
intended). While fundamental analysis posits airy connections between
economic variables and exchange rates, technical analysts purport to operate
in a more scientific realm. Trades are not based on whims, but on
quantifiable and observable patterns in prices. Trends are confirmed based on
concrete principles, and trades are executed only when quantitative indicators
support them.

91

92

Chapter 4 | Forex Analysis
In addition, the forecasting power of technical analysis is often self-fulfilling.
For example, if every trader expected the EUR/USD to plunge when it hit the
psychotically important level of $1.50, then a flurry of anticipatory sell
orders would all but ensure such a result. In addition, if a steep rally in a
currency pair brought the rate well above what fundamentals justified, it
would probably be reflected in various technical indicators. Technical
analysts would respond by selling the pair, and a correction would become
self-fulfilling.
Perhaps the strongest argument in favor of technical analysis is that it is
flexible and broadly applicable to most asset and securities markets. By now,
you must have realized that if you fancy yourself as a fundamental analyst,
you will need to learn a unique framework for analyzing currencies. Throw
out everything you learned about the stock market and the bond market, and
start from scratch. On the other hand, if you were a technical analyst in your
previous life as a commodities trader, making the transition to trading
currencies should be fairly uneventful. That’s not to say that you won’t need
to spend some time acquainting yourself with the peculiarities of forex. At
the very least, though, you don’t need to learn an entirely new analytical
approach.
As will become clear in Chapter 6, however, technical analysis can be quite
arbitrary. It is impossible to devise cut-and-dried trading rules since market
conditions are always changing, and since patterns that repeat themselves are
likely to be arbitraged away. An exchange rate is unlikely to behave in
exactly the same way over time, despite what technical indicators may imply.
In fact, most technical analysts will admit that their goal is to merely be right
60% of the time. After taking transaction costs (spreads) into account, this
implies that it can only be slightly more accurate than the flip of a coin.
In addition, technical analysis is intellectually unsatisfying. Why is the euro
rising against the dollar? Because fear has reached an apex and greed is
rising, of course! As an explanation, this is only slightly more profound than
the notion that supply exceeds demand, or vice versa. While this might in
fact be relevant within the scope of technical analysis, it lacks punch.
Personally, I would feel much more comfortable betting on a rising euro if I
understood that it was being driven by changes in specific economic
variables, rather than by the abstract idea that it was previously “oversold.” It
reminds me of Plato’s Allegory of the Cave: technical analysts are chained to
the wall and see only the shadows—the prices—while fundamental analysts

Forex for Beginners
live in reality and try to see what’s actually causing those shadows. But I
digress.
Most importantly, the recent track record of technical analysis does not
inspire much confidence. According to publicly available data, only 25% of
retail forex accountholders earn a profit in any given quarter. (This figure
ranges from 20%–40%, by quarter and by broker. If the same survey were
conducted on an annual basis, the overall figure would no doubt be even
lower!) Given that the overwhelming majority of accountholders are day
traders, this does little to boost the case for technical analysis.
This fact was reinforced by a 2011 Federal Reserve Bank research paper
titled “Technical Analysis in the Foreign Exchange Market.”1 The paper
compared the results of nearly 100 academic studies from the modern
financial era and came to the following conclusion: “Technical Trading Rule
profitability has been declining since the late 1980s. . . . Major currencies no
longer trend reliably but markets in newly trading currencies appear to
display some profit opportunities from technical rules. This finding suggests
that traders in major currency markets have arbitraged away technical
patterns but those patterns still exist in emerging markets.” As a result of the
“financial arms race,” profits inure to those with the fastest computers and
smartest algorithms: “The excess returns to relatively simple rules based on
filters or moving averages had disappeared by the early 1990s, but returns to
more complex or sophisticated rules have persisted.”
Technical analysts should be alarmed by these conclusions. Where
competition is high (for major currencies), technical trading rules tend to be
unprofitable. The same can apparently be said for trading rules that are too
simplistic. The implications are straightforward enough: to earn consistent
profits in technical analysis, you should stick to obscure corners of the
market (where spreads are higher) and/or develop more complex trading
rules.

1 Christopher J. Neely and Paul A. Weller, “Technical Analysis in the Foreign Exchange

Market” (Working Paper 2011-001B, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January 2011),
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1734836.

93

94

Chapter 4 | Forex Analysis

Blending Technical and Fundamental
Analysis
Ultimately, I think the smartest strategies should incorporate aspects from
both schools of thought. Technical and fundamental analysis alike can claim
concrete strengths and weaknesses. Whether they are effective at any given
time depends on prevailing market conditions, one’s time horizon for
investing, etc. Let’s face it: exchange rates are influenced by both technical
and fundamental factors, and investors that focus exclusively on one type of
analysis do so at their peril.
In Chapter 7, I will introduce a strategic approach to currency investing that
is based on both types of analysis. For the sake of simplicity, I will first
introduce each one separately, beginning with fundamental analysis.
