 Who could have had a greater advantage than yours truly, sitting in an office at Fidelity during the boom in financial services and in the mutual funds? This was my chance to make up for missing Pebble Beach. Perhaps I can be forgiven for that incredible asset play. Golf and sailing are my summer hobbies, but mutual funds are my regular business. 
 I’d been coming to work here for nearly two decades. I know half the officers in the major financial-service companies, I follow the daily ups and downs, and I could notice important trends months before the analysts on Wall Street. You couldn’t have been more strategically placed to cash in on the bonanza of the early 1980s. 
 The people who print prospectuses must have seen it—they could hardly keep up with all the new shareholders in the mutual funds. The sales force must have seen it as they crisscrossed the country in their Winnebagos and returned with billions in new assets. The maintenance services must have seen the expansion in the offices at Federated, Franklin, Dreyfus, and Fidelity. The companies that sold mutual funds prospered as never before in their history. The mad rush was on. 
 Fidelity isn’t a public company, so you couldn’t invest in the rush here. But what about Dreyfus? Want to see a chart that doesn’t stop? The stock sold for 40 cents a share in 1977, then nearly $40 a share in 1986, a 100-bagger in nine years, and much of that during a lousy stock market. Franklin was a 138-bagger, and Federated was up fiftyfold before it was bought out by Aetna. I was right on top of all of them. I knew the Dreyfus story, the Franklin story, and the Federated story from beginning to end. Everything was right, earnings were up, the momentum was obvious (see chart).

One Up on Wall Street 

 How much did I make from all this? Zippo. I didn’t buy a single share of any of the financial services companies; not Dreyfus, not Federated, not Franklin. I missed the whole deal and didn’t realize it until it was too late. I guess I was too busy thinking about Union Oil of California, just like the doctors. 
 Every time I look at the Dreyfus chart, it reminds me of the advice I’ve been trying to give you all along: Invest in things you know about. Neither of us should let an opportunity like this one pass us by again, and I didn’t. The 1987 market break gave me another chance with Dreyfus (see Chapter 17 ). 
 The list below is only a partial record of the many tenbaggers I’ve either neglected to buy or sold too soon during the period I’ve managed Magellan. With a few of them I got a small part of the gain, and with others I managed to lose money through bad timing and fuzzy thinking. You’ll notice the list goes only up to m, but that’s only because I got tired of writing them down. This being an incomplete account, you can imagine how many opportunities must be out there.

One Up on Wall Street 

 * Throughout the day I’m constantly referring to stock charts. I keep a long-term chart book close to my side at the office, and another one at home, to remind me of momentous and humbling occurrences. 
 What most people get out of family photo albums, I get out of these wonderful publications. If my life were to flash before my eyes, I bet I’d see the chart of Flying Tiger, my first tenbagger; of Apple Computer, a stock I rediscovered thanks in part to my family; and Polaroid, which makes me remember the new camera that my wife and I took on our honeymoon. That was back in a more primitive era, when we had to let the film develop for sixty seconds before we could see the picture. Since neither of us had a watch, Carolyn used her physiology training and counted out the seconds with her pulse.

One Up on Wall Street 

 7 
 I’ve Got It, I’ve Got It—What Is It? 
 However a stock has come to your attention, whether via the office, the shopping mall, something you ate, something you bought, or something you heard from your broker, your mother-in-law, or even from Ivan Boesky’s parole officer, the discovery is not a buy signal. Just because Dunkin’ Donuts is always crowded or Reynolds Metals has more aluminum orders than it can handle doesn’t mean you ought to own the stock. Not yet. What you’ve got so far is simply a lead to a story that has to be developed. 
 In fact, you ought to treat the initial information (whatever brought this company to your attention) as if it were an anonymous and intriguing tip, mysteriously shoved into your mailbox. This will keep you from buying a stock just because you’ve seen something you like, or worse, because of the reputation of the tipper, as in: “Uncle Harry’s buying it, and he’s rich, so he must know what he’s talking about.” Or: “Uncle Harry’s buying it, and so am I, because his last stock tip doubled.” 
 Developing the story is really not difficult: at most it will take a couple of hours. In the next few chapters I’m going to tell you how I do it, and where you can find the most useful sources of information. 
 It seems to me that this homework phase is just as important to your success in stocks as your previous vow to ignore the short-term gyrations of the market. Perhaps some people make money in stocks without doing any of the research I’ll describe, but why take unnecessary chances? Investing without research is like playing stud poker and never looking at the cards. 
 For some reason the whole business of analyzing stocks has been made to seem so esoteric and technical that normally careful consumers invest their life savings on a whim. The same couple that spends the weekend searching for the best deal on airfares to London buys 500 shares of KLM without having spent five minutes learning about the company. 
 Let’s go back to the Houndsteeth. They fancy themselves to be smart consumers, even going so far as to read the labels on pillowcases. They compare the weights and prices on the boxes of laundry soap to find the best buy. They calculate the watts-per-lumen of competing light bulbs, but all of their savings are dwarfed by Houndstooth’s fiascoes in the stock market. 
 Isn’t that Houndstooth over there in his recliner, reading the Consumer Reports article on the relative thickness and absorbency of the five popular brands of toilet paper? He’s trying to figure out whether or not to switch to Charmin. But will he give equal time to reading the annual report of Procter and Gamble, the company that makes the Charmin, before he invests $5,000 in the stock? Of course not. He’ll buy the stock first and later toss the Procter and Gamble annual report into the garbage can. 
 The Charmin syndrome is a common affliction, but it’s easily cured. All you have to do is put as much effort into picking your stocks as you do into buying your groceries. Even if you already own stocks, it’s useful to go through the exercise, because it’s possible that some of these stocks will not and cannot live up to your expectations for them. That’s because there are different kinds of stocks, and there are limits to how each kind can perform. In developing the story you have to make certain initial distinctions. 
 WHAT’S THE BOTTOM LINE? 
 Procter and Gamble is a good illustration of what I’m talking about. Remember I mentioned that L’eggs was one of the two most profitable new products of the 1970s. The other was Pampers. Any friend or relative of a baby could have realized how popular Pampers were, and right on the box it says that Pampers are made by Procter and Gamble. 
 But on the strength of Pampers alone, should you have rushed out to buy the stock? Not if you’d begun to develop the story. Then, in about five minutes, you would have noticed that Procter and Gamble is a huge company and that Pampers sales contribute only a small part of the earnings. Pampers made some difference to Procter and Gamble, but it wasn’t nearly as consequential as what L’eggs did for a smaller outfit such as Hanes. 
 If you’re considering a stock on the strength of some specific product that a company makes, the first thing to find out is: What effect will the success of the product have on the company’s bottom line? Back in February of 1988, I recall, investors got very enthused about Retin-A, a skin cream made by Johnson & Johnson. Since 1971 this cream had been sold as an acne medicine, but a recent doctors’ study suggested it might also fight skin blots and blemishes caused by the sun. The newspapers loved this story, and headline writers called it the anti-aging cream, and the “wrinkle-fighter.” You would have thought that Johnson & Johnson had discovered the Fountain of Youth. 
 So what happens? Johnson & Johnson stock jumps $8 a share in two days (January 21–22, 1988), which adds $1.4 billion in extra market value to the company. In all this hoopla the buyers must have forgotten to notice that the previous year’s sales of Retin-A brought in only $30 million a year to Johnson & Johnson, and the company still faced further FDA review on the new claims. 
 In another case, which happened about the same time, investors did better homework. A new medical study reported that an aspirin every other day might reduce the risk of men’s getting heart attacks. The study used the Bufferin brand of aspirin made by Bristol-Myers, but Bristol-Myers stock hardly budged, moving up just 50 cents per share to $42⅞. A lot of people must have realized that domestic Bufferin sales last year were $75 million, less than 1.5 percent of Bristol-Myers’s total revenues of $5.3 billion. 
 A somewhat better aspirin play was Sterling Drug, maker of Bayer aspirin, before it was bought out by Eastman Kodak. Sterling’s aspirin sales were 6.5 percent of its total revenues, but close to 15 percent of the company’s profits—aspirin was Sterling’s most profitable product. 
 BIG COMPANIES, SMALL MOVES 
 The size of a company has a great deal to do with what you can expect to get out of the stock. How big is this company in which you’ve taken an interest? Specific products aside, big companies don’t have big stock moves. In certain markets they perform well, but you’ll get your biggest moves in smaller companies. You don’t buy stock in a giant such as Coca-Cola expecting to quadruple your money in two years. If you buy Coca-Cola at the right price, you might triple your money in six years, but you’re not going to hit the jackpot in two. 
 There’s nothing wrong with Procter and Gamble or Coca-Cola, and recently both have been excellent performers. But you just have to know these are big companies so you won’t have false hopes or unrealistic expectations. 
 Sometimes a series of misfortunes will drive a big company into desperate straits, and, as it recovers, the stock will make a big move. Chrysler had a big move, as did Ford and Bethlehem Steel. When Burlington Northern got depressed, the stock dropped from $12 to $6 and then climbed back to $70. But these are extraordinary situations that fall into the category of turnarounds. In the normal course of business, multibillion-dollar enterprises such as Chrysler or Burlington Northern, DuPont or Dow Chemical, Procter and Gamble or Coca-Cola, simply cannot grow fast enough to become tenbaggers. 
 For a General Electric to double or triple in size in the foreseeable future is mathematically impossible. GE already has gotten so big that it represents nearly one percent of the entire U.S. gross national product. Every time you spend a dollar, GE gets almost a penny of it. Think of that. In all the trillions spent annually by American consumers, nearly a penny of every dollar goes to goods or services (light bulbs, appliances, insurance, the National Broadcasting Corporation [NBC], etc.) provided by GE. 
 Here is a company that has done everything right—made sensible acquisitions; cut costs; developed successful new products; rid itself of bumbling subsidiaries; avoided getting suckered into the computer business (after selling its mistake to Honeywell)—and still the stock inches along. That’s not GE’s fault. The stock can’t help but inch along since it’s attached to such a huge enterprise. 
 GE has 900 million shares outstanding, and a total market value of $39 billion. The annual profit, more than $3 billion, is enough to qualify as a Fortune 500 company on its own. There is simply no way that GE could accelerate its growth very much without taking over the world. And since fast growth propels stock prices, it’s no surprise that GE moves slowly as La Quinta soars. 
 Everything else being equal, you’ll do better with the smaller companies. In the last decade you’d have made more money on Pic ’N’ Save than on Sears, although both are retail chains. Now that Waste Management is a multibillion-dollar conglomerate, it will probably lag behind the speedy new entries in the waste-removal field. In the recent comeback of the steel industry, shareholders in the smaller Nucor have fared better than shareholders in U.S. Steel (now USX). In the earlier comeback of the drug industry, the smaller SmithKline Beckman outperformed the larger American Home Products. 
 THE SIX CATEGORIES 
 Once I’ve established the size of the company relative to others in a particular industry, next I place it into one of six general categories: slow growers, stalwarts, fast growers, cyclicals, asset plays, and turnarounds. There are almost as many ways to classify stocks as there are stockbrokers—but I’ve found that these six categories cover all of the useful distinctions that any investor has to make. 
 Countries have a growth rate (the GNP), industries have a growth rate, and so does an individual company. Whatever the entity, “growth” means that it does more of whatever it does this year (make cars, shine shoes, sell hamburgers) than it did last year. President Eisenhower once said that “things are more like they are now than they ever were before.” That’s a pretty good definition of economic growth. 
 Keeping track of the growth rates of industry is an industry in itself. There are endless charts, tables, and comparisons. With individual companies it’s a little trickier, since growth can be measured in various ways: growth in sales, growth in profits, growth in earnings, etc. But when you hear about a “growth company,” you can assume that it’s expanding. There are more sales, more production, and more profits in each successive year. 
 The growth of an individual company is measured against the growth of the economy at large. Slow-growing companies, as you might have guessed, grow very slowly—more or less in line with the nation’s GNP, which lately has averaged about three percent a year. Fast-growing companies grow very fast, sometimes as much as 20 to 30 percent a year or more. That’s where you find the most explosive stocks. 
 Three of my six categories have to do with growth stocks. I separate the growth stocks into slow growers (sluggards), medium growers (stalwarts), and then the fast growers—the superstocks that deserve the most attention. 
 T HE S LOW G ROWERS 
 Usually these large and aging companies are expected to grow slightly faster than the gross national product. Slow growers didn’t start out that way. They started out as fast growers and eventually pooped out, either because they had gone as far as they could, or else they got too tired to make the most of their chances. When an industry at large slows down (as they always seem to do), most of the companies within the industry lose momentum as well. 
 Electric utilities are today’s most popular slow growers, but throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s the utilities were fast growers, expanding at over twice the rate of GNP. They were successful companies and great stocks. As people installed central air conditioning, bought big refrigerator/freezers, and generally ran up their electric bills, electricity consumption became a high-growth industry, and the major utilities, particularly in the Sunbelt, expanded at double-digit rates. In the 1970s, as the cost of power rose sharply, consumers learned to conserve electricity, and the utilities lost their momentum. 
 Sooner or later every popular fast-growing industry becomes a slow-growing industry, and numerous analysts and prognosticators are fooled. There’s always a tendency to think that things will never change, but inevitably they do. Alcoa once had the same kind of go-go reputation that Apple Computer has today, because aluminum was a fast-growth industry. In the twenties the railroads were the great growth companies, and when Walter Chrysler left the railroads to run an automobile plant, he had to take a cut in pay. “This isn’t the railroad, Mr. Chrysler,” he was told. 
 Then cars became the fast-growth industry, and for a time it was steel, then chemicals, then electric utilities, then computers. Now even computers are slowing down, at least in the mainframe and minicomputer parts of the business. IBM and Digital may be the slow growers of tomorrow. 
 It’s easy enough to spot a slow-grower in the books of stock charts that your broker can provide, or that you can find at the local library. The chart of a slow grower such as Houston Industries resembles the topographical map of Delaware, which, as you probably know, has no hills. Compare this to the chart of Wal-Mart, which looks like a rocket launch, and you’ll see that Wal-Mart is definitely not a slow grower (see accompanying charts). 
 Another sure sign of a slow grower is that it pays a generous and regular dividend. As I’ll discuss more fully in Chapter 13 , companies pay generous dividends when they can’t dream up new ways to use the money to expand the business. Corporate managers would much prefer to expand the business, an effort that always enhances their prestige, than to pay a dividend, an effort that is mechanical and requires no imagination. 
 This doesn’t mean that by paying a dividend the corporate directors are doing the wrong thing. In many cases it may be the best use to which the company’s earnings can be put. (See Chapter 13 .) 
 You won’t find a lot of two to four percent growers in my portfolio, because if companies aren’t going anywhere fast, neither will the price of their stocks. If growth in earnings is what enriches a company, then what’s the sense of wasting time on sluggards? 
 T HE S TALWARTS 
 Stalwarts are companies such as Coca-Cola, Bristol-Myers, Procter and Gamble, the Bell telephone sisters, Hershey’s, Ralston Purina, and Colgate-Palmolive. These multibillion-dollar hulks are not exactly agile climbers, but they’re faster than slow growers. As you can see in the chart of Procter and Gamble, it’s not as flat as the map of Delaware, but it’s no Everest, either. When you traffic in stalwarts, you’re more or less in the foothills: 10 to 12 percent annual growth in earnings. 
 Depending on when you buy them and at what price, you can make a sizable profit in stalwarts. As you can see on the Procter and Gamble chart, the stock has performed well throughout the 1980s. However, if you’d bought it back in 1963, you only made fourfold on your money. Holding a stock for twenty-five years for that kind of return isn’t a very exciting prospect—since you’re no better off than if you’d bought a bond or stuck with a cash fund. 
 In fact, when anyone brags about doubling or tripling his money on a stalwart (or on any company, for that matter), your next question ought to be: “And how long did you own it?” In many instances the risk of ownership has not resulted in any advantage to the owner, who therefore took chances for nothing.

One Up on Wall Street 

 In the market we’ve had since 1980 the stalwarts have been good performers, but not the star performers. Most of these are huge companies, and it’s unusual to get a tenbagger out of a Bristol-Myers or a Coca-Cola. So if you own a stalwart like Bristol-Myers and the stock’s gone up 50 percent in a year or two, you have to wonder if maybe that’s enough and begin to think about selling. How much can you expect to squeeze out of Colgate-Palmolive? You aren’t going to become a millionaire off it the way you could have with Subaru, unless there is some startling new development you would have heard about by now. 
 Fifty percent in two years is what you’d be delighted to get from Colgate-Palmolive in most normal situations. With the stalwarts you have to consider taking profits more readily than you would with a Shoney’s, or a Service Corporation International. Stalwarts are stocks that I generally buy for a 30 to 50 percent gain, then sell and repeat the process with similar issues that haven’t yet appreciated.

One Up on Wall Street 

 I always keep some stalwarts in my portfolio because they offer pretty good protection during recessions and hard times. You can see here that during the 1981–82 period, when the country seemed to be falling apart and the stock market fell apart with it, Bristol-Myers went sideways (see chart). It didn’t do that well in the 1973–74 washout as we’ve already seen, but nothing escaped that bath, and besides, the stock was grossly overpriced at the time. In general, Bristol-Myers and Kellogg, Coca-Cola and MMM, Ralston Purina and Procter and Gamble, are good friends in a crisis. You know they won’t go bankrupt, and soon enough they will be reassessed and their value will be restored. 
 Bristol-Myers has had only one down quarter in twenty years, and Kellogg hasn’t had a down quarter for thirty. It’s no accident that Kellogg can survive recessions. No matter how bad things get, people still eat cornflakes. They may take fewer trips, postpone the purchase of new cars, buy fewer clothes and expensive knickknacks, and order fewer lobster dinners at restaurants, but they eat just as many cornflakes as ever. Maybe they eat more cornflakes, to make up for the lack of lobsters. 
 People don’t buy less dog food during recessions either, which is why Ralston Purina is a relatively safe stock to own. In fact, as I write this, my colleagues are flocking to the Kelloggs and the Ralston Purinas, since they’re all afraid of a recession right now. 
 T HE F AST G ROWERS 
