
Island formation as 3-day gap exists
from gap down on 6th day and gap
up from 9th trading day of the month.

FIGURE 5.6

Stranded on an island. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Chart Patterns

77

too far away from a trend line, they are likely to revert back to the trend
line. For example, in late May silver futures prices moved way off the trend
line formed during April and early May (Figure 5.7). When the market
blasted up to the $5.17 high in early June (also a nice example of an evening
star formation, by the way), notice how prices came back to the extended
trend line.
Trading using trend line analysis is relatively simple but, like any other
type of analysis, is not foolproof. Even if you have defined exactly where a
trend line for an uptrend will intersect with prices on the chart, prices may
not quite reach that point, leaving your order unfilled, or they may break
through a support line and just keep going down, leaving you with a loss.
Again, a reminder: Technical analysis is not an exact science. Consider
the trend line as only a guide to the direction of market prices.
One situation that deserves some discussion is the test of broken support. When long-term support lines are broken, traders usually talk about a
breakout occurring. The momentum of the market causes prices to drop dramatically, and the price decline often is exaggerated. What can happen to

FIGURE 5.7

Sticking to the trend. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

78

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

traders if they chase the market after the move has occurred is that when
they sell short, they usually get filled at the low of that move.
If you study charts and trend lines, you will see that, in most cases, the
market will try to retest the area from which it fell. In other words, once
the support line is broken, the market will try to revisit that area, and the
old support now becomes a new resistance level. The gold chart provided
as Figure 5.8 shows how prices broke the uptrend line, only to come back
to test it three days later. If you had been chasing the market, you might
be short from the $310 to the $315 area instead of waiting for that retest near $325. Look at the results shown in Figure 5.9. A double top forms
with a bearish dark candle signal, and the price fails from the retest of the
support/resistance line.
Trend line analysis is a necessary foundation tool to help identify other
chart patterns that develop from significant support and resistance price
levels. It is subjective. What I see on the charts could be completely different from what you see. But that is one facet of what makes markets. The mar-

FIGURE 5.8
permission.)

Test and retesting the trend line. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

79

Chart Patterns

Market breaks
support then
retests trend.

FIGURE 5.9

Tumble from a retest zone. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

ket will judge who is right and who is wrong. The technical analyst just wants
to follow the trend and profit from it. It is very important that you learn these
charting techniques for yourself.

Trend Channels
Trend channels are self-explanatory—the market bounces between two
parallel trend lines defined by the highs and lows that form the support and
resistance boundaries. The trick is to successfully identify the support or
resistance lines early in the channel’s development. Once they are established, traders can go long or buy near the support line or sell short or liquidate longs near resistance lines. The element of risk is that the market breaks
out from this channel or band.
Chartists can trade another method using these so-called bands: Buy
once the market breaks out above the resistance line and sell when the market breaks below the support line. Keep in mind that once the market breaks

80

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

out above or below its trading range, it generally will try to retest the original trend, as Figure 5.9, the weekly gold chart, and Figure 5.10, the S&P 500
hourly chart, illustrate.
Points A and B identify the uptrend on the S&P chart. Notice how the
market danced or bounced off the trend line from point C to point D, a great
example of the axiom, “What was once support is now resistance.”

Triangle Chart Patterns
Charts display a number of triangle patterns, which usually reflect some type
of congestion area or indecision about prices. There are three main types of
triangles: symmetrical, ascending, and descending (Figure 5.11).
The symmetrical triangle is also known as a pennant or a coiling formation as the pattern forms from a series of highs that are lower than the
preceding high and a series of lows that are higher than the preceding low.
Triangles form as the market consolidates while market participants are deciding whether to commit to a position or add to positions already established. This so-called timeout period usually involves a decline in volatility.

“D”

Last “test” of
trend line support

“C”
“B”

“A”

First break or
violation of
trend line support
Trend line drawn from points “A” to “B.”
Trend line support is broken at point “C.”
Old support now reverses role and turns
into resistance. Point “D” shows last
unsuccessful retest of the uptrend and prices
reverse downward.

FIGURE 5.10

Trending channels. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

81

Chart Patterns

Descending
triangle

Symmetrical
triangle

Ascending
triangle

FIGURE 5.11

Multiple triangles. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Ascending triangles indicate an upward bias, with a flat top and a series of higher lows. Generally, the bottom slope of the triangle coincides
with the trend or a trend to be. The example on the soybean chart (Figure
5.11), coming after an island gap and a gap higher, indicates a very strong
upside reaction could occur, which, in fact, did happen. In this case, the market was too impatient to fill in the entire triangle with price action between
the flat top resistance line and the upward sloping support line to complete
the price action to form the apex of the triangle.
Similarly, the descending triangle indicates a downward bias—a flat
bottom support off which prices bounce for a time and a series of lower
highs that come together into an apex. It also flows with the direction of the
trend or the trend to be.
As a rule, triangles are used as continuation patterns and serve as a
measuring guide for the extent of a move. The length of time it takes the
triangle or congestion area to form is regarded as the distance a market will
move once it breaks out of the triangle pattern. The more powerful breakouts seem to occur when the triangle does not entirely complete the coiling process to the apex or tip of the triangle—the market appears to be

82

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

impatient to advance or continue the move, as with the ascending triangle
on the soybean chart (Figure 5.11).
If you buy the upside breakout of a symmetrical triangle in an uptrending
market, then you should place a stop below the first low point that establishes the bottom support line. The reverse is true when you sell a downside
breakout in a downtrend.
Here is a cautionary note: Triangles, just like other techniques, are not
a completely reliable trading pattern. They do have false breakouts, and
traders need to be aware that the longer the triangle takes to form, the less
power the breakout usually has behind it. Generally speaking, based on a
daily chart time frame, triangles can take 6 to 10 trading days or up to 2
weeks to develop, occasionally even longer. They can develop on intraday
charts such as 15-minute and even 60-minute charts, and they can show up
on weekly charts.
Monthly charts occasionally show triangles, but considering the length
of time and rolling out of expired contracts in commodity markets, triangles
are not so prevalent in my research. Due to the difference of seasonal price
pressures on most commodities—harvest supply pressures for agriculture
products, for example—pricing of deferred contracts makes triangles on
monthly charts ineffective, in my opinion.

Wedge Patterns
Wedge patterns are simply longer extensions of the triangle. These patterns
often form in the direction of the trend, meaning a rising wedge would form
in an uptrend. The difference between a wedge and the triangle, in addition
to taking longer to form, is that the market trades so that prices do not form
a pattern anywhere close to the apex of the wedge.
The Eurodollar chart shown as Figure 5.12 illustrates a long-term price
wedge. The trend is up, and notice how the pattern forms with increasing
lows above support and decreasing highs below resistance. The distance of
the wedge opening added to the point of the breakout, which occurs in midApril, is the extension or measuring distance you can use to determine a
price objective. This measurement is not an absolute rule of wedges as they
can vary in length and size. If a chart pattern appears to be an elongated triangle but looks more like a flattened angle, then it is considered a wedge
formation.

Diamond Formations
Diamonds provide another measuring technique that is reliable, but they are
a rare occurrence. Most times they are considered a topping pattern, sort of
like a head-and-shoulders top. They rarely show up as bottom patterns, but

Chart Patterns

83

FIGURE 5.12

Wedge measurement. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

they can and do act as continuation patterns. When acting as a continuation
pattern, you should consider them as a bull flag except the formation takes
the shape of a diamond (Figure 5.13). The distance from the base of the
move in March to the height of the diamond was the measurement you could
have used to project the distance from the point of the breakout or the end
point of the diamond to derive a price objective.

Flag Formations
Flags are much more common than the diamond or some other formations.
Flags can be seen on five-minute to weekly charts and on rising or declining
trends. In a rising market, the base of the flag is the starting point for a substantial price advance (or decline in the case of a bear flag formation). It is
then followed by erratic and choppy downward price action that lasts for
several time periods—a consolidation period or a timeout while the market sorts out buying and selling pressure. The flag usually forms a smaller
countertrend that serves as a correction or a pause in a price trend before
prices usually continue on in the direction from which they entered the

84

FIGURE 5.13

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

Diamond measurement. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

flag formation. A flag on a daily chart can take as little as three to five days
or as long as five weeks to form as the soybean chart provided as Figure 5.14
confirms. Of course, on an intraday chart whatever time period you are
using would require at least three to five bars to form.
As a measuring technique, analysts take the distance from the bottom
of the flagpole to the top of the pole. Then take that distance and extend it
up (or down for a bear trend) from the bottom of the flag to get an idea how
far prices will move (some add the flagpole distance to the breakout point
to arrive at a price objective). Another old-time adage is that the flag flies at
half-mast—that is, it is at the halfway point of an extended move—so you
can expect prices to advance above the flag (in a bull trend) by the same
distance as they moved up below the flag.

Pennants
Pennants are in the same category as a flag formation except that the shape
of the consolidation area more closely resembles a triangle although it is

85

Chart Patterns

Measuring objective

Flagpole

FIGURE 5.14

Displaying the flag. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

slightly more condensed than the triangle. It is another portrayal of a pause
in the trend and is usually a continuation pattern.

Funnel Formations
Funnel formations are also known as foghorns in view of the market’s expanding tops and bottoms. They do not happen often and represent extremely choppy or volatile scenarios. They usually form in a series of three
waves of higher highs and lower lows. Just when you believe the market has
broken support, a rally occurs and makes higher highs. You would rather
trade later than getting in at the early stage of this formation.
Figure 5.15, a soybean chart, captures a great example of an expanding
top pattern. I numbered the highs and lows in the sequence that they occurred rather than try to identify waves to help illustrate the characteristics
of the funnel top. Point 1 establishes the first high as it breaks out and closes
higher than the currently established high back in January. Point 2 is the
secondary high of the move. Point 3 is the first reactionary low from Point

86

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

5
Measure
the height
of the
wedge

2
1

3
4

The distance from the height
of the wedge gives measurement
of price objective.

FIGURE 5.15

Expanding top means volatility. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

2. Notice that the market makes a lower low at Point 4 and then Point 5 is
a higher high than Point 2.
This pattern certainly can whipsaw a trader. Once you became convinced that support was broken at Point 4, new highs popped up. Then, just
as you thought the move could continue higher as Point 5 took out Point 2,
the market came tumbling down. Remember, volatility often marks tops and
bottoms. This formation is another way of confirming that, when the market’s trend does finally change, it usually is not a small price reversal, as the
chart illustrates. These are the types of patterns that may give a trader the
confidence to ride a trend a while longer.

Rounding Bottoms and Tops
Rounding bottom and top patterns clearly involve a longer-term trend reversal process. A market feature I heard about long ago applies here: Markets will try to scare you out or bore you out of a position. With the
rounding bottom on the gold chart shown as Figure 5.16, you can see that you

87

Chart Patterns

FIGURE 5.16

Rounding bottom: How boring! (Source: Gecko Software, Inc.

Reprinted with permission.)

could easily succumb to boredom during the gradual semicircular bottoming action.
The rounding bottom pattern can also be classified, to some degree, as
an inverted head-and-shoulders formation and is also termed a saucer bottom. The battle between bulls and bears or buyers and sellers develops over
a period of time to form this established basing action. The magnitude of
the strength and reliability that this bottom pattern carries with it depends
on the severity of the prior trend from which it developed. In other words,
after a long and continuous downtrend, the shift or change in trend captured
by a rising bottom can be a powerful reversal.
On Figure 5.16, for example, an extensive long-term decline brought
prices down below $270 before the tide began to turn and prices finally advanced toward $390, nearly a 50 percent price appreciation. The long-term
bottoming phase might certainly have distracted an investor from carrying
a long position off the bottom, which occurred in February–March 2001. The
majority of the rally did not even begin to take place until well over a year
later when prices began to edge above the lip of the saucer in 2002.

88

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

The situation illustrated in Figure 5.16 is a great example of how a market can bore you out of a position. Investors can sometimes take the attitude
that it will never move or it is in a trading range or, best of all, a better opportunity exists elsewhere. In this example, once the market finally breaks
out, several bullish patterns develop including a symmetrical triangle to support a conclusion that higher prices were still to come. To summarize, rounding bottoms or tops require time to develop, and traders have to demonstrate
patience during these basing periods as they can turn into reliable trend reversal patterns.

Opening Patterns
Many other chart patterns have been identified over the years, some complicated and some simple, and it would be impossible to cover the nuances
of all these patterns. However, let me mention a couple of short-term patterns based on the opening prices of the regular trading session (although
stock index futures trade almost around the clock, the open is considered
to be the period when trading begins at the New York Stock Exchange, 8:30
a.m. Central time). These two patterns meet two of my criteria: simplicity
and effectiveness.
Oops Signal The first is the oops trade associated with Larry Williams,
creator and developer of many trading concepts and author of a number of
trading books, who solidified his reputation as a trading legend by taking a
$10,000 account to more than $1 million in a highly publicized trading contest. The oops signal is based on trader psychology and gets its name from
a simple conclusion, “Oops, we made a mistake.”
When I interviewed Larry on my radio show, he explained that when a
broker would report to a client that the client was stopped out of a position,
the broker would say, “Oops, we lost.” Sometimes the broker would say,
“Let’s go the other way.” Then as the market turned around again, the client
would hear those famous words, “Oops, we lost again.”
The oops signal is a gap trading method that fades the direction of the
gap. When a market opens lower than the previous day’s low, a trader should
place a buy stop a few ticks above the previous day’s low, as Figure 5.17 illustrates. When a market opens higher than the previous day’s high, a trader
should place a sell stop a few ticks below the previous day’s high, as shown
in Figure 5.18.
Markets sometimes gap open in one direction as traders react to an economic report, a news event, or some other surprise factor. The outcome of
that gap is based on the opinions that are formed by the masses as traders
chase the market. Then as prices accelerate in one direction, human psychology and rationale begin to kick in. Traders come to their senses and re-

89

Chart Patterns

Higher open
Once a market
gaps lower,
place a buy stop
above the
previous day’s low.

Once a market
gaps higher,
place a sell stop
below the
previous day’s high.

Lower open

FIGURE 5.17
signal.

Oops buy

FIGURE 5.18

Oops sell

signal.

alize that the market’s price may possibly have overreacted to the initial
news or event that created the gap in the first place.
The oops signal capitalizes on this fake-out situation. What makes the
signal work is that, as traders return to a rational state and reevaluate the
impact of the event on market values, prices are susceptible to a reversal
that can move values back in the opposite direction of the gap. These reactions tend to work better in countertrend conditions—for example, taking
a sell oops signal in an uptrend.
The oops signal is like a key reversal described in Chapter 3. The market gaps higher on bullish news but fails to maintain momentum and reverses lower. If traders get suckered into a long position based on the bullish
news and then see the market head lower and below the previous day’s
close, they are likely to conclude, “Oops,” scramble out of the long position,
and maybe even sell short, compounding the force to drive prices lower.
Using a stop order to enter a position in the opposite direction of the
gap reduces the risk of a true sentiment change in the market based on supply or demand conditions. If the event produced a true change in market
value, the opening gap might be a breakaway gap condition described earlier in this chapter. A stop order would prevent you from getting in front of
this freight train that may be the start of a big move.
Figure 5.19, the mini-sized Dow futures contract, illustrates two classic
oops signals. The first one shows a higher open in an uptrend, so a countertrend sell stop was placed a few ticks below the prior day’s high. This
trade would have been a very nice position trade for approximately 400
points if the stops were managed effectively. The second oops signal occurred in a short-term downtrend, so a buy stop was placed above the prior
day’s low for another countertrend trade. If you were to hold this position
more than one day without proper stop or risk management, a nice shortterm trade could have resulted in a loss.

90

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

Sell stop
placed
below
high and
close.

Oops signal opens
higher then trades
lower.

Buy stop
placed
above
low and
close.
Oops signal opens
lower then trades
higher.

FIGURE 5.19

Profitable oops signals on mini-sized Dow futures. (Source:

FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Day session open
gives selling opportunities
for most of the trading session
and stays below the open for a
majority of the day.

FIGURE 5.20
with permission.)

Opening range breakout pattern. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

91

Chart Patterns

Opening Range Breakout A second pattern based on the open is the
opening range breakout method described by Larry Pesavento, another
master technician and trader. The opening price will be near the high or low
of the day 67 percent of the time, according to Larry. Usually it is within 10
percent of the exact high or low. This is valuable information for a day
trader, who wants to be a buyer when prices are above the opening range
and a seller when prices are below the opening range.
Figure 5.20 reveals how this concept works on a 5-minute chart of the
mini-sized Dow futures contract for December 2, 2003. Note that the market
did trade for the majority of the day below the day’s opening range, which
was near the high of the day. Figure 5.21 is a daily chart of the same contract
so you can gauge the scope of the daily range and see prior historic values.
More important as it relates to this concept, look at how many times the
open is, in fact, near the actual high or low for the day.

Tuesday’s session
sell open theory

FIGURE 5.21

Opening price relative to the day’s high or low. (Source:

FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

92

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns
