
A TRADER'S FOCUS
By highlighting some of the problems of day traders, swing traders, and
position traders, it becomes apparent that focusing on time frames in order
to define yourself as a trader may not be the most successful way. Each
of these time frames is just as capable of producing successful results as
another. They should be treated as fluid parts of a whole which can be
incorporated at any time, depending on the market's activity, rather than
artificial constraints.
Instead of fixating on various time frames, professional traders tend
to take a specialist approach. They may specialize in bonds or short selling or a particular strategy, or they may combine all three. The specialist

Some Essentials of Trading

53

approach to trading allows them to incorporate fundamental infonnation,
multiple market time frames, and a specific set of technical analysis tools.
By removing time as the definitive determinant of a trader's success,
the market dictates whether you become a day, swing, or position trader.
Specialization is liberating in its confinement and teaches you how to read
the rhythms and opportunities according to what's most appropriate, not
according to your whim. Millions of dollars have been made by stock specialists and traders in the pits in Chicago.
Instead of focusing on a time frame for trading, traders should look to
three arenas to specialize: market, buy or sell, and technique. By specializing in one or all of these areas, the time frame has a tendency to take care
of itself. The benefits of specialization far outweigh the negative of missed
opportunities.

Market Specialist
Retail traders have a tendency to watch too many markets. They want to be
involved with gold, oil, S&P 500, cocoa, lumber, euro, and so on, all at one
time. This is counterproductive. Their reasoning is that they don't want to
miss anything. They simply do not see the material difference between gold
and lumber or the euro and the yen. They are all interchangeable when it
comes to opportunity.
Two problems arise when speculation is approached in this way. The
first is that not all opportunities are created equal. By approaching gold
the same way you approach wheat, you are ignoring several key factors.
There is a difference in leverage, difference in fundamental factors, and a
difference in volatility that affects each market.
The second problem is that you will miss opportunities by trying to
watch everything at once. Computers have changed the life of the trader
tremendously. Each trade setup can be programmed and the trader can be
alerted to the setup. Unfortunately, as often happens, by the time you are
alerted to the activity the move is underway and you are effectively chasing
the market. Or you can be faced with too many choices, with little chance
of discerning which one will actually take off and which one will not. This
type of trade cherry picking can be frustrating and adds another layer of
decision making that can cause trading hesitation.
The professionals that trade in the pits of the com market trade one
thing and one thing only: com. The professionals that trade in the pits
of crude oil options only trade crude oil options. Many of them successfully earn a living focusing on one market. This can be replicated by retail traders. By focusing on one market, retail traders go from being just a
trader to a euro trader or a wheat trader or an oil trader.

54

DESIGNING THE TRAD E

By becoming a market-specific trader you liberate yourself. Much like
your current (or former) profession, there are trade journals, conferences,
magazines, and seminars designed for these specific industries. Each is a
fount of information that can give you fundamental knowledge and "public"
industry secrets that you would not have access to as an average trader
following a few signals.
Couple this additional knowledge with the prescient ability to understand a market's rhythm, solely because you trade it exclusively, and you
then begin to approach the san1e level of market savvy that professionals
have. From this level of trading comes the ability to choose a day, swing,
or position trade depending on the market's needs, not your own.

Buy or Sell Side Specialist
Who says you have to buy and sell? While it is easy to become caught
up in buying stocks, few people ever short stocks. Many stock investors
that come to futures or forex trading go to the extreme: they simply buy
and sell too much. Since longs and shorts are treated the same when it
comes to futures and forex, it is easy to get whipsawed in and out of
positions.
If a trader finds himself losing money in his long position, they he may
go short; if the short position is losing money, he then may go long. There
are no rules against this activity and what many traders find themselves
doing is chasing the markets. This constant chase generates commissions
for the brokerage, not necessarily profits.
Not all signals are created equal. In a long-trending market, is shorting
the best thing to do? In a short trending market, is buying the best thing
to do? By limiting trading activity to the market's most probable direction,
you can develop a laser-like precision in making your trading decisions.
You also learn patience.
All traders operate with a finite amount of capital. Whether it is a few
thousand or a few million dollars, successful trading can only be achieved
by limiting your trading activity to the opportunities that are most likely to
succeed, not by taking every chance that comes your way. Not all opportunities are created equal.
It is said that trading is much like playing baseball, in that the more
times at bat the more likely you are to succeed. If you swing at obviously bad pitches you will skew your batting average or even worse-strike
out-unnecessarily. The san1e can be said of trading. Taking every buy and
sell signal that comes your way is in no way superior to trading solely longs
or solely shorts.

Some Essentials of Trading

55

Technique Specialist
Many professional traders come up with one or two techniques that help
them trade the markets efficiently. The goal is to help them minimize their
losses while at the same time maximizing their opportunity to profit. Sometimes the technique will be something as simple as selling options, other
times they can be as complicated as butterfly spreads. No matter what the
technique is there are always three components.
First, a trading technique must have a built-in risk management component. Selling options, you might rely on the fact that the majority of options
that reach expiration expire worthless (approximately 75 percent). Or, on a
spread trade, you limit your downside risk to the difference between a long
and a short. Second, a trading technique must be able to be consistently applied to various trade and market setups. Finally, a trading technique takes
account of capital appreciation as secondary to capital preservation. This
is very important.
Professional traders have a fiduciary responsibility to their clients to
preserve their capital, above all else. If they fail in that responsibility it
prevents them from collecting incentive fees and will eventually halt their
trading altogether. Retail traders should not take their fiduciary responsibility to themselves any less seriously.

Which Is Better: Time Frame or SpeCialization?
There is a debate as to whether it is better to be a day trader or a swing
trader. This debate is rather futile. The market is the best determinant of
how long you should be in the markets. No one in their right mind holds on
to a losing position simply because they are swing trader, nor will they cut
off their profits right in the middle solely because they are a day trader.
Their actions would break one of the core tenets of trading, "cut your
losses and ride your profits." That's just common sense. Yet, time and time
again, traders break the only rule that makes their trading successful. This
is done solely to adhere to an artificial time constraint that the market
doesn't put on itself.
Is there any wonder that so many traders have difficulty when it comes
to trading? They want to let their profits run, but their day trading system
forces them to get out as quickly as possible. Position/trend traders insist
that the trend is their friend, but they won't cut their losses because the
trend has not "officially" changed. Time frame trading is detrimental in the
long run. No market will neatly adhere to the time frame you want to trade.
The market will do what it wants and if you are not careful enough to pay
attention to it, your trading will be more difficult than it needs to be.

56

DESIGNING THE TRADE

On the other hand, when you specialize in a particular market, market
direction, or strategy you give yourself the freedom to trade any time frame
based on a different set of criteria. You are fixated on optimizing your profits by managing your risk. Whether a 5-minute chart or a 30-day chart, you
make it infinitely easier to enter a trade and cut your losses. This is the key
benefit to choosing specialization over time frame.

Pure Trader versus Flexible Trader
If it isn't broke, don't fix it!

If you are happy and successful with the type of trading you're doing
then the techniques presented here will be helpful. The intent is not to stop
you from doing what works. The goal is to expand your horizon and make
your decision-making process more flexible, based on the markets' rhythm,
not your own.
Much confusion results when traders attempt to follow market truisms, but feel their hands are tied because of arbitrary time frames. While
being a pure trader can be an effective way to earn profits, you must decide
whether you want to make living at it or you are only looking to make extra
income. Depending on that decision, various time frames mayor may not
work for you.
Forcing yourself to be a day trader is a difficult task if you are simply looking to earn extra income during your retirement. You may want to
\ travel or take a vacation, and the moment you walk away from the screen
is the moment you stop having the market work for you.
On the other hand, if you are trying to earn a living from the markets
and are looking for monthly market trading results to pay the bill, swing
trades may take too long for you. Whatever the case, you don't have to
force yourself to be a different trader than what your lifestyle can accommodate. You can accomplish your goals regardless of the time frame, as
long as you keep your eyes on your ultimate profit-making, risk management objectives.

ESSENTIAL TRADING (;ON(;EPTS
There are very few pieces of vital information necessary to effectively use
the strategies given here. No matter what trading system or time frame you
operate in, you must be able to determine five things at any given time: entry price, loss price, profit price, trend, and counter-trend. If you are lacking anyone of these of bits of information you are better off sitting on the
sidelines.

Some Essentials of Trading

57

The simple creature that the market is, dictates that it can only move
in one of three directions at any given time; up, down, or sideways. Traders
have to figure out a way, to the best of their ability, to take advantage of
the up, down, or sideways movement. The straightforward approach of the
average retail trader requires that they buy when the market goes up, sell
when the market goes down, and stay out of the market when it moves
sideways.
The problem with the straightforward approach arises when the market doesn't follow the game plan. You go long or short, the market moves
in the opposite direction for a little while, then sideways, then back in your
direction, and finally collapses into the opposite direction. Until now, the
only response for the retail trader was to use a stop to protect them from
loss. Yet still traders lose money.
By dissecting a trade into its five core components you give yourself
the ability to exploit the market the same way that professional traders do.
You go one step beyond stop orders and the need to predict the markets.
You are capable of exploiting the entire daisy chain trading effect with
grace and ease.

Daisy Chain Trading Effect
If there is any secret to trading, it lies with how effectively you manage

margin and leverage. The typical approach to margin and leverage is to
view it as a dangerous enemy. Whether it is futures, spot forex, or options,
the fear of the leverage they provide can be paralyzing. This does not need
to be the case.
Futures, spot forex, and options were not created in a vacuum. While
they may be traded separately, it was never the intended purpose. Futures
and options, along with many more sophisticated instruments, were designed to operate as insurance for the cash market. Whether the cash market is stocks or actual gold and oil, futures and options were created to
help protect the owners from losing money.
Time and time again, throughout my books and in my seminars I talk
about the daisy chain trading effect. The cash market is protected by futures, which is protected by options, and options protect both cash and
futures markets. When the market is looked at in this way a host of opportunities open up. No longer is the leverage or margin your enemy, but a part
of your risk management plan.
This feeds directly into trading flexibility. It quickly becomes apparent that opportunities are created by combining the advantages of the
various derivatives products with each other and the cash market to maximize returns and minimize losses. In a world in which you use the various
forms of leverage and margin together you are able to buy stock shares, but

58

DESIGNING THE TRADE

guarantee that your loss won't exceed the strike price of the option, or
CFD (for my international readers) , that you have put in place to protect
yourself. You can combine spot forex trading with futures forex contracts
without batting an eye.
This is the approach that professional traders take to trading. Nothing
is sacred. You neither attempt to fixate on a time frame, nor do you artificially constrict yourself to one type of financial product. The reality is that
technical analysis can be applied in the exact same way, no matter the financial product. So there are few, if any, benefits to being just a commodity
trader, or just a forex trader, or just a stock trader.
By being aware of the daisy chain effect and then utilizing it, retail
traders develop a proactive approach to the markets. The emphasis shifts
from profits to loss management. This is a necessary shift in order to
achieve longevity in trading. Developing ways to minimize loss first allows
profits to handle themselves. This is the core of the professional trader's
approach.
Risk lU anagement Is Not the Same as Money Management Loss,
loss, loss! This is what risk management deals with. Managing your loss.
Whether you use stops, limits, or any of the other strategies given, all risk
management does is explain how you manage loss. Money management,
however, deals with how you handle your money "win, lose, or flat." There
is an essential confusion between the two topics. Money management deals
with how you treat the money in your account. Risk management deals
with what you do when faced with the risk of losing your principal and
profits.
Stipulating that the most you will risk on a trade is 5 percent or that
you will only commit one-third of your principal to the markets at any given
time are both money management rules. They have no bearing on what you
do to achieve these goals. But if you say that every time you put on a trade
you will use a stop to protect from losing 5 percent of your account value,
then you have risk management.
In this way you separate the actions you take to protect yourself from
loss, from the amount you are willing to lose. You can adjust the amount
from 5 percent to 50 percent, yet still maintain the same set of risk management strategies to get the job done. Knowing the difference is essential to
understanding how to react to the markets when your principal is affected
by sudden gains and losses.

Five Core Components of a Trade Setup
Now you have become more flexible in your trading. You no longer define
yourself in such rigid terms as day, swing, or position trader. You have

Some Essentials of Trading

59

become more of a market specialist. You have found the few markets that
you want to trade and you now find yourself open minded to the daisy
chain effect that bears on the markets you watch. Are you ready to get
started yet? Not quite.
To develop an effective risk management strategy and to fully utilize
the daisy chain effect to your benefit, you must be capable of identifying
five core pieces of data. Three of them are lumped together: entry price,
loss price, and profit price. These three prices are essential to determining
if the risk of the trade is worth the profit potential. The second two pieces
of information focus on time. It is essential to determine if you are trading with trend or the counter-trend. Which one you trade will effect the
likelihood of you achieving your profit targets and also how quickly.
Entry Price, Loss Price, and Pl'ofit Price No matter what time
frame you attempt to trade in there are only three prices that every trader
must be concerned with: the trade entry price, the loss target price, and
the profit target price. Each one of these components must be determined
in advance in order to confidently execute a trade and to decide ultimately
what to do, whether the trade is failing or is successful.
In Winning the Trading Game we covered various technical analysis
tools that help you determine how to effectively come up with the necessary entry, loss, and profit target prices. Knowing these numbers is essential to developing your flexibility as a trader and devising the proper trading
strategy to approach the market. These three numbers alone will give you
the necessary vision to determine the full potential of a trade.
As with many trading suggestions, finding key prices is simple but not
easy. Once established, they reduce your need for guess work. They become the facts and figures you use to design your trade. They illuminate
what your potential losses and profits will be. At the same time, it is not
necessary to be 100 percent perfect in choosing any of them.
It has been said that W.D. Gann had an uncanny ability for forecasting
trades. In 1909 a reporter witnessed 286 winning trades and only 22 losing
trades. This gave Gann an accuracy of 92 percent. Too many traders believe
they have to have these same types of results in order to be successful. The
reality is far from it. Of the three numbers you need to know: entry, loss,
and profit; your entry price is the least necessary.
Markets move swiftly, and while you always want to get the optimum
entry price, slippage can affect your fill. This phenomenon makes specific
entry prices unreliable. It is better to use entry price as a guideline rather
than a set-in-stone number. It is more important to know how you will
exit a trade. Knowing your potential loss exit price and your profit exit
price are essential and should not be afforded the same flexibility as the
entry price.

60

DESIGNING THE TRADE

These two prices, loss and profit, are essential in calculating your potentialloss and your potential profit. They are the best way to determine if
the trade you are thinking of taking is worth the risk. The traditionally acceptable "risk of loss rule" is the willingness to risk one to gain two. While
this equation can be effective in assisting traders in estimating what their
potential trade success could be, it rarely works out.
It is one thing to know what the numbers are; it's entirely another thing
to be able to trade those numbers properly. This flaw is not the fault of the
trader- even though traders will typically blame themselves-but more so
a fault of the tools at their disposal. The inaccuracy of using stops and limits by themselves makes it difficult to have any sense of control in your
trading. With the problem of slippage, missed opportunities of limit orders,
and the self-defeating nature of stops, they only get you out when the market has momentum against you. It is no wonder why so many traders are
frustrated with them.
With the limitations that stops and limits have, you want to minimize their overall use in your exit prices as much as possible. The more
rigid you are in dealing with your exit price, the more likely you will succeed in the long run. This is the place where more emphasis should be
placed by the trader, rather than in attempting to discover the best entry
price.

The trend and counter-trend are two more
key components that every trader must be able to successfully identify. If
you cannot determine whether you are entering a market when it is trending or counter-trending, how will you know where to place your primary
trader?
Knowing whether you are trading the trend or the counter-trend is
paramount to which entry and exit prices you choose. If you are following the trend, you will have different time expectations than if you are following a counter-trend. Trends will typically lumber and meander towards
their destination in fits and spurts, creating multiple opportunities for anyone to jump on at the appropriate pull back.
Counter-trends typically behave differently. They are swift and aggressive and are actually the retracement opportunities that develop from the
actual trend. There is fast money to make and lose during counter-trends.
While they may quickly move against the trend, they lose momentum just
as fast and turn back around to follow the overall trend once again.
At some point trends and counter-trends converge and switch places.
Where once a market moved steadily higher or lower, the countertrend emerges, acting like a quick-release pressure valve. Then something changes, typically a fundamental shift in supply or demand, which
'frend and Counter-trend

61

Some Essentials of Trading

pushes the counter-trend into new territory. It completely changes the
rhythm and tone of the markets, thereby setting up new opportunities as
the trend.
This yin/yang cycle between trends and counter-trends is important
to understand. It dictates how you interact with the markets and what
tactics you set out using in order to gain the maximum effect. This is of
monumental importance when deciding what time frame you would like to
trade in.
In the following figures there are clear examples of the interconnectedness of trend and counter-trend activities. Looking at the daily charts
of both the gold and S&P 500 we can clearly see the trends and the countertrends.
In Figure 3.1 we can see that gold has been a long-term up trend from
9/06/2007 to 03/13/2008.
In Figure 3.2 we can see that the S&P 500 is in a long term down trend
from 1010112007 to 3110/2008.
Using these same charts we can identify the counter-trends. In
Figure 3.3 we can see eight times when the market moves counter, short,
to the long-term up trend. Surprisingly, the number of days the market
moved counter-trend to the long-term trend were few. An eight-day move
in 11/2007 was the longest move of all of the counter-trends.
