me time to sell them. There were no bids. He asserted that the accounting failed us and that accounting should be more like engineering. 7 Buffett recounted how, in the dark days of the Salomon Brothers scandal, its traders were doing business with Marc Rich—who had fled the country for securities fraud! Yet the traders resisted orders to stop trading with him because they were making money at it. Buffett had to issue a specific directive to stop it. This is the sort of thing that happens in a corporate culture of greed. Munger intoned, “There is much that happens in the bowels of American business that you don’t want to know about.” Thinking About Risk Buffett noted that it’s important to think about risks, including those that have never happened before. The investment banks all had models, they had weekly risk committee meetings and they still didn’t have a clue. Buffett opined that “a chief risk officer is an employee that makes you feel good while you do dumb things.” At Berkshire, Buffett is the chief risk officer, and they spend a lot of time thinking about what could hit them out of the blue. Munger said one can see how risk adverse Berkshire is. It behaves in a way where no one will worry. There’s a double layering of safety around risk. While the crisis originated in the mortgage area, the troubles have spread to other areas. In fact, Buffett said he couldn’t remember such shock waves and the exposure of weakness of other practices like this one. Stupid things were done, and now the price must be paid. And he predicted, eventually, we will see it all again, just in a different form. Some combination of wanting to get rich, leverage and belief in the tooth fairy will generate another bubble in time. Munger noted that this was a particularly foolish mess. He asked if folks remembered that Internet-based grocery delivery business, Webvan, which he thought was a simply asinine idea. Well, he asserted, that idea was a lot smarter than the ideas cooked up in the mortgage industry. Buffett summed up that he could have more leverage at Berkshire, but for what? Why expose the company to ruin and disgrace for an extra percentage point of return? You cannot farm-out risk management. Buffett willingly accepts lower returns for being able to sleep well, whatever may come. 8 Fair Value Accounting Buffett allowed that accounting for asset values is a tough thing, though he still strongly favors fair value versus cost. The trouble with fair value can occur when the market produces prices that makes no sense. He talked about CDOs (collateralized debt obligations), which were aggregations of tranches of thousands of different mortgage claims. They were so complicated that there could be 15,000 pages to read to understand all the mortgages and tranches involved. As if that wasn’t complicated enough, there are also CDOs squared, which might be a security that comprises 50 CDOs. At 15,000 pages per CDO, one would have to read some 750,000 pages to understand one CDO squared. When you start buying securities made of tranches of other instruments, nobody knows what they’re doing. It was madness. Forcing people to mark things to market (“fair value”), valuing things like these CDOs at a 10 cent market price versus the cost of 100 cents, helps to keep management a little more honest. Munger also took a shot at Alan Greenspan, suggesting Greenspan had overdosed on Ayn Rand—adopting the belief that if things happen in a free market, they must be okay. Munger emphatically disagreed, saying that some things should be forbidden: “If we had just banned the phrase ‘this a financial innovation that reduces risk,’ we would have prevented a lot of trouble.” CDS Trouble? When asked about CDS (credit default swaps), a $60 trillion national market, Buffett felt the CDS market was not a big risk to tumble into chaos. A CDS is insurance against a company going bankrupt. While corporate default rates will rise, most of the CDS market is a zero-sum game. The losses of some will be matched by the gains of others. In contrast, when the subprime mortgages went south, real dollars were lost. With the Fed stepping in to bail out Bear Stearns, Buffett believed the odds for a CDS calamity now are low. Munger concurred. Could we have a big time mess out of CDS? Yes. But the stupidity is not as bad as in the mortgage market where skid-row bums were swept up and given easy term mortgages. What Munger did believe was bizarre was that CDS contract holders actually have a perverse incentive: they make money when corporations fail. So there could be manipulation to create corporate failures to collect on contracts. Munger believed it was insane for regulators to allow this. It is illegal to buy life insurance on people you don’t know as it creates a moral hazard (if they die, you get rich). He concluded that the CDS market is the product of a major nutcase bunch of proprietors and regulators. Buffett tallied, “Charlie 1, Invisible Hand 0.” Keep It Simple Munger asserted that Berkshire has lower due diligence expense than any other large corporation. And they have less trouble than any other large corporation. At Berkshire, they think like engineers, looking for big margins of safety. If you need an accountant to tell you about a deal, you should be the accountant and let him run the business. Buffett noted that this simplicity is a big advantage. Mars came to Berkshire because they knew no lawyers were needed. The folks at Mars knew that at Berkshire, a deal’s a deal, and the check will clear. Branded Food Companies Berkshire has long been invested in branded food companies and recently took a more than 8% stake in Kraft Foods. Buffett observed that big food companies are good businesses. They earn good returns on tangible assets. Good brands like See’s, Coke, Mars, Wrigley’s are tough to compete with. Coke now provides 1.5 billion servings a day worldwide. Since 1886, Coke has been delivering “happiness” and “refreshing” associations. These associations get implanted in people’s minds. Good branded products are often a good investment. Keep It Simple II Buffett allowed that one of their success secrets has been to focus only on those things that they figure out. If it’s a “no go,” Buffett will cut off a proposal in mid-sentence (a technique he says he learned from Charlie). If he can figure it out, he can make a decision in five minutes. A fascinating point: Buffett claims he could spend five months more on the idea, and it wouldn’t add value to his decision. Munger chimed in that they have a good “blotter out” system. They don’t waste time on certain things. 9 China Olympics Buffett was in favor of going ahead with the Olympics, believing it is a mistake to start deciding which of the 200 countries are worthy to participate. He noted that the U.S. didn’t allow women to vote for 120 years and that blacks, at one time, were considered three-fifths of a person. Munger was even more pointed, saying that distressed persons should ask themselves, “Is China more or less imperfect over the decades?” He believes China is clearly on the right track and that it is a mistake to take what you like least about something and then obsess about it. Bargains in Banks? Buffett noted that the size of a bank means little to him. What really counts is the culture. He wants a bank CEO who has risk controls in his DNA. While places like Wells Fargo, U.S. Bancorp and M&T Bank are not immune from problems, they are immune from institutional stupidity. Too many banks do crazy things by trying to do what is popular. As Maury Cohen once said, “There are more banks than bankers.” Munger noted that smaller banks are probably a good place to prospect for investment value. Buffett feigned great excitement: “That’s wildly bullish coming from Charlie! I’m gonna buy that stuff as soon as I get out of here.” Nuclear Proliferation Buffett noted that one of the greatest risks to civilization continues to be nuclear proliferation. A given percentage of the world’s 6.5 billion people will be psychotic. Thousands of years ago, the worst the demented few could do was to throw rocks. With the advance of technology came bows and arrows, then guns and cannons and, today, nuclear devices. He believes it is paramount to minimize the risk and that not much progress has been made. We should do everything possible to reduce access to materials. As Albert Einstein warned in 1945 with the advent of the A bomb, “This changes everything in the world except how men think.” Buffett said he hoped that this issue will be at the top of the next U.S. administration’s agenda. Savings Rate Somewhat surprisingly to us, Buffett suggested that the fact that the U.S. savings rate has turned negative is not necessarily a big negative for the economy. He noted that the economic value of the United States has beenincreasing for decades even without a high savings rate. With a per capita GDP of $47,000, we’re so rich we may not need to save as much. With imports exceeding exports, the world is doing the savings for us. China, with a much higher savings rate, will grow faster than us, and it probably needs to do so. Dividends No meeting would be complete without the perennial “When are you going to pay a dividend?” question. Buffett noted it has been better to retain the cash at Berkshire, where it can automatically compound. If you need cash, you can sell stock and pay capital gains tax at a lower rate than a dividend would be taxed. Munger kidded that Warren has always planned to pay a dividend in the manner of St. Augustine: “God give me chastity, but not yet.” Corporate Compensation Buffett admitted that there isn’t much the individual investor can do. What is needed is for the half-dozen largest institutional owners, in egregious cases, to withhold their votes and make statements about excessive compensation. Big shots do not like to be embarrassed. The press can help, too. An effective pressure is needed to check the self-interest of management. Munger reflected that in England, class warfare resulted in a 90% income tax rate. While it proved to be totally counterproductive, it showed how the politics of envy can ruin an economic system. Munger believes CEOs taking compensation have a moral duty not to take the last dollar. Like Supreme Court justices, they should choose to be underpaid . Buffett noted, “Envy is the worst of the seven deadly sins. It’s the only one that makes you feel worse, and the other party feels nothing. Gluttony—that has at least some temporary upside. As for lust—I’ll let Charlie speak to that.” Pharma Berkshire expanded its position in Johnson & Johnson and added shares of Sanofi in 2007. Buffett admitted that he doesn’t know much about the drug pipelines, and in five years it will all be different anyhow. In aggregate, he believes pharma is doing something enormously important, and overall, the group should have decent profits. A group approach should provide a reasonable result over five years. Munger deferred, “You have a monopoly on our joint knowledge of pharmacology.” Buffett quipped, “He gets cranky late in the day.” Keys to Good Health Buffett joked that good health starts with a balanced diet: some Coca-Cola, some See’s Candy, some Wrigley’s gum and a Mars bar. Seriously, he noted the importance of a good mental attitude, to love what you do and to do it with other people who love what they do. He said he feels blessed in so many ways, especially with great partners and great managers. It would be crazy to focus on the minuses. He also noted that he was lucky to find his passion so early in life. He recalled reading his dad’s books on investing as a boy and how that turned him on. (He joked that was before Playboy was invented.) He pointed out that it is a terrible mistake to sleepwalk through life, to just go through the motions. Ideally, you have a job that you would do for free. Surprisingly, he claimed that when he went to work for Ben Graham at the age of 24, he never even asked what his salary would be. He also noted that getting the right spouse is essential. He told the story of the man who spent 20 years looking for the perfect woman before he finally found her. Unfortunately, she was looking for the perfect man. Benefits of Public Speaking In a revealing aside, Buffett admitted that years ago he was terrified of public speaking. He got physically ill at the thought. He said he even signed up for a $100 Dale Carnegie course but cancelled the check when he got home. Later, he did a communication course in Omaha. Doing it with others in the same boat helped him to “get outside of himself.” He’s very glad he did it, noting that effective communication is under taught, and recommended that many could benefit by forcing themselves to learn public speaking at an early age. 10 Number One Investment As he has counseled on numerous occasions, Buffett suggested the best investment one can make is in oneself. He noted that few people get the maximum horsepower out of life. Potential exceeds realization for so many. When he speaks to students, he suggests they adopt the mindset of someone who is picking one car for the rest of their lives. How would they treat it? They would read the manual carefully, change the oil twice as often and clean up the rust spots. Well, each of us gets one mind and one body for life. How will you treat yours? Buffett admitted that the focus has been on the mind at Berkshire. He and Charlie didn’t bother to work too hard on the body. Munger also suggested that it is very important to learn how to avoid being manipulated by lenders and vendors. He strongly recommended Robert Cialdini’s book, Influence , for the task. He also recommended Cialdini’s newest book, Yes , noting that Cialdini is the rare social psychologist who can connect the world of theory and daily life. Read Buffett reflected that he devoured books from an early age. He spends much of his day reading books, annual reports and newspapers. Munger noted that different people learn in different ways. He too has always been an avid reader. With books, he likes that you can learn just what you want to learn and at the speed of your choosing. Buffett concluded that if you read 20 books on a subject you are interested in, you are bound to learn a lot. Legacy Buffett hopes that in the long run, Berkshire will provide decent performance for shareholders and maintain its unique culture. Buffett hopes it will be seen as the best home in the world for family businesses. Munger sees Berkshire deserving to be even more of an exemplar and sees it having even more influence on other corporations. Buffett concluded with this quip: “We also hope that Berkshire will have the oldest living managers in America. 1 Luckily for all Berkshire shareholders. 2 Note the steady increase in equities in Berkshire’s Cash/Bond/Equity Ratio (See Appedix II). 3 Berkshire has been active in the stock market, accumulating 8.6% (about $4 billion) of Kraft Foods and adding to its stakes in Burlington Northern, Wells Fargo, U.S. Bank, Johnson & Johnson and Carmax. 4 We recall how Buffett famously spoke about employee ethics at the congressional hearings of the Salomon scandal: “Lose money for the firm, and I will be understanding. Lose reputation for the firm, and I will be ruthless.” 5 In past meetings, Munger has referred to “earnings management” as evil as it pressures managers to do irrational things. 6 Almost weekly, we are reading of blowups of hedge funds levered 10:1, 20:1, and more. 7 GURF reminds us of Bob Rodriguez’s “to whom” securities, as in, when it comes time to sell, “to whom” will you sell them? 8 Ironically, this is the mindset that has produced among the very highest average rates of compounding over the past four decades. 9 Less information, when it’s the right information, is a key to good decision-making. 10 Throwing a party for 31,000 . . . yes, it is clear that young Warren has come a long, long way with his stage fright.

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 2009 Venue: Qwest Center Attendance: 35,000 or so Details About This Year:   The highlight of this year’s movie was a tongue-in-cheek skit where Buffett becomes a floor salesman for Nebraska Furniture Mart. After a miserable year of investing in 2008, the board suggests Buffett might help the company more by selling a few more mattresses. The new best-selling mattress is the “Nervous Nellie” with a special “night deposit” compartment under the mattress for storing important items. A shopper tries out the mattress and notes that “it bounces back slow.” Once the sale is made, Buffett hurries to remove his valuables from under the mattress, including some vintage Playboys. Fortune 500 Ranking: 13th Stock Price: $96,629 One dollar invested in 1964 would now be worth $7,812 . Berkshire’s per-share book value has grown from $19.46 to $84,487 (a rate of 20.3% compounded annually). The S&P 500 compounded at 8.9% annually for the same period.

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 Highlights From 2009’s Notes Negative Treasury Yields Buffett opened the meeting with an overhead. 1 The overhead was of a trade ticket dated December 18, 2008, where Berkshire sold a $5 million Treasury bill due in April of 2009 for more than its maturity value: $5,000,090.97. This means the buyer was willing to accept a negative yield. Extraordinary. Buffett quipped that the ticket was, in effect, an ad for the Nervous Nellie mattress and added that we may not see such a thing again in our lifetimes. First Quarter Earnings Buffett gave a heads up on first quarter earnings, sharing that Berkshire operating earnings were $1.7 billion down from $1.9 billion a year ago. He sees Berkshire’s insurance and utility operations doing well for 2009 as they are not all that economically sensitive. The retail and manufacturing subsidiaries have been hit hard by the recession. He noted that MidAmerican Energy’s $1 billion of operating earnings would be reinvested in utility operations. Float bumped up from $58 billion to $60 billion due to a deal with Swiss Re. Cash ended the quarter at $23 billion, though cash has since dropped to $20 billion as Berkshire invested $3 billion in a Dow Chemical convertible preferred. Debt? Equity? How About Both? You want yield? How about something in the double digits? You want appreciation? How about equity participation in some of the biggest companies in the world? Well, that’s what Buffett has done with his special deals. Buffett upped his “other” category in investments with deals combining both yields and equity kickers with Goldman Sachs ($5 billion of a 10% preferred and warrants to buy 43 million shares at $115/share), General Electric ($3 billion of a 10% preferred and warrants to buy 135 million shares at $22.25/share) and Wrigley ($6.5 billion total—$4.4 billion in 11.45% notes and $2.1 billion of 5% preferred). We note also that preferred dividends are tax-preferenced for corporations, so in the case of Goldman and GE, that 10% preferred dividend is equal to nearly a 14% interest coupon on an after-tax basis to Berkshire. 2 This is why we would guess that while Buffett and Munger agreed that the opportunities of 2008 were great, though not as compelling as the 1974–75 bear market when PEs were 4 (though interest rates were higher then), they were referring to the general market, not the unique opportunities Buffett was able to create during this meltdown. Summarizing 1974, Munger declared, “I knew I’d never get another trip to the counter like that.” Buffett said, as with hamburger, he’d rather pay ½ X than X, so he liked the lower prices. With stocks down 40% and interest rates down, stocks and bonds had to be more attractive. He noted that the corporate bond market was very disorganized. For Berkshire’s life insurance companies, they barreled into good quality corporate bonds yielding 10% or better with great call protection. Financial Literacy Buffett allowed that financial literacy is a tough sell in a world of calculators. Few can actually do the math anymore. Add in credit cards, and you’ve made it easy for people to do silly things. Munger chimed in with an anecdote about going to Vegas for his honeymoon back in 1952 at the Flamingo. There, he saw very well-dressed people who had traveled for miles to do something dumb with negative probabilities, and he thought to himself, “What a world of opportunity!” Munger added that states legalize gambling with lotteries, effectively encouraging the populace to bet against the odds. Banks Buffett and Munger were both complimentary of the government’s actions in the midst of crisis and are optimistic for the recovery of the banking system. Buffett asserted that mid-September, we were at the brink of a total meltdown throughout the financial system. There was that one weekend where Lehman went down, AIG went down and Merrill Lynch would have gone down if not acquired by the Bank of America. Under such pressure, overall, he believed the government did a good job, particularly in guaranteeing the safety of bank deposits and money market funds. Buffett spoke especially well of Wells Fargo, calling it a fabulous bank with advantages that the other large banks do not have. In particular, Wells Fargo has the lowest cost deposit base, making it the low-cost producer in the business. Buffett provided that Wells Fargo will come out of this way stronger than it went in. In a fascinating aside, Buffett shared that he was teaching a class the day Wells Fargo went under 9. Usually, he refuses to answer the old “name a stock to buy” question, but on that day, he said that “if I had to put all my net worth in one stock, I’d buy Wells Fargo.” Wells Fargo has a fabulous business model. With Wachovia, it picked up the fourth largest deposit base in America. Wells Fargo will be much better off in a couple of years because this debacle happened. Efficient Market Jab Buffett and Munger do their level best each year to debunk the efficient market hypothesis that dominates academic thinking. Buffett noted that investing is really all about laying out cash now to get more back later. Buffett joked that in 600 B.C., Aesop, who was a very smart man, though he didn’t know it was 600 B.C., he couldn’t know everything—said, “A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” That’s really it. Munger noted that a lot of spreadsheets and fancy math can lead to false precision and worse decisions. He allowed, “They teach the fancy math in business schools because . . . well, they gotta do something.” Buffett chimed in that if you taught the “bird in the hand” maxim, you would not get tenure. Rising in the priesthood requires complexity. Buffett added that this false precision only arises with very high IQs. You only need an IQ of 120 or so to be a good investor. In fact, he suggested, if you have a high IQ, keep your 120 and sell the rest. Higher math can lead you astray. The Housing Bubble Buffett noted that housing prices had risen for so long that there became an almost total belief that housing prices would never fall. They could only go up. Thus, a $20 trillion asset class, housing, out of the nation’s $50 trillion in assets became increasingly levered up. And the blame is shared by all players. Buffett pointed out that it was Congress that presided over the two largest mortgage entities in the world, Fannie Mac and Freddie Mac, and both are in receivership. As for the rating agencies, especially Moody’s, in which Berkshire owns a 20% stake, Munger noted that they are good at fancy math and, as with the man with the hammer, treated each problem like a nail. Going forward, Buffett believed the rating agencies are good businesses: there are few competitors, they affect a large segment of the economy and they don’t require much capital (though they are still very much attackable). Buffett noted that the biggest surprise may have been that so many of these AAA toxic creations ended up in the hands of the creators themselves. They drank their own Kool-Aid. Stupidity ran wild, and “everyone else was doing it” became the primary rationale. It’s hard to stop once there is such widespread industry acceptance. Real Estate California volumes are up for real estate transactions, especially in the lower to mid-priced homes, so Buffett sees some stability coming to parts of the real estate market. The new mortgages going on the books each day are much better in quality than the old ones they are replacing. Low interest rates are helping. Buffett laid out the big picture brilliantly: There are about 1.3 million new households created each year. Maybe a bit less right now with the recession. During the bubble, we were building two million new homes annually, which far outstripped the household formation rate. The current total excess in homes is about 1.5 million. The building rate has plunged to about 500,000 units annually. So if we continue to build homes at that reduced rate, we can sop up about 800,000 of the excess housing inventory annually for a couple years, and supply and demand will roughly come back into balance. Buffett quipped that we could take care of the overhang tomorrow by blowing up 1.5 million homes or accelerate household formation by having 14 year olds start marrying. However, what is happening is that we’re producing less, and eventually, the excess inventory will get absorbed. In sum, housing is more affordable, mortgage rates are low, payment terms are more sound . . . we’re on the road to healing. Four Investment Managers Buffett has four investment managers, inside and/or outside Berkshire, and each of the four did no better than the S&P 500’s 37% decline in 2008. Buffett added that he’s tolerant of that as “I didn’t cover myself with glory.” Munger added that practically every investment manager he regards highly got creamed last year. Furthermore, they don’t want a manager at Berkshire that thinks he can jump into cash and back into the market. They have excluded those types. 3 Warrenomics 101 Buffett loves to teach college students. Buffett noted that he had eight sessions last year with students from 49 different universities. His two courses, if he were to run a business school, would be 1) How to Value a Business, and 2) How to Think About Markets. That would be it. In valuing businesses, it is important to understand the language of accounting, to stay within your circle of competence, and to focus on what is meaningful and sustainable. In thinking about markets, it is important to remember that markets are there to serve you, not instruct you. The key here is emotional stability, to have an inner peace about your decisions. It is important to think for yourself and to make good decisions over time. 4 It is simple, but not easy. The key with markets is that you cannot allow yourself to be forced to sell (from using too much leverage) and that you must not sell in a panic mode, emotionally pulling the rug out from under yourself. Munger added that there is so much that is false and nutty in modern banking, investing and academia that the most one can hope for is to reduce the nonsense. If someone has an IQ of 150 but thinks it is 160, it leads to disaster. Buffett imagined himself an economics teacher, professing the efficient market hypothesis: “Everything is priced properly.” And mused, “What do you do for the rest of the hour?” And this is the stuff of Nobel Prizes! Buffett concluded with Max Plank’s observation of the inexorable evolution of science despite the strong resistance to new ideas by even the best and brightest of his peers: “Science advances one funeral at a time.” Replace Ajit? Ajit Jain heads up BH Reinsurance and has done wonders, building float to an incredible $24 billion as of year-end 2008. What would Berkshire do without him? Buffett noted that the authority here goes with the person, not the position. While he’s happy to give his pen to Ajit, signing for major deals, he would not do so with anyone else. He recounted the story of how Mutual of Omaha back in the 1980s, the largest health and accident association at the time, got into property and casualty insurance. By handing its pen to insurance brokers, Mutual of Omaha lost half of its net worth in a very short time—a huge scandal. In sum, if Ajit were gone, some of what BH Reinsurance does would not be replaced. Munger added that Berkshire is not looking for mismanagement. While they like businesses that can withstand some folly, some fabulous things are one off. That’s the case with Ajit. What Matters at Berkshire Buffett asserted that Berkshire was cheaper at the end of 2008 than it was at the end of 2007. The investments are worth more than what they are carried for. And the non-insurance operating earnings may suffer for a bit but long term will do very well. Munger noted that 2008 was a bad year for a float business. 5 However, long term, the fact that Berkshire can have so much float at a cost of less than zero is a great advantage. The key is to focus on what matters. According to Munger, what matters at Berkshire is that the property and casualty business is probably the best in the world, the utility subsidiary is the best, ISCAR is the best at what it does, etc. Munger emphasized that it is not easy to get into these positions. GEICO Perhaps no world-beating subsidiary is hotter right now than GEICO, the low-cost provider of auto insurance. Buffett noted that the economic downturn changed consumer behavior like ringing a bell. Everyone is a bargain shopper now. That has hurt at American Express, where the average ticket is down 10%. It has helped at GEICO, where the phone is ringing off the hook. Thousands are coming to the website every day to see if they can save money. In the first four months of 2009, GEICO has added 505,000 policy-holders. The competitive advantage GEICO has built over the past decade is paying off hugely. Buffett sees market share going to 8.5% by year-end. That’s up from 7.2% at the beginning of 2007. Incredible! And each policyholder has significant value—effectively an annuity paying, on average, around $1,500 annually for a policy they must have if they want to drive—and Americans love to drive. Buffett quoted Marshall Fields: “We waste half of the money we spend on advertising . . . the problem is we just don’t know which half.” From a paltry $20 million ad budget when Berkshire took full control of GEICO in 1995, Buffett has amped up the annual ad budget to $800 million—far more than State Farm or Allstate. 6 He wants everyone in the U.S. to have in mind that there’s a good chance to save money at GEICO. He related that to Coca-Cola, which, since 1886, has advertised to associate Coke with moments of pleasure and happiness all around the world. And that share of mind is paying off for GEICO—with the economic downturn, thousands more are checking to see if they can save even $100 with GEICO. Munger noted that in effect, GEICO is earning $800 million pre-tax (the ad spend) that never shows in the earnings. Buffett agreed, saying GEICO could probably go to a maintenance advertising level of, say, $100 million and maintain the present policyholder count for many years. Infrastructure: Build the Grid Munger nearly elbowed Buffett out of the way to answer a question on whether the U.S. should be spending more on infrastructure. “YES” was his answer. He went on to say that there is one big no brainer that would hugely improve U.S. industry and commerce, and that is to build a nationwide electricity grid. We have the technology and know-how, and it would be 100% likely to make the system better. 7 Derivatives Buffett asserted that the use of derivatives caused leverage to run wild, straining an already fragile economic system and causing problems to pop up in unexpected places. After 1929, Congress decided it was very dangerous to let people borrow against their securities. The Federal Reserve instituted margin requirements of 50%. Derivatives totally went around these regulations of the markets. In addition, while normal securities settle in three days or less, keeping counterparty risk to minimum, derivative contracts can have very long settlements. These unsettled contracts pile up over time, adding to the risk in the system. (Buffett recommended reading John Kenneth Galbreath’s The Crash. ) Munger believed the deeper problem was that the derivatives dealer was not only the croupier at the gambling table, but was also playing the game itself against his clients with an informational advantage. He concluded that society does not need this sort of thing. Berkshire Derivatives Buffett has written derivative contracts on both equity markets and on high yield bond markets, which has caused quite a stir. The equity puts raised $4.9 billion in cash, which Berkshire will hold for the duration of the contracts, and the contracts do not require Berkshire to post much (if any) collateral. In effect, it’s much like writing long tail catastrophe reinsurance where Berkshire creates that much coveted “float.” The high yield bond contracts are experiencing higher than expected default rates, so Buffett is not doing so well with those and may end up losing some money. The Berkshire Advantage Buffett noted that the Berkshire culture and business model are very difficult to copy. Shareholders are high grade with an average turnover of 20% a year, versus 100% for the average publicly traded large company. They run the business without teams of lawyers and bankers. Management is decentralized and incentives are rational. The culture is constantly reinforced as the managers see it works. In contrast, Munger opined that many corporations are run stupidly, forcing things down from headquarters, worrying about quarterly profits. For companies selling to Berkshire, Buffett noted that it is important that “it is known that we like allocating cash flows. Our reputation is that we buy to keep, and people can trust us on that.” Buffett noted one of his standard management questions is, “What would you do differently if you owned 100% of the company?” Answering the question for himself, he said he wouldn’t change a thing at Berkshire. Copy Berkshire Buffett noted there are things that Berkshire does that the average investor cannot copy.   Float—Berkshire has that $58 billion interest-free loan. Berkshire makes direct purchases and deals of its own design. Berkshire sometimes buys whole companies. Beyond that, Buffett shared that he did copy Ben Graham by studying Graham Newman reports years ago. “Coat-tailing” was the term. Munger concluded that it is quite smart to follow very good investors around. Inflation Buffett said it is certain we will have some inflation over time. For the U.S. and governments throughout history, this is the classic way of reducing the cost of external debt. Inflate and pay the world back with cheaper dollars. Buffett noted that the Chinese, the largest holder of government bonds, will suffer the most with devaluation as it is fixed-dollar investors whose notes are worth less at maturity. Buffett also chided politicians who constantly refer to how much all of this government bailing-out is costing the taxpayers. The taxpayers have yet to pay one cent more than in years past! Buffett guaranteed that the dollar will buy less over time, and that is happening with all other currencies as well. All major nations are electing to run major deficits in the face of the economic crisis. Buffett was emphatic: “You can bet on inflation.” Munger reflected that when he was growing up in Omaha, a postage stamp was 2 cents and a hamburger was a nickel. And yet, he has lived in the most privileged era of history. Buffett added that a Coke was 5 cents with a 2-cent deposit—so it really hasn’t gone up that much. Meanwhile, a newspaper was a penny, but now costs a $1 and loses money. The best protection against inflation, according to Buffett, is your own earning power. If you constantly increase your earning power, you’ll be sure to get your share of the economic pie. The next best thing is to own wonderful businesses, especially those that have low capital requirements. For example, Coca-Cola requires little capital to grow and is sure to get its percentage of income, however it is measured, whatever the currency. Munger summed up, “A young man should become a brain surgeon and invest in Coke instead of government bonds.” Newspapers Buffett loves newspapers, reading at least five a day. However, he said that most newspaper companies today are not a buy at any price. What was an absolutely essential business 30 years ago is now a business looking at unending losses. Buffett said Walter Annenberg invented a term, “essentiality,” and that newspapers once had that for advertisers and customers. Over time, that essentiality has eroded, and there appears to be no end to that erosion. At Berkshire’s Buffalo News , Buffett said the unions have been very cooperative, and it can still make a little money. At the Washington Post , there is a good cable business and a very good education business but no answers yet for the newspaper. Munger said it was a national tragedy to lose such an important sinew of the civilization. The newspaper, with its desirable editorial influence, kept government honest. Retail and Manufacturing Buffett again said he looks for housing supply and demand to return to equilibrium in a couple years. Business for Berkshire’s housing-related products will recover at that point. As for retail, Buffett sees a big change in consumer behavior going for the low-priced products, and he suspects it will last quite a long time. He wryly noted that for years, government has asked people to save more while the savings rate drifted down to zero. Now, government wants people to spend more, and the savings rate has jumped up to about 4%–5%. In commercial real estate, the 5% cap rates of recent years look silly now. Vacancies are up. Shopping centers are suffering. Real estate could be tough for quite a period. South Florida in particular he expects to be flat for a long time due to huge oversupply. Share Repurchases Buffett noted that corporate America as a whole has not added value with its stock repurchases. Back in the 1970s and 1980s, stocks were cheap—clearly well-below intrinsic value—and very few corporations repurchased shares. Then, during the last 10 years, buying stock became the thing to do. Many companies had stock buyback programs at high to even silly prices. Buffett estimated that 90% of the buyback activity in the last five years was mostly herd behavior. Now, with stock prices dramatically marked down, many at less than half the prices at which repurchases were made, there are few buybacks going on. Opportunity Cost Buffett noted that calibrating opportunity costs last year got a little crazy with prices and intrinsic values changing so fast. He shared that Berkshire got lots of calls and ignored most of them, but interestingly, even the calls he chose to ignore were helpful in calibrating the more promising ones. 8 For example, Goldman Sachs called on a Wednesday. The time for that transaction was NOW—it wouldn’t be there a week later. So in a chaotic market, Berkshire was able to put large sums to work fast. The Constellation Energy offer (which “failed,” though Berkshire took home a $1 billion profit), $5 billion in Goldman Sachs preferred and warrants, $3 billion in GE preferred and warrants, etc. Buffett noted that he hadn’t had a flurry of activity like this in a long time. The New PE at BYD Munger was very excited about Berkshire’s attempt to acquire 10% of BYD, a Chinese manufacturer. He noted that BYD is no startup, with $4 billion of revenue and having already pulled off miracles in becoming a world leader in lithium batteries and a major player in cellphone components. Now, the company aims to take on the auto world from a standing start by building electric cars. It already has the best-selling car model in China and makes each of the parts itself. Munger seems especially excited by the fact that BYD has 17,000 engineering graduates—the top of the class in a country of 1.3 billion people. 9 Lithium batteries are needed in every utility function. To harness the power of the sun, we will need batteries. BYD is the sweet spot, Munger concluded. Buffett quipped, the Irish banks were my big idea and BYD was Charlie’s. He’s the winner! 10 Moody’s Downgrade Buffett admitted to being irritated with the Moody’s downgrade of Berkshire from AAA to AA. Buffett claimed it makes little difference in Berkshire’s borrowing costs, and there remains no stronger credit than Berkshire, having always conducted its affairs so that no one worries about getting their insurance checks well into the future. Munger noted that at least Moody’s showed considerable independence in making the change. 11 And he predicted the next change by Moody’s in the Berkshire rating will be in the other direction. Buffett quipped that as Charlie has told him before, “In the end, you’ll see it my way because you’re smart and I’m right.” Utility Investments MEC is now the largest wind utility in the nation. Iowa is No. 1 in wind power with some 20% of its power wind-generated. The wind blows 35% of the time, so this is not base capacity. Overall, MEC is a net exporter of energy for Iowa. Berkshire is a big taxpayer, so it can use the 1.8 cents per kilowatt/hour tax credit. They are putting in wind power in the Pacific Northwest and are looking to do more. Munger noted that he’s very proud that MEC is a leader in the field. Buffett noted that he wished that he had been able to purchase Constellation Energy. The day David Sokol heard CEG was in trouble, facing bankruptcy, he called Buffett with an idea to make an offer. That very evening, Sokol and Greg Abel were in Baltimore with an all-cash offer. So Berkshire went from an 11 a.m. phone call by Sokol to an in-person bid that night! Munger added that Berkshire once bought a pipeline in two hours. Dynergy had purchased the Northern Natural Gas pipeline from Enron, and then Dynergy itself went down. To close the deal, Berkshire needed FERC approval, so Buffett agreed to do whatever FERC said to do post-deal. Buffett noted that while it’s the shareholders you need to please in most deals, it’s the regulators you need to please in utility transactions. China Munger weighed in with praise for Chinese economic policy: China has one of the most successful economic policies in the world. Growth is so significant and important to China that it amounts to just a trifle if the dollar declines. Their goal has been to make it very hard to compete with them all over the world. That’s exactly what they’ve done and what they should do. Gen Re Buffett announced that Gen Re is working well after a terrible start. When Berkshire bought it in 1998, Gen Re’s premier reputation was not reality. It was an enormous mess. Thanks to Tad Montross and Joe Brandon, the operations have been turned around. Now Buffett feels terrific about its future. Munger noted that it is important sometimes to turn lemons into lemonade, and while it wasn’t pretty or pleasant, Joe Brandon was the one brilliant hero in the transaction. Insurance Buffett said they have marvelous insurance businesses. His worst-case estimate was that Berkshire could lose 3%–4% of a major industry loss. For example, Hurricane Katrina amounted to about a $60 billion loss, while Berkshire lost less than $3 billion. In a $100 billion event, Buffett guessed Berkshire would now pay around $3 billion to $4 billion. 12 Swiss Re: A Four-Course Meal In another exciting tale of fast action, Buffett related how Swiss Re was under extreme pressure last year during the crisis. Buffett met with them in Washington D.C. to hammer out a deal that met their needs and that was good for Berkshire. Buffett emphasized that Swiss Re’s problems were ones of capital adequacy, not underwriting standards. Berkshire agreed to a quota share arrangement where it will receive 20% of Swiss Re’s property casualty reinsurance business over five years. Earlier in 2008, Berkshire had purchased 3% of Swiss Re. Then, in February of this year, Berkshire invested $3 billion Swiss francs in a 12% note that is callable at 120% of par for two years and in three years is convertible at $25 francs/share. The notes are senior to Swiss Re equity of $20 billion. Buffett said the odds are good that the note will get called, which would not make him happy. Then, in addition to all that, Berkshire did a $2 billion Swiss franc adverse loss cover with Swiss Re. That pushed Berkshire’s float to just over $60 billion at quarter end. So to summarize, Berkshire bought shares of Swiss Re, wrote a 20% quota share contract, invested in a 12% convertible note, and provided an adverse loss cover. That’s a lot of bites from one apple! Hope for the World Buffett offered that there is always a lot wrong with the world, but it’s theonly world we got. Fortunately, over time, people do better and better. For all its flaws, the capitalist system works, unleashing human potential. Consider that there were 35,000 people at the Berkshire meeting—that would have been 10% of the entire population of the U.S. in 1790. Buffett allowed that we’ll have bad years in capitalism. There were six panics in the 19th century. While we have had these interruptions, we have grown at a great clip overall. The standard of living increased 7 to 1 in the 20th century. At one time, a black man was considered three-fifths of a person, and women couldn’t vote for our first 130 years. We were wasting human potential. Our kids and grandkids will live better and better. Buffett repeated that he hopes to grow 2% or so faster than the S&P 500 in intrinsic business value. And that’s a far cry from outperforming the market by 10% annually in his partnership days. However, Munger beamed that Berkshire’s best days of contributing to civilization are ahead. He noted that mankind is getting close to solving the technical problem of our time—solar power. Cheap, clean, storable power will change the world. Munger said, “As I get closer and closer to my death, I get more cheerful about the future I won’t see.” He talked about the potential of solar power as the final breakthrough. It would solve the main technical problems of humankind. He’s excited that MEC and BYD will participate. If we have enough clean energy, we can do all sorts of things. 1 We always take special note when Buffett goes to visuals. 2 Again, this is the best of all worlds—double-digit yields AND equity participation rights. And Buffett isn’t done yet. Subsequent to year-end, Berkshire acquired $3 billion Swiss francs worth of a 12% convertible note with Swiss Re and invested $3 billion in an 8.5% convertible preferred of Dow Chemical. All in, that’s over $20 billion in high yield securities with equity kickers. Amazing. 3 For Corey and me, this news was a nice balm for our bruised egos. 4 So focus on the process , not the outcome. 5 We believe he’s referring to that 15:1 leverage factor—just as it has turbo-charged Berkshire’s up-market returns, it leverages the losses incurred in a down market. 6 We haven’t seen recent numbers, but GEICO outspent the entire rest of the auto insurance industry combined on advertising for most of the past decade. 7 Munger said much about the grid at the Wesco Financial meeting as well. 8 Who can match Buffett’s flow of information? 9 The thought occurs to us that Munger may be on the verge of a new analytic device—the PE ratio—that is, Price to Engineers. We noted last year that Munger gave us the “GURF” asset accounting idea—“good until reached for.” 10 Berkshire lost a few hundred million dollars on Irish banks last year. 11 Berkshire owns 20% of Moody’s. 12 Again, we wonder how Berkshire can have 6%–7% market share in reinsurance and yet have only 3–4% exposure in a catastrophe?
