 It’s no surprise why so many annual reports end up in the garbage can. The text on the glossy pages is the understandable part, and that’s generally useless, and the numbers in the back are incomprehensible, and that’s supposed to be important. But there’s a way to get something out of an annual report in a few minutes, which is all the time I spend with one. 
 Consider the 1987 annual report of Ford. It has a nice cover shot of the back end of a Lincoln Continental, photographed by Tom Wojnowski, and inside there’s a flattering tribute to Henry Ford II and a photograph of him standing in front of a portrait of his grandfather, Henry I. There’s a friendly message to stockholders, a treatise on corporate culture, and mention of the fact that Ford sponsored an exhibition of the works of Beatrix Potter, creator of Peter Rabbit. 
 I flip past all that and turn directly to the Consolidated Balance Sheet printed on the cheaper paper on of the report (see charts). (That’s a rule with annuals and perhaps with publications in general—the cheaper the paper the more valuable the information.) The balance sheet lists the assets and then the liabilities. That’s critical to me. 
 In the top column marked Current Assets, I notice that the company has $5.672 billion in cash and cash items, plus $4.424 billion in marketable securities. Adding these two items together, I get the company’s current overall-cash position, which I round off to $10.1 billion. Comparing the 1987 cash to the 1986 cash in the right-hand column, I see that Ford is socking away more and more cash. This is a sure sign of prosperity. 
 Then I go to the other half of the balance sheet, down to the entry that says “long-term debt.” Here I see that the 1987 long-term debt is $1.75 billion, considerably reduced from last year’s long-term debt. Debt reduction is another sign of prosperity. When cash increases relative to debt, it’s an improving balance sheet. When it’s the other way around, it’s a deteriorating balance sheet. 
 Subtracting the long-term debt from the cash, I arrive at $8.35 billion, Ford’s “net cash” position. The cash and cash assets alone exceed the debt by $8.35 billion. When cash exceeds debt it’s very favorable. No matter what happens, Ford isn’t about to go out of business. 
 (You may have noticed Ford’s short-term debt of $1.8 billion. I ignore short-term debt in my calculations. The purists can fret all they want about this, but why complicate matters unnecessarily? I simply assume that the company’s other assets [inventories and so forth] are valuable enough to cover the short-term debt, and I leave it at that.)

One Up on Wall Street 

 As often as not, it turns out that long-term debt exceeds cash, the cash has been shrinking and debt has been growing, and the company is in weak financial shape. Weak or strong is what you want to know in this short exercise.

One Up on Wall Street 

 Next, I move on to the 10-Year Financial Summary, located on , to get a look at the ten-year picture. I discover that there are 511 million shares outstanding. I can also see that the number has been reduced in each of the past two years. This means that Ford has been buying back its own shares, another positive step. 
 Dividing the $8.35 billion in cash and cash assets by the 511 million shares outstanding, I conclude that there’s $16.30 in net cash to go along with every share of Ford. Why this is important will be apparent in the next chapter. 
 After that, I turn to...already this is getting complicated. If you don’t want to proceed with this exercise, and you’d rather read about Henry Ford, then ask your broker whether Ford is buying back shares, whether cash exceeds long-term debt, and how much cash there is per share! 
 Let’s be realistic. I’m not about to lead you on a wild-goose chase through the trails of the accounts. There are important numbers that will help you follow companies, and if you get them from the annual reports, fine. If you don’t get them from the annual reports, you can get them from S&P reports, from your broker, or from Value Line. 
 Value Line is easier to read than a balance sheet, so if you’ve never looked at any of this, start there. It tells you about cash and debt, summarizes the long-term record so you can see what happened during the last recession, whether earnings are on the upswing, whether dividends have always been paid, etc. Finally, it rates companies for financial strength on a simple scale of 1 to 5, giving you a rough idea of a company’s ability to withstand adversity. (There’s also a rating system for the “timeliness” of stocks, but I don’t pay attention to that.) 
 I’m putting aside the annual report for now. Let’s instead consider the important numbers one by one on their own and not struggle further with finding them here.

One Up on Wall Street 

 13 
 Some Famous Numbers 
 Here, and not in any particular order of importance, are the various numbers worth noticing: 
 PERCENT OF SALES 
 When I’m interested in a company because of a particular product—such as L’eggs, Pampers, Bufferin, or Lexan plastic—the first thing I want to know is what that product means to the company in question. What percent of sales does it represent? L’eggs sent Hanes stock soaring because Hanes was a relatively small company. Pampers was more profitable than L’eggs, but it didn’t mean as much to the huge Procter and Gamble. 
 Let’s say you’ve gotten excited about Lexan plastic, and you find out that General Electric makes Lexan. Next, you discover from your broker (or from the annual report if you can follow it) that the plastics division is part of the materials division, and that entire division contributes only 6.8 percent to GE’s total revenues. So what if Lexan is the next Pampers—it’s not going to mean much to the shareholders of GE. You look at this and ask yourself who else makes Lexan, or you forget about Lexan. 
 THE PRICE/EARNINGS RATIO 
 We’ve gone on about this already, but here’s a useful refinement: The p/e ratio of any company that’s fairly priced will equal its growth rate. I’m talking about growth rate of earnings here. How do you find that out? Ask your broker what’s the growth rate, as compared to the p/e ratio. 
 If the p/e of Coca-Cola is 15, you’d expect the company to be growing at about 15 percent a year, etc. But if the p/e ratio is less than the growth rate, you may have found yourself a bargain. A company, say, with a growth rate of 12 percent a year (also known as a “12-percent grower”) and a p/e ratio of 6 is a very attractive prospect. On the other hand, a company with a growth rate of 6 percent a year and a p/e ratio of 12 is an unattractive prospect and headed for a comedown. 
 In general, a p/e ratio that’s half the growth rate is very positive, and one that’s twice the growth rate is very negative. We use this measure all the time in analyzing stocks for the mutual funds. 
 If your broker can’t give you a company’s growth rate, you can figure it out for yourself by taking the annual earnings from Value Line or an S&P report and calculating the percent increase in earnings from one year to the next. That way, you’ll end up with another measure of whether a stock is or is not too pricey. As to the all-important future growth rate, your guess is as good as mine. 
 A slightly more complicated formula enables us to compare growth rates to earnings, while also taking the dividends into account. Find the long-term growth rate (say, Company X’s is 12 percent), add the dividend yield (Company X pays 3 percent), and divide by the p/e ratio (Company X’s is 10). 12 plus 3 divided by 10 is 1.5. 
 Less than a 1 is poor, and 1.5 is okay, but what you’re really looking for is a 2 or better. A company with a 15 percent growth rate, a 3 percent dividend, and a p/e of 6 would have a fabulous 3. 
 THE CASH POSITION 
 We just went over Ford’s $8.35 billion in cash net of long-term debt. When a company is sitting on billions in cash, it’s definitely something you want to know about. Here’s why: 
 Ford’s stock had moved from $4 a share in 1982 to $38 a share in early 1988 (adjusted for splits). Along the way I’d bought my 5 million shares. At $38 a share I’d already made a huge profit in Ford, and the Wall Street chorus had been sounding off for almost two years about Ford’s being overvalued. Numerous advisors said that this cyclical auto company had had its last hurrah and the next move was down. I almost cashed in the stock on several occasions. 
 But by glancing at the annual report I’d noticed that Ford had accumulated the $16.30 a share in cash beyond debt—as mentioned in the previous chapter. For every share of Ford I owned, there was this $16.30 bonus sitting there on paper like some delightful hidden rebate. 
 The $16.30 bonus changed everything. It meant that I was buying the auto company not for $38 a share, the stock price at the time, but for $21.70 a share ($38 minus the $16.30 in cash). Analysts were expecting Ford to earn $7 a share from its auto operations, which at the $38 price gave it a p/e of 5.4, but at the $21.70 price it had a p/e of 3.1. 
 A p/e of 3.1 is a tantalizing number, cycles or no cycles. Maybe I wouldn’t have been impressed if Ford were a lousy company or if people were turned off by its latest cars. But Ford is a great company, and people loved the latest Ford cars and trucks. 
 The cash factor helped convince me to hold on to Ford, and it rose more than 40 percent after I made the decision not to sell. 
 I also knew (and you could have found out on of the annual report—still in the readable glossy section) that Ford’s financial services group—Ford Credit, First Nationwide, U. S. Leasing, and others—earned $1.66 per share on their own in 1987. For Ford Credit, which alone contributed $1.33 per share, it was “its 13th consecutive year of earnings growth.” 
 Assigning a hypothetical p/e ratio of 10 to the earnings of Ford’s financial businesses (finance companies commonly have p/e ratios of 10) I estimated the value of these subsidiaries to be 10 times the $1.66, or $16.60 per share. 
 So with Ford selling for $38, you were getting the $16.30 in net cash and another $16.60 in the value of the finance companies, so the automobile business was costing you a grand total of $5.10 per share. And this same automobile business was expected to earn $7 a share. Was Ford a risky pick? At $5.10 per share it was an absolute steal, in spite of the fact that the stock was up almost tenfold already since 1982. 
 Boeing is another cash-rich stock. In early 1987 it sold in the low $40s, but with $27 in cash, you were buying the company for $15. I tuned in to Boeing with a small position in early 1988, then built it up to a major one—partly because of the cash and partly because Boeing had a record backlog of commercial orders yet to be filled. 
 Cash doesn’t always make a difference, of course. More often than not, there isn’t enough of it to worry about. Schlumberger has a lot of cash, but not an impressive amount per share. Bristol-Myers has $1.6 billion in cash and only $200 million in long-term debt, which produces an impressive ratio, but with 280 million shares outstanding, $1.4 billion net cash (after subtracting debt) works out to $5 per share. The $5 doesn’t count for much with the stock selling for over $40. If the stock dropped to $15, it would be a big deal. 
 Nevertheless, it’s always advisable to check the cash position (and the value of related businesses) as part of your research. You never know when you’ll stumble across a Ford. 
 As long as we’re on the subject, what is Ford going to do with all its cash? As cash piles up in a company, speculation about what will become of it can tug at the stock price. Ford’s been raising the dividend and buying back shares at a furious pace, but it has still amassed excess billions over and above that. Some investors wonder if Ford will blow the money on a you-know-what, but so far, Ford has been prudent in its acquisitions. 
 Already Ford owns a credit company and a savings-and-loan, and it controls Hertz Rent A Car through a partnership. It made a low bid for Hughes Aerospace but lost out. TRW might create sensible synergy: it’s a major worldwide producer of automotive parts and is in some of the same electronics markets. Furthermore, TRW could become the major supplier of airbags for cars. But if Ford buys Merrill Lynch or Lockheed (both were rumored), will it join the long list of diworseifiers? 
 THE DEBT FACTOR 
 How much does the company owe, and how much does it own? Debt versus equity. It’s just the kind of thing a loan officer would want to know about you in deciding if you are a good credit risk. 
 A normal corporate balance sheet has two sides. On the left side are the assets (inventories, receivables, plant and equipment, etc.). The right side shows how the assets are financed. One quick way to determine the financial strength of a company is to compare the equity to the debt on the right side of the balance sheet. 
 This debt-to-equity ratio is easy to determine. Looking at Ford’s balance sheet from the 1987 annual report, you see that the total stockholder’s equity is $18.492 billion. A few lines above that, you see that the long-term debt is $1.7 billion. (There’s also short-term debt, but in these thumbnail evaluations I ignore that, as I’ve said. If there’s enough cash—see line 2—to cover short-term debt, then you don’t have to worry about short-term debt.) 
 A normal corporate balance sheet has 75 percent equity and 25 percent debt. Ford’s equity-to-debt ratio is a whopping $18 billion to $1.7 billion, or 91 percent equity and less than 10 percent debt. That’s a very strong balance sheet. An even stronger balance sheet might have 1 percent debt and 99 percent equity. A weak balance sheet, on the other hand, might have 80 percent debt and 20 percent equity. 
 Among turnarounds and troubled companies, I pay special attention to the debt factor. More than anything else, it’s debt that determines which companies will survive and which will go bankrupt in a crisis. Young companies with heavy debts are always at risk. 
 Once I was looking at two depressed stocks in technology: GCA and Applied Materials. Both manufactured electronic capital equipment—machines to make computer chips. It’s one of those highly technical fields that’s best avoided, and these companies had proven it by falling off the ledge. In late 1985, GCA stock fell from $20 to $12, and Applied Materials did even worse, falling from $16 to $8. 
 The difference was that when GCA got into trouble, it had $114 million in debt, and almost all of it was bank debt. I’ll explain this further on. It only had $3 million in cash, and its principal asset was $73 million of inventories—but in the electronics business, things change so fast that one year’s $73-million inventory could be a $20-million inventory the next. Who knows what they could really get for it in a fire sale? 
 Applied Materials, on the other hand, had only $17 million in debt and $36 million in cash. 
 When the electronic-components business picked up, Applied Materials rebounded from $8 to $36, but GCA wasn’t around to enjoy the revival. One company went kaput and was bought out at about 10 cents a share, while the other went up more than fourfold. The debt burden was the difference. 
 It’s the kind of debt, as much as the actual amount, that separates the winners from the losers in a crisis. There’s bank debt and there’s funded debt. 
 Bank debt (the worst kind, and the kind that GCA had) is due on demand. It doesn’t have to come from a bank. It can also take the form of commercial paper, which is loaned from one company to another for short periods of time. The important thing is that it’s due very soon, and sometimes even “due on call.” That means that the lender can ask for his money back at the first sign of trouble. If the borrower can’t pay back the money, it’s off to Chapter 11 . Creditors strip the company, and there’s nothing left for the shareholders after they get through with it. 
 Funded debt (the best kind, from the shareholder’s point of view) can never be called in no matter how bleak the situation, as long as the borrower continues to pay the interest. The principal may not be due for 15, 20, or 30 years. Funded debt usually takes the form of regular corporate bonds with long maturities. Corporate bonds may be upgraded or downgraded by the rating agencies depending on the financial health of the company, but whatever happens, the bondholders cannot demand immediate repayment of principal the way a bank can. Sometimes even the interest payments can be deferred. Funded debt gives companies time to wiggle out of trouble. (In one of the footnotes of a typical annual report, the company gives a breakdown of its long-term debt, the interest that is being paid, and the dates that the debt is due.) 
 I pay particular attention to the debt structure, as well as to the amount of the debt, when I’m evaluating a turnaround like Chrysler. Everyone knew that Chrysler had debt problems. In the famous bailout arrangement, the key element was that the government guaranteed a $1.4-billion loan in return for some stock options. Later the government sold these stock options and actually made a big profit on the deal, but at the time you couldn’t have predicted that. What you could have realized, though, was that Chrysler’s loan arrangement gave the company room to maneuver. 
 I also saw that Chrysler had $1 billion in cash, and that it had recently sold off its tank division to General Dynamics for another $336 million. True, Chrysler was losing a small amount of money at the time, but the cash and the structure of the loan from the government told you that the bankers weren’t going to shut the place down for at least a year or two. 
 So if you believed the auto industry was coming back, as I did, and you knew that Chrysler had made major improvements and had become a low-cost producer in the industry, then you could have had some confidence in Chrysler’s survival. It wasn’t as risky as it looked from the newspapers. 
 Micron Technology is another company that was snatched from oblivion by the debt structure—and Fidelity had a major hand in it. This was a wonderful company from Idaho that staggered into our office on its last legs, a victim of the slowdown in the computer memory-chip industry and of the Japanese “dumping” of DRAM memory chips on the market. Micron sued, claiming that there was no way the Japanese could produce chips at lower cost than Micron, and therefore the Japanese were selling the merchandise at a loss to drive out the competition. Eventually Micron won the suit. 
 Meanwhile, all of the important domestic producers except Texas Industries and Micron got out of the business. Micron’s survival was threatened by the bank debt it had built up, and its stock had fallen from $40 to $4. Its last hope was selling a large convertible debenture (a bond that can be converted into stock at the buyer’s discretion). This would enable the company to raise enough cash to pay off the bank debt and ride out its short-term difficulties, since the principal on the convertible debenture wasn’t due for several years. 
 Fidelity bought a large part of that debenture. When the memory-chip business turned around and Micron returned to profitability, the stock rose from $4 to $24, and Fidelity made a nice gain. 
 DIVIDENDS 

 “Do you know the only thing that gives me pleasure? It’s to see my dividends coming in.” 
 —John D. Rockefeller, 1901 

 Stocks that pay dividends are often favored over stocks that don’t pay dividends by investors who desire the extra income. There’s nothing wrong with that. A check in the mail always comes in handy, even for John D. Rockefeller. But the real issue, as I see it, is how the dividend, or the lack of a dividend, affects the value of a company and the price of its stock over time. 
 The basic conflict between corporate directors and shareholders over dividends is similar to the conflict between children and their parents over trust funds. The children prefer a quick distribution, and the parents prefer to control the money for the children’s greater benefit. 
 One strong argument in favor of companies that pay dividends is that companies that don’t pay dividends have a sorry history of blowing the money on a string of stupid diworseifications. I’ve seen this happen enough times to begin to believe in the bladder theory of corporate finance, as propounded by Hugh Liedtke of Pennzoil: The more cash that builds up in the treasury, the greater the pressure to piss it away. Liedtke’s first claim to fame was building a small oil company, Pennzoil, into a strong competitor. His second claim to fame was beating Texaco (the Goliath) out of $3 billion in a court battle that everyone said Pennzoil (the David) would lose. 
 (The period of the late 1960s discussed earlier ought to be remembered as the Bladder Years. Still today, there is a propensity among corporate managers to piss away profits on ill-fated ventures—but much less than twenty years ago.) 
 Another argument in favor of dividend-paying stocks is that the presence of the dividend can keep the stock price from falling as far as it would if there were no dividend. In the wipeout of 1987, the high-dividend payers fared better than the nondividend payers and suffered less than half the decline of the general market. This is one reason I like to keep some stalwarts and even slow growers in my portfolio. When a stock sells for $20, a $2 per share dividend results in a 10 percent yield, but drop the stock price to $10, and suddenly you’ve got a 20 percent yield. If investors are sure that the high yield will hold up, they’ll buy the stock just for that. This will put a floor under the stock price. Blue chips with long records of paying and raising dividends are the stocks people flock to in any sort of crisis. 
 Then again, the smaller companies that don’t pay dividends are likely to grow much faster because of it. They’re plowing the money into expansion. The reason that companies issue stock in the first place is so they can finance their expansion without having to burden themselves with debt from the bank. I’ll take an aggressive grower over a stodgy old dividend-payer any day. 
 Electric utilities and telephone utilities are the major dividend-payers. In periods of slow growth they don’t need to build plants or expand their equipment, and the cash piles up. In periods of fast growth the dividends are lures to attract the enormous amounts of capital that plant construction requires. 
 Consolidated Edison has discovered it can buy extra power from Canada, so why should it waste money on expensive new generators and all the expense of getting them approved and constructed? Because it has no major expenses these days, Con Ed is amassing hundreds of millions in cash, buying back stock in above-average fashion, and continually raising the dividend. 

