If you created a bar chart showing the number of women at each
particular height, it would look like the chart shown in Figure 4-2.
The type of graph shown in Figure 4-2 is called a histogram. It
graphically shows the frequency of a particular measure compared with other nearby measures (in this case the measure of a
woman’s height). The graph in Figure 4-2 has the same shape as

Height Histogram

Number of Women

16

100%

14
80%

12
10

60%
8
40%

6
4

20%
2
0

10%
53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

Figure 4-2

A Histogram of Women’s Heights

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Cumulative Percentage

18

56 • Way of the Turtle

the normal distribution graph in Figure 4-1, but it also has the
advantage of being something you can construct without using
complex mathematical formulas. You only need to be able to
count and categorize.
A histogram like this can be constructed from your trading systems to give you an idea of how the future might turn out; it provides you with a way to think in terms of probabilities rather than
prediction. Figure 4-3 is a histogram of monthly returns from a 20year test of a simpliﬁed version of the Turtle system, the Donchian
Trend system. In addition to being simpler, it has a better performance record than the Turtle system.
The histogram sections in Figure 4-3 are divided into 2 percent
segments. One bar lists the number of months with between 0 percent and 2 percent positive returns, the next bar lists the number
between 2 percent and 4 percent, and so on. Note how the shape
of the histogram resembles the normal distribution of heights
described above. The notable difference is that the shape is elongated toward the right. This elongation represents the good months
and sometimes is referred to as skew and fat tails.
The histogram shown in Figure 4-4 represents the distribution
of the trades themselves. Figure 4-4 shows how individual trades
are distributed. The section on the left is for losing trades, and the
section on the right is for winning trades. Note that the scales for
each section include both a number scale on the outside left and
right and a percentage scale in the middle from 0 percent to 100
percent. The cumulative lines move from 0 percent to 100 percent
from the center of the graph outward.
The numeric legends on the left and right indicate the number
of trades represented by each 20 percent section of the graph. For

Losing Months

Figure 4-3
Distribution of Monthly Returns

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.
2
2% %+
4% 4%
-6
6% %
8% - 8
%
10 - 10
% %
12 - 1
% 2%
14 - 1
% 4%
16 - 16
% %
18 - 1
% 8%
20 - 20
% %
22 - 22
% %
24 - 2
% 4%
26 - 2
% 6%
28 - 2
% 8%
-3
0%
30
%
+

28 30
% %+
26 - 30
% %
24 - 2
% 8%
22 - 2
% 6%
20 - 24
% %
18 - 2
% 2%
16 - 2
% 0%
14 - 18
% %
12 - 1
% 6%
10 - 14
% %
8% 12%
-1
6% 0%
4% 8%
-6
2% %
0% 4%
-2
%

• 57 •
Number of Months
40
40

30
30

20
20

10
10

0
0

Winning Months

Number of Months

Monthly Return Distribution

3746

100%

1854

2997

80%

1483

2248

60%
1659

1497

1301
739

749
0

10

32

2.5R+ 2R

1.5R

6

1112
828

40%

742
406

20%

221

78

0%
1R

0.5R <0.5R

<1R

1R

2R

Losing Trades

Figure 4-4

371
126

Distribution of Trade Outcomes

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

3R

4R

42
5R

44

29

22

15

6

6R

7R

8R

9R

10R 11R

Winning Trades

9

5

2

12R 13R

3

18

14R 15R+

0

Number of Trades

• 58 •

Number of Trades

Donchian - R-Multiple™ Distribution

Think Like a Turtle • 59

example, the 100 percent level for losing trades is 3,746, which
means that there were 3,746 losing trades during the 22 years of
the test. The corresponding 100 percent level for winning trades is
1,854 trades.
The trades are divided into bars on the basis of the amount of
proﬁt they earned divided by the amount risked on a trade. This
concept is known as an R-multiple and was invented by the trader
Chuck Branscomb as a convenient way to compare trades between
systems and between markets. (R-multiples were popularized by
Van Tharp in his book Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom.)
An example will help illustrate this system. If you buy a contract
of August gold at $450 with a stop at $440 in case the trade goes
against you, you have $1,000 at risk since the $10 difference
between $450 and $440 multiplied by the 100 ounces in a contract
totals $1,000. If that trade earns $5,000 in proﬁt, it is called a 5R
trade because the $5,000 proﬁt is ﬁve times the amount of the
money that was risked ($1,000). In Figure 4-4, the winning trades
are divided into buckets at 1R intervals and losing trades are divided
into buckets at 1⁄2R intervals.
It may seem odd that in this histogram the losing trades outnumber the winning trades by so much. This is actually a very common occurrence in trend-following systems. However, although the
number of losing trades is very high, the system keeps most losses
close to the desired entry risk of 1R. Winning trades, in contrast,
are many times the entry risk, with 43 trades returning 10 or more
times the entry risk.
How does this help one think like a Turtle?
As Turtles, we never knew which trade would end up being a
winner and which a loser. We just knew the general shape of the

60 • Way of the Turtle

distribution of possible outcomes we might encounter: A distribution much like the ones shown in the graphs above. We thought
that each trade possibly could be a winner but that most probably
would be losers. And we knew that some would be medium-sized
winners of 4 to 5R and some would be large winners of 12R or even
20R or 30R. But ultimately, the Turtles knew that the winners
would be large enough to cover the losses from the losing trades
and that there would be proﬁt left over.
Thus, when we made a trade, we did not measure our personal
worth by the outcome of the trade because we knew it most likely
would be a losing trade. We thought in terms of probabilities, and
that gave us the conﬁdence to make decisions in the face of large
degrees of risk and uncertainty.

Dos and Don’ts for Thinking Like a Turtle
1. Trade in the present: Do not dwell on the past or try to predict
the future. The former is counterproductive, and the latter is
impossible.
2. Think in terms of probabilities, not prediction: Instead of trying
to be right by predicting the market, focus on methods in which
the probabilities are in your favor for a successful outcome over
the long run.
3. Take responsibility for your own trades: Don’t blame your
mistakes and failures on others, the markets, your broker,
and so forth. Take responsibility for your mistakes and learn
from them.

Think Like a Turtle • 61

Playing Favorites
Some of the Turtles had a hard time with this concept; they felt the
need to be right and to predict the markets. For this reason, even
after the ﬁrst month’s heating oil example, they did not trade consistently. I remember one in particular who was convinced that
Rich had given me and a few of the others secret rules that he had
not shared with the class at large. That idea was completely ludicrous. Why would Rich intentionally leave out important information and then give traders his own money for them to lose, not
to mention losing his bet?
There were no hidden secrets. The truth was that I actually used
a much simpler trading method than most of the other Turtles
employed. I traded using 100 percent of my account allocated to the
longer-term 10-week breakout system. This meant fewer trades and
less monitoring of the markets. I certainly was not doing anything
unusual or acting on information that had not been made public.

Excuses, Excuses
The idea that Rich had left out some key ideas was the easiest way
for our paranoid Turtle to explain his inability to trade successfully
during the program. This is a common problem in trading and in
life. Many people blame their failure on others or on circumstances
outside their control. They fail and then blame everyone but themselves. Inability to take responsibility for one’s own actions and their
consequences is probably the single most signiﬁcant factor leading
to failure.
Trading is a good way to break that habit. In the end, it is only
you and the markets. You cannot hide from the markets. If you

62 • Way of the Turtle

trade well, over the long run you will see good results. If you trade
poorly, over the long run you will lose money. Despite the obvious
and unavoidable link between what you do and your trading results,
some people still try to blame the markets. They invent scenarios
in which the “specialists” or another mysterious group of traders
conspires to steal their money rather than taking the blame for their
own trading mistakes.
Although there is no question that there many traders endeavoring to take your money at any point in time, I have never seen
any evidence of mass-scale collusion or fraud of the kind imagined
by those who blame their failures on the market, their brokers, or
other participants.
The bottom line is that you make the trades and you are responsible for the outcome. Don’t blame anyone else for giving you bad
advice or withholding secrets from you. If you screw up and do something stupid, learn from that mistake, don’t pretend you didn’t make
it. Then go ﬁgure out a way to avoid making that same mistake in
the future.
Blaming others for your mistakes is a sure way to lose.

five
TRADING WITH
AN EDGE
Trading with an edge is what separates the professionals from the
amateurs. Ignore this and you will be eaten by those who don’t.

rading is about buying at one price and then selling at a higher
price later or selling short at a particular price and then buying to exit the short position at a later point. When they are determining when to enter a market, most beginners employ a strategy
that is no better than throwing darts at the chart. Experienced
traders would say that their strategy has no edge. The term edge is
borrowed from gambling theory and refers to the statistical advantage held by the casino. It also refers to the advantage that can be
gained by counting cards when one is playing blackjack. Without
an edge in games of chance, you will lose money in the long run.
This is true in trading as well. If you do not have an edge, the
costs of trading will cause you to lose money. Commissions, slippage, computer costs, and exchange and pricing data fees add up
very quickly. An edge in trading is an exploitable statistical advantage based on market behavior that is likely to recur in the future. In

T

• 63 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

64 • Way of the Turtle

trading, the best edges come from the market behaviors caused by
cognitive biases.

Elements of an Edge
To ﬁnd an edge, you need to locate entry points where there is a
greater than normal probability that the market will move in a particular direction within your desired time frame. You then pair
those entries with an exit strategy designed to proﬁt from the type
of moves for which the entry is designed. Simply put, to maximize
your edge, entry strategies should be paired with exit strategies.
Thus, trend-following entry strategies can be paired with many different types of trend-following exit strategies, countertrend entry
strategies can be paired with many different countertrend exit
strategies, swing trading entries can be paired with many different
types of swing trading exit strategies, and so on.
To understand why this is important, let’s dig further into the
components that make up the edge for a system. System edges
come from three components:
• Portfolio selection: The algorithms that select which
markets are valid for trading on any speciﬁc day
• Entry signals: The algorithms that determine when to buy
or sell to enter a trade
• Exit signals: The algorithms that determine when to buy or
sell to exit a trade
It is possible for an entry signal to have an edge that is signiﬁcant
for the short term but not for the medium term or long term. Con-

Trading with an Edge • 65

versely, it is possible to have an exit signal that has an edge for longterm systems but not for the short term. Some concrete examples
will help demonstrate this effect.

The Edge Ratio (E-Ratio)
When you are examining entry signals, you care about the price
movement subsequent to the occurrence of the market actions that
constitute the signal. One way to look at this movement is to break
the price movement into two parts: the good part and the bad part.
Good price movement is that which progresses in the direction
of the trade. In other words, when you buy, it’s good when a market moves up and bad when it moves down, and when you sell
short, it’s good when a market moves down and bad when it moves
up. Consider the case where a buy results in a price that initially
moves in a direction that is bad for the trade, the price goes down;
then it goes up and moves to a price higher than the entry price for
the trade; after this move down, the price moves up for a while and
then goes down again, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Traders refer to the maximum move in the bad direction as the
maximum adverse excursion (MAE) and the maximum move in the
good direction as the maximum favorable excursion (MFE). Thus,
the lines with the double arrows in the ﬁgure show the size of the
MAE and MFE for the price move indicated. Figure 5-1 demonstrates the case where the MFE (good price movement) is much
higher than the MAE (bad price movement).
You can use these to measure the edge of an entry signal directly.
If a certain entry signal generates a move in which the average maximum good movement was higher than the average maximum bad

66 • Way of the Turtle

Good vs. Bad Price Movement

Buy

Buy

Bad Price Movement

Figure 5-1

Good Price Movement

Good versus Bad Price Movement

movement (i.e., the average MFE was higher than the average
MAE), this would indicate that a positive edge existed. If the average MAE (adverse movement) was higher than the average MFE
(good movement), this would indicate that a negative edge existed.
One would expect that a truly random entry would result in approximately the same good movement as bad movement. For example,
take the case in which one bought if a coin landed heads up and
sold if it landed tails up. One would expect that the price movement subsequent to this type of entry would have an MFE equal
to its MAE.
To turn this way of thinking about an edge of an entry into a
concrete way of measuring the edge for entry signals, it is necessary to add a few more steps. First, you need a way to equate price
movement across different markets. Second, you need a way to
determine the time period over which to measure the average
MFE and average MAE. To normalize the MFE and MAE across
markets so that you can compare the averages meaningfully, you
can use the same mechanism the Turtles used to normalize the
size of our trades across markets: equating them by using the average true range (ATR).

Trading with an Edge • 67

To isolate the behavior of entries over various markets, it is useful to be able to compare the price behavior of an entry signal
across different time frames. I usually examine a speciﬁc number
of days and then measure the MFE and MAE for that number of
days after each signal is generated. At Trading Blox, where I head
Research and Development for a sophisticated system-testing environment, we have implemented an entry edge measure we call the
E-ratio (short for edge ratio).
The E-ratio combines all of the pieces described above by using
the following formula:
1. Compute the MFE and MAE for the time frame speciﬁed.
2. Divide each of them by the ATR at entry to adjust for
volatility and normalize across markets.
3. Sum each of these values separately and divide by the total
number of signals to get the average volatility-adjusted MFE
and MAE.
4. The E-ratio is the average volatility-adjusted MFE divided
by the average volatility-adjusted MAE.
To deﬁne the time frame, we use the number of days in the
description of the ratio to indicate the number of days over which the
component MFE and MAE were computed. For example, an E10ratio measurement computes the MFE and MAE for 10 days, including the day of entry; an E50-ratio uses 50 days, and so on.
The E-ratio can be used to measure whether an entry has an
edge. For example, you can use it to test whether a completely random entry has any edge. To illustrate, I ran a test of the E-ratio for
the period of the last 10 years by using an entry that randomly

68 • Way of the Turtle

enters long or short at the open, depending on the computer equivalent of a coin ﬂip. The average of 30 individual tests showed an
E5-ratio of 1.01, an E10-ratio of 1.005, and an E50-ratio of 0.997.
These numbers are very close to the 1.0 we would expect, and if
we ran more trials, the numbers would get closer and closer to 1.0.
This is the case because the price is just as likely to go against a
position as it is to go in a direction favorable to a position over any
reasonable time period.
You can also use the E-ratio to examine the major components
of the Donchian Trend system. The two major components of the
entries for this system are a Donchian channel breakout and a trend
portfolio ﬁlter. The Donchian channel breakout is a rule that states
that one should buy when the price exceeds the highest high of the
previous 20 days and sell short when the price goes lower than the
lowest low of the previous 20 days. The trend portfolio ﬁlter means
that you can initiate long trades only in markets in which the 50day moving average is higher than the 300-day moving average and
can initiate short trades only in markets in which the 50-day moving average is lower than the 300-day moving average. One of the
roles of the portfolio ﬁlter is to eliminate markets that are not in a
market state favorable to this system.
Let me show you how to use the E-ratio to examine the tradeentry rules for the Donchian Trend system. All the tests described
below were performed by using a set of 28 high-volume U.S. futures
markets, employing data from January 1, 1996, to June 30, 2006.
The E5-ratio for our sample is 0.99, and the E10-ratio is 1.0. “Wait
a minute,” you might say. “I thought that the E-ratio would be greater
than 1 when an entry had a positive edge.” This is true. However,
remember that we need to consider that the Donchian channel

Trading with an Edge • 69

breakout system is a medium-term, trend-following system, so its entry
needs to have an edge over the medium term, not the short term. One
might say more generally that an entry needs to have an edge only
over the time frame for the system in which it is being used.
The E70-ratio for our entry is 1.20, which means that trades
taken in the direction of a 20-day breakout move on average 20 percent farther in the direction of the breakout than they do in the
opposite direction when one looks at the price movement in the
70 days subsequent to the entry signal.
Figure 5-2 shows how the edge ratio changes for 20-day breakouts over varying numbers of days. First, the edge ratio starts off
below 1.0, meaning that over the very short term there is generally
more movement against a trade taken at a breakout than there is
in the direction of the breakout. This is one of the reasons trading
breakouts can be very difﬁcult psychologically. It is also one of the
reasons you can make money using a countertrend trading style by
betting on the breakout not holding and in favor of a bounce off of
the support or resistance. There is a positive edge for these strategies in the very short term.
Second, the edge ratio begins to climb steadily but still ﬂuctuates fairly erratically on the positive side of 1.0, indicating a positive edge but one where it is difﬁcult to quantify with true precision.

The Trend Portfolio Filter Edge
How do the portfolio selection criteria affect the edge for the
Donchian channel system? You can examine this in two ways. First,
you can look at how the portfolio selection ﬁlter affects the edge of
purely random entries and compare them with the baseline edge

Edge-Ratio as Edge-Ratio Days Varies
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8

• 70 •

0.6
0.4
0.2

Edge-Ratio Days

Figure 5-2

Edge Ratio as Number of Days Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

0

5

15

14

0

5
14
0

13

13

5

0
12
5

12

11

0
10
5
11
0

95

10

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0.0

Trading with an Edge • 71

ratio of 1.0 for random entries without any portfolio ﬁltering. Second, you can combine the ﬁlter with our entry signals to see how the
portfolio trend ﬁlter affects the edge ratio of our breakout signals.
Running a test of 70,000 random entries with the trend portfolio ﬁlter shows a remarkable E70-ratio of 1.27. This is even greater
than the E70-ratio for the entry signal itself. This serves as a clear
indication that this portfolio selection algorithm increases the edge
of the system.
Using a trend portfolio ﬁlter substantially increases the likelihood
of movement in the direction of a trade taken with a breakout. The
E70-ratio for our example moved from 1.20 to 1.33. Further, the
use of a trend ﬁlter combined with a breakout changes the shape
and smoothness of the resulting edge ratio graph (Figure 5-3).
Notice how much smoother the graph in Figure 5-3 is and how
much higher the edge ratio climbs after we add the trend portfolio
ﬁlter. The graph shows that the E120-ratio is about 1.6.
The reason for this result is that breakout trades that go against
the long-term trend have been eliminated. Those trades were a
source of many of the signiﬁcant moves against the initial position
since breakouts that occur in the direction opposite a trend are
much less likely to result in signiﬁcant continuation. These breakouts are also indicative of the market being in a state which is not
as favorable to the Donchian Trend system.

The Exit Edge
Even the exit signals for a system should have an edge if possible.
Unfortunately, it is somewhat more difﬁcult to measure the edge of
an exit. This is the case because exits are dependent on the condi-
