Everyone wants to invest
when you’re at new highs
and making 50 percent a
year. Everyone says they
want to get in at a 10
percent drawdown or a
20 percent, or whatever,
and no one ever does it. I
just want to point out
that right now, here is
another chance to do just
that—buy us at historical
lows—and very few
people are thinking in
those terms. They want to
buy the lows, but never
seem to.
Richard Dennis10

Some turtles won. Some
were dismal failures.
There were reasons
for this.

For example, today is in
the middle of June and
there is a lot of talk about
the weather, the grain
situation, and whether it
rains or snows or is dry. I
have no idea. It’s not the
kind of thing I deal with.
I don’t have any way to
use information like that.
I don’t think anyone else
really does either … If I
think it is going to rain,
perhaps it’s an indication
of how I should dress for
the day, but little else.12

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Traders such as Bill Dunn, Keith Campbell, Millburn Ridgefield,
Bruce Kovner, John Henry, and Ed Seykota know that in order to
aim for and win big profits, trader and client must be aligned. Dunn
is adamant about that alignment:
“Now there is, of course, the possibility of turning down the
leverage and trading more capital, but with less leverage.
That works fine if the client will go along with you and
you’re charging management fees because you’re charging
management fees on the capital and then incentive fees on
the profit. Dunn Capital Management does not charge any
management fees to any of its clients. So we care about the
numbers that are generated.”11
There might be safety with watered down trend following from
a low-risk, low-reward standpoint, but the true way to win the big
money is through Dunn’s approach of higher risk, higher reward.
And when you shoot for higher risk, higher reward, you’re less
inclined to worry about management fees from your clients because
incentive fees on only profits earned can be fantastic paydays. The
key is to be in concert as trend trader Jason Russell notes:
“Managers often say that they are managing to long-term
objectives but act to meet short-term objectives of clients
who have not spent the time understanding what trend
following means to them. As much as the managers,
industry, and regulators try to educate and illustrate, the
ultimate responsibility lies in the hands of the client.”
Of course, you might opt to trade as a trend follower for your
own account and never hire one of the professional trend following
traders. In that instance, you can pay fees to yourself for a job well
done.

Fortune Favors the Bold
Trend following, like any entrepreneurial endeavor, demands
you be responsible for yourself. Charles Faulkner emphasized the
point:
“Trend trading and even trading in general isn’t for
everyone. As too few people check out what the day-to-day

Chapter 11 • The Game

life of a trader is like, and trend trading specifically, I
strongly recommend they find out before making a lifechanging commitment.”
What does “life-changing commitment” involve? You commit to
not wanting to be right all of the time. Most people, let’s face it, must
be right. They live to have other people know they’re right. They
don’t even want the success. They don’t want to win. They don’t
want money. They just want to be right. The winners, on the other
hand, just want to win.

283

Optimism means
expecting the best, but
confidence means
knowing how to handle
the worst.
Max Gunther13

What else can you do? You commit to patience and faith in a
trading system that is not structured on quarterly performance or
some other artificial measure of the “mass.” You work hard to gain
experience. Great experience leads to great intuition. You commit
to thinking for the long term and not feeling insecure if you don’t
have a steady earnings stream of 1–2 percent a month. You might
have one year where you are down 10 percent. The following year
you might be down 15 percent. The next year you might be up 115
percent. If you quit at the end of the second year, you will never get
to the third year. That’s reality.
Trend following trader Larry Hite once passed a note to me
about “bets” that hints at that very reality:
“Life is nothing more than a series of bets and bets are
really nothing more than questions and their answers.
There is no real difference between, “Should I take another
hit on this Blackjack hand?” and “Should I get out of the
way of that speeding and wildly careening bus?” Each
shares two universal truths: a set of probabilities of
potential outcomes and the singular outcome that takes
place. Every day, we place hundreds, if not thousands, of
bets—large and small, some seemingly well considered, and
others made without a second thought. The vast majority of
the latter, life’s little gambles made without any thought,
might certainly be trivial. “Should I tie my shoes?” Seems
to offer no big risk, nor any big reward. While others, such
as the aforementioned “speeding and wildly careening bus”
would seem to have greater impact on our lives. However, if
deciding not to tie your shoes that morning causes you to
trip and fall down in the middle of the road when you finally

Although this may seem a
paradox, all exact science
is dominated by the idea
of approximation.
Bertrand Russell14

284

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

decide to fold your hand and give that careening bus plenty
of leeway, well then, in hindsight the trivial has suddenly
become paramount.”
As a trend follower, you commit to a choice that is anything but
trivial: Trade yourself or let a trend following trader trade for you.
There are pros and cons to both choices and you won’t determine
your best direction until you get in the game and stop with the
“buy-and-hold long-only everything will be alright” nonsense. 2008
was a sea change. It was a turning point. The big question, “Will
your behavior change now that you know better?”

Afterword
“If you can find someone who is really open to seeing anything,
then you have found the raw ingredient of a good trader,
and I saw that in Bruce right away.”
—Michael Marcus on Bruce Kovner

Acceptance
The first edition of Trend Following hit the streets in April
2004. Almost immediately, the book made a splash landing in the
top 100 of all books available at Amazon.com. One hedge fund that
I had never heard of bought 1,000 copies because they liked the
message and wanted to use it as an educational tool. Another fund
bought 3,000 copies. Quickly, the success of the book brought me
in contact with an assortment of Wall Street professionals.
Much of that recognition started in Baltimore at Legg Mason’s
headquarters. Richard Cripps, the Chief Market Strategist at Legg
Mason, wrote a review of Trend Following. Following his review, he
invited me to Legg Mason’s headquarters for lunch with his
colleague Timothy McCann. We talked about my book and the Legg
Mason Equity Compass, a systematic trading model for stocks. After
our conversation, Cripps escorted me up a flight of stairs to a
nondescript door. I had no idea where we were headed. Upon
285

Success and happiness—
the conditions needed to
thrive on this earth—are
reflections of the choices
we make.
Brett N. Steenbarger

286

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

entering the room, it was a surprise to find it filled with young
banking associates listening to a speaker at a podium. Michael
Mauboussin, Legg Mason’s Chief Investment Strategist, motioned
for me to sit down to the side. I recognized that the speaker was Bill
Miller, the fund manager of Legg Mason Value Trust. At the time
Miller had beaten the S&P 500 Index for 14 straight years. (He has
since had a steep drawdown along with the likes of Warren Buffett
and Ken Heebner.)
Most of the Ivy League
guys I know are so used
to being “right” they get
very uncomfortable
dealing with
uncertainty—when there
is no right answer. Their
egos often make them so
afraid of being “wrong,”
that they’re unable to
make good bets. They
aren’t comfortable with
the idea of risk, because
they don’t know how to
assess it or measure it.
[They have been] taught
to absorb knowledge, not
what to do with it.
Larry Hite, Hite Capital

Miller spoke for a few more minutes, and then introduced me to
the audience inviting me to the podium. Until that moment, I had no
idea I was going to speak. For the next hour, Miller, from one side of
the room, and Mauboussin, from the other side, alternately peppered
me with questions about trend following, risk management, and
technical analysis. As I continued to field questions, it was clear that
the audience was primarily fundamentally trained but curious and
open to hearing about new ideas and concepts such as trend
following.
After the presentation, I thanked Miller for the opportunity to
make my case and was curious how he found out about Trend
Following. He said: “I read a lot. I surf Amazon.com for all types of
books. I came across yours, bought it, liked it, and told all my
people at Legg Mason that they should read it.”
At that moment, I knew Trend Following was catching on.
Forget sales (which were very good)—I knew that if the book’s
message had struck a chord with a long-ime mutual fund manager,
not trading as a trend following trader, I was on to something, but
acceptance did not stop there.
The same curiosity that would ultimately push me to write
Trend Following motivated me to seek out and interview even more
trend following traders in person. I interviewed, either in their
offices or homes, many of the world’s best performing trend
following traders (Bernard Drury, Michael Clarke, and Grant Smith
of Millburn Ridgefield to name a few), collectively managing over
$10 billion USD. I also sat down with short-term systematic trader
Toby Crabel of Crabel Capital at his home in St. Thomas
overlooking Magen’s Bay. They all liked Trend Following.
Not long after those initial meetings, I had the opportunity to sit
down with Larry Hite at his home in Manhattan and at his office on
Park Avenue. In the 1990s, Hite was instrumental in transforming a
sleepy, 200-year-old London-based sugar-trading firm known as

After word

287

ED & F Man into The Man Group, now the largest hedge fund
manager in the world with over $40 billion USD under
management. The fundamental driver of Man’s growth was the
application of a risk-management concept developed by Hite that
he calls Asymmetrical Leverage (ASL). For The Man Group, Hite
devised a “guaranteed fund” that offered investors above-market
rates of return while setting aside a portion of the money in zerocoupon bonds to protect the principal.
Chatting in Hite’s living room, eating sushi at one of his favorite
New York City spots, and talking about the joys of entrepreneurship
was great. However, it was later in his office, as Hite stood at the
chalkboard explaining some of the basic concepts of asymmetrical
leverage that I really “got” him. He point blank said it was
impossible to predict the movement of any market. Then he asked
me, “What is the value of perfect knowledge?” “What if we knew the
ending prices at the end of the year across a portfolio of markets?”
And that was when he told me about his experiment: “In an attempt
to answer these questions, we went to our databases and looked up
the prices on December 31st of a given year. We asked ourselves:
‘With this knowledge, how much leverage could we have used to get
the maximum advantage at the beginning of that same year on
January 1st?’ We found that even with perfect foresight of the
ending price, we could not sustain more than three to one leverage
because we could not predict the path it took to get there.”
Luckily, I had a gut feeling where he was headed, but I am sure
he stumps many people. The big lesson from Hite, however, was
“bets.” And it was an excerpt from one of his speeches that really
struck the chord:
“Life is nothing more than a series of bets, and bets are
really nothing more than questions and their answers.
There is no real difference between, ‘Should I take another
hit on this Blackjack hand?’ and ‘Should I get out of the way
of that speeding and wildly careening bus?’ Each shares two
universal truths: a set of probabilities of potential outcomes
and the singular outcome that takes place. Everyday we
place hundreds if not thousands of bets—large and small,
some seemingly well considered, and others made without
a second thought. The vast majority of the latter, life’s little
gambles made without any thought, might certainly be
trivial. ‘Should I tie my shoes?’ seems to offer no big risk,

Our response to this
environment has to be
disciplined. If
disagreement of opinions
leads to trends, we need
to maintain our positions.
Similarly, we must be
willing to close or change
positions without
ambiguity if called for.
Risk management is
especially opportune at
this time. Will Rogers
summed it up succinctly:
“Even if you are on the
right track, you’ll get run
over if you just sit there.”
Mark S. Rzepczynski
President, John W. Henry & Company

288

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

nor any big reward. While others, such as the aforementioned ‘speeding and wildly careening bus,’ would seem to
have greater impact on our lives. However, if deciding not
to tie your shoes that morning causes you to trip and fall
down in the middle of the road when you finally decide to
fold your hand and give that careening bus plenty of leeway,
well then, in hindsight the trivial has suddenly become
paramount.”
Even more disturbing are
the extreme lies in your
“approach.” Trend
followers use “systems”
and “money
management” to make
money based on
momentum. They buy
high and hope that there
are enough suckers to
buy higher. How can you
describe that as sound
investing? You make it
sound like this is some
form of intelligent
investing. Like there is
some rhyme or reason.
There are no sound
principles behind it. No
intelligence. No reason.
Just hold and hope and
hope you get out before
the crowd. Trend
following depends on
someone else being
dumber than you.
Trend Following book critic

While putting together a documentary film (Broke: The New
American Dream) over the course of 2007-2008 I saw exactly what
Hite was speaking about first hand. From people tied up in exotic
mortgages facing foreclosure to people playing the lottery every day
using “systems,” the ability to think in terms of odds is just not
natural for most people.

Inefficient Markets
As every author knows, especially first-time unknown authors
writing about relatively obscure subjects such as trend following
trading, you spend a significant amount of your time promoting
your book. Because I fit the definition of “first-time unknown
author” to a tee, that’s exactly what I did, with no idea whether
Trend Following would sell 10 or 10,000 copies. Thankfully, the
book has sold over 100,000 copies and has been translated into
German, Korean, Japanese, Chinese (traditional and simplified),
French, Russian, and Turkish. As a result of the book’s success, I
soon found myself point person for trend following. With each
forecast of trend following doom and gloom, usually in the form of
book review, column, or interview, I would “set the record straight.”
I’d usually start by addressing the assumption that generates
much of the confusion in the first place—the efficient market
hypothesis. The hypothesis essentially says that you can’t find an
edge to beat the market, and simply sticking with a benchmark or
index is the best path to take for profit (believe that still after
2008?). Proponents of the efficient market hypothesis argue that
because markets are efficient and prices fully reflect all
information, traders who consistently outperform the market do so
out of luck, not skill. Of course, in the real world, markets are both
efficient and inefficient, some more than others. In the real world,
there are traders who do beat the market by a wide margin, and
many of them are trend followers.

After word

289

What accounts for the patience, discipline, and commitment to
long-term success as a trend follower? It might ultimately be about
making a profit, but it is also an understanding and keen
appreciation for the scientific method. Just as scientists start with
a hypothesis, trend followers start with a certain view of the world.
Their divergent view sees the world in trends. Facing the reality of
any market environment head on is the philosophical foundation of
trend following. Yet, if the approach is that simple (and profitable),
then why does trend following continue to be ignored or confused
by so-called bright and market-wise people?
A recent email from one skeptic confessed that, “…the
consistent volatility [and drawdown] of [trend following] makes it
an untenable strategy, at least for me.”
Trend following is, indeed, untenable for those who cannot
stand the feelings of being in a drawdown or who can’t stand dealing
with volatility. Trend followers understand that if you avoid
volatility and drawdown, you will avoid large profits as well, a
mindset that can be threatening to those who feel safest when they
think they are pursuing supposedly low-risk trading methods. In my
interviews with many of the great traders, we wondered why so
many criticize trend following for drawdowns (which they typically
recover from rather quickly), but seemingly ignore stock market
drawdowns like those in 2008. This focus on trend following
drawdowns probably accounts for The Financial Times’ Philip
Coggan’s tentative review:

Hendrik Houthakker, a
prominent Harvard
economist, ran a test on
trend following…he ran it
on one contract. I believe
it was wheat. Well some
years it made money,
some years it didn’t make
money. Houthakker…
didn’t try to trend follow
across the board [just one
market]. He came to the
conclusion that trend
following did not work.
Larry Hite, Hite Capital

“It is possible that momentum-based strategies might work.
Academic studies have suggested some success in the short
term, although mean reversion occurs over longer periods.”
“It is possible that momentum-based strategies might work?”
Don’t the results of Sunrise Capital, TransTrend, John W. Henry,
David Harding, Jerry Parker, Larry Hite, George Crapple, Ken
Tropin, Salem Abraham, Christian Baha, Dinesh Desai, Paul Rabar,
Tom Shanks, Louis Bacon, Bruce Kovner, Bernard Drury, Michael
Clarke, William Eckhardt, Liz Cheval, and Bill Dunn, to name just
a few, count for something beyond “might work”? I’ll trust the
actual trading results of these traders over the “academic studies”
and “suggestions” that Coggan relies on.
Bottom line, no one can make an intellectually honest
argument against the hard performance data of trend followers—
even though many people try. To that end, to quell naysayers, I

I get the same sort of
value from these books
[Trend Following] as I do
from studying the Keech
cult, supernatural
operators such as Uri
Geller and horoscope
readers.
Victor Niederhoffer
See page 164 for more on
Niederhoffer.

290

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

have added performance reports on multiple trend-following
trading traders to Appendix B, “Performance Guide.” These monthby-month performance data histories should be an “aha” moment
for people who did not know about it and an irritant for those who
want to pretend it doesn’t exist. Are you prepared to honestly deal
with the reality of what the performance data shows?
Take, for example, the following from trend follower Salem
Abraham’s commentary to investors:
I decided almost 20 years
ago that rather than
become an expert trend
follower I could better
leverage my time by
becoming an expert at
identifying other trend
followers. The decision
has been very rewarding.
Having placed over a
billion dollars with trend
followers over the years, I
have become increasingly
convinced that the level of
passion, discipline,
intelligence and hard
work to become a long
term success at trend
following is enormous.
Jon C. Sundt, President,
Altegris Investments

“Our research allows us to select trades that put the odds
in our favor. However, it takes time to prove that the odds
truly are in our favor. The statistics that follow demonstrate
this truth:
• Percentage of time we make money in any day:
54 percent
• Percentage of time we make money in any month:
56 percent
• Percentage of time we make money in any 3 months:
64 percent
• Percentage of time we make money in any 6 months:
77 percent
• Percentage of time we make money in any 12 months:
92 percent
• Percentage of time we make money in any 24 months:
100 percent
“We do not have a crystal ball, so we do not know when this
current losing period will end. However, we can look in the
rear view mirror and see that when we experienced periods
like this before, not only did we survive, but we thrived.”
Those are the facts of life as long-time trend following traders
deal with daily. Would it nice if the roller coaster ride was
smoother? Perhaps, but you have to deal with the real world, and
the real world is uncertain. Ride the bucking bronco, baby…or you
can always accept the fake security of buy and hold investing.

Trend Following Critics
My interviews with the top traders confirmed what I have
always believed and repeatedly say to be the primary reason people

After word

are confused about trend following. Their confusion is linked
directly to a trading and investing culture familiar and therefore
comfortable with only one approach to the markets: fundamental
analysis (buy and hold, long only, etc.). Fundamental traders and
investors think the only way to beat the market is to gather all the
information you can find. They want news, they want CNBC, they
want Jim Cramer, they want crop reports, they want OPEC rumors,
they want Bernanke’s shoe size—they believe extraneous
information will help them to make profitable trading decisions.
Trend followers, on the other hand, say, “Enough!” They know the
market price is the best source of information about the market
direction because the market price is the aggregate vote of
everyone. Think about it—what else can you truly believe in except
the market price? The market price can’t be fixed or doctored. It is
real.
What are some of the arguments put forth by trend following
critics? When Peter Deoteris at Welling@Weeden reviewed Trend
Following, he diminished the trend following community by
mistakenly referring to trend followers as “a couple of commodities
traders.” The universe of trend following traders is hardly a party of
two traders alone. Clearly there are many successful trend followers,
and the majority of them trade stocks, currencies, bonds, and
commodities. What is the implication of the word “commodity?” by
Deoteris. Many people assume the term “commodity” means “risky.”
That criticism conveniently ignores the fact that all trading is risky.
The trick is to understand the risk in any trading approach and to
know what to do with it on a daily basis.
Deoteris also perpetuated the myth that trend followers attempt
to forecast significant market events:
“…there clearly is a strong element of revisionist history at
work here…looking back and using subsequent events to
justify various traders’ positions. When those positions
were established, however, they were based on logic and
assumed risks that were often entirely different.”
As any reader of Trend Following knows, trend followers take
trading positions with no knowledge that an event or crisis will
occur. They take their positions as markets move. With price
leading the way, they follow along. The fact that these particular
small, initial price trends lead to big trends that lead to big events
is not something anyone can predict. Do you think trend followers
