
Q.: You wait for prices to stop going down and going against you?

A : Yes. T'll give you one example that I use. Technically I’ve
seen and I’ve tested on Trade Station that markets that are in good
uptrends and followed by trend followers, have anywhere from
two-, three-, or four-day price drop correction, which is, in my
mind, a reflection of the trend followers cutting losses. If the trend
is over, this might not apply. But frequently what I’ve found is that
the trend is going to reassert itself. What happens is the market
eventually takes out it’s high the day before and, let’s say, we had a
three-day correction. So you had down moves day one, two, three,
and on day four I’m watching and I’m thinking, “Are they out?
Are they out? Are they out? I don’t know. I don’t know.” I’ve
reevaluated everything. I’ve probably spent hours thinking about
if I'd do this trade again and all of a sudden it takes out yesterday's
high. At that point, most likely, I'm going to start to execute and

205


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

buy and basically this is my averaging down. I figure that this trend
should now snap back, it should continue, the trend should go up
and at that stage, I do tighten up my stops. I will look to suffer
less standard deviation risk because, by my logic, this should be
over. We’ve just had a pretty good standard deviation correction
in prices—I think that the trend followers are out. If this is a real
trend, it should reexert itself. If it doesn’t now, I’m out because
I’ve doubled up and I am in a risky position. If it goes wrong, not
only do you have a move that is one standard deviation worse than
I thought, we’re now exploring standard deviation two, so I’m out.

Q: Do you find any drudgery about this business?

A : Well mainly the recordkeeping, the data you have to keep. You
have to keep your data in meticulous tick-by-tick format or daily
data points. You can’t miss a day. You've got to update all that stuff.
You have to keep your records correct. I’m trading many different
markets. I might have positions on in 10 different markets and
reasonable option positions against them in maybe five, So now
I’ve got to make sure that not only are my positions correct in the
accounting on the statement but in my computer, too, and that I’m
monitoring the risk correctly. That I find just tremendous drudgery
and the end of the year just getting all the files all together for tax
purposes is a mess. You know the shoe boxes and the reams of data
and going through it and seeing what I did and didn’t make on this
or that trade.

Q.: Do you do your own taxes?
A: No. Too complicated.

Q.- you trade a lot of foreign markets. Do you have tax accoun-
tants in every country, some are not specialist in all the markets,
so do you have a lot of people whom you seek advice from?

206


THE TREASURE HUNTER

A : Yes, I do, and the tax laws for trading and investing are
complicated in and of themselves just here in the United States.

Q.: They get infinitely more complicated when you go overseas?

A: It can get more complicated overseas. There’s some planning
that you can do for the U.S. stuff. Try and find someone who
specializes in accounting for traders. Don’t go to HR Block and
don’t go to some generic accounting firm that might be great in
the basics but they don’t know how to do taxes for traders. You are
also going to have to delineate your trading between what’s your
real active stuff that you’re doing versus what is you more passive
investment activity. Then, when you go overseas, it’s hard enough
just to learn our tax system—to try and learn the foreign ones are
almost impossible. So my advice to you is that your best bet is
to try and take advantage of double-tax treaties. I talk to experts
who structure my investments in these countries by either using
America’s double-tax agreements or they will set up our business in
a country that has a double-tax agreement in the country that I’m
going to be investing in. It just simplifies everything and keeps it all
governed here. I would urge people to really get with a professional
because the laws are complex, they're always changing, and if you
make a mistake, any amateur auditor from the IRS will get your
records. I mean it’s all on paper. It’s very easy to go through your
records see what you did wrong and even if you did it wrong
honestly, you’re going to be looking at higher taxes, penalties,
interest, and things you don’t want.

: Okay Indi we've been at this for a while and it’s getting time
for lunch. How would you summarize the most important parts of
this interview? Please feel free to add anything we may not have
covered.

A : Gordon Gekko said that lunch is for wimps [laughter]. All
traders are different, but we can find some common ground. First,
I will start at the beginning. Every great trader who I have ever

207


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

read about has had the baptism-under-fire trade. You know the
trade which occurred early in your career, where you nearly blew
it all and the event becomes a type of soul searching exercise where
you decide whether or not you can continue in this arena. If you
are a slow learner like me it actually happens twice. My warning
to all traders is that this will happen to you. What happens next is
up to you. Vince Lombardi, the all-time-great American football
coach, said, “Its not whether you get knocked down, its whether
you get up that counts.”

Second, focusing on the money and or pressure to make money
eliminates a large pool of potential traders from ever becoming
successful traders. I was lucky in that I was born to parents who
instilled in me at a very early age that they would love and respect
me and elevate my self worth no matter what my net worth was.
When I first started trading, I felt psychologically invincible be-
cause I knew that if I totally blew out trading then I could at least
count on two people who would always be there for me no matter
what happened. Thank you, Dad and Mom.

As time goes on, I try to surround myself with people: friends,
girlfriends, investors, etc. who do not pressure me to make money.
I am not aware of any successful trader who feels that putting on
massive pressure to make money will enhance their trading. We
all know that getevenitis—you know, the disease of getting even
with a market that just took some money from you—is the most
expensive form of revenge in this business.

In another vein, you wouldn’t think of getting in the boxing
ring with Mike Tyson and then focus on the belt you could win.
You would be knocked out in no time because you would be too
busy staring at the belt you could win instead of on the task at
hand. Don’t focus on the prize. Focus on the process. Similarly,
Mr. Miyagi would be a great trader coach because he taught the
Karate Kid to not focus on the karate or the black belts, but on
the process itself. He would show him how to sand da floor, paint
da fence, wax on, wax off. Embedded in that disciplined learning
approach was the attainment of black belt proficiency in the art
of karate. So my advice is to go out there and wax on and wax
off—meaning focus on the process. Each trader is different in this

regard.
208


THE TREASURE HUNTER

Third, go out and watch the movie: Million Dollar Baby and
listen to Clint Eastwood’s rule number one for becoming a Million
Dollar Baby: “Protect yourself!” No capital, no trading, no life.

Fourth, you need intellectual freedom and flexibility to be suc-
cessful in this arena. Go back and reread the part of this interview
where I described the best trade I ever had. Jesse Livermore once
said: “Our job in speculating is not to be on the bull side or the
bear side, but on the winning side.”

Finally, there are two pieces of advice in commodity trading
legend which has been passed down through the ages as gospel.
One: “You must cut your losses and let your profits ride!” Two:
“Losers average losers!” Both are conceptually correct, yet the
logic of both has been blown out of proportion, if not twisted, over
time. Today it is considered a sin for any self-respecting trader to
not cut losses quickly, sometimes too quickly. Today it is also a
trading sin to average losing trades. We need to reexamine these
ideas with a greater level of maturity and sophistication in order to
continue to be able to win at trading in the future.

In 1974 Muhammad Ali in the “Rumble in the Jungle” against
George Foreman in Kinshasa, Zaire, used a strategy in boxing that
was considered a boxing sin at the time to become Heavyweight
Champion of the World against great odds. It was the so called
rope-a-dope strategy. The theory at the time was that lying on the
ropes was wrong because it exposed a fighter to more punishment
than if he moved around the ring. This did not discourage Ali
from using the strategy against Foreman. Foreman was a harder
puncher than Ali. Most analysts felt that Ali would have to stay
away from Foreman to beat him. Instead, Ali started to lie on the
ropes by the end of the first round and used the ropes for the rest
of the fight. Foreman’s strategy, which was totally obvious (just
like cutting losses and letting profits run in trading) was to cut off
the ring, get Ali to the ropes and hit him. Since Ali was willingly
lying on the ropes, Foreman would plant himself in front of Ali
and punch as hard as he could. Foreman landed constant blows to
the body, but due to Ali’s focus on protecting himself had trouble
landing to the head. Ali scored on Foreman with an occasional jab
or series of jabs as Foreman tried to reposition himself or catch
his breath. Foreman began to tire from all this activity (in trading

209


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

terms, getting repeatedly stopped out and then trying to reenter
at worse levels) and from the occasional punches he was taking
from Ali (in trading terms, the actual capital losses related to the
stops getting hit and possibly not being able to reenter at favorable
levels). Foreman was visibly finished by the end of the fifth round
and eventually knocked out in the eighth.

If Clint Eastwood can take great trading advice and apply it
to boxing, perhaps I can take great boxing advice and apply it to
trading. The greatest boxing advice I could find inverted a boxing
sin and converted it into a favorable outcome against great odds.
This advice came from the greatest boxer of all time, Muhammad
Ali. Thank you, Muhammad Ali, you have always been a hero.

My commodity trading version of rope-a-dope is to take a com-
modity trading sin. That is, not cutting losses quickly and then
making it worse for a brief period of time and space—but don’t
expose yourself too long—by adding to the loser trade. I have
found that in the long run I am achieving better results, behaving
with better discipline and emotional control than the people who
mindlessly cut losses too quickly and won’t even consider averaging
down to improve odds. Warren Buffett once said, “I buy a stock I
like for 100, it goes to 90, I still like it, 1 buy more. How is that more
risky?” Just like Warren Buffett, I also have trouble perfectly tim-
ing trades. This strategy has at times enhanced my performance
in spite of my initial poor timing. It definitely involves superior
discipline and emotional control—try it sometime—than someone
who allows themselves to get whipsawed too soon out of a per-
fectly good trend. My risk is increased for only a very short period
of time and movement. Be careful about exposing yourself for too
long. My opponents are getting tired out both in terms of physical
capital and mental capital due to the fact that they got thrown out
of a good trade too quickly and now must try—and I emphasize
try—to reenter later, most likely at higher prices, and with less real
capital and less mental capital than when they started. Constantly
getting stopped out and trying to reenter trades is very tiring from
both a mental capital and physical capital perspective.

Please, don’t take trading lore for granted. Step back and try
to take a more mature and sophisticated view of how to achieve
results. “Whipsaw is for losers!” Did you ever consider that? If so,

210


THE TREASURE HUNTER

I hope you will find your own version of the rope-a-dope strategy.
You will need to first understand the concept of value for buys and
possibly the concept of hysteria for sales as well as the concept of
margin of error for both buys and sells. I wish you all the best of
luck in your endeavors. Thank you all, and now let’s go to lunch.

LESSONS FROM INDI JONES
Protect Yourself, Protect Your Capital

The most important pearl of wisdom from Indi Jones is how trad-
ing relates to boxing. According to Indi, the number one rule in
trading is the same as the number one rule in boxing, which is to
always protect yourself. “No capital, no trading, no life,” he states
succinctly. So how do you protect your capital? Always know your
worst-case scenario. Before you place a trade, figure out what you
are willing to lose in terms of points, ticks, and dollars. Check your
risk/reward ratio and make sure that no one trade has the potential
to destroy your entire account. As a general rule of thumb, Indi
Jones does not like to lose more than 5 percent of his equity on a
single trade. This way, even if the trade becomes a loser, he can
still survive to take another swing at the market.

Along the same lines, always have a backup plan. When Indi
first started out, he knew that if he lost his $25,000 starting capital,
he could find a job loading UPS trucks at night in less than a month.
As time progressed, he was able to build up some savings, which
allowed him to set up stop-losses on his life. In case he ever had a
major trading loss, he was able to put money away in places that
he could not touch, such as trusts or charitable foundations.

Take the Risk, Take the Plunge

Once you know your risk, you can take the plunge. One of the
worst sins in trading is to be right in your analysis, have the asset
move dramatically in your favor but not be on board for the ride.
In some cases, when a breakout into a new trend occurs, there
could be large extension moves with little retracement. In order
not to miss the trade, Indi will initiate a probative position just to
get some exposure and then if it retraces against him, he will look

211


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

for opportunity to add to that position. The key, however, is not
just to add blindly. If the asset does retrace, the retracement can
last for two, three, or even four days. What Indi will do is wait for
the price to show that the trend will continue before taking the
plunge again.

When You Are in Sync with the Markets,
Keep Pressing the Trade

Once you are in sync with the market, step on the gas. Indi Jones’
most memorable trade was in orange juice, where he made money
on the ride up as well as the ride down. Having banked profits
when a snowstorm sent orange juice prices skyrocketing, Indi was
looking to flip his trade and sell when prices failed to extend their
rally after CNBC started showing pictures of oranges covered
with icicles. Having made significant profits over the past few
trading days, Indi stepped on the gas and sold the commodity
aggressively. Yet before doing so he knew exactly how much he
wanted to risk. At worst, he was not willing to lose more than 40
percent of the money that he made on the move up. This is an
extremely important tip to remember if you are going to press
your luck in the markets—never risk all of your profits.

Be Aware of Market Sentiment

Indi always has his pulse on the sentiment of the market. Every
single day he speaks to many different types of market players and
reads at least 10 different newsletters. If market sentiment is very
one sided and price acts the other way by breaking a significant
support zone, for example, it may be a good signal for Indi to
bet against the consensus. The flush out can last for days if not
weeks in the commodity markets, especially if it’s a news-driven
surprise that confounds market’s expectations. You, too, can keep
on top of the overall market sentiment by reading newsletters,
blogs, mainstream media, as well as looking at the Commitment
of Traders Report that provides information on commercial and
noncommercial positioning.

212


CHAPTER 8

THE NEWS JUNKIE
ROLAND CAMPBELL

A veteran of the technology bubble, Roland Campbell likes to
practice the Warren Buffett way of trading, which is to trade only
what makes sense to him. This tactic has served him well, as he
went short stocks with negative earnings and long stocks with pos-
itive earnings before the stock market collapsed in 2001. Since
then he has moved to trading currencies, employing much of the
same fundamental-based trading that he did in stocks—albeit on
a shorter-term basis. Roland’s strategy is to trade news flow, but
only news flow that catches the market off guard. When everyone
is wrong and getting stopped out, that is when he wants to be in
the market. Fading market sentiment and psychology is a very im-
portant aspect of his trading and one that has proven well for him.
He looks for big moves based on misaligned sentiment, which is
how he once managed to turn $60,000 into $100,000 on one single
trade. Crediting part of his success to the Chinese practice of Feng
Shui, Roland believes that the comfort of his trading environment
helps him stay focused and relaxed when he trades.

213


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

We took an afternoon to talk to Roland over the phone and he
was kind enough to share his tricks of the trade.

Q:can you tell us a little bit about yourself?

A : Sure. Actually I don’t trade full-time. I do it on a part-time
basis so that makes it a little easier for me. It takes the pressure off
because I have a steady income. My work is scheduled such that
I’m able to trade the markets just about all the time. I would say
most days during the week or anytime there’s market moving news,
I’m available to trade it. I work a lot of Saturdays and Sundays, so
I don’t have to make a certain amount of money. I feel like I’ve
done well because of that. If it was my only source of income, it
would be a little bit scary, but it would still be manageable.

Q.:s0 what do you actually do as your full-time job?

A : ['m a systems engineer for a large bank. My work doesn’t
relate in anyway to trading.

Q.. were you ever exposed to trading when you were younger?

A : I basically came across it by myself. My family is very, very
conservative in that regard. They believe in saving money, just
putting it in the bank. My dad does have a 401(k), but that was
about it. So it wasn’t discussed very often. It was actually when I
moved to San Francisco during the tech boom, to take a job there.
Everyone around me was trading stocks such and I felt completely
lost. I didn’t know what was going on. So I felt like I wanted to be
involved in those conversations and started doing my own research
and finding companies that I liked. Once I found those companies
and started learning a little bit about them, I would invest small
chunks of money in them.

214


THE NEWS JUNKIE

Q.- your education background is in technology, but did you ever

take any economics or finance courses?

A : I did, but those were just required courses. I took nothing
beyond the required education.

Q. How did you figure out what kind of stocks you were inter-
ested in trading?

A : For the most part I knew I wanted to trade in and out, so
I wanted a stock that had a lot of volume. I traded the big tech
names in the beginning, mainly through word of mouth. Actually I
caught the market right about when it was breaking. So I learned
a lot about shorting stocks at that time, too. I was able to come out
pretty well in the market and kind of step up to the plate when
other people were dumping.

Q.:s0 you mean shorting, right? How did you learn to do that?

A. Because I’m always very pessimistic. I saw all these companies
out there and thought, “How can they be possibly making money?”
I looked at the balance sheets of most of them and they weren't.
They were losing money. So I said, “Why doesn’t everybody short
the stock?—I don’t understand.” So I would short the stocks that
weren't making money, buy the ones that were, and see how it all
fell. And it turned out really well. I would just cover the shorts
and then put more money into the companies that were making
money—like banks—those were my favorites back then.

Q.:s0 you traded the Warren Buffett way by making sure that
the fundamentals lined up?

A : Exactly.

215


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:s0 how long were you doing that for?

A : I started that in about 2000, that was when I really started
trading. I did a little bit of options trading as well. Similar strategies,
though.

Quin the beginning was it all about fundamental analysis? Did
you ever look at price charts?

A : In the beginning it was all fundamental. I didn’t really know
anything about technicals. I hadn’t gotten that far along.

Q.: How much did you start with?
A : Probably $5,000 to $10,000 in that range.

Q.: Was this your savings or money that you borrowed?

A : It was actually savings. But it was my first time trading. So
obviously any little hit hurt. Now that ’'m more experienced, I
realize I probably shouldn’t have been trading that money.

Quin the beginning when you first traded stocks, you did well.
Did that streak continue?

A : Actually, I feel like I got extremely lucky in the beginning.
That was probably a curse because it hooked me into the markets.
I was up 10 or 20 percent in a few days and I thought, “I’m meant
to be in this market.” Within a year though, I blew up the account
because I just traded too fast, too hard in the beginning.

Q.- After a few months you were overtrading?
A : Right. I was trading too often, that was my problem.
216


THE NEWS JUNKIE

Q.- what's typically your style? Are you someone who gets out of
trades by the end of the day? Or do you end up holding them for
longer?

A : Back then I would hold. If it was a good strong fundamental
company, I had no problems holding them for a couple weeks. But
on the side I would do the little tech plays in and out within an
hour of two, and those caught up to me.

Q.:s0 what was your return like in the beginning?

A : Let’s see, that first account I basically blew up in about six
months. So then I opened my next account, promising myself I
wouldn’t take the risk because I stood in front of a lot of very
strong companies and tried to short them, like Expedia, Krispy
Kreme Donut, and just got crushed. That’s where most of my
losses came from, two or three very bad trades.
