
UNSUCSESSFUL TRADERS
There are many reasons why traders are not successful. These reasons can be
broken down into three broad categories.
Lack of Skills
The trader is generally not aware that the trading environment is different
from all other environments. Trading has the appearance of something that
should be easy to do coupled with the possibility of making vast amounts of
money in a relatively short period of time.
The trader will thus create some inflated expectations of success.
Adherence to these inflated expectations without the appropriate skills equals
disappointment which equals pain which equals psychological damage which
34

equals fear. Fear diminishes the trader's ability to be objective, execute his
trades, or learn about the fundamental nature of the markets.
Of course, it is possible to make money without the appropriate skills.
However, without these skills the trader will invariably lose what he made
back to the markets plus more. The result is disappointment, pain,
psychological damage, and fear.
People generally don't know how to repair psychological damage and as a
result don't know how to release themselves from their fear. To compensate,
we learn some very sophisticated ways of covering our fear up. In society we
can get by and even be successful with a facade of confidence because people
will generally support each other's illusions about themselves. The market,
however, has no vested interest in supporting anyone's illusions about
himself. If a trader is feeling fearful, he can try to cover it up all he wants but
his trading results will readily reflect his true feelings.
Limiting Beliefs
Most people have a whole assortment of beliefs that argue against their
success as a trader. Some of these beliefs you may be consciously aware of,
most of them you may not be aware of. In any case, you cannot negate their
significance in how they will determine and affect your behavior as a trader.
Many traders will try to circumvent confronting these limiting beliefs by
becoming an expert market analyst. It doesn't matter how good a market analyst
you become; if you don't release yourself from the effects of these beliefs, you
won't be successful to the extent these limiting beliefs have power in your mental
system. There are many market gurus who can predict market moves with
uncanny accuracy but can't make money as a trader. Either they don't know the
nature of beliefs and how they affect and determine behavior, or they don't want
to confront the issues surrounding these beliefs. You have to want to do it or
nothing will happen. And if you choose not to, you will be subjecting yourself to
the same recurring cycles of negative experiences again and again until you either
decide to work through whatever issues are necessary or lose all your money and
have to give it up.
Lack of Self-Discipline
If the type of environmental conditions exist that are beyond your skill level to
respond to appropriately (without doing harm to yourself), then you will need to
institute some rules and limitations to guide your behavior until you learn how
to act in your best interests. When you were a child your parents didn't let you
cross the street by yourself because the consequences of your inability to cross
safely might have precluded your getting a second chance. When you were able
to make the appropriate distinctions about the nature of traffic, your parents
trusted you enough to cross the street on your own.
Until they trusted you, they always feared the possibility of your getting hit by
a car. As a result of their fear, they restricted your freedom of movement,
35

regardless of the opportunities that may have existed for you across the street.
Your interaction with the trading environment works the same way. The
difference is that no one is stopping you from standing in the middle of the street
(metaphorically) to get hit by a truck. You are the only one who can stop
yourself. After you have been hit once or twice, it might not be so easy to cross
the street, regardless of how good the opportunities look on the other side.
What makes it even more difficult (continuing with the traffic metaphor) to
step out into the street is when you further realize that the cars and trucks can
come at you in a seemingly random fashion. All of a sudden you're lying on the
street not even knowing what hit you because you thought you were being
careful.

36

PART II

The Nature of the
Trading Environment
from a Psychological
Perspective

37

In Chapters 1 and 2 the material presented outlined some of the
difficulties of trading. In the next six chapters, I will get much more specific
by explaining the characteristics of the market environment from the
psychological perspective of the individual trader. From this perspective it
will become clear to you how the market environment is much different
from the cultural environment you learned to function within. This will
confront you with some very unusual psychological challenges.
My primary objective is for you to understand clearly why any degree of
success as a trader is so elusive, attained by so few, and why you may need to
change some deeply ingrained cultural attitudes and beliefs to function
successfully in the trading environment.

38

CHAPTER 3

The Market Is
Always Right

If all trading stopped at any particular price, what would this last posted
price represent? At the most fundamental level, this last price (or any
current price) would represent the consensus belief about value, relative to
the future, of all the traders who are in the market in that moment. The
current price is a direct reflection of the beliefs of all the traders who choose
to act as a force on prices by putting on a trade. So, when there are two
traders, one wanting to buy and one wanting to sell at a price and do so, they
have made a trade, and they have also made a market.
All that is needed to make the market right are two traders willing to trade
at a price. Regardless of the criteria they used to determine value, how
rational, irrational, meaningful, or meaningless by your or anyone else's
belief system, if two traders are willing to express their belief in future
value by making a trade, they have made a market. Unless the trade can be
undone, it has to be right by virtue of the fact that it was made.
What you wanted, thought, believed, or expected is of no consequence
in the overall scheme of things unless you can trade with enough volume
to control the market and move prices in the direction you deem to be
correct. To do this, you would personally have to represent a buying or
selling force strong enough to absorb all the counteracting buying or
selling represented by the traders who didn't happen to agree with you, at
any given moment, with enough financial power left over to bid or offer the
price where you want it to be.
39

For an observer of market behavior, each trade that is made and the type
of movement it creates in prices can tell you something about the
consistency of the market and potential for movement in a direction—if you
can discern the meaning and put that meaning within some framework
defining opportunity. Price movement creates opportunities to buy low and
sell high, or vice versa, if you can perceive what is likely to be high and low
relative to some point in the future. Movement in any given direction is
equivalent to the amount of force that is being applied to create that
movement.
For example, if prices penetrated all-time lows, the fact that you may
have believed that they would not do it is meaningless, unless you can
personally trade with enough volume to move the price back above the old
low. You have to consider that for prices to have penetrated all-time lows,
there must have been more traders who believed that the current price was
above what they considered to be of value, at least enough to where they
believed the all-time low was a selling opportunity or they would not have
sold. For prices to follow through and continue to go lower would indicate
that there are more traders willing to act on their belief that prices are high
and as a result sell than there are traders who are willing to buy at those
prices (all-time lows).
What you believed about value and your reasons for believing it may be
of highest quality, but if the market doesn't share your belief, it doesn't really
matter how "right" you are based on your superior reasoning process or
what you believe to be the quality of your information, because prices are
going to go in the direction of the greatest force.
The point here is that right and wrong as you may traditionally think of
them don't exist in the market environment. Academic credentials,
degrees, reputations, even a high I.Q. don't make you right in this
environment as they would in society. Traders, acting on their belief in the
future by putting on a trade, are the only force that can act on prices to make
them move. Movement creates opportunity to make money, and making money
is what trading is all about. This is also true for the hedger trading to protect the
value of his assets.
Each individual trader will define what market condition represents enough
of an opportunity to put on a trade for whatever reason suits him. Regardless of
how wrong you think he may be, if the net result of the collective actions of all
the traders participating is moving prices against your position, then they're right
and you're the one who is losing money.
The market is never wrong in what it does; it just is. Therefore, you as an
individual trader interacting with the market—first as an observer to perceive
opportunity, then as a participant executing a trade, contributing to the overall
market behavior—have to confront an environment where only you can be
wrong, and it's never the other way around. As a trader, you have to decide what
is more important—being right or making money—because the two are not
always compatible or consistent with one another.
40

CHAPTER 4

There Is
Unlimited Potential for
Profit and Loss

The most effective manner to illustrate the "unlimitedness" of the market
environment is to compare it to gambling. With any gambling game you
will always know exactly how much you can win or lose each time you play.
You decide exactly how much you want to wager, you know exactly how
much you can win as well as lose, and you may even know the mathematical
odds of either possibility.
This is not the case in market environment. In any particular trade you
never really know how far prices will travel from any given point. If you
never really know where the market may stop, it is very easy to believe there
are no limits to how much you can make on any given trade.
From a psychological perspective this characteristic will allow you to
indulge yourself in the illusion that each trade has the potential of fulfilling
your wildest dream of financial independence. Based on the consistency of
market participants (ratio between buyers and sellers) and their potential to
act as a force great enough to move prices in your direction, the possibility
of having your dreams fulfilled may not even remotely exist. However, if
you believe it does, then you will have the tendency to gather only the kind
of market information that will confirm and reinforce your belief, all the
while denying vital information that may be telling you the best opportunity is in the opposite direction.
If you are in a losing trade, the market could be moving farther and
farther away from your entry point, increasing your potential loss by the
moment. While this is happening, however, you may only be able to
41

imagine it coming back in your favor, instead of confronting the possibility
of the market continuing against your position. This type of thought
process will continue until the sheer magnitude of the loss overwhelms you,
and the possibility of the loss increasing is suddenly more pertinent than the
possibility of the market coming back. You finally exit the trade never
intending or ever imagining you could have allowed yourself to take such a
large loss.
From a psychological perspective, the possibility for unlimited profits,
happiness, power, and so on, whatever it means to you when you imagine
making all the money you ever wanted to make, can be extremely
dangerous. The possibility may in fact exist, but how realistic it is in any
given trade is another matter.
There are several psychological factors that go into being able to assess
accurately the market's potential for movement in any given direction. One
of them is releasing yourself from the notion that each trade has the
potential to fulfill all your dreams. At the very least this illusion will be a
major obstacle keeping you from learning how to perceive market action
from an objective perspective. Otherwise, if you continually filter market
information in such a way as to confirm this belief, learning to be objective
won't be a concern because you probably won't have any money left to
trade with.

42

CHAPTER 5

Prices Are in Perpetual
Motion with No Defined
Beginning or Ending

The markets are always in motion; they never stop, only pause. As long as
there are traders who, for whatever reasons, are willing to buy higher than
the last price and, as a result, bid the price up, or traders willing to sell for
less than the last price and offer the marker lower, prices will remain in
perpetual motion. Even when the markets are closed, prices are theoretically
in motion. For example, what price traders may be willing to buy or sell at
on the opening the next day does not have to be at the price level the
market closed at the previous day.
What are usually thought of as three simple decisions of enter, hold, or
liquidate a trade become a perpetual process of deciding how much is
enough from both a profit and a loss perspective. If you are in a profitable
trade, is there ever enough? Greed stems from a belief that there is never
enough or there won't be enough. In an unlimited environment that is in
perpetual motion, isn't there always the possibility of getting more? The
appetite of true greed can never be satisfied; it will always leave the greedy
ones with a feeling of lacking regardless of how much they have acquired. If
you are in a losing trade, you won't want it to exist because it represents
failure, so you can just act as if it doesn't, by convincing yourself that you are
in a winning trade that hasn't gone in your favor yet.
The "how much is enough" question can be answered in an infinite
number of ways relative to your beliefs on the value of money, what you
need it for, how important it is, can you really risk it, how secure do you
feel, and what is enough today may not be enough tomorrow because of
43

other factors in your life—all relative questions that have no definitive
answers and change with the changing environmental conditions. Having to
confront these personal issues as a trader will only contaminate your
observations of market movement because they have nothing to do with
market direction and the potential or lack of potential of any particular
market move. This is why successful traders have always stated
emphatically, "Only trade with money you can afford to lose," meaning
money that has little or no value in your life. The less meaning the money
has, the less potential there is for your personal "how much is enough"
issues to contaminate your perception of market movement.
Thus, if you allow it, the market can always tempt you into thinking there
may be more to be had in a winning trade and always give you something to
hang on to in order to justify your hope that it will come back and make you
whole, if you are in a losing trade. Succumbing to either one of these
temptations subjects you to the possibility of some very negative and
painful consequences.
The market environment is also unstructured in such a way that, from a
psychological perspective, there is no beginning and there is no ending.
What I mean by this statement (before you think that it's not true, the market
opens and closes at a specified time every day) is that from the perspective of
the individual trader, the game only begins when you decide to enter and
ends only when you decide to exit irrespective of market openings and
closings.
You have the freedom to structure the game inside your mind in any
particular way you please. You can get in whenever you want for whatever
reasons are good enough to justify your actions. You can get out whenever
you want. In fact the game only ends when you have decided that you've
had enough and take the appropriate action to end it. The psychological
implications to the individual confronting these conditions are staggering.
Entering a trade will involve all your beliefs about opportunity in
relationship to risk, missing out, needing a sure thing, and not being wrong.
Exiting a trade will involve all your beliefs about loss, greed, failure, and
control.
Considering the unlimited potential for profit, entering the market will
be much easier for most traders than will be getting out. This is because
exiting the trade will require that you confront your beliefs about greed,
loss, and failure in relationship to the constant temptation of the possibility
for unlimited profits.
These individual psychological issues are completely independent of
objective market action. And even more significant, as I will explain in
Part III, your beliefs about loss, being wrong, failure, and control will
operate independently of your conscious intent. For example, think of the
last time you perceived an opportunity to profit and the fear of being
wrong, or losing, and so on, immobilized you, keeping you from putting on
the trade.
44

To the extent that these issues exist as a component of your mental
environment, they will determine the effect they have on your perception of
market activity, the decisions you make, and your ability to act on what you
decide.
However, one of the most significant and potentially damaging factors
related to this no beginning and no ending characteristic of the market
environment is that it allows you to be a passive loser. The best way to
illustrate this concept is to compare the markets with any form of
gambling games. For example, with blackjack, horse racing, or craps the
player has to make a conscious choice to play and decide before the event
exactly how much he will wager. The event begins and ends according to
the rules of the game, and the risk of loss is limited to the size of the wager.
Each new event is a fresh start, where the odds of winning may be
determined by mathematical probabilities and the rules of the game
automatically take the player out after each event. When the game ends, the
player knows exactly what the outcome is and then must make a conscious
decision to participate again. Therefore, the structure of the game forces the
player to be an active loser. To subject himself to the possibility of losing
any more money than he has already lost requires that he place a wager for a
specified amount. He has to actively participate to lose and do nothing to
stop losing. Obviously, if the player does nothing, he will not be subjecting
his assets to the possibility of loss.
If the player is losing consistently, he will need to confront his beliefs
about loss and failure to quit playing altogether. This could be difficult
because he can always rationalize that, based on the odds, he is bound to win
eventually and that he can always quit after the next game. But he does not
need his own mental structure to end any particular game because it's
automatic.
This is very much different from the market environment where you can
be a passive loser. Once you put on a trade, you have to actively
participate to end your losses. You don't need to do anything to continue to
lose, and the market could go against your position indefinitely. If for any
reason you choose not to act or can't act, you could lose everything you own
and more. Depending on the size of your position and the volatility of the
market, this could happen very quickly. The only way out is to confront
your personal issues about greed, loss, and failure. What specific issues or
combination of them come into play in each trade will depend on whether
you are in a winning or losing position.
Since, all of us seem instinctively to avoid confronting any issue that
could cause pain, such as getting out of a winning trade too soon or
having to admit we were wrong to get out of a loser, the easiest way out of
a situation like this is to convince ourselves (indulge ourselves in the
illusion) we are in a winning trade that will never end or gather all the
evidence possible to suggest that we really aren't in a losing trade.
Therefore, in either case we will have no reason to confront the forces
45

inside of us that keep us from objectively perceiving what the market is
telling us about the possibilities and potential for profit in any given
moment.
The markets make it extremely easy for you not to have to confront these
very tough psychological issues. For example, if you focus your attention
on price movement at the tick-by-tick level, the market can graphically
display billions of combinations of behavior characteristics and price
patterns to get from one point to the next. It is very easy to use this type of
information to support any belief, rationalization, justification, distortion, or
illusion you need to want to have about where it is going in the future.
Most traders will attempt to simplify price movement by thinking the
price can only do three things. Go up, go down, or stay basically the same.
Some traders may even carry this distorted logic to the point where they
believe there is a 50/50 probability for success in any give trade. This of
course couldn't be further from the truth. For example, let's say that
prices stayed within a 10-tick trading range for an entire trading session, if
you take into account each tick, how many price patterns is it possible for the
market to display going from the top to bottom of the range and then back again?
I'm not a statistician, but I'm sure it's at least millions. To illustrate this a little
further, if point A is the bottom of the range, prices could have changed up one
tick, down two, up one, down three, up two, down one, up one, down two, up
three, down one, up two, down one, up one, down one, up two, down one, up
three, down one, up two, down one, up three, down one, up one, down one, up
two, down one, up three to point B, ten ticks up from point A. This is
obviously a very shortened version of the way prices usually move, but it does
represent one pattern out of millions of possible pattern combinations, and each
pattern you identify can repeat itself at some point in the future.
If you are a buyer at point A, what are the odds the price will stay above your
entry point? What are the odds that the price will be above or significantly
above your entry point tomorrow or the next day without having gone below
your entry point first, by two ticks, five ticks, or ten ticks, before it goes back up
again above your entry point? Once prices go below your entry point, what are
the odds they never go above your entry point? What are the odds they never go
below? To answer these questions, you would have to know a great deal about
the consistency of the market and its potential to behave in certain ways. In any
case, relative to most traders' emotional disposition to deal with this kind of
movement and within the context that most people think of as 50/50 odds, it
definitely doesn't apply in the markets.
To illustrate another point, if you got short halfway between points A and B,
which ticks would you have the tendency to place greater weight on in terms of
market information? The down ticks naturally. They confirm what you believe
and the up ticks don't Yet each in relationship to one another can tell you
something about the consistency of the market and its potential to move in any
given direction. How can you begin to assess that potential accurately if you
place a greater significance specifically on the information that confirms what you
46
