
Key Points
• Trend followers always prepare for drawdowns after strong
periods of performance.
• An absolute return strategy means you are trying to make the
most money possible.
• The fact that markets are volatile is not a problem. The
problem is you if volatility scares you.
• Trading is a zero-sum game in an important accounting sense.
In a zero-sum game, the total gains of the winners are exactly
equal to the total losses of the losers.
• Trend followers go to the market to trade trends. However, not
all market players are trying to do the same thing. Fannie Mae
could be making a change in their bond portfolio. A major
investment bank could be trading a strategy that will not
tolerate volatility. The bottom line is that people trade for

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

different goals. George Crapple, a trend follower with 25+ years
in experience, makes the point: “So while it may be a zero-sum
game, a lot of people don’t care. It’s not that they’re stupid; it’s
not speculative frenzy; they’re just using these markets for a
completely different purpose.”

121

This page intentionally left blank

Big Events,
Crashes, and
Panics

4

“I have noticed that everyone who ever told me that the markets are
efficient is poor.” —Larry Hite, Mint Investment Management Company
“Rare events are always unexpected, otherwise they would not occur.”
—Nassim Taleb1

To comprehend trend following’s true impact, you have to look
at trend followers’ performance data—the returns they generate.
Their performance data makes clear that they were the winners in
the biggest trading events, bubbles, and crashes of the last 30 years.
This chapter outlines high profile times where trend followers won
huge profits in the zero-sum game.

An investment in DUNN
acts as a hedge against
unpredictable market
crises.
Dunn Capital Management

Wall Street is famous for corporate collapses or mutual and
hedge fund blow-ups that transfer capital from winners to losers and
back again. However, interestingly, the winners always seem to be
missing from the after-the-fact analysis of the mainstream media.
The press is fascinated with losers. Taking their lead from the press,
the public also gets caught up in the drama and narrative of the
losers, oblivious to the real story: Who are the winners and why?
Occasionally, the right question is asked:
“Each time there’s a derivatives disaster, I get the same
question: If Barings was the loser, who was the winner? If
Orange County was the loser, who was the winner? If
Procter & Gamble was the loser, who was the winner?”2

123

I’d say that Procter &
Gamble did what
their name says, they
proctored and
gambled. And now
they’re complaining.
Leo Melamed

124

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Prominent academics in finance searching for winners also
come up short, as Christopher Culp of the University of Chicago
laments:
“It’s a zero-sum game. For every loser there’s a winner, but
you can’t always be specific about who the winner is.”3
When the big trading events happen, many people know the
losses are going somewhere, but after time passes, they stop
thinking about it. Reflecting on the unknown is not pleasant, as
author Alexander Ineichen notes:
“Fear is still in the bones of some pension fund trustees—
after Mr. Leeson brought down Barings Bank. The failure of
Barings Bank is probably the most often cited derivatives
disaster. While the futures market had been the instrument
used by Nick Leeson to play the zero-sum game [and]
someone made a lot of money being short the Nikkei
futures Mr. Leeson was buying.”4
It often seems that trends
create events more than
events create trends. The
event itself is usually a
reflection of everyone
“getting it” as Ed
[Seykota] calls it, “an
aha.”’ By this time, the
trend followers usually
have well-established
positions.
Jason Russell6

Someone did indeed make a lot of money trading short to
Leeson’s long, as I discuss later in the chapter. Perhaps Wall Street
looks at the issue through the wrong lens. Michael Mauboussin and
Kristen Bartholdson know that standard finance theory comes short
when explaining the winners during high impact times:
“One of the major challenges in investing is how to capture
(or avoid) low-probability, high-impact events. Unfortunately, standard finance theory has little to say about the
subject.”5
The unexpected events that everyone refers to are the source of
big profits for trend followers. Big, unexpected events made David
Harding, Christian Baha, Transtrend, Sunrise Capital, Michael
Clarke, Bernard Drury, Paul Mulvaney, Bill Dunn, Salem Abraham,
Bill Eckhardt, John W. Henry, and Jerry Parker (to name a few)
rich. Trend trader Michael Rulle explains trend following’s success
during uncertain times:
“For markets to move in tandem, there has to be a common
perception or consensus about economic conditions that
drives it. When a major ‘event’ occurs in the middle of such
a consensus, such as the Russian debt default of August

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

125

1998, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, or the
corporate accounting scandals of 2002 [and the 2008
equity market crash], it will often accelerate existing trends
already in place…‘events’ do not happen in a vacuum…
This is the reason trend following rarely gets caught on the
wrong side of an ‘event.’ Additionally, the stop loss trading
style will limit exposure when it does—When this
consensus is further confronted by an ‘event,’ such as a
major country default, the ‘event’ will reinforce the crisis
mentality already in place and drive those trends toward
their final conclusion. Because trend following generally
can be characterized as having a ‘long option’ profile, it
typically benefits greatly when these occurrences
happen.”7
However, big events also generate plenty of inane analysis by
focusing on unanswerable questions such as those posed by
Thomas Ho and Sang Lee, authors of The Oxford Guide to
Financial Modeling:8
1. “What do these events tell us about our society?”
2. “Are these financial losses the dark sides of all the benefits of

financial derivatives?”
3. “Should we change the way we do things?”
4. “Should the society accept these financial losses as part of the

‘survival of the fittest’ in the world of business?”
5. “Should legislation be used to avoid these events?”

On Saturday, February
25, 1995, Mike Killian,
who almost singlehandedly built Barings
Far East customer
brokerage business over
the past seven years, was
awakened at 4:30 a.m. in
his Portland, Ore., home.
It was Fred Hochenberger
from the Barings Hong
Kong office.
“Are you sitting down?”
Hochenberger asked a
sleepy Killian.
“No, I’m lying down.”

It is not unusual to see people frame market wins and losses as
a morality tale. These types of questions are designed to absolve the
guilt of the market losers for their bad strategies (i.e. Amaranth,
Bear Stearns, Bernard Madoff, etc.). The market is no place for
political excuses or social engineering. No law changes human
nature. If you don’t like losing, examine the strategy of the winners.
The performance histories of trend followers during the 2008
market crash, 2000–2002 stock market bubble, the 1998 LongTerm Capital Management (LTCM) crisis, the Asian contagion, the
Barings Bank bust in 1995, and the German firm Metallgesellschaft’s collapse in 1993, answer that all important question: “Who
won?”

“Have you heard any
rumors?”
Killian, perplexed, said
no.
“I think we’re bust.”
“Is this a crank call?”
Killian asked.
“There’s a really ugly
story coming out that
perhaps Nick Leeson has
taken the company
down.”9

126

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Event #1: 2008 Stock Market Bubble and Crash
One reason for this
paucity of early
information is suggested
by the following part of
the term trend following.
The implication is one of
passivity, of reaction,
rather than of bold,
assertive action—and
human nature shows a
distinct preference for the
latter. Also, trend
following appears to be
too simple an idea to be
taken seriously. Indeed,
simple ideas can take a
very long time to be
accepted; think of the
concept of a negative
number, or of zero: simple
to us, but problematic to
our ancestors.
Original Turtle Stig Ostgaard

The world changed in October 2008. Stock markets crashed.
Millions of people lost trillions of dollars when their long-held buy
and hold strategies imploded. The Dow, S&P, and Nasdaq fell like
stones with the carnage carrying over into November 2008. Most
everyone has felt the ramifications: jobs lost, firms going under, and
fear all around. No one made money during this time. Everyone
lost. Hold on, is that really true? It is not true. There were winners
during October 2008, and they made fortunes ranging from +5
percent to +40 percent in that single month.
Who were the winners? Trend followers. How did they do it?
First, let me state how they did not do it:
1. Trend followers did not know stock markets would crash in

October 2008.
2. Trend followers did not make all of their money from shorting

stocks in October 2008.
What did they do? Trend followers made money from many
different markets from oil to bonds to currencies to stocks to
commodities. Trend followers always seem to do particularly well in
times of wild and extended price swings, in part because their trend
following trading systems programmed into computers can make
calculated, emotionless buys and sells that human traders might be
slower to accept.
“We are not going to be the first to get in or the first to get out,
but we are generally able to capture 80 percent of the trends,” says
Paul Wigdor of Superfund. For example, consider Superfund
performance from January 2008 through October 2008 along with
their annual performance figures from 1996 to 2008:
• January: –2.21%

• June: 9.88%

• February: 14.17%

• July: –10.26%

• March: 1.59%

• August: –8.36%

• April: –1.23%

• September: 2.59%

• May: 6.52%

• October: 17.52%

127

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

Superfund Annual Returns:
• 1996: –10.30%

• 2003: 24.33%

• 1997: 20.70%

• 2004: 10.98%

• 1998: 62.55%

• 2005: –3.30%

• 1999: 25.39%

• 2006: 10.47%

• 2000: 23.19%

• 2007: –1.81%

• 2001: 18.82%

• 2008: 30.02%

• 2002: 38.42%
Not only trend following trader Superfund won big. Consider
other trend following traders during the same period:
1. One fund run by John W. Henry & Co., founded by Boston Red

Sox baseball-team owner John W. Henry, was up 72.4 percent
through October 2008.
2. TransTrend, a Dutch-based trend following trader managing

more than $1 billion in assets, saw one of its funds go up +71.75
percent from January 2008 through November 2008.
3. Clarke Capital Management Inc., led by Michael Clarke, saw its

$72.2 million fund gain 82.2 percent through October 2008.
Clarke, as but one example of his winning bets, shorted crude
oil when it was around $140, and then stayed with the trade
down to $80 before exiting, thereby collecting the bulk of the
trend. This is just one example of his winning bets.
4. Trend follower Bernard Drury started selling short S&P 500

index futures in November 2007. The index is down about 36
percent since and the largest Drury fund was up 56.9 percent
through October 2008.10
5. Paul Mulvaney, another trend following trader who has used a

much longer timeframe in his trading (weekly bars), saw his
fund post a 45.49 percent return for the month of October
2008—yes, in one month.
How did these numbers happen? What is the source of these
returns? For example, trend follower Superfund provided some
insights into its 2008 trading performance:

128

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“October 2008 provides a prime example of how [we] can
produce gains in volatile and otherwise adverse market
conditions. During this month and preceding months, [our]
trading system not only profited from trends that were
gaining momentum, but also responded to historic volatility
by reducing or eliminating positions, and thus risk
exposure, in markets in which trends were growing stale.”
How did they do it? How did it work out like this? Superfund
explained to me:
“In February 2008, a sustained downward trend in the U.S.
dollar against various currencies accelerated. This coincided with a significant rally in gold and energy markets.
Many trend following trading systems…profited from short
positions in the U.S. dollar [see Chart 4.1] and long
positions in gold and energies.”

CHART 4.1: U.S. Dollar Short Trade

Superfund described the continuing unfolding market chaos:
“At the same time, several world stocks indices exhibited
signs of weakness. By June, however, gold stumbled nearly
$200 from recent highs above $1,000 per ounce [see Chart
4.2]. [We were able] to continue capturing gains in the U.S.
dollar, energies, and stocks while reducing its long exposure
to gold as returns in this market faltered.”

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

129

CHART 4.2: Long Gold Trade with Exit

But how did these events lead to October 2008 gains?
Superfund clarified:
“During July and August, profitable trends in the U.S.
dollar, energies, and grains exhausted themselves. It was at
this juncture that the [our] system repositioned itself for
results in October despite short-term drawdowns during
these two months. While speculative traders may have
viewed the precipitous drop in energies and other
commodities as an opportunity to add to their long
positions, [we] identified the end of sustained trends in
these markets and significantly reduced its positions, and
therefore its risk, particularly in the U.S dollar. Meanwhile,
[our] system began identifying emerging trends in world
treasury markets [see Chart 4.3], as well as meats and
industrial metals.”
Chart 4.3 shows the patience trend followers had to endure in
the face of extreme volatility.
As the historic month of October 2008 arrived, Superfund
offered a behind the scenes glimpse of their thinking:
“Approaching October, [we were] ready to take advantage
of changing market conditions both because of positions
[we] no longer held as well as positions [we] had entered

But the other level of
trend following is
something else entirely.
This is the meta-level,
which sits above the
tableau of material and
psychological cause and
effect, allowing
participants to observe
the behavior of the
markets as a whole and
to design intelligent,
premeditated responses to
market action. This is the
level of trend following
from which we as traders
should—and usually do—
operate.
Original Turtle Stig Ostgaard

130

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

during the subpar return periods of July and August. For
example, [we] had avoided the potential for substantial
losses from an 18.3 percent decline in gold futures and a 32
percent collapse in crude oil [see Chart 4.4] by reducing
long exposure to these markets before their substantial
October declines.”

CHART 4.3: Long Five-Year Notes Trade

CHART 4.4: Crude Oil Winning Short Trade

Superfund, like other trend followers, captured a nice trend in
the Nikkei 225 (see Chart 4.5):

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

131

CHART 4.5: Nikkei Winning Short Trade

But this is not about predictions, so when trends changed,
Superfund switched gears:
“After having been short the U.S. dollar for most of the first
half of 2008, by October, [we] had established positions
designed to profit from the reversal of the U.S. dollar trend in
July and August. At that point, currencies such as the British
pound began to decline against the dollar [see Chart 4.6].”

CHART 4.6: British Pound Winning Trade

It may surprise many
to know that in my
method of trading,
when I see by my
records that an
upward trend is in
progress, I become a
buyer as soon as a
stock makes a new
high on its movement,
after having had a
normal reaction. The
same applies whenever
I take the short side.
Why? Because I am
following the trend at
the time. My records
signal me to go ahead!
Jesse Livermore (1940)

132

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Superfund, like most all trend followers, realized the bulk of
their October profits as a result of the ability to capitalize on a
variety of different market conditions while limiting losses based on
a combination of diversification, flexibility, risk management, and
discipline. While a substantial portion of trend following October
profits were derived from short positions in the stock indices and
world currencies, trend followers also realized profits from long
bond positions. They also avoided major losses by reducing
exposure to gold and energies.
Although not as large as more established trend following traders
in terms of assets under management, Justin Vandergrift of Chadwick
Investment Group offered insights into his 2008 performance. He
took me through some of his trades where he saw monster returns at
a time when buy and holders were all gasping for air.
Vandergrift first outlined a European interest trade (see Chart
4.7): “In the midst of the global financial crisis, we received signals
on many short-term interest rates. The Euribor is a short-term
interest rate futures contract traded at the EUREX. We bought on
October 7 and are still long (through December 2008). Central
banks around the globe began dropping interest rates to ward off
equity market declines. Lower interest rates mean higher Euribor
futures prices. That said, fundamentals did not drive our decisions.”

CHART 4.7: December 2008 Euribor

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

Vandergrift explained how he profited from another short term
interest rate, the EuroSwiss (see Chart 4.8): “The EuroSwiss is
another short-term interest rate futures contract. We entered this
position well before the global equity market crash.”

CHART 4.8: December 2008 EuroSwiss

I know I perhaps sound redundant about how trend followers
don’t even care what markets they make money in, but it is a
critical point. Consider Vandergrift’s explanation about trading
“hogs” (see Chart 4.9): “The Hog position was one of the most
beautiful trends that I’ve seen in years. As the U.S. dollar rallied,
nearly every commodity tied to the dollar moved violently.
Although our larger portfolio gains happened in October, this
position profited throughout the fall of 2008.”
Sure, we all focus on “stocks,” but what about lumber?
Vandergrift explained his lumber trade (see Chart 4.10): “Lumber
was another great market over the fall of 2008. Lumber fell due to
the housing crisis in the U.S. Lower demand means lower
lumber prices. We sold the market short in the late summer and
held the position until mid-November. However, it is important to
keep in mind that we went short based off of price action, not
fundamentals.”

133

134

This evidence of
structure in stock
prices suggests
alluring possibilities
in the way of
forecasting. In fact,
many professional
speculators, including
in particular
exponents of the socalled Dow Theory
widely publicized by
popular financial
journals, have adopted
systems based in the
main on the principle
that it is advantageous
to swim with the tide.
Alfred Cowles (1937)

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

CHART 4.9: December 2008 Lean Hogs

CHART 4.10: January 2009 Lumber

Did you make money in “coffee” in the fall of 2008 (see Chart
4.11)? “Although traded in London, Robusta Coffee is denominated
in U.S. dollars. The move up in Robusta Coffee was helped in large
part from a strengthening U.S. dollar. A higher dollar means less

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

purchasing power in other currencies, pushing Robusta lower. My
fundamental views once again mean little, we just followed the
trend.”

CHART 4.11: January 2009 Robusta Coffee

