
c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

12:46

Retracement Entries and Multiple Time Frames

Char Count=

111

to turn the trade into a position trade. Position trades should be entered
from a position trading plan, and day trades should be entered from a day
trading plan.

Managing Risk Using Multiple Time Frame
Examples and Fibonacci Retracement Setups
Using Fibonacci Retracement setups with multiple time frames is a natural combination. Many times a trader will come across a pattern that has
already completed on a larger time frame and observe that the trade has
already moved in the anticipated direction; the trader now needs to find an
entry into the trade. Using a Fibonacci retracement level and then scaling
down to a smaller time frame is an excellent method for entering a trade
in that manner. See Figure 8.12 for a 60-minute Butterfly pattern that forms
and is completed on Google stock.
Looking at Figure 8.12, the 1.272 extension of the Butterfly does not
hold, and the pattern is completed at the 1.618. Let’s take a look now at a
5-minute chart showing the 1.272 price level around $427.50 per share. If
the trader had entered there using a lower time frame, he would have been
able to manage the risk in the trade with the use of a stop-loss order and
then reenter the trade at the 1.618 again using a 5-minute chart. Refer to
Figure 8.13 to study the 1.272 price level.
The first thing to notice on this micro view of the 60-minute pattern
is that there is a gap-up open and a long, wide range bar. These are both
warning signs to alert the trader to either pass on the trade or wait for another acceptable entry. The market during the day on the 5-minute chart
presents an opportunity for entry by forming a 5-minute Gartley sell pattern. This offers a very low-risk entry into a very high-priced stock. The
risk in this trade using this small 5-minute pattern and placing the stop just
above the high of the day is around $2.00 per share.
A partial profit could be taken on the retracement of the 5-minute Gartley pattern and the stop kept at the initial location if the trade is being held
overnight. This trade would have been stopped out if held until the next
morning and would have been a breakeven or very small loss trade.
If the trader then wants to initiate another entry at the 1.618 completion level of the 60-minute Butterfly pattern, the 5-minute chart can be
used to aid the trader. See Figure 8.14 for a micro view of the entry using
the 1.618.
Many times in trading you have to initiate multiple attempts into a trade
in order to achieve a larger gain. It is very important to learn techniques
to manage the risk when reentering trades in this manner. In Figure 8.14,
GOOG gaps up on the open and has a long, wide range bar. This time the

c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

112

12:46

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

price reverses and trades below the opening price. Once the price forms the
5-minute Gartley sell pattern and Opening Price Retracement sell pattern,
it offers an excellent entry into the trade with very little risk. The risk in
this trade with the stop-loss placed just above the high of the day is just
around $3.00 per share.
The trader can then reduce the risk in the trade and/or put oneself into
a risk-free trade by taking partial profits at the .618 retracement level equal
to or close to the amount of risk in the trade. If day trading, then the trader
would close the trade at the end of the day. If the trader is position trading
based on the longer-term 60-minute chart, a stop-loss order would be kept
working and the trader would then use larger profit targets based on the
60-minute chart retracements and trail a stop to protect profits.

Multiple Pattern Completions in Multiple
Time Frames
Now let’s look at an example of multiple patterns in multiple time frames
completing around the same price area. Refer to Figure 8.15 and the Gartley
“222” sell pattern on the daily time frame. We’ll look at Figure 8.16 next for
a closer view and another sell pattern that forms and is completed on a
15-minute chart in the same price area.

Figure 8.15 Daily chart of the euro shows a Gartley “222” sell pattern.

c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

12:46

Retracement Entries and Multiple Time Frames

Char Count=

113

Figure 8.16 This chart of the euro shows a 15-minute Gartley “222” sell pattern
that completes within a couple of ticks (pips) of the daily Gartley “222” sell pattern
in Figure 8.15.

The high of point D on the daily Gartley “222” sell pattern is at 1.2891
and the 15-minute D completion point is at 1.2888—within a few ticks
(pips) of the larger time frame. When there is a congestion area of support
or resistance price levels that are formed by multiple patterns, the trader
can use that information for entering trades, placing stop-loss orders and
profit-taking objectives.

Opposing Patterns on Multiple Time Frames
Our last example in this chapter shows you an example of a daily chart of
corn (Figure 8.17) and a 30-minute chart of corn (Figure 8.18) that can be
used to alert the trader to opposing price patterns.
The corn daily chart (Figure 8.17) shows a larger Butterfly pattern and
AB=CD pattern with a completion point at D. Notice the circled area on
this chart. If you look closely, you will see that after the completion of the
buy pattern a sell Gartley “222” pattern forms and shortly after that pattern
another Gartley “222” buy pattern. Figure 8.18 shows a detail of these two
patterns that are clearly visible on the 30-minute chart.
The information offered by these two conflicting patterns can be used
in several ways:

c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

114

August 31, 2007

12:46

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 8.17 Corn daily chart shows a large bullish Butterﬂy pattern and AB=CD
pattern completing.

Figure 8.18 Corn 30-minute chart shows two opposing Gartley “222” patterns
that have formed. One is a Gartley “222” sell pattern and the other is a Gartley “222”
buy pattern.

c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

Retracement Entries and Multiple Time Frames

12:46

Char Count=

115

Ĺ Assuming the trader, after entering the large Butterfly/AB=CD buy pattern, has already taken partial profits and is anticipating a larger move
based on the larger time frame pattern, the trader could manage the
risk in the trade by observing whether the AB=CD sell pattern makes
new lows; if it does, the Butterfly buy pattern would be considered a
failed pattern. A stop-loss order at the low of the completion of the
daily Butterfly pattern could be maintained at that level, and the trader
would be stopped out with a small profit on the trade. Once the trader
sees that the Gartley “222” sell pattern failed by making highs above the
X point of that pattern, the trader can then move the stop-loss order up
to protect profits. Since the trader is working with a larger time frame
such as the daily chart in this example, it is important to not move a
stop-loss order too close and to give the market enough room to move
around, as well as to use the chart points that would suggest a failure
of the pattern.
Ĺ Another important point for a trader who chooses to trade the Gartley
“222” sell pattern in Figure 8.18 to be aware of is that the risk in the
trade can be closely managed based on an awareness of a larger time
frame pattern that has completed and is thus far profitable. A trader in
this situation would want to be cognizant of stop-loss protection and
diligent in taking profit objectives.
Ĺ The Gartley “222” buy pattern that also formed in the 30-minute time
frame gives a trader who missed the original entry point an excellent
entry into the trade with a quantifiable risk and stop-loss level using
point X of the daily Butterfly/AB=CD pattern.
Ĺ A trader could also use the Gartley “222” buy entry to add onto an existing position in the market being traded. Adding onto a position must
always be within the trader’s trade plan and money management and
risk parameters. This type of trading must also be within the trader’s
skill and market knowledge level.
Notice also in Figure 8.18 the gap up areas on the right side of the chart.
These are certainly showing a shift of sentiment in this market, and that
information can be used to the advantage of the trader who is long—that
higher prices may be ahead and it would be a good idea to hold the position.
Conversely, it would give a trader who was short that market an alert to
tighten stops or exit the trade.
We have covered several areas using and interpreting information
based on multiple time frames. The trader should always be aware of the
larger time frames and the overall market conditions of any market or stock
one is trading and learn to combine time frames to improve one’s trading
skills.

c08

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

12:46

Char Count=

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

CHAPTER 9

Classical
Technical
Analysis
Patterns

S

ince the beginnings of technical analysis, classical technical patterns
have been repeating over and over in all time frames and in all markets. It’s interesting that these patterns have not changed in centuries. They are truly a reflection of crowd psychology. We present three
of these classical technical analysis patterns in this chapter and show you
how Fibonacci ratios can be applied. Many times you will see the structures
of the patterns form with exact Fibonacci ratios. Adding the Fibonacci ratios to these patterns will give the trader an additional tool for timing entries and controlling risk.
We present the Double Top and Double Bottom pattern, the Head and
Shoulders pattern, and the Broadening Top and Broadening Bottom pattern. These three patterns were first publicized in R.W. Schabacker’s book,
Stock Market Theory and Practice (B.C. Forbes, 1930). We will take a look
at these patterns both from a structural sense of how they are formed and
from a trading perspective with ideas for entering the trades, placing stops,
and taking advantage of areas to reverse a position. Some of the best trading opportunities can come from failed patterns, and it certainly is true
with these patterns when they fail.
117

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

118

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

A BRIEF HISTORY OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
The history of technical analysis using charts to monitor price dates back
at least 1,000 years and was first documented by the Japanese. They used
rice as a gauge to determine supply and demand. In the late 1800s into the
early 1900s an evolutionary process occurred and launched a technical revolution of sorts by great technical analysts such as Jesse Livermore, H.M.
Gartley, W.D. Gann, Richard Wyckoff, Richard Schabacker, Ralph Elliott,
Charles Dow, George Cole, and a host of others too numerous to mention
who devoted their time and lives to the art, science, and skill of technical
analysis. An extraordinary note is that much of their work was done by
hand. Computers were not available to compute moving averages and instantly call up charts of various time frames with multitudes of indicators
and filters applied. These pioneers hand drew their charts meticulously,
carefully noting market observations that were then tested and applied as
theories and trading strategies. These technicians were great market observers, and today many of the great traders still do some chart work by
hand on a daily basis as part of a daily ritual. There were services available that furnished daily or weekly charts of around 50 select individual
stocks for a fee, but it certainly was a long way from the real-time data we
enjoy today.
Through the Depression years and even World War II, there was very
little printed material available regarding technical analysis. The first financial news printed in newspapers, long before the Wall Street Journal, had
begun about 10 years after the Civil War. As communications advanced and
improved, so did the ease of gaining financial information through ticker
tape, teletype, and telephone. Some of us can remember using the ticker
tapes through the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
As the Internet and home computers became accessible, the communications industry as related to financial information and technical analysis
programs exploded. Real-time data and charting software packages loaded
with every indicator and testing capability imaginable are now available to
both the novice technician and the professional alike.
For many years technical analysis was looked at by the financial community as a form of voodoo and not worthy of consideration for seriously
making money. Books such as Jack Schwager’s Market Wizards have dispelled these myths with interviews from some of the greatest traders of
our time, like Marty Schwartz, who embrace technical analysis as the core
of their trading strategies. In his interview with Schwartz, Schwager asks
about his transition from a fundamental to a technical analyst. Schwartz’s
reply clearly indicates that it was not until he went to technical analysis
after using fundamentals for nine years that he became rich.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:12

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

Char Count=

119

As we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, only recently has
the academic world given its blessing (through its research) to the validity
of technical analysis and the repetition of particular patterns that make it
possible for traders to profit.

BASICS OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Everything in technical analysis starts with a single bar chart. This bar
chart is plotted on an x-axis and y-axis showing time and price. The price
bar represents the total sum of all buyers and sellers for that bar in that
time frame. The individual price bars give a great deal of information:
Ĺ The high price of the bar.
Ĺ The low price of the bar.
Ĺ The opening price of the bar.
Ĺ The closing price of the bar.
Ĺ The time frame of the bar.
Volume is also involved in the formation of the bar. The reason a bar
forms is irrelevant; what is important is how multiple bars form in relation to one another over a period of time to create particular patterns
that repeat. It is important that the technical analyst learn to read these
bars as patterns and act appropriately when a pattern forms that offers a
trading opportunity.

DOUBLE BOTTOM AND TOP PATTERNS
R.W. Schabacker stated that the Double Bottom pattern was an important
chart formation. This pattern can be found at major bear market bottoms
and is a reversal pattern and an accumulation phase. The Double Top pattern is just the opposite; it is a reversal pattern and a distribution phase and
can be found at major tops. The pattern may also form as an intermediate
pattern in a longer trend that is established.
Double Top and Bottom patterns are seen with a fair amount of
regularity on price charts in all time frames. They are sometimes referred
to as W bottoms because of the apparent shape forming the letter W. It is
probably one of the most common patterns that novice technical analysts
become aware of. As a reversal pattern it can be very powerful. If the
pattern is seen on an index chart, then it is probable that the same pattern
will be forming on many stocks that are in that index.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

120

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Double Bottom Pattern Example
If you will take a moment to examine Figure 9.1 and the example of the
Double Bottom pattern on the Dow Index, you will see long, wide range
bars to the downside that are indicated with arrows. They generally would
indicate further downside in price, but on the second test down the lows
hold and the market reverses back up, showing large bars to the upside,
which is a definite shift in momentum. Because of this shift in momentum,
the trader attempting to short as price approaches the .618 retracement
level would either stand aside and wait for further confirmation, use a very
closely managed stop, or look for an entry to trade long, which may be
found on a smaller time frame.
The market’s job is to fool as many market participants as possible,
and it is evident from this example that it did just that. This pattern formed
prior to the Dow Jones Industrial Average reaching all-time highs above
12,000. When the market does fool many participants, it catches traders
and investors off guard. Those who shorted believed that the price would
continue lower based on the long, wide range bars. They were forced into
covering or holding and painfully watching losses grow larger. This will
create upside fuel for this pattern.

Figure 9.1 This Double Bottom pattern formed in the Dow Jones Industrial Average weekly chart prior to reaching all-time highs above the 12,000 level.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

13:12

Char Count=

121

Also notice in Figure 9.1 the number of bars that formed after the first
bottom formed. The retracement up was approximately three bars up, and
then the second leg of the double bottom was approximately three bars
down. When the time ratios are equal in length, as in this example, the
pattern is generally more significant. This concept was first described by
W.D. Gann in the 1920s, and he referred to it as the equal time phenomenon.
This is another way of describing symmetry.

Looking for Trend Clues
Figure 9.2 offers a closer look at what is happening with the Dow index
price than is clearly visible on the weekly chart in Figure 9.1. We will examine some clues in Figure 9.2 that the astute trader could use to determine
a potential early trend reversal. We can see that the second low just barely
ticked through the first low of the Double Bottom pattern before reversing.
After the second low is made, long, wide range bars start to form to the
upside. These are marked with arrows in Figure 9.2. The first retracement
pattern that forms is able to retrace only to the .382 level. This, along with
the wide range bars up, is an indication of a trend. We will cover ways to
identify trends in Chapter 10 on trend identification of the S&P 500 market.

Figure 9.2 Daily view of the Double Bottom pattern on the Dow index. On this
chart you can see that the price on the second bottom just barely ticks through the
lows below reversing.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

122

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 9.3 Dow index daily chart example of a countertrend trade and managing
risk and locking in a proﬁt in a Double Bottom pattern.

Managing Countertrend Trades in a Trend Environment
At times traders will find themselves in a trade that is counter to the trend.
It is imperative that upon realizing this or suspecting that a trend is developing against them, traders use trade management to control the risk in
the trade and protect any profits. In Figure 9.3 we can see that the price
does indeed turn down from the .618 level and has a move large enough
to offer the trader profits. The price reaches the .382 retracement, and
profits should be taken and the stop-loss order moved to breakeven. This
accomplishes two very important tenets in trading:
1. Locking in a profit—always remember you are trading to make

money, and not to prove that you are right.
2. Moving the stop down to breakeven after taking a partial profit re-

duces the risk in the trade and protects profits and capital.
This trade management can be applied to any of the patterns that are
reversal patterns and the trader is in a countertrend trade.
Figure 9.4 shows an example of using a Fibonacci ratio to move a
stop-loss order. The assumption is if the price exceeds the .786 it will
move beyond that level to the 1.00 or to an extension ratio such as the
1.272 or 1.618.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

13:12

Char Count=

123

Figure 9.4 Dow index daily chart of Double Bottom pattern: managing countertrend trade using Fibonacci ratios to move stops and protect proﬁts. The stop-loss
order can be moved to just above the .786. The assumption is if the price exceeds
the .786 level, it will move higher.

Double Top Pattern Example
Figure 9.5 shows an example of a Double Top pattern in the crude oil market that leads to a large decline. The second top does not exactly match the
first top in price, but there is only a few cents’ difference. Once the market
turns down from the second top, it accelerates to the downside, as is visible with the gaps down and the long, wide range bars. A trader recognizing
these warning signs would want to look for areas to trade with that trend
and momentum. A smaller time frame could be used for entries.

Pattern Recognition
The Double Top and Bottom patterns should be easy to see and aesthetically pleasing to the eye. The key to these patterns is the formation of the
second leg of the top or bottom. It is not unusual for the second low on a
Double Bottom pattern to be exceeded by a small amount or the second
high on a Double Top pattern to be exceeded by a small amount. The reason for this is that stops are placed just at or slightly beyond these levels

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

124

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 9.5 Crude oil daily chart example of a Double Top pattern. The two highs
are within 20 cents.

and are taken out just as the market reverses. Refer back to Figure 9.2 for
an example of the price exceeding the second low. The same principles for
controlling risk and managing trades apply to both the Double Top pattern
and the Double Bottom pattern.

Failure Point
The technician should always be aware of where the failure points are on
any technical pattern. This knowledge will help the trader to control risk
and manage the trade by placing stops at the appropriate price levels. The
failure point of the Double Top pattern would be at the high of the pattern.
(Refer back to Figure 9.5.) If the price reversed back up to those highs, the
trader would want to cover any short positions and look for a place to go
long. The trader could use a buy-stop order just above the highs to let the
market pull them into the trade. A stop-loss order could be placed based
on a visible chart point or dollar amount.
The failure point on the Double Bottom pattern would be if price reversed back down through the lows. The trader could use a buy-stop order to let the market pull them into the trade and then place a stop-loss
