
Action-Reaction-Resolution
It would be nice to wrap up this discussion after posting a few bullet points
about the index futures and program algorithms, but life isn’t so simple
in our twenty-first-century markets. Massive liquidity across a spectrum
of futures, debt, currency, and derivative exchanges ensures that crosscurrents outside the realm of ordinary supply and demand impact every
aspect of our trading activities, from initial position choice to final profit or
loss. Despite this enormous complexity, many technicians still believe that
pretty patterns predict everything they need to know about trend direction,
extension, and duration. Sadly, this is a weak-handed view because convergence-divergence oscillation between equities and numerous world
markets exert tremendous power over price movement.
In the real world, cross-market forces can trigger cascading selloffs
on the most bullish patterns and parabolic rallies on the most bearish ones.
That’s not to say we should just abandon our pattern analysis because it
doesn’t work anymore. In fact, nothing could be further from the truth.
But using triangles, rectangles, and trendlines to make trading decisions
in a vacuum, and without consideration of the dominating external forces,
is a surefire way to lose money.
Which brings us back to the concept of pattern failure, a central
theme in The Master Swing Trader. When the book was published in 2000,
traders were just entering a tough environment in which classic technical
analysis had started to lose its historic potency. In the simplest terms,
technical analysis stopped working after the bubble burst, because its
Internet-trained adherents had became the majority that needed to be
punished, and just like every overplayed inefficiency, the profit door was
slammed shut.

PART ONE

38

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

2.3

Breakouts and breakdowns evolve through action-reaction-resolution (1-2-3) cycles. Cerner rallies above
resistance at 40, after a four-month basing pattern. The breakout sets off the action phase with a rally that gives
way to a series of whipsaws, which are common during the reaction phase. Volatility quiets down for a week,
and price then surges above the first high, triggering the long-awaited resolution phase. This confirms the initial
breakout and initiates a fractal 1-2-3 cycle in a smaller time frame.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

To this day, traders chase around deceptively simple breakouts and
breakdowns without recognition of many ways that pattern failure will undermine their bottom-line results. It’s really a shame because a single addition
to their workflows will address this critical issue in an efficient manner. It
starts with a deconstruction of the three-step mechanics you’ll observe in the

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

39

majority of breakouts, breakdowns, whipsaws, and pattern failures. I call this
the action-reaction-resolution cycle, or simply the 1-2-3 cycle.
Successful breakouts and breakdowns tend to occur in three phases.
They begin when price pushes through support or resistance on increased
volume. We’ll call this the action phase. Price expands a few ticks or points
and reverses, which initiates the reaction phase. The instrument then shifts
into countertrend mode and spawns the first pullback, where sidelined
players get a “second chance” opportunity to buy or sell near the support
or resistance level. If all systems are working as intended, a second impulse
eventually kicks into gear and carries price through the initial swing high
or low. This thrust marks the resolution phase, which confirms the breakout
or breakdown.
Whipsaws, as well as false breakouts or breakdowns, result when
supply-demand dynamics fall out of balance. Whipsaws are defined by
choppy swings at or near support or resistance levels. The natural tug and
pull between bulls and bears generates most whipsaws, but program algorithms also impact this activity with trend-neutral strategies that target
common stop levels in order to generate volume. Whatever the source,
whipsaws are responsible for many of the losses in a typical trading
portfolio. This remarkably efficient engine of destruction can take control
whenever breakouts or breakdowns fail to generate well-organized
reaction phases.
The resolution phase can unfold quickly once whipsaws start to die
down. Volatility reduction induces price contraction that, in turn, triggers
a wave of fresh entry signals. Positive feedback then kicks in and generates the directional surge needed to carry the instrument through the
initial high or low swing. Price exceeding the high or low signals successful completion of the breakout or breakdown and the initiation of a
new 1-2-3 cycle in a smaller time frame.
Pattern failures occur when price action traps the side of the market
acting upon the initial breakout or breakdown signal. Using popular
technical strategies, the crowd chases into positions at these inflection
points but is then vulnerable because follow-through depends upon a
second crowd seeing the next set of technical signals and jumping in behind
them. With these dynamics in play, false breakouts and breakdowns can
occur for two reasons. First, the second crowd fails to appear on schedule.
Second, predatory programs and traders that have deconstructed these
impulses take aggressive contrary positions. The resultant counterswing
when both adverse dynamics hit at the same time can be breathtaking and
utterly destructive to trend-following positions.

40

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

You’ll find this 1-2-3 cycle is a recurring theme as you move through
this book because it’s intimately tied to survivalist trading techniques. For
now, just go back and memorize the pattern because it will provide an
immediate benefit to your bottom line. And, if you have the courage, pull
up your trading records and examine your biggest losers, with a sharp
focus on 1-2-3 cycle elements that would have saved your backside.

Working with Cross-Market Influences
Cross-market analysis provides a well-defined trading edge because it
helps us to measure risk for each segment of the 1-2-3 cycle in our proposed
trades as well as in open positions. Sympathetic markets trending in the
same direction as our signals increase the odds for a profitable resolution
phase. Alternatively, adverse markets lower the odds for a successful resolution phase. For example, choppy Asian markets make it more likely that
our non-U.S. positions in Web portals, steel mills, and agricultural feed
producers will stumble through whipsaws in the New York session.
What cross-markets do you need to watch during the trading day?
Start with an active subscription to the CME Globex index futures. If you’re
strapped for cash, you can pull up index-related exchange-traded funds as
a replacement, as long as you keep in mind that these instruments can’t
access the 24-hour markets. Next, add a variety of energy and commodity
markets to your real-time view. Again, ETFs will provide an alternative,
but choose them with care because they may not track the futures markets
reliably, as many traders and investors discovered when the United States
Oil Fund crashed in 2008. In any case, data fees for energy and commodity
futures are worth their weight in gold, even if you don’t intend to play
crude oil or precious metals directly.
Equity traders can track price action in other world markets, like the
European and Asian bourses, bonds, and currency pairs by just paying
attention to the financial headlines. Currencies, in particular, are specialized animals that can respond violently to global economic shifts,
but unless you intend to trade them directly, just throw up a EUR/USD
quote, read the financial news, and forget about the other crosses. Use
country ETFs to observe gyrations in the most active world markets, but
keep in mind that these instruments don’t track foreign markets outside
of U.S. exchange hours, so they have limited value during the trading day.
Of course, you can also add foreign markets to your real-time data subscriptions, but the cost can be prohibitively high.

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

41

As a general rule, avoid long-term positions when world markets are
overly volatile or unpredictable. In addition, it’s absolutely vital to have
a preplanned fire drill ready to go when you awake to discover shock
movement in the overnight markets. These seismic shifts in prices and
perceptions often require aggressive utilization of the premarket session
in order to reduce risk ahead of the New York open. Look for more detail
about this specialized arena of battle in Chapter 10. Alternatively, think
clearly when an overnight shock hits the markets, because ill-advised
decisions by weak-handed players can trigger a host of predatory trades.
For example, there’s often a quick flush that shakes out traders reacting to
the traps that have been sprung overnight. This capitulation can set up a
counterreaction that fills an early gap or throws momentum chasers into a
secondary trap that can be exploited later in the session.
Economic releases and Fed meetings affect many markets simultaneously, triggering volatile spirals of price discovery that both increase risk
and set up excellent trading opportunities. Not surprisingly, price action
after big economic shocks generally follows an action-reaction mechanism that’s nearly identical to the 1-2-3 cycle. Traders initiate the cycle
dynamics by chasing the logical direction based on the bull or bear
quality of the shock. A counterimpulse then hits the tape, testing the new
boundaries triggered by the event. Finally, the market discounts the news
and shifts methodically toward a new price level, rewarding some and
punishing others.
The major world markets have natural relationships between each
other, and with specific economic segments, that predict the long- and
short-term behavior of stock prices. Here are five common relationships
that guide a large segment of the equity population:
• An inverse relationship between commodities and bonds
• An inverse relationship between the U.S. dollar and commodities,
especially gold
• A positive relationship between stocks and bonds
• Copper as a proxy for industrial activity
• Gold as a proxy for inflation-deflation
• Oil as a proxy for economic growth-contraction
Energy and commodity markets, in particular, have become central
to our trading strategies in recent years. This is especially true because raw
materials correspond directly with a broad set of related equities. More
importantly, these issues tend to do their own thing rather than follow
around the S&P 500 or Nasdaq-100 indices like obedient puppies. This

42

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

independence provides traders with profitable alternatives when price
action in the major indices doesn’t support our favored strategies. However, it’s important to remember that commodity futures and their
underlying stocks rarely move in perfect harmony because the interrelationships are complicated, to say the least. Within the energy complex,
for example, companies might focus on refining, exploration, distribution, drilling, or a subset of these activities. Each of these specializations
has a relative dependence on daily fluctuations in crude oil or natural gas
prices.
When trading energy stocks to take advantage of rising crude oil
prices, it’s best to pick issues that are (a) outperforming the futures and (b)
outperforming other energy stocks. As a general rule, small cap explorers
offer the most speculative positions, while dividend paying trusts and
integrated oil companies offer the most safety. Traders love the drilling
and pipeline operations because they can track performance directly
against the hugely popular Oil Services HOLDRS Trust. In addition, direct
country plays, like Brazil’s Petróleo Brasileiro S.A., work extremely well as
proxies for rapidly rising or falling crude oil prices because they’re trading
on the value of their underground reserves.
A similar alignment and convergence process runs through the
entire metals group. The gold futures contract has a unique position in this
complex because it’s a highly emotional instrument tied to fear, inflation,
hedging, and Asian demand. Gold bull-bear cycles also tend to be long
lasting, with trends measured in decades rather than in months or years.
As a result, day-to-day movement of precious metals equities rarely tracks
the major indices.
It’s easy to lose money playing these stocks due to the misconception that price action will track gold, silver, or platinum prices. While
the longer-term trends of gold, silver, and platinum miners will generally
track commodity futures, weekly performance is more intimately tied to
company hedging practices, proven resources, and speculation on new
resources. This is a two-edged sword because a handful of these mining
operations will strongly outperform the underlying commodities while
the majority underperforms.
As with other sectors, it’s best to choose the strongest equities in the
precious metals group for long positions and the weakest ones for short
positions. The most effective technique to plot this relative performance is
to compare the current price to the 200-day EMA. I’ll discuss this important
measurement tool in Chapter 4.

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

43

Trading versus Technical Analysis
There’s a major problem with technical analysis in our modern markets.
As it turns out, interpreting price charts is a relatively easy skill set to learn,
while applying a cohesive strategy that makes money is infinitely more
difficult. Many traders gravitate toward chart reading at the expense of
everything else, because they’re too lazy to study the market’s numerous
quirks and nuances. After all, it takes less effort to draw a few lines marking
out support or resistance than to understand the multitude of forces that
really move the financial markets. In truth, no one is printing money these
days, and you’ll need to do more than read the pretty patterns in order to
book a year’s worth of profits.
Of course, everyone is an armchair technician because it takes little
work or commitment, but putting your money on the line every day is
another story. Real-life trading requires a detailed plan of execution, a strong
stomach, and a ton of patience. And it’s much harder to do than impressing
your online buddies with a sea of trendlines, flags, or double bottom patterns.
Admittedly, I look at a ton of charts each day, but my primary objective is
to find intersections of price and time where other technicians are likely to
get trapped, become irrational, or trip over their own belief systems. In this
way I can use their overreliance on chart reading to my personal advantage.
It’s just one of the many strategies that takes popular technical analysis and
turns it, diabolically, against its most ardent disciples.
Do you flip through the charts in a role-playing exercise, trying to
visualize all the rallies or selloffs where you would have been right if
only you’d taken action? If so, you might be reinforcing a fantasy mindset
that won’t help your bottom line because, in essence, you’re engaged
in unconscious risk-avoidance. Of course, there’s nothing wrong with
using the charts to filter out noise and to make better trading decisions.
In fact, it’s a required practice on the road to profitability. But be warned:
price patterns hide so many perception traps that misinformation often
defines reality.
Now take this little quiz. Your honest answers to these three questions
should tell you whether you’re a trader or just a closet technician:
• Can you translate what you see on the chart into a plan that works
for that market, that time frame, and your pocketbook?
• Do you see all the traps and whipsaws that might tear through
your stops before price finally moves on to your objective?

44

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

• How will you deal with the panic attack when the market moves
against you because program algorithms are controlling the
data flow?
Market whales can paint the tape however they choose, but their
absolute power isn’t the only problem with classic technical analysis these
days. As I noted earlier, so many weak players rely on chart reading that
common technical perceptions no longer define a workable edge. In truth,
the modern markets spin off a thousand shades of reality, and what you
see depends on how you look. Ironically, long-term profitability demands
an intimate knowledge of the numerous ways that charts and patterns
generate false information. It also requires an adaptive trading strategy
that avoids or mitigates the shakeouts, fakeouts, and downright lies that
price charts radiate each day.
Technical analysts get kudos for their market calls, but the practice is
often self-serving and overrated. It also fosters a sports betting mentality
that does little or nothing to generate consistent income. In addition, it’s
a popular deception that gives the public someone to blame when things
turn out poorly. As strange as it sounds, profitability has little to do with
being right or wrong. Rather, long-term survival depends on a capability
to manage risk and to accurately compute the odds in your favor in real
time. It also requires peaceful coexistence with the technical confusion,
divergence, and misdirection that pops up at every turn.
In other words, you need to pay a lot more attention to the diabolical
mind of the market than to all those fancy trendlines on your favorite
chart.

The Real World: Awakening to Insanity
There’s been an overnight selloff in the Asian and European markets. You
held three long positions overnight, and you’re now forced to deal with
the consequences.
The rally day is winding down, and it’s time to decide which positions
to hold overnight. After the pleasantly strong session, you’re willing to
carry more exposure than usual, expecting eager bulls to keep up buying
pressure in the morning. Sensing an opportunity, you add shares to two
open positions and even throw in a “lottery ticket,” not wanting to miss

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

45

any profits. At the end of the day, you’re holding 500 shares of Apple,
1,000 shares of General Mills, and 1,500 shares of NetEase, a Chinese
momentum play.
You’re up with the birds the next day, fully prepared to see glowing
green lighting up your trading screen, confirming expectations for a strong
and profitable opening. Instead, everything has fallen apart overnight,
with panicky traders worldwide getting out at any price they can. Your
stomach does back flips when you realize those great positions you took
overnight now look like sitting ducks, lined up nicely in a row for sellers to
shoot down. Indeed, it’s going to be a rough morning in which a few bad
decisions might cost you thousands of dollars in shock losses. So where
do you start the triage process, and how do you get out of the way of the
moving train?
Right away, you notice the selloff started in Asia, with big indices in
that part of the world down almost 5%. This is a huge problem because
your highest-risk position, the Chinese tech play, has already been trading
and might be heavily impacted by the selloff. In addition, the stock is naturally volatile, swinging through two, three, or even four points on a relatively quiet day. The potential risk hits you like a brick wall, demanding
your undivided attention before you look at your other positions.
Apple is a mixed bag because it’s an archetype for many things, marketwise. For starters, it’s a Nasdaq-100 component, which warns that
any sell programs hitting the index futures could rip a big hole in the
downside. It’s also a punching bag for hedge funds looking to pull down
the entire market through narrowly targeted selling pressure. This works
both ways, however, because equally powerful forces wanting to trigger
short squeezes often bid up the stock to force buying pressure to ripple
through the tech sector.
Finally, General Mills could turn out to be the saving grace because
big selloffs often trigger rotation into defensive groups like foods, soaps,
and cosmetics. But you really don’t know yet if the few buyers out
there will feel like risking their capital on anything at all that day. So this
stock moves into the “observe and report” category, in which you’re
hoping for resiliency while keeping one nervous finger on the exit
button.
Ironically, your response to the early morning crisis will be easier if
your exposure is more heavily weighted to the S&P 500 or Nasdaq-100
indices. In either case, you can sell short the related futures contract in
the premarket and balance out your long side exposure. More often,
positions in trading accounts tend to show weak correlation with the

46

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

major indices and need to be managed independently when disaster
strikes.
Take a moment to consider just how bad things really are. Many
selloffs are just shakeout events in which prices bounce back quickly
after weak hands give up and sell out. A good way to approach this
inquiry is to look at overnight trading ranges for the CME Globex index
futures, as discussed earlier in this chapter. Your primary question: are
the index futures trending lower, or are they caught within relatively
narrow boundaries? One-way movement in the wee hours of the
morning is far more dangerous than a two-sided market. This positive
feedback loop predicts that index prices could drop far lower and drag
down positions more violently than expected after the opening bell.
Premarket quotes confirm your worst fears, with Apple and NetEase
trading down between 2% and 3%. You can make an immediate sell or
hold decision with the Apple quote because the stock is highly liquid and
trading a tight spread in the premarket session. NetEase is more confusing because there are two and a half points between the bid and ask
prices. You decide, correctly, to sit on your hands and watch for a better
exit price closer to the opening bell. If that doesn’t work, you’re ready to
accept your painful fate and execute a post opening fire drill.
Is Apple trading stronger or weaker than the Nasdaq-100 index
futures? This simple comparison can provide actionable convergencedivergence data. A stronger Apple points to resiliency that might survive
the opening downdraft, while weaker performance signals downside
leadership. However, there are no perfect guarantees with a bullish
divergence, and the stock might still trade much lower after the open.
With this in mind, you look for a beneficial premarket exit. Any price you
can live with fits this loose definition, but it’s even better if you can get
out near even, even though you carried a profit overnight. This “nothing
ventured, nothing gained” outcome helps your mental state and gets
you ready for that day’s new opportunities.
Once you decide which positions to hold and which are marked for
elimination, follow premarket action to see if your risk evaluation still
makes sense. Quite often, early trading on your safe stocks will scare
the heck out of you, while the most dangerous ones hold up better than
expected. Many electronic crossing networks are open for business prior
to 8 a.m. New York time, but most discount brokerages don’t report premarket activity until that time. This systemic omission gives early birds
an advantage because a large pool of traders will see nothing on their
