
At one end of the scale are large companies which in spite of out-
standing prospects of major further growth are so financially strong,
with roots going so deep into the economic soil, that they qualify
under the general classification of “institutional stocks.” This means


84 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

that insurance companies, professional trustees, and similar institutional
buyers will buy them.They will do so because they feel that, while they
may misjudge market prices and could lose a part of their original
investment should they be forced to sell such stocks at a time of lower
quotations, they are avoiding the greater danger of loss they could suf-
fer if they bought into a company that subsequently fell from its pres-
ent competitive position.

The Dow Chemical Company, Du Pont, and International Business
Machines are good examples of this type of growth stock. In Chapter
One I mentioned the totally insignificant return available from high-
grade bonds during the ten-year period 1946 to 1956. At the close of
this period, each of these three stocks—Dow, Du Pont, and IBM—had
a value approximately five times what it sold for at the beginning of the
period. Nor during these ten years did their holders suffer from the
standpoint of current income. Dow, for example, is almost notorious for
the low rate of return it customarily pays on current market price. Yet
the investor who bought Dow at the start of this period would at the
end of it be doing well from the standpoint of current income. Although
Dow at the time of purchase would only have provided a return of
about 2 per cent (this was a period when yields on all stocks were
high), just ten years later it had increased dividends or split stock so
many times that the investor would have been enjoying a dividend
return of between 8 and 9 per cent on the price of his investment ten
years earlier. More significantly, the ten-year period covered is not an
unusual one for companies of the caliber of these three. Decade after
decade, with only occasional interruptions from such one-time influ-
ences as the great 1929-1932 bear market or World War II, these stocks
have given almost fabulous performance.

At the other end of the scale, also of extreme interest for the right
sort of long-range investment, are small and frequently young compa-
nies which may only have total sales of from one to six or seven million
dollars per annum, but which also have products that might bring a sen-
sational future. To qualify under the fifteen points already described,
such companies will usually have a combination of outstanding business
management and equally capable scientific personnel who are pioneer-
ing in a new or economically promising field. The Ampex Corporation
at the time the stock was first offered to the public in 1953 might serve
as a good example of this type of company. Within four years the value
of this stock had increased over seven-fold.



What to Buy 85

Between these two extremes he a host of other promising growth
companies varying all the way from those as young and risky as was Ampex
in 1953 to those as strong and well entrenched as are Dow, Du Pont, and
IBM today. Assuming it is time to buy at all (see the next chapter), which
type should the investor buy? ’

The young growth stock offers by far the greatest possibility of
gain. Sometimes this can mount up to several thousand per cent in a
decade, But making at least an occasional investment mistake is
inevitable even for the most skilled investor. It should never be for-
gotten that if such a mistake is made in this type of common stock,
every dollar put into the investment can be lost. In contrast, if the
stock is bought according to the rules described in the next chapter,
any losses that might occur in the older and more established growth
stocks should be temporary, resulting from a period of unanticipated
decline in the stock market as a whole. The long-range gain in value
of this class of big company growth stock will, over the years, be con-
siderably less than that of the small and usually younger enterprise.
Nevertheless it will mount to thoroughly worthwhile totals. Even in
the most conservative of the growth stocks it should run to at least
several times the original investment.

Therefore, for anyone risking a stake big enough to be of real sig-
nificance to himself or his family, the rule to follow should be rather
obvious. It is to put “most” of his funds into the type of company
which, while perhaps not as large as a Dow, a Du Pont, or an Interna-
tional Business Machines, at least comes closcr to that type of stock
than to the small young company. Whether this “most” be 60 per cent
or 100 per cent of total investments varies with the needs or require-
ments of each individual. A widow with a half million dollars of total
assets and no children might put all her funds in the more conserva-
tive class of growth stocks. Another widow with a million dollars to
invest and three children for whom she would like to increase her
assets-—to a degree that would not, however, jeopardize her scale of
living—might well put up to 15 per cent of her assets in carefully
selected small young companies. A businessman with a wife, two chil-
dren, a present investment worth $400,000, and an income big enough
to save $10,000 per annum after taxes might put all his present
$400,000 into the more conservative-type growth companies but ven-
ture the $10,000 of new savings each year on the more risky half of
the investment scale.


86 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

In all these cases, however, the gain in value over the years of the
more conservative group of stocks should be enough to outweigh even
complete loss of all funds put into the more risky type. Meanwhile, if
properly selected, the more risky type could significantly increase the
total capital gain. Equally important if this happens, these young risky
companies will by that time have reached a point in their own devel-
opment where their stocks will no longer be carrying anything like the
former degree of risk but may even have progressed to a status where
institutions have begun buying them.

The problems of the small investor are somewhat more difficult. The
large investor can often completely ignore the matter of dividend
returns in his endeavor to employ all his funds in situations affording
maximum growth potential. After his funds are so invested he may still
obtain from them sufficient dividends cither to take care of his desired
standard of living or to enable him to attain this standard if the dividend
income is added to his other regular earning power. Most small investors
cannot live on the return on their investment no matter how high a
yield is obtained, since the total value of their holdings is not great
enough. Therefore for the small investor the matter of current dividend
return usually comes down to a choice between a few hundred dollars
a year starting right now, or the chance of obtaining an income many
times this few hundred dollars a year at a later date.

Before reaching a decision on this crucial point, there is one matter
which the small investor should face squarely. This is that the only funds
he should consider using for common stock investment are funds that
are truly surplus. This does not mean using all funds that remain over
and above what he needs for everyday living expense. Except in the
most unusual circumstances, he should have a backlog of several thousand
dollars, sufficient to take care of illnesses or other unexpected contin-
gencies, before attempting to buy anything with as much intrinsic risk
as a common stock. Similarly, funds already set aside for some specific
future purpose, such as sending a child through college, should never be
risked in the stock market. It is only after taking care of matters of this
sort that he should consider common stock investment.

The objective which the small investor then has for this surplus
becomes somewhat a matter of personal choice and of his particular
circumstances, including the size and nature of his other income. A
young man or woman, or an older investor with children or other heirs
of whom he or she is particularly fond, may be willing to sacrifice a



What to Buy 87

dividend income of, say, $30 or $40 a month in order to obtain an
income ten times that size in fifteen years. In contrast, an elderly per-
son with no close heirs would naturally prefer a larger immediate
income. Similarly, a person earning a relatively small income and with
heavy financial obligations might have no choice but to provide for
immediate needs.

However, for the great majority of small investors, the decision on
the importance of immediate income is one of personal choice. It prob-
ably is largely dependent on the psychology of each individual investor,
My own purely personal view is that a small amount of additional
income (after taxes) palls in comparison to an investment that in the
years ahead could bring me a sizable income and, in time, might make
my children really wealthy. Others may feel quite differently about this.
It is to the large investor, and to the small investor who feels as I do on
this subject and desires an intelligent approach to the principles that
have made this kind of results possible, that the procedures set forth in
this book are presented.

The success which any particular individual will have in applying
these principles to his own investments will depend on two things. One
is the degree of skill with which he applies them. The other is, of course,
the matter of good fortune. In an age when an unforeseeable discovery
might happen tomorrow in a research laboratory in no way connected
with the company in which the investment has been made, and in an
age when five years from now that unrelated research development
could result in either tripling or cutting in half the profits of this invest-
ment, good fortune obviously can play a tremendous part so far as any
one investment is concerned. This is why even the medium-sized
investor has an advantage over those of very small means. This element
of good or bad fortune will largely average out if several well-selected
investments are chosen.

However, for both large and small investors who prefer far greater
income some years from now to maximum possible return today, it is
well to remember that during the past thirty-five years numerous stud-
ies have been made by various financial authorities. These have com-
pared the results obtained from the purchase of common stocks which
afford a high dividend yield with those obtained from the purchase of
low-yield stocks of companics that have concentrated on growth and
the rcinvestment of assets. As far as I know, every one of these studies
has shown the same trend. The growth stocks, over a five- or ten-year


88 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

span, have proven spectacularly better so far as their increase in capital
value is concerned.

More surprising, in the same time span such stocks have usually so
increased their dividends that, while still paying a low return in relation
to the enhanced value at which’ they were by then selling, they were by
this time paying a greater dividend return on the original investment
than were the stocks selected for yicld alonc. In other words, the growth
stocks had not only shown a marked superiority in the field of capital
appreciation, but given a reasonable time, they had grown to a point
where they showed superiority in the matter of dividend return as well.



3
When to Buy

Ihe preceding chapters attempted to show that the heart of succes-

sful investing is knowing how to find the minority of stocks that in

the years ahead will have spectacular growth in their per-share earn-
ings. Therefore, is there any reason to divert time or mental effort from
the main issue? Does not the matter of when to buy become of rela-
tively minor importance? Once the investor is sure he has definitely
found an outstanding stock, isn’t any time at all a good time to buy it?
The answer to this depends somewhat on the investor’s objective. It also
depends on his temperament.

Let us take an example. With the ease of hindsight it can be made the
most extreme example in modern financial history. This would be the
purchase of several superbly selected enterprises in the summer of 1929
or just before the greatest stock market crash of American history. In time
such a purchase would have turned out well. But twenty-five years later
it would provide a much smaller percentage gain than would have been
the case if, having done the hardest part of the job in selecting his com-
panies properly, an investor had made the small extra effort needed to
understand a few simple principles about the timing of growth stocks.

In other words, if the right stocks are bought and held long enough
they will always produce some profit. Usually they will produce a hand-
some profit. However, to produce close to the maximum profit, the kind
of spectacular profit defined earlier, some consideration must be given
to timing.

The conventional method of timing when to buy stocks is, I believe,
just as silly as it appears on the surface to be sensible. This method is to


90 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

marshal a vast mass of economic data. From these data conclusions are
reached as to the near- and medium-term course of general business.
More sophisticated investors will usually form opinions about the future
course of money rates as well as business activity. Then, if their forecasts
for all these matters indicate no rhajor worsening of background condi-
tions, the conclusion is that the desired stock may be bought. It some-
times appears that dark clouds are forming on the horizon, Then those
who use this generally accepted method will postpone or cancel pur-
chases they otherwise would make.

My objection to this approach is not that it is unreasonable in the-
ory. It is that in the current state of human knowledge about the eco-
nomics which deal with forecasting future business trends, it is impos-
sible to apply this method in practice. The chances of being right are
not good enough to warrant such methods being used as a basis for
risking the investment of savings. 'his may not always be the case. It
might not even be the case five or ten years from now. At present, able
men are attempting to harness electronic computers to establish
“input-output” series of sufficient intricacy that perhaps at some future
date it may be possible to know with a fair degree of precision what
the coming business trends will be.

‘When, if ever, such developments occur, the art of common stock
investment may have to be radically revised. Until they occur, however,
I believe that the economics which deal with forecasting business trends
may be considered to be about as far along as was the science of chem-
istry during the days of alchemy in the Middle Ages. In chemistry then,
as in business forecasting now, basic principles were just beginning to
emerge from a mysterious mass of mumbo-jumbo. However, chemistry
had not reached a point where such principles could be safely used as a
basis for choosing a course of action.

Occasionally, as in 1929, the economy gets so out of line that spec-
ulative enthusiasm for the future runs to unprecedented. proportions.
Even in our present state of economic ignorance, it is possible to make
a pretty accurate guess as to what will occur. However, I doubt if the
years when it is safe to do this have averaged much more than one out
of ten. They may be even rarer in the future.

The typical investor is so used to having economic forecasts made
for him that he may start by trusting too strongly the dependability of
such forecasts. If so, I suggest that he look over a file of the back issues
of the Commercial & Financial Chronicle for any year he may choose since



When to Buy 91

the end of World War II. As a matter of fact it might pay him to look
over such a file even though he is aware of the fallibility of these fore-
casts. Regardless of the year he selects he will find, among other mate-
rial, a sizable number of articles in which leading economic and finan-
cial authorities give their views of'the outlook for the period ahead.
Since the editors of this journal appear to select their material so as to
give the ablest available presentations of both optimistic and pessimistic
opinions, it is not surprising that opposing forecasts will be found in any
such series of back issues. What is surprising is the degree by which such
experts disagree with each other. Even more surprising is how strong
and convincing some of the arguments were bound to seem at the time
they were written. This is particularly true of some of the forceasts that
turned out to be most wrong.

The amount of mental effort the financial community puts into
this constant attempt to guess the economic future from a random
and probably incomplete series of facts makes one wonder what
might have been accomplished if only a fraction of such mental effort
had been applied to something with a better chance of proving use-
ful. | have already compared economic forecasting with chemistry in
the days of alchemy. Perhaps this preoccupation with trying to do
something which apparently cannot yet be done properly permits
another comparison with the Middle Ages.

That was a period when most of the Western world lived in an envi-
ronment of unnecessary want and human suffering. This was largely
because the considcrable mental ability of the period was devoted to
fruitless results. Consider what might have been accomplished if half as
much thought had been given to fighting hunger, disease, and greed as
was devoted to debating such points as the number of angels that could
balance on the head of a pin. Perhaps just part of the collective intelli-
gence nowadays employed in the investment community’s attempt to
guess the future trend of the business cycle could produce spectacular
results if it were harnessed to more productive purposes.

If, then, conventional studies of the near-term economic prospect
do not provide the right method of approach to the proper timing of
buying, what does provide it? The answer lies in the very nature of
growth stocks themselves.

At the risk of being repetitious, let us review for a moment some of
the basic characteristics of outstandingly desirable investments, as dis-
cussed in the preceding chapter. These companies are usually working


92 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

in one way or another on the very frontiers of scientific technology.
They are developing various new products or processes from the labo-
ratory through the pilot plant to the early stages of commercial pro-
duction. All of this costs money in varying amounts. All of it is a drain
on other profits of the business’ Even in the early stage of commercial
production the extra sales expense involved in building sufficient vol-
ume for a new product to furnish the desired margin of profit is such
that the out-of-pocket losses at this stage of development may be greater
than they were during the pilot-plant period.

From the standpoint of the investor there are two aspects of all this
that have particular significance. One of these is the impossibility of
depending on any sure time table in the development cycle of a new
product. The other is that even for the most brilliantly-managed enter-
prises, a percentage of failures is part of the cost of doing business. In a
sport, such as baseball, even the most outstanding league champions will
have dropped some percentage of their scheduled games.

The point in the development of a new process that is perhaps
worth the closest scrutiny from the standpoint of timing the buying of
common stocks is that at which the first full-scale commercial plant is
about to begin production. In a new plant for even established proces-
ses or products, there will probably be a shake-down period of six to
eight weeks that will prove rather expensive. It takes this long to get the
equipment adjusted to the required operating efficiency and to weed
out the inevitable “bugs” that seem to occur in breaking in modern
intricate machinery. When the process is really revolutionary, this expen-
sive shake-down period may extend far beyond the estimate of even the
most pessimistic company engineer. Furthermore, when problems final-
ly do get solved, the weary stockholder still cannot look forward to
immediate profits. There are more months of still further drain while
even more of the company’s profits from older lines are being ploughed
back into special sales and advertising efforts to get the new product
accepted.

It may be that the company making all this effort is having such
growth in revenue from other and older products that the drain on prof
its is not noticed by the average stockholder. Frequently, however, just
the opposite happens. As word first gets out about a spectacular new
product in the laboratory of a well-run company, eager buyers bid up
the price of that company’s shares. When word comes of successful
pilot-plant operation, the shares go still higher. Few think of the old



When to Buy 93

analogy that operating a pilot plant is like driving an automobile over a
winding country road at ten miles per hour. Running a commercial
plant is like driving on that same road at 100 miles per hour.

Then when month after month difficulties crop up in getting the
commercial plant started, these unexpected expenses cause per-share
earnings to dip noticeably. Word spreads that the plant is in trouble.
Nobody can guarantee when, if ever, the problems will be solved. The
former eager buyers of the stock become discouraged sellers. Down
goes the price of the stock. The longer the shake-down lasts the more
market quotations sag. At last comes the good news that the plant is
finally running smoothly. A two-day rally occurs in the price of the
stock. TTowever, in the following quarter when special sales expenses
have caused a still further sag in net income, the stock falls to the low-
est price in years. Word passes all through the financial community that
the management has blundered.

At this point the stock might well prove a sensational buy. Once the
extra sales effort has produced enough volume to make the first pro-
duction scale plant pay, normal sales effort is frequently enough to con-
tinue the upward movement of the sales curve for many years. Since the
same techniques are used, the placing in operation of a second, third,
fourth, and fifth plant can nearly always be done without the delays and
special expenses that occurred during the prolonged shake-down peri-
od of the first plant. By the time plant Number Five is running at capac-
ity, the company has grown so big and prosperous that the whole cycle
can be repeated on another brand new product without the same drain
on earnings percentage-wise or the same downward effect on the price
of the company’s shares. The investor has acquired at the right time an
investrnent which can grow for him for many years.
