
254

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Beginner: At the start, track approximately six, but no more than 10
trading vehicles. You can always add more later. It is better to start with
fewer markets and follow them well than to start with a lot and fall
behind.
Daily homework is essential for developing a feel for the markets.
Allocate time to study your markets each day. Even if you come home
late at night from your job or a party, you can still find 10 minutes to
download the data and glance at your five or six stocks. You can
update your mental picture of them even if you don’t plan to trade
them tomorrow. A beginner who follows too many stocks bites off
more than he can chew, falls behind, and becomes demoralized. Better
to follow a small number, get to know them well, and add more later.
Intermediate: You may track several dozen stocks or futures at this
stage. Analyzing each will take just as much time as it did when you
were a beginner, but you’ll analyze them more deeply. A serious amateur or a semiprofessional trader can use his time more efficiently with
the help of the ABC Rating System (see next page).
Some good traders choose not to expand the number of stocks or
futures they trade. A person might concentrate only on soybeans and
their products, or only currencies, or only five or six technology stocks.
In addition to analyzing your markets, expect to spend a minimum of
five to six hours a week reading books and articles and interacting with
other traders on the Internet.
After about a year or longer at this stage you will face an important
choice: to treat trading as a mildly profitable hobby or to try to rise to
the professional level. In that case, you will need to dedicate more time
to trading. You will have to make sacrifices in other areas of your life
and spend at least four to six hours a day working in the markets.
Professional: people who trade for a living tend to drop other professional interests. The markets demand time and attention, and money
management is more challenging because the account is much bigger.
A professional trader almost always uses some version of the ABC
Rating System, unless he chooses to trade just a handful of markets.
He spends more time researching the markets. At the same time, he
reviews them faster, thanks to his greater level of expertise. He spends
several hours each week reading, deepening his analysis and improving his money management, and also keeping track of new developments on the Internet.

TRADING FOR A LIVING

255

The rewards are very good at this stage, but a professional who has
put years into getting there does not become intoxicated with the
results. He lives very well, but continues to work harder than most
beginners. Traders at this level love the markets and derive a great deal
of satisfaction from them, like skiers enjoy tall mountains.

Managing Time with the ABC Rating System
Markets generate colossal volumes of information. No human can
process all the available data. No one can have in mind all the fundamental values, the economic trends, the technical indicators, the intraday action, and the buying and selling by insiders and market makers
while making a trading decision. We want to be thorough in our
research, but it can never be complete. We need to select a relatively
small number of markets and design a trading plan in order to channel the incoming information into a more manageable stream.
Trading is not about being brilliant, not about making forecasts, and
not about scanning a huge universe of trading vehicles. Trading is
about managing—our capital, our time, our analysis, and ourselves. If
we manage right, we’ll grind out profits.
Managing time is an important aspect of success. Find out how
much time you need, depending on your personal style, to research a
new market and track it daily. The ABC Rating System is designed to
deliver major time savings, allowing you to track and trade more markets in the same time. This system is not for beginners, but an intermediate or expert trader can definitely benefit from it.
The ABC Rating System, shown to me by D. Guppy, is a system for
managing time. It helps us concentrate on the markets in which a trade
seems imminent and spend less time in less promising markets. The
ABC system calls for a quick weekly review of all stocks or futures that
you track and sorting them into three groups: A for those you think you
might trade tomorrow, B for those you think you may trade later in the
week, and C for those you do not expect to trade in the coming week.
The best time to run the ABC system is on weekends, after you have
downloaded all your data. Prepare a spreadsheet with a horizontal line
for every stock or future you follow. Put their names in the left column.
Use vertical columns to record your A, B, and C ratings, one column
per day. Prepare the weekly and daily templates in your trading software. Drop the first market into the weekly template. Does it look like

256

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

you might want to trade this stock tomorrow? For instance, if you only
trade from the long side and the weekly chart is in a solid downtrend,
you will not trade it next week. In that case, mark it with a C and move
on. Drop the next market into your weekly template. If it looks like a
possible trade, then drop it into your daily template. Does it look like
you might want to trade it on Monday? If so, put an A into your spreadsheet. If it looks like an unlikely trade on Monday but possibly later
that week, put a B in your spreadsheet. Now move to the next market
and drop it into the weekly template. Repeat this process until you go
through your entire list.
Keep a good pace, do not slow down. You should be done with
each market in well under one minute. Remember, good trades should
leap at you from the screen and grab you by the face—it’s me, trade
me! If you have to squint at a chart, there’s probably no trade.
The real work begins after you have filled in your ABC spreadsheet.
Now you must study each stock or future you have marked with an A.
Apply your trading system, set up entry levels, stops, and profit targets,
and write down your orders for the day ahead. Do this for every market you have rated an A, leaving aside all others. After the closing on
Monday, go through all your A-rated markets. If you have entered
them, fill in a page in your trading diary and continue to manage those
trades according to your plan. If your entry orders have not been triggered, review those markets again—do you still want to enter on
Tuesday? Filtering out B and C groups saves time and lets you concentrate on the most promising trades.
Repeat the procedure after the closing on Tuesday, but now also
review the markets you rated B over the weekend. Now is the time to
decide whether you can upgrade them to an A and start monitoring
them daily or downgrade them to a C and leave them alone until the
weekend.
Earlier, we reviewed the action plan, a spreadsheet for recording your
orders for the day ahead. That and the ABC system lend themselves to
being combined into a single spreadsheet. Each horizontal line holds
a trading vehicle, and each vertical column one trading day. The cells
are filled with the letters A, B, or C, indicating your rating for that stock or
future for the day ahead. Red triangles in the corners identify those cells
in which you have inserted comments that tell you how to trade them.
Boredom is the trader’s enemy. It is hard to watch a market day after
day while it goes nowhere. A professional must track his markets, but

TRADING FOR A LIVING

257

no one enjoys watching paint dry. The ABC system provides an elegant solution. It lets you monitor all your markets in a quick and efficient manner, while dedicating most of your time and attention to the
most promising trades. Once you get used to applying the ABC system,
you can easily double the number of markets you follow and increase
your trading opportunities.

THE DECISION-MAKING TREE
A professional trader takes the markets seriously and gives them the
time and attention they deserve. If you have read this far, you are probably more dedicated than the average person. Now is the time to zero
in on your plan of action.
You need to allocate a certain time to market work each day; keeping in close touch with the market is essential for success. You have to
decide what markets to trade and focus on a select few to be successful. You need to design a plan for your education. Last but not least,
you need to design your trading plan; a written plan is the hallmark of
a serious trader.

Designing a Trading Plan
Traders go through three stages of development. We all start out as
beginners. Some of us survive long enough to become serious amateurs or semipros, and a few rise to the expert level. A trader with a
good written plan shows a rising level of development.
A beginner never writes down a plan because he has nothing to
write. He is having too much fun chasing hot tips and trying to make
a quick killing. Even if he wanted to write, he wouldn’t know where to
begin. A serious amateur or a semipro who writes down a plan, including money management rules, is on his way toward the expert level.
The main difference between a trading plan and a mechanical system is the degree of freedom it allows traders. Trading systems are
rigid, whereas plans lay down the main rules but leave you free to use
your judgment.
Some beginners gain a false sense of security from pouring tons of data
into mechanical systems and finding sets of rules that would have worked
in the past. The markets are live social organisms that develop, grow, and
change. Rigid rules fitted to past data are not likely to perform well in the

258

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

future. If mechanical systems could work, the best programmers would
have owned the markets by now. All mechanical trading systems, left
alone, self-destruct with the passage of time. Promoters keep selling them
because the public loves marketing gimmicks.
A trading plan includes a few unbreakable rules along with more
flexible recommendations that call for an exercise of judgment. Your
judgment grows with experience. A trading plan includes the principles for selecting markets, defines the types of trades, generates buy
and sell signals, and allocates trading capital. When you write a plan,
avoid the temptation to make it all-encompassing. Know when to stop.
Write down your rules but indicate where you will use your judgment
at the moment of decision.
You must know what type of trading appeals to you. A general
idea—to make money buying and selling—is not specific enough.
Winners make money in different ways, while all losers fall into the
same wastebasket of impulsivity. A long-term fundamental investor,
like Peter Lynch, searching for his elusive “10-bagger”—a stock that
rises 10-fold—acts differently from a successful short-term trader who
goes short to sell him that stock. Both may succeed in the long run,
but the floor trader with a 30-minute time horizon will close his shorts
on a tiny but profitable dip before the end of the day, just as surely as
the long-term investor will hold on to his longs.
A trading plan reflects your interests in specific markets and techniques, your experience, and the size of your account. It reflects
your personality as well as the behavior of your markets. If two
friends with equal capital and similar experience traded the same
market and wrote down their plans, they would come up with different outlines. You may create more than one plan if you like different
types of trading.
If you do not have a plan, start working on one. Drafting an intelligent plan requires a huge amount of work. The first time I tried to do
it was on a flight from New York to Los Angeles. I thought that five
hours in the air would be enough. A month later I was still at it.
Here are two fairly basic outlines of trading plans to illustrate their
basic structure and provide starting points for developing your own.
Reading someone’s trading plan is like reading a guide to lovemaking.
That manual may open your eyes to a few new positions, but ultimately you’ll have to do what suits your temperament and environment to enjoy the results.

TRADING FOR A LIVING

259

Trading Plan A Trader A has $50,000 in his account and is interested in the stock market. He has been tracking it for a while and has
observed that large-capitalization stocks (Dow-type stocks) tend to
move in steady trends but swing above and below their central tendencies several times a year.
A trading plan takes a concept of market behavior—that prices oscillate above and below their average value—and translates it into a plan
of action. It identifies the trend and the deviations, selects the tools for
catching them, and includes money management rules, profit targets,
and stops.
RESEARCH

1. Download four years’ worth of data for 30 stocks in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average.
2. Use weekly charts with a 26-week EMA to identify their long-term
trends.
A serious trader will test other approaches such as a longer or a
shorter EMA, different EMAs for different stocks, or another trendfollowing tool, such as a least regression trendline. Finding the best
tools for tracking the average consensus of value in your market
forces you to do a lot of research before putting on the first trade.
3. Determine the average deviation from value for each stock you plan
to trade.
Measure how high a stock rises above or falls below its weekly
EMA before swinging back. Channels can help, or you can put the
numbers into a spreadsheet. Find out how far from the EMA the
reversals occur, both in terms of price and percentages, as well as
the average duration of those deviations.
WEEKLY ACTIONS

Review the weekly charts of all stocks you follow. Mark those that have
deviated from their central tendencies by more than 75% of their average deviation and place them on your daily monitoring list.
DAILY ACTIONS

To streamline our discussion, we will consider only buying even though
a complete trading plan is also likely to spell out steps for shorting.

260

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

1. Apply a 22-day EMA to stocks on your daily monitoring list to define
their short-term trends. Research whether a longer or a shorter EMA
would do a better job. When a stock is deviating on the weekly chart
but its daily EMA stops moving and turns flat, it becomes a buy
candidate.
Here is another research idea: Is buying more profitable when the
broad market rises? How will you define the trend of the broad market? The EMA of an index, such as the S&P or NASDAQ, or an indicator, such as a new-high–new-low Index*? If your stocks march to
their own drummer, then ignore the broad market; otherwise, you
may buy more when the broad market rises and less when it falls.
2. When the weekly chart shows a downside deviation, buy the first
uptick of the daily EMA. Research types of entries—below the EMA,
in its vicinity, at the market, or on a breakout above the previous
day’s high.
3. Place a stop using the SafeZone indicator on the daily chart and set
a profit target at the weekly EMA. Recalculate your orders daily.
Calculate your dollar risk per share and decide how many shares to
buy while observing the 2% Rule. A trader with $50,000 in his account
may not risk more than $1,000 per trade, including slippage and commissions. Do not enter a trade if 6% of your account is already exposed
to risk in other trades.
This plan includes several inviolate rules: buy only when prices are
below the weekly EMA; buy only when the daily EMA is rising; do your
homework, recalculate your stops daily, and never risk more than 2%
of your account equity; do not expose more than 6% of your account
to risk. This plan also makes you exercise your judgment about exactly
where to enter, where to set profit targets, and what size to trade (as

*This simple indicator, which can easily be calculated for any exchange, is the best
gauge of the power of bulls and bears in the stock market. New highs are the stocks
that are making a new high for the year—the leaders in strength. New lows are the
stocks that are making a new low for the year—the leaders in weakness. If you compare their number each day, you will see whether the upside or the downside leadership is stronger. This indicator shows you what the leaders are doing, and you can
usually expect the crowds to follow the leaders. I have described this indicator at
length in Trading for a Living.

TRADING FOR A LIVING

261

long as you follow the 2% and the 6% Rules). It goes without saying
that you have to back up your written plan by keeping good records.
Your plan is likely to grow more elaborate with the passage of time.
The market will throw several curves at you, which will lead you to
adjust your plan and make it longer. The plan above ties Triple Screen
analysis (multiple timeframes and indicators) with money management,
entries, and exits.
Trading Plan B Trader B has $30,000 of risk capital and wants to
trade futures. He has noticed that those markets tend to spend a lot of
time in flat trading ranges, punctuated by relatively brief but fast trends.
He wants to take advantage of those short-term impulse moves.
RESEARCH
This trader has relatively little money, but doesn’t want to trade minicontracts. Therefore, he should focus on inexpensive markets whose
normal levels of noise will not overwhelm his money management
rules.
For example, a 1-point change in the S&P 500 translates into $250
in the S&P futures. A normal 5-point move on an ordinary day will
lead to a $1,250 change in equity, exposing a trader with a $30,000
account to a 4% loss. The 2% Rule puts many volatile and expensive
markets off limits for small accounts. Coffee, soybeans, currencies,
and many others have to be left alone until your account grows much
larger.
1. Download two years’ history in corn, sugar, and copper. Corn is
the least volatile of grains, and sugar is the least volatile tropical. Both
are very liquid, permitting easy entries and exits, unlike other inexpensive markets, such as orange juice, whose thin volume exposes
traders to bad slippage. Copper is liquid and tends to be relatively
quiet, except during economic booms. E-minis, electronically traded
index futures, are good for futures traders interested in the stock
market. Download two data series for each contract: at least two
years of continuous data for weekly charts and six months of the
front month data for daily charts.
2. Test several EMAs to determine which does the best job of tracking
trends on the weekly charts. Do a similar job with the daily charts.
Find the best channels for each market, especially for the past three

262

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

months on the daily charts. Those channels must contain 90 to 95
percent of recent market action. The past three months are the most
relevant, but it is a good idea to go back two years in your channel
research to prepare yourself for their dramatic expansions and contractions. Many traders lose their bearings when markets change. If
you know your history, you’ll feel less surprised.
WEEKLY ACTIONS
Review the weekly charts of your markets and determine their trends.
When the weekly trend is up, proceed to the daily charts and look for
buying opportunities. When the weekly is down, look for shorting
opportunities. If the weekly trend is unclear, either leave that market
alone or go directly to the daily charts.
You can define weekly trends by using the slope of an EMA, or you
can be more inventive, especially if you track just a few markets. For
example, you can use both the EMA and the MACD-Histogram to identify trends. When both indicators move in the same direction, they signal extra strong moves.
DAILY ACTIONS
Again, to streamline our discussion, we will only discuss buying, but
the same logic applies to shorting. Every futures trader must be comfortable with shorting. These markets have no uptick rule, and the number of short positions always equals that of longs.
1. Apply the Impulse System. When both the EMA and MACD-Histogram
rise, they give a strong buy signal.
2. Go long the following day, but do not buy above the upper channel line.
This aggressive entry aims to capture high-speed impulse moves.
You will have to research and test this idea in the market you want
to trade at the moment. Avoid the trap of mechanical systems that
people trade long after the markets have changed.
Before you enter a trade, calculate where to put your stop. See
what percentage of capital you will risk in that trade. Decide
whether your money management rules allow you to take it. Does
the 6% Rule allow you to trade? For example, if you’ve lost 3.5%
of your account this month and have an open trade with 2% of

TRADING FOR A LIVING

263

equity at risk, no new trade may be opened because it would risk
more than 6% of your equity.
3. Set a stop using the SafeZone indicator on the daily chart.
If your stop placement allows you to take the trade, place the buy
order. As soon as you have your confirmation, place your stop. Recalculate your stop and place a new one each day. Don’t allow a sudden violent move to blow through a mental stop while you’re not
watching.
Take your profit before the close of the day during which the
daily screen goes off its buy signal. This means you have to calculate your formula a few minutes before the close. The upper channel line on the daily chart is too modest a target when you are
fishing for an impulse move. Stay with the trade as long as the buy
signal stays in force. Be sure to test this approach.
This plan combines inviolate rules with recommendations that
encourage you to use your judgment. Using multiple timeframes, following money management rules, using stops, and scrupulously keeping records are non-negotiable. Choosing the markets, the entry points,
and the profit targets and deciding what size to trade—these all depend
on your judgment.
Expect to modify your plan as you continue to research the markets
and as your expertise grows. Remember to write down any changes,
and record your development as a trader. Be sure to add short selling
to your plan because this is an integral part of trading futures.
At some point you may want to design a flowchart of your decisionmaking process, along these lines:
Does the 6% Rule allow me to trade?
If No, stand aside; if Yes:
Is the weekly chart giving a signal?
If No, move to the next market; if Yes:
Is the daily chart giving me a signal to trade in the same direction?
If No, skip that market; if Yes:
Where will I put my profit target and stop; is the risk-reward ratio
worth trading?
If No, skip that trade, if Yes:
