individual to amass enough capital to corner the market for, say, oil or treasury bills.
38. Most accounts published about the scandal incorrectly refer to oil floating on top of water in the tanks.
39. Mark I. Weinstein, “Don’t Leave Home Without It: Limited Liability and American Express,” Working
paper, American Law & Economics Association Annual Meetings, Paper 17, Berkeley Electronic Press,
2005, p. 14–15, is the source that American Express was certifying more warehouse receipts than the
Department of Agriculture said existed in salad oil.

40. Haupt was a securities dealer who traded both stocks and commodities and was a member of the NYSE;
thus, he was required to meet the exchange’s net capital rules (which state that capital must be 1/20 of its
total liabilities). SEC Rule 15c3-1 regulates broker-dealer net capital. Under the Aggregate Indebtedness
Standard, 2% of net capital is required today, compared to 5% in the 1960s. The New York Stock Exchange
paid $10 million to cover its customers’ losses. H. J. Maidenberg, “Lost Soybean Oil Puzzles Wall St.,” Wall
Street Journal, November 20, 1963.
41. Equivalent to 2.9% of its value.
42. The Stock Exchange had closed mid-session on August 4, 1933, due to a tear-gas prank. Some consider
the Kennedy assassination closing to be the first “real” closing of the market.
43. John M. Lee, “Financial and Commodities Markets Shaken; Federal Reserve Acts to Avert Panic,” New
York Times, November 23, 1963.
44. H. J. Maidenberg, “Big Board Ends Ban on Williston, Walston and Merrill Lynch Are Instrumental in the
Broker’s Reinstatement, Haupt Remains Shut, Effect of Move Is Swept Aside by Assassination of President
Kennedy,” November 24, 1963. The soybean-oil drama, including the American Express role, peaked during
a period of about a week following the assassination.
45. American Express at the time was the only major U.S. public company to be capitalized as a joint stock
company rather than a limited liability corporation. This meant its shareholders could be assessed for
deficiencies in capital. “So every trust department in the United States panicked,” recalls Buffett. “I
remember the Continental Bank held over 5 percent of the company, and all of a sudden not only do they
see that the trust accounts were going to have stock worth zero, but they could get assessed. The stock just
poured out, of course, and the market got slightly inefficient for a short period of time.”
46. The Travelers Cheque was American Express’s main product. The company introduced the card
defensively when banks developed credit cards as a countermeasure to the Travelers Cheque.
47. Warren Buffett letter to Howard L. Clark, American Express Company, June 16, 1964. Brandt sent
Buffett a foot-high stack of material, according to Jim Robinson, former CEO of American Express, who saw
it. “I remember seeing Henry’s stuff on American Express, just reams of it,” said Bill Ruane in an interview.
48. At the end of it all, De Angelis pleaded guilty to four federal counts of fraud and conspiracy, and was
sentenced to ten years in prison. “The Man Who Fooled Everybody,” Time, June 4, 1965.
49. Howard Buffett, August 6, 1953, last will and testament.
50. Interviews with Patricia Dunn, Susie Buffett Jr., Warren Buffett.
51. In Grand Old Party (New York: Random House, 2003), Lewis L. Gould describes the way being a
Republican became identified with racism in the minds of many people who changed parties during the civilrights era.
52. Buffett cannot recall whether he initially registered as an independent or a Democrat. His preference
would have been to register as an independent, but that would have precluded him from voting in primaries.
Either immediately or within a few years, he did register as a Democrat.
53. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
54. Susan Goodwillie Stedman, recalling personal interview with Susan T. Buffett conducted November
2001, courtesy of Susan Goodwillie Stedman and Elizabeth Wheeler.
55. Dan Monen as quoted in Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York:

Doubleday, 1996. Monen is now deceased.
56. Warren’s inability to deal with Howard’s death is the incident most widely cited by family members as
indicative of his inner state during this period.
Chapter 27
1. Warren Buffett letter to Howard L. Clark, American Express Company, June 16, 1964.
2. L. J. Davis, “Buffett Takes Stock,” New York Times, April 1, 1990.
3. “I’m not a hundred percent sure of that. I’ve been told that by other people, so it’s hard to remember.
But I’m pretty sure it was Howard Clark.”
4. In July 1964, Buffett’s letter to partners said, “…our General category now includes three companies
where B.P.L. is the largest single stockholder.” Readers could infer from this a fairly concentrated portfolio.
5. Letter from Warren Buffett to partners, November 1, 1965.
6. Letter from Warren Buffett to partners, October 9, 1967.
7. Letter from Warren Buffett to partners, January 20, 1966.
8. The author studied Buffett’s written work and interview material in reaching this conclusion. Charlie
Munger, on the other hand, often uses the terms “dishonor” and “disgrace” (referring to others and not
himself).
9. Interview with John Harding.
10. In 1962, according to an interview with Joyce Cowin.
11. Per capita. According to Everett Allen in Children of the Light: The Rise and Fall of New Bedford
Whaling and the Death of the Arctic Fleet (Boston: Little, Brown, 1983), yearly income from whaling
amounted to $12 million by 1854, making New Bedford probably the richest city per capita in the world
before the Civil War.
12. More than thirty ships were lost in the disaster of 1871, most from New Bedford. The devastating cost of
1871 in financial and human terms laid waste to the industry. Whalers began building metal boats that could
break through the ice in a futile quest to save what remained of the whaling industry.
13. Baleen is the “teeth” through which whales sieve plankton. The use of spring steel also reduced baleen
demand.
14. Horatio Hathaway, A New Bedford Merchant. Boston: D. B. Updike, the Merrymount Press, 1930.
15. Partnership agreement, Hathaway Manufacturing Company, 1888. Among the other partners was William
W. Crapo, a longtime New Bedford associate of Hetty Green’s, who also invested $25,000. The total initial
capital was $400,000.
16. With a fortune estimated at $100 million.
17. Eric Rauchway, Murdering McKinley: The Making of Theodore Roosevelt’s America. New York: Hill
and Wang, 2003.
18. The North was no workers’ paradise, but in the South there were virtually no laws against child labor,
excessive work hours, or unsafe work conditions. The mills owned the workers’ houses and the stores where

they shopped, controlled their water supply, owned their churches, and effectively controlled the state
governments and the courts. Machine-gun-bearing state militia prevented strikes. The workers were more like
sharecroppers. Nearly ten thousand Northern workers had lost their jobs when the textile industry marched
southward to the Carolinas in search of cheaper labor when air-conditioned plants were constructed after
World War II.
19. Seabury Stanton, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., A Saga of Courage. New York: Newcomen Society of North
America, 1962. Stanton made this address to the Newcomen Society in Boston on November 29, 1961.
20. Ibid.
21. In A Saga of Courage, Seabury says he conceived of the Stantons as forming part of an “unbroken thread
of ownership” that stretched back to Oliver Chace, who had founded New England’s textile industry and
created Berkshire Fine Spinning’s oldest predecessor company in 1806. Chace was a former apprentice of
Samuel Slater, who first brought Sir Richard Arkwright’s innovative spinning-frame technology to the United
States at the end of the eighteenth century.
22. Hathaway Manufacturing Corporation Open House tour brochure, September 1953. Courtesy of Mary
Stanton Plowden-Wardlaw.
23. If the goal had been to save jobs, the money to modernize need not have been spent. Roger Lowenstein,
in Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist (New York: Doubleday, 1996), quotes Ken Chace (now
deceased) as saying that Seabury hadn’t the slightest idea of return on investment.
24. Stanton (now deceased) is stated as having these opinions in “Berkshire Hathaway’s Brave New World,”
by Jerome Campbell, Modern Textiles, December 1957.
25. Berkshire Hathaway 1994 chairman’s letter.
26. Interviews with David S. Gottesman, Marshall Weinberg.
27. Letter to Warren Buffett on May 4, 1990, from James M. Clark Jr. at Tweedy, Browne Co., noting that
“Howard Browne gave various accounts code initials.”
28. Interview with Ed Anderson.
29. Interviews with Chris Browne, Ed Anderson.
30. According to Ed Anderson, this is how Buffett traded. The author is well acquainted with Buffetting in
other contexts.
31. The commission sounds tiny, but at ten cents a share, Buffett later said, it was by far the highest
commission he ever paid on a stock.
32. Interviews with Mary Stanton Plowden-Wardlaw, Verne McKenzie.
33. He also felt that Seabury’s strategy of trying to bypass the New York “converters”—who turned the
company’s “gray goods” into finished dyed goods and sold them to customers—was a serious misjudgment.
34. “If you’re in a business that can’t take a long strike, you’re basically playing a game of chicken with your
labor unions because they’re going to lose their jobs, too, if you close down…. And there’s a lot of game
theory involved. To some extent, the weaker you are, the better your bargaining position is—because if
you’re extremely weak, even a very short strike will put you out of business; and the people on the other side
of the negotiating table understand that. On the other hand, if you have a fair amount of strength, they can
push you harder. But it is no fun being in a business where you can’t take a strike.” Berkshire Hathaway’s
Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger, “The Incentives in Hedge Funds Are Awesome, But Don’t Expect the

Returns to Be Too Swift,” Outstanding Investor Digest, Vol. XVI, No. 4 & 5, Year End 2001 Edition.
35. Several of the Grahamites swear they saw the room. Buffett swears this story is not true. A former Plaza
Hotel employee confirms that the seventeenth floor did have a few exceptionally small rooms, with bad
views, and that it was possible to haggle the room prices down, especially later in the evening.
36. Interview with Ken Chace Jr.
37. According to Roger Lowenstein’s Buffett, Ken Chace was the source. Warren does not recall any of the
details, including talking to Jack Stanton, but he says Ken Chace’s account is most likely correct.
38. Mary Stanton Plowden-Wardlaw, letter to Warren Buffett, June 3, 1991. Stanley Rubin set it up.
39. Interview with Mary Stanton Plowden-Wardlaw.
40. The detailed version of this story was related in Roger Lowenstein’s Buffett, with Ken Chace as the
source. Buffett recalls sitting on a bench near the Plaza with Chace, eating ice cream.
41. “The Junior League is an organization of women committed to promoting voluntarism, developing the
potential of women and improving the community through the effective action and leadership of trained
volunteers. Its purpose is exclusively educational and charitable,” according to its mission statement. (The
author is a member.)
42. He replaced the elderly Abram Berkowitz, who worked for the company’s law firm, Ropes & Gray, and
had cooperatively decided to step down.
43. Stanton said he “hastened [his] retirement due to a disagreement with regard to policy with certain
outside interests which have purchased sufficient stock to control the company.” “Seabury Stanton Resigns
at Berkshire,” New Bedford Standard-Times, May 10, 1965.
44. Berkshire Hathaway Board of Directors’ minutes, May 10, 1965.
45. “Buffett Means Business,” Daily News Record, May 20, 1965.
46. Adapted in part from the documentary Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth (June 2004)
and in part from interviews.
Chapter 28
1. Interview with Doris Buffett.
2. Ibid.
3. November 10, 1965.
4. Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. New York: Bantam Books, 1968.
5. “Riot Duty Troops Gather in Omaha,” New York Times, July 5, 1966. The governor said the problem was
unemployment, which ran triple that of whites. 30% of blacks were unemployed in Omaha.
6. Bertrand Russell, Has Man a Future? New York: Simon & Schuster, 1962. This powerful, absolutist book
argued that unless something “radical” happened, mankind was eventually doomed by weapons of mass
destruction, and predicted the development of mass chemical and biological weapons in the not-distant
future.
7. The 1955 Russell-Einstein Manifesto. Russell was president of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in

1958, and was cofounder with Einstein of the Pugwash Conference, a group of scientists concerned about
nuclear proliferation.
8. Interview with Dick Holland.
9. Buffett and his chief administrative officer John Harding chose a set of representative large-cap stocks, in
effect creating a market index. Buffett did not want to execute the trade through a brokerage firm because
the broker kept the proceeds from the sale and paid no interest to him. Harding contacted university
endowment funds. Buffett went personally to Chicago to get shares. The idea of lending directly to a shortseller was so novel at the time that most universities passed. However, Harding was able to borrow about
$4.6 million of stock.
10. Buffett put $500,000 into treasury bills in the first quarter of 1966.
11. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr., Meg Mueller, Mayrean McDonough.
12. Interview with Kelsey Flower.
13. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
14. Interview with Marshall Weinberg.
Chapter 29
1. “The Raggedy Man,” by James Whitcomb Riley, a children’s poem about a handyman.
2. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
3. Buffett tells the story, which Charlie Heider recalls and found unforgettable. Parsow doesn’t recall it.
4. Both Byer-Rolnick and Oxxford were acquired by Koret in 1967.
5. Interview with Sol Parsow.
6. Gottesman worked for Corvine and Company, which, he says, was going out of business. He founded his
own firm, First Manhattan Co., in 1964.
7. Interview with Sandy Gottesman.
8. “That’s not negotiating,” claims Munger. “It’s just using pithy examples to steer people to what they
should be doing. Sure, it’s persuasion, but it’s legitimate persuasion.”
9. The Kohns were planning to sell for a quarter less than the tangible net assets of the business. Gottesman
had done a private placement of debentures for Hochschild-Kohn with Equitable Life that year and was
familiar with its financial statements. His mother-in-law, her brother Martin Kohn, and another sister were
equal stockholders who owned a class of preferred stock in the company. The preferred stock was in arrears,
not having paid a dividend in some time. In effect, therefore, they could have controlled the business. They
had not exercised this privilege, however. The common stock was owned largely by their relative Louis
Kohn, from another branch of the family and second in command after Martin Kohn.
10. DRC Offering documents for 8% debentures, December 18, 1967.
11. He gave them the money anyway, partnered with National City to provide $9 million in short-term
financing for the deal. Diversified Retailing Company, Inc., Prospectus, December 18, 1967. According to
Gottesman and Moody’s Bank & Finance Manual, Martin Kohn was on the board of Maryland National
Bank.

12. Charles T. Munger testimony, In the Matter of Blue Chip Stamps, Berkshire Hathaway Incorporated,
HQ-784. Thursday, March 20, 1975, page 187.
13. Buffett mentioned the problem to the partners in his mid-1966 letter but stressed the more important
question of buying a company rather than a stock. Another factor was the banks, which had also started
issuing credit cards, cutting further into Hochschild-Kohn’s edge.
14. Interview with Charlie Munger. The company was purchased in April 1967.
15. Diversified Retailing Company, Inc., Prospectus, December 18, 1967.
16. Buffett says Rosner told him he got Aye Simon’s consent to sell the business by saying something along
the following lines: “And to hell with you. If you’re going to second-guess it, you come down and run the
store.” The relationship was irretrievably broken.
Chapter 30
1. Including Buffett’s stock in Data Documents, a separate investment, the Buffetts’ net worth was
somewhere between $9.5 and $10 million.
2. Buffett’s description, in Patricia E. Bauer’s “The Convictions of a Long-Distance Investor,” Channels,
November 1986, was, “One time we had a dog on the roof, and my son called to him and he jumped. It was
so awful—the dog that loves you so much that he jumps off the roof…”—leaving the reader to wonder how
the dog got on the roof.
3. Interview with Hallie Smith.
4. “Haight-Ashbury: The Birth of Hip,” CBC Television, March 24, 1968.
5. In 1967, over 2.5 billion shares traded, topping the previous 1966 record by one third. Thomas Mullaney,
“Week in Finance: Washington Bullish,” New York Times, December 31, 1967.
6. But insurers looked undervalued and he thought they would get taken over. He bought Home Insurance
and Employers Group Associates.
7. Sun Valley Conference, 2001.
8. At high rates of return, and paying no tax. If a shareholder had taken $0.06 a share—after paying a tax on
the $0.10 dividend—and put it in the market earning 5% on average, he would have about $0.42. If Buffett
had kept that $0.10, and compounded it at the 21% he earned over the past forty years, a shareholder, who
would have been slightly diluted over the years, would be $135 richer. Looking at it on a larger scale, the tiny
dividend “cost” Berkshire shareholders over $200 million as of 2007.
9. Interview with Verne McKenzie.
10. Letter to partners, July 12, 1967.
11. Interview with Verne McKenzie.
12. “Requiem for an Industry: Industry Comes Full Circle,” Providence Sunday Journal, March 3, 1968.
13. Letter to partners, January 25, 1967.
14. By September 30, 1967, the partnership had $14.2 million in treasuries and short-term debt out of a total
$83.7 million invested.

15. Alice was a friend of Ringwalt’s; the family believed she may have once had some sort of
“understanding” that might have led to marriage until Ernest put a stop to it. Ringwalt had a reputation as a
ladies’ man, but Alice also kept house for her father, and “no one was good enough for her,” Buffett says.
16. Interview with Bill Scott.
17. Interview with Charlie Heider.
18. Robert Dorr, “‘Unusual Risk’ Ringwalt Specialty,” Omaha World-Herald, March 12, 1967, and
Ringwalt’s Tales of National Indemnity and Its Founder (Omaha: National Indemnity Co., 1990) recount
stories of lion tamers, circus performers, and hole-in-one contests. Buffett heard of the burlesque stars from
Ringwalt.
19. Berkshire paid Heider a $140,000 fee for the transaction.
20. Interview with Bill Scott.
21. With the company closely held, it took only a week to round up the necessary 80% shareholder
approvals.
22. In his book, Ringwalt says he was only driving around looking for a metered place on the street because
he refused to pay a parking garage.
23. This was a reason why National Indemnity would not need reinsurance, or protection from other insurers,
which was both expensive and would make it a dependent.
24. Ringwalt also was included in the shareholder register of Diversified Retailing in 1976 (he actually sold
3,032 shares back to the company in its tender offer).
Chapter 31
1. As quoted in an interview with Jose Yglesias as Dr. King prepared for the Poor People’s Campaign. Jose
Yglesias, “Dr. King’s March on Washington, Part II,” New York Times, March 31, 1968.
2. Wead, who declined to be interviewed, was the director of Wesley House, a community improvement
organization of the Methodist Church.
3. Interview with Racquel Newman and her son, Tom Newman. A number of other people recalled Susie and
Rackie’s activities.
4. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
5. Buffett had met Rosenfield through a connection to Hochschild-Kohn.
6. Grinnell’s founder, Congregational minister Josiah Grinnell, pastor of the First Congregational church in
Washington, D.C., bolted from its doors in 1852 when his Southern congregation took exception to his
abolitionist views. It was Grinnell who sought advice from the famous New York Herald editor Horace
Greeley and who heard the words that every schoolchild in America would subsequently learn without
knowing their source: “Go West, young man, go West!” The phrase was originally written by John Soule in
the Terre Haute Express in 1851.
7. Interview with Waldo “Wally” Walker, Dean of Administration at the time.
8. The luckless George Champion, chairman of the board of Chase Manhattan Bank, followed King on the
program, speaking on “Our Obsolete Welfare State.”

9. This common paraphrase of Lowell was more eloquent than Lowell’s actual words: “Though her portion
be the scaffold, And upon the throne be wrong.” James Russell Lowell (1819–1891), “The Present Crisis,”
1844.
10. Interview with Hallie Smith.
11. From King’s 1963 speech at Western Michigan University. King may have said something like this at the
October 1967 Grinnell Convocation, but no transcript exists.
12. King first said this in Cleveland in 1963 and used variations of it in most major speeches thereafter. He
called the idea that you can’t legislate morality a “half-truth.” “It may be true that the law cannot make a
man love me,” he said, “but it can keep him from lynching me, and I think that is pretty important.”
13. Despite flirting briefly with the magic 1,000, it had ended down more than 15%.
14. Letter to partners, January 25, 1967.
15. Letter to partners, January 24, 1968.
16. Galbraith in an interview by Israel Shenker, “Galbraith: ’29 Repeats Itself Today,” published in the New
York Times on May 3, 1970. “The explosion in the mutual funds is the counterpart of the old investment
trusts. The public has shown extraordinary willingness to believe there are financial geniuses in the hundreds.
Financial genius is a rising stock market. Financial chicanery is a falling stock market.” Galbraith reiterates
this in “The Commitment to Innocent Fraud,” Challenge, Sept.–Oct. 1999: “In the world of finance, genius is
a rising market.”
17. Grinnell forgave Noyce after intervention from his physics professor Grant Gale and, according to
