news send price above or into obvious resistance? Conversely,
does bad news drop price through or into obvious support?
7. Look for safe exits. Early birds can find safe exits when shock
events hit the market. The best escape route comes at 8:00 a.m.
New York time when traders using discount brokers get their
first quotes of the day. Post a pretty bid for them to execute before
they realize that Armageddon has struck the tape.
8. Establish a first bias. Compare early action to the prior day’s
close, and think about who will get trapped and who will benefit
from the imbalance. This analysis can help you avoid many
weak-handed plays at the open.
9. Respect seasonality. Follow the trend when Monday’s premarket leans in the same direction as Friday’s close, but fade it
when Tuesday’s premarket tracks Monday’s close. Look for continuation of the trend on Wednesday and Thursday, followed by
a battle of opposing wills as the week draws to an end.

PART FIVE

238

Controlling Exposure

10. Find the theme. The majority of stocks won’t do anything that
day, so it’s your job to uncover the handful of issues ready to
move. Triage the list by watching premarket volume because it
shows where other traders are risking their money.
11. Think irrationally. It doesn’t matter if premarket news is good
or bad. More importantly, how does it shake up expectations? If
you can’t figure this out for yourself, find experts you trust and
listen to them.
12. Place deep limit orders. Place limit orders in the premarket at
prices where no one in their right mind will give you the bargain
of the century. Then sit back and watch these gifts get filled
because other traders panic or just haven’t woken up yet.
13. Set your collar. Determine who has the upper hand and
how aggressive you want to trade after the market opens for
business.
14. Avoid the crowd. Compile a list of early morning momentum
plays and then sit on your hands, waiting until the reactionary
crowd gets trapped on the wrong side of the tape.
15. Cover dips and sell spikes. Speculative stocks jump big percentages in the premarket when they report simple news items.
These spikes often print the highs or lows of the day, so use them
to take profits and wait for reentry at better prices.

Trading the News
News events generally fall into one of three categories: economic, company, or institutional releases. Economic releases are scheduled well in
advance, with most of them hitting the airwaves at 8:30 a.m., 9:45 a.m.,
or 10:00 a.m. New York time. Company releases can come at any time but
surge in the weeks following the end of a quarter. Institutional releases
tend to spike on Monday mornings but continue throughout the week.
Of the three categories, traders get economic news with the shortest delay
from source to media release. Earnings reports come in second because
SEC rules force companies to distribute quarterly results through a wide
variety of sources at the same time. Institutional releases are the slowest of
the three by a wide margin. In fact, traders should assume that preferred
clients have already acted upon analyst upgrades and downgrades by the
time that type of news is released to the public.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

239

Traders face a huge challenge trying to decipher cause-and-effect
relationships between news and price movement. They’ll often assume
that good news is good and buy a stock that’s risen for a few days, not
realizing that smart money has already bought the rumor and is getting
ready to sell the news. In most cases, fast-moving algorithms will squeeze
out a stock’s initial news-driven inefficiency by the time you read it or hear
about it. You can see this happening in the Caterpillar spike posted earlier
in this chapter.
So how can the survivalist trader take advantage of news-related
opportunities without becoming the market’s ultimate bag holder? Start
by standing aside through most news items or exiting positions just
minutes before scheduled news hits the airwaves. Instead, save your
firepower for shock events that fall well outside current expectations. The
best entry into postnews volatility often comes on the afternoon following
the release, or even two to three days later.
Here’s the theory: Everyone who wants to buy or sell the news takes
a position within the first few hours after it hits the wires. Once they’ve
charged off the sidelines, there’s no one left to take that side of the market,
which immediately triggers a buy-sell imbalance. In turn, this forces a
reversal or shakeout, which is your cue to wake up and get to work. Pull
up a 60-minute chart and pick out the most obvious support-resistance
levels. Assume the reversal will eventually reach the 50-period EMA
before there’s a major counterswing. Place tiered limit orders and enter
the trade in small pieces, so you’ll be positioned if price turns ahead of
schedule. Once you’ve loaded up, be prepared to hold the trade at a loss
until the primary trend reasserts itself or your stop gets hit.
More conservative traders can stand aside even longer when there’s a
sharp pullback after a news-driven rally. Be patient during the retracement
process, and wait for a low-risk entry to set up and yield a buy signal.
For example, selling pressure will often end with a breakout in a lower
time frame pattern, like a 60-minute bull flag. Note that although you’re
assuming risk a few days after the big news event, the intraday chart is
generating the majority of feedback needed to compute the reward:risk
profile and to find your entry price. Once positioned, focus your undivided
attention on the highs of the news day and exit the position immediately
if a double top pattern starts to form.
These news entry techniques will give you enough courage to jump
in the next time your favorite company blows away earnings expectations
or announces the next iGadget, but what about economic releases that
move the world markets each day? Start with a close look at the market

PART FIVE

240

F I G U R E

Controlling Exposure

10.4

News that shocks expectations can trigger buy-sell imbalances that take several days to unwind. Amgen
releases data showing the superiority of its cancer drug over a competing product. The stock gaps nine points
and then sells off in a steady downtick for nearly four days, relieving the short-term overbought condition. The
stock tags the 50-bar EMA and settles into a series of higher lows that traders can use to enter positions ahead
of a breakout into the mid-sixties.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

clock. Many government reports, including monthly unemployment
numbers, get released one hour before the New York opening bell. It’s
vital that traders be wide awake and glued to their screens when these
items hit the newswires. Even better, watch the index futures for an hour
or so before the release, and identify any bias that will get supported or
faded depending on the news.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

241

Don’t trade the economic release directly. Instead, watch the index
futures after the news and take note of price boundaries getting hit in the
next few minutes. The key observation is similar to earning news, i.e.,
whether prices trade into or through obvious support-resistance levels.
Trading into a major line in the sand suggests the broad market will reverse
shortly after the open. Trading through a major barrier generates a testing
phase that might yield a trend day in the first hour of the regular session.
The strongest trend days come when there’s synergy between prerelease bias and subsequent news. The major indices can gap 2% or more
and hold the opening price easily when these two forces are in sync.
Conversely, watch out for a shakeout day when a major report, like the
monthly labor numbers, gives neither side an obvious advantage. Fortunately, those choppy sessions often present opportunities to build multiday positions. Identify your entry levels early, and then step in slowly
as the shakeout unfolds and pulls the market toward your trigger numbers. Then hold on tight and look for follow-through in the next one to
three days.
Just stick to the charts and play the technicals. When you secondguess yourself because a release “looks” bullish or bearish, you’ll hesitate
just as the best trade is being offered to you. The bottom line is, we’re
not smart enough to understand the news or what it suggests about the
economic outlook, but we can see how everyone else is interpreting it and
then take appropriate action. Also keep in mind that you’re a trader and
not a gambler. Never buy or sell before an economic number just to play
the release. These are lottery tickets that have no place in a sound trading
strategy. It’s even worse if you make money a few times on such gambles,
because the horse race mentality sets you up for massive failure down
the road.
The ticker tape often gets painted into economic numbers and then
faded after the actual releases. Beneath the surface, big money is using
the news to find better prices to sell short or to shake the public out of
long positions. You can often predict these infuriating reversals through
convergence-divergence relationships. Consider where the market closed
in the prior session and what the sentiment bias was at that time. For
example, a selloff day closes near the daily lows. You wake up the next
morning, expecting a red screen and a big gap down. To your surprise, the
index futures are trading a few ticks or points higher in a persistent bid.
Then you recall there’s a big economic release coming out at 10:00 a.m.
The weak rally continues into the report, and the market then sells off violently on relatively good news. As it turns out, a false bid was propping up

242

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

the index futures so big money could sell short at higher prices. Sadly, this
is business as usual with economic reports that public traders believe are
market movers, while funds and institutions view the same data as old,
flawed, or inconsequential.
Finally, watch out for economic numbers that fall well outside
standard deviation. All bets are off when the market spits out one of these
rarities. The good news is that you’re on equal footing with the big boys
when this happens, because they’re just as surprised as everyone else.

Intraday Buy-Sell Swing
The vast majority of stocks follow the direction of the intraday swing,
although each issue moving in lockstep will be relatively stronger or
weaker than the broader averages. This forces the survivalist trader to
complete two critical tasks. First, find instruments that take advantage of
the intraday swing in that particular session. Second, find the best times
of day to enter and exit the market. A little common sense goes a long
way here. For example, it’s logical to play the strongest stocks we can find
during the opening hour of an up day. Remarkably, we often do the exact
opposite because we overthink the process and forget to use our eyeballs.
Here’s a better plan. Just look at your trading screen after the index futures
set up a potential rally day, and trade the issues glowing the brightest
shade of green. After all, they’re attracting the most capital, in response to
the initial rally impulse.
However, tactics need to evolve after the first 60 minutes because a
strong stock tends to move higher early in the session and then pull back
through the midday hours. These issues routinely attract a second wave
of buying interest later in the day or the next morning and resume their
uptrends. So, rather than chasing a strong stock after the first hour, sit back
and wait for the contrary trade to develop. This often happens as soon as
the pullback drops just below the price level it shouldn’t reach on a purely
technical basis. This mini-failure shakes out the last set of stops and invites
weak-handed short sellers looking for a fast buck. Their impatience adds
just enough upside fuel to lift the stock back above the broken level and to
establish a new upswing.
As I noted in the first chapter, index futures oscillation generates the
rhythmic pulse that defines the intraday swing. In the real world, however,
interpreting the swing requires more brainpower than just staring at a
simple uptrend or downtrend. Perhaps that’s why the opening price

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

243

10.5

Strong openings often give way to midday shakeouts. Joy Global spikes up to a new swing high four mornings
in a row. The stock prints the intraday high in the first 90 minutes of each session and spends the rest of the day
churning through the early range. The momentum crowd chasing the first hour uptrend got shaken and stirred,
while the survivalist trader bought weakness and sold the next day’s open for a healthy profit. Note how broken
swing lows in the first three sessions (1, 2, 3) printed contrary buy signals.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

principle and first hour trading range have become staples of intraday
market analysis. The utility of these technical tools is simple enough to
understand. Market players start the new session looking for “tells” that
expose relative levels of buying and selling pressure. The opening print
yields an immediate testing level, while the early trading range provides
two more data points within the first 60 minutes. Together, these three
levels set up logical proving grounds for the short-term trend.

PART FIVE

244

Controlling Exposure

On positive days, the index futures use first hour breakouts and
pullbacks to opening prices as springboards for substantial rallies. Flip
this over for selloff days. More often than not, conflicted sessions trigger
whipsaws that render these levels useless for the day. That’s why it so
important to watch for wide range bars triggered by these inflection
points. Simply stated, when a moving market expands sharply away
from a first hour high, first hour low, or the opening print, those levels
become trigger points for trading decisions later in the day or even in the
following session. Interplay between price action and these pivot points
can be complex, contrary, or hard to interpret at times. For example, a
significant downside swing often evolves after the index futures break
above the first hour range, chop around for a few minutes, and then fall

F I G U R E

10.6

S&P 500 intraday swings.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

245

back within its boundaries. This small-scale pattern failure encourages
traders to close out long positions, establish short sales, and pile in with
downside momentum strategies. This contrary phenomenon also follows
a diabolical quirk in which real selloffs don’t start until the index futures
break out, while real rallies don’t start until they break down.
A well-tuned 15-minute Stochastics (Figure 10.6) lets traders visualize
the intraday swing with great ease, but proper interpretation is everything with this classic tool. For starters, don’t assume a reversal is coming
just because the indicator hits overbought or oversold territory. Instead,
wait for confirmation in the price pattern or for the indicator to accelerate
in the opposite direction. Once a new swing begins, look for a 1-2-3 or
1-2-3-4-5 pattern before the start of the next counterswing. Remain skeptical
and on the sidelines when the indicator surges toward the halfway point
between overbought and oversold levels and then turns in the opposite
direction. More often than not, this is a false positive designed to trap
overeager traders.
Four days of S&P 500 index futures oscillation point out the value
of Stochastics cycle analysis. The instrument pivots through repeated
1-2-3 impulses with a few aborted swings and a single 1-2-3-4-5 swing.
Each oscillation establishes a convergence-divergence relationship with
relative price movement, not absolute price movement. In other words,
it doesn’t tell us whether the swing is taking place near a price high or
low. However, it does help the trader to interpret classic technical patterns
developing in the intraday market. For example, Stochastics downswings confirm sell signals for the August 7 head and shoulders pattern,
as well as two bear flag breakdowns. In addition, the failed breakout on
August 12 unfolds while the 1-2-3-4-5 downswing diverges sharply with
the rising index.

Gap Strategies
Gaps are shock events that jolt price up or down, leaving an open window
to the last bar. Chapter 5 of The Master Swing Trader presents a detailed
background on this elemental charting phenomenon. Market folklore
offers guidance on trading gaps, but statements like “gaps get filled” don’t
tell us how to make the right decisions when one suddenly appears on the
price chart. So, how can we take advantage of a gap when sitting on the
sidelines, and how do we protect ourselves when caught on the wrong
side of a big hole at the opening bell?

246

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

First, we need to figure out what kind of gap we’re actually dealing
with. Certain trades work best with each gap type, so proper identification
is extremely important. In most cases, gaps will fall into one of these three
groupings, based on relative location:
• Breakaway gaps appear as markets break out into new trends, up
or down.
• Continuation gaps print about halfway through trends, when
enthusiasm or fear overpowers reason.
• Exhaustion gaps burn out trends with one last surge of emotion
and price movement.
Generally speaking, gaps also fall into one of three emotional categories:
• Breakaway gaps surprise because they appear suddenly on charts
you’ve ignored.
• Continuation gaps exhilarate because they pay off big as momentum accelerates.
• Exhaustion gaps frustrate because they turn up when your analysis
points to a reversal.
Breakaway gaps trigger momentum dynamics, which often yield
immediate follow-through in the direction of the new trend. These fastmoving markets can be difficult to enter, especially for the survivalist
trader. Two strategies work in specific scenarios, but many of these
volatile gaps are best left to the momentum crowd, at least until a counterswing sets into motion. The first technique is simple enough: wait for
a postgap range to develop, and trade the breakout in the direction of the
new trend.
The second strategy revolves around the classic pullback play. The
counterswing after a breakaway gap favors a reversal back in the direction
of the primary trend, even if the holes get filled marginally. For this
reason, it makes sense to buy a low volume decline after a notable breakout, or to sell the low volume bounce after a notable breakdown. The countertrend will often carve out a flag pattern that retraces 50% or less of the
trend wave that includes the gap. Enter right at the gap fill if the counterwave reaches that far, or wait for a flag breakout or breakdown. The
trick is to get positioned early in the reversal because the primary trend,
once reactivated, should carry well above the breakout high or below the
selloff low.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

247

10.7

Sell the pullback to a downside breakaway gap in anticipation of a continued decline. ANADIGICS ticks higher
for nearly three months and then breaks the bullish trendline (1) in a huge breakaway gap. The selloff carries to
13.75 and gives way to a bear flag bounce (2) that fails under the 38% retracement, near the high of the gap bar.
The flag breakdown triggers a reliable sell signal for a continued downtrend that takes out the first low (3).

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

Markets often retest breakaway gaps right after they occur, but many
bars can pass before price returns to test a continuation gap. Also, you
can’t trade a continuation gap if you can’t find it, so here’s an old technician’s trick: Wait until you can count three distinct trend waves, up or
down. Then measure out the rally or selloff from start to finish, and look
for a gap around the 50% level. Realistically, the gap doesn’t need to be
perfectly positioned as long as it fits with the three-wave observation.

PART FIVE

248

Controlling Exposure

Once you’ve located the continuation gap, wait for price to pull into a
test and place a limit order within its boundaries. The retracement, or
move against the primary trend, should run into a brick wall in the
vicinity of the gap and reverse sharply. Realistically, the continuation
gap may fill for a few bars before the trend reverses. With this in mind, a
more defensive strategy is to stand aside until the instrument enters the
gap and then moves forcefully in the other direction, before entering the

F I G U R E

10.8

Exhaustion gaps can set up profitable short sales. ATP Oil & Gas doubles in price in less than two weeks. The
uptrend accelerates on May 7 with a massive gap that fills in the first hour of the session. The parabolic rise
and subsequent failure point to an exhaustion gap that will end the trend. The trader can enter the short sale on
a bounce into the last swing high, prior to the gap (1), or wait for a notable reversal, like the May 11 down gap
(2), and then sell short.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

249

position. You’ll find an illustration of this classic continuation gap strategy
in Chapter 1.
Watch from the sidelines when an exhaustion gap makes its unexpected appearance following an extended rally or selloff, and enter a
trade in the opposite direction of the trend in place prior to the gap. These
final impulses often take on a parabolic look, with a subsequent reversal
at the same angle of attack as the primary trend. These big holes, once
filled, often mark the end of uptrends or downtrends, with the last burst
of energy signaling a climax ahead of a major counterswing. In addition,
exhaustion gaps give already-positioned traders opportunistic signals to
take long side profits or to cover short sales.
Apply a little common sense when observing premarket action above
or below the last closing price. The most important question for the survivalist trader: does the news or ticker tape justify the gap you’re going
to see when the opening bell finally rings? Overemotional traders put out
market orders before the open to get into gap plays, trying to catch a ride on
the momentum train. Unfortunately, this reactionary practice often yields
the worst fills imaginable. A better plan is to stand aside at the open and
apply a first hour range breakout/breakdown strategy. However, gaps
trigger unique pattern features that must be custom fitted with this broad
approach. You’ll find a detailed examination of these entry techniques in the
last section of this chapter.
