
may be based on one or more of the following business criteria, or on any
combination thereof, on a consolidated basis: net income (or adjusted net
income), return on equity (or adjusted return on equity), return on assets (or
adjusted return on assets), earnings per share (diluted) (or adjusted earnings

per share [diluted]).

In other words, Disney's CEO was going to get paid no matter what. ‘To
add insult to injury, the gang at Disney wrote that “[we believe] that the spe-
cific target constitutes confidential business information the disclosure of
which could adversely affect the Company.” More likely, it would have ad-
versely affected Disney management because the board wouldn’t have been
able to move the goalposts in the middle of the game. This kind of nondis-
closure on the compensation front is a bad sign when you're looking for good
managers.

Another sign of poor compensation procedures is paying managers for
actions that make the company bigger, but not better. In 2001, for example,

Disney wrote the following in its proxy statement:

As permitted by the plan, special bonuses were paid outside the plan to three
executives . . . Peter Murphy, Thomas Staggs and Louis Meisinger—for ex-
traordinary services to the Company unrelated to the plan’s performance tar-
gets, including, in the case of Messrs. Murphy and Staggs, services related to
the Company’s acquisition of Fox Family Worldwide, Inc.

105


106 ANALYZING A COMPANY—-MANAGEMENT

Rewarding management for consummating an acquisition is an ab-
solutely terrible idea—paying big bonuses just for getting a deal done simply
encourages executives to go out and do more dubious deals. A better idea,
though not one I’ve ever seen implemented, would be to wait a couple of
years and pay a bonus only if an acquisition has provided an adequate—and
predetermined—return on the investment.

The bottom line is this: Executives’ pay should rise and fall based on the
performance of the company. So, after reviewing a company’s historical fi-
nancials, read the past few years’ proxies to see whether this has truly been the
case or whether some lackeys on the board of directors have cooked up justi-
fications for big bonuses even in bad times. Firms with good corporate gov-
ernance standards won't hesitate to pay managers less in bad times and more

in good times, and that’s the kind of pattern you want to see as a shareholder.

Other Red Flags
Aside from the big-picture question of whether executives’ pay truly is linked
to company performance, keep an eye out for the following issues when

you're assessing executive compensation.

Were Executives Given “Loans” that Were Subsequently Forgiven? This was a
common—and disgusting—practice before the Sarbanes-Oxley Act banned
it in 2002. Companies would give loans to senior managers at below-market
rates of interest and then often quietly forgive the loans a few years later. In
my book, a loan that’s not repaid is a bonus, and companies that tried to
fudge executive pay in this fashion weren't treating shareholders with re-
spect. If the executive needed a loan, he should have asked his bank, not
his employer. Don’t tolerate this kind of behavior from companies you're
investigating—even though it’s not legal any longer, companies that did
this sort of thing in past should be viewed with skepticism. After all, would
they have stopped unless they were forced to? (Loans of this sort are usually
disclosed in the “other compensation” column of the executive compensa-

tion table in the footnotes.)

Do Executives Get Perks Paid for by the Company that They Should Really Be
Paying for Themselves? \tsasure sign of corporate excess when execs get coun-

try club memberships and other frippery paid for by shareholders. After all,


COMPENSATION

when youre paying someone several hundred thousand dollars per year, mak-
ing shareholders foot the bill for their greens fees seems rather silly. More im-
portantly, such behavior at the top sets a poor example for everyone else in the
firm. Managers who enjoy ridiculous perks are acting like latter-day royalty
rather than prudent custodians of shareholders’ money. Conversely, thrifty
CEOs are a plus: Managers who do things such as paying for their own park-

ing and eschewing pricey perks set a good tone for the rest of the organization.

Does Management Hog Most of the Stock Options Granted in a Given Year, or Do
Rank-and-File Employees Shave in the Wealth? Generally, firms with more
equitable distribution schemes perform better over the long run. Most firms
break out the percentage of options granted to executives relative to the total

granted in the proxy statement.

Does Management Use Stock Options Excessively? Even if they're distributed be-
yond the executive suite, giving out too many options dilutes existing share-
holders’ equity. If a company gives out more than 1 or 2 percent of the
outstanding shares each year, they're giving away too much of the firm's equity
every year. Conversely, it’s a great sign if the firm issues restricted stock instead
of options. Restricted stock has to be counted as an expense on the income
statement (options don't, as of this writing), and restricted stock also forces the

recipient to participate on the downside if the stock falls.

If @ Founder or Large Owner Is Still Involved in the Company, Does He or She Also
Get a Big Stock Option Grant Each Year? This makes me queasy. After all, it’s
hard to argue that, for example, CEO Larry Ellison of Oracle needs additional

options to motivate him when he already owns 25 percent of the firm.

Do Executives Have Some Skin in the Game? Vhat is, do they have substantial
holdings of company stock, or do they tend to sell shares right after they exer-
cise options? As a shareholder, I want management to have meaningful equity
in the company. After all, selling shares in the name of “diversification” means
not being exposed if the company goes downhill. Generally, ’'m happier own-
ing companies where executives own stock right alongside me because large
unexercised option positions are cold comfort. You can find this information

in the footnotes of the proxy. Companies indicate executives’ percentage

107


108

ANALYZING A COMPANY—-MANAGEMENT

ownership including options prominently in a table labeled “security owner-
ship of certain beneficial owners,” but they declare only how many actual
shaves are owned in the footnotes. In Peoplesoft’s 2003 proxy, for example,
CEO Craig Conway was listed as owning 3.8 million shares, or 1.2 percent of
the company. But if you looked at the footnote, you'd have seen that he
owned only 626,000 shares, 625,000 of which weren't even vested yet.

Character

Compensation by itself is often a good litmus test for character—anecdotally,
there’s a pretty strong relationship between management teams that are in it
for the money and management teams that treat shareholders poorly. How-
ever, there are some other important questions you should ask to get a handle

on whether a firm’s management deserves your trust.

Does Management Use Its Position to Enrich Friends and Relatives?

In a company’s annual 10-x filing, look for a section called “related-party
transactions.” If a friend or relative of a company officer has substantial busi-
ness dealings with the firm, you'll read about it here. Often, this stuffis pretty
innocuous—an ex-officer or director is paid some nominal amount each year
for consulting services. As long as the firm isn’t paying out hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars, this kind of thing doesn’t get my hackles up.

But when the firm pays substantial amounts of money to, for example, an
interior-design firm run by the CEO’s wife or to a law firm in which the
CFO's son-in-law is a partner, I sit up and take notice. The key here is to
make sure that (1) the firm isn’t sending a great amount of business in the di-
rection of related parties and (2) there’s not an egregious pattern of abuse.
One or two small related-party transactions aren't a big deal, but they do
cause me to raise an eyebrow because they may be signs of a deeper problem.
And if it looks as though virtually all family members of the company officers
have their hands in the till, you have a big character issue.

Is the Board of Directors Stacked with Management's Family Members
or Former Managers?
Look at the biographies of the board, which are also in the proxy statement.

If many of them are closely related to top management—or are former


CHARACTER

managers themselves, it’s a good bet the board isn’t going to be as hard-nosed
when questioning management’s actions as it could be. And because the
board is shareholders’ last line of defense against a CEO running amok, that’s

hardly a good thing.

Is Management Candid about Its Mistakes?

Not even the smartest executives get everything right, and it’s important that
a management team be able to honestly discuss poor decisions and why they
were made. CEOs who bury mistakes might be burying other things as well.
Look for this type of candor in annual reports and in quarterly conference
calls. I especially like to look at the letter to shareholders in the annual re-
port. Is it a candid assessment of the past year’s successes and failures or a

fluff piece?

How Promotional Is Management?

Although a certain amount of rallying the troops is the job of a CEO, watch
out for company officers who cross the line and begin blindly pumping up
the stock or themselves. This is a red flag because management’s job is to
worry about running the company—if executives get that right, the stock
price will take care of itself over time. Executives who complain about how
undervalued their firm’s shares are or who opine about its true worth are
probably more concerned with the value of their options than with making
solid, long-term business decisions. Self-promotional managers, meanwhile,
are not likely to make decisions that are in the best interests of long-term
shareholders. If you read a number of glowing media articles in which a CEO
paints himself or herself as a latter-day savior, watch out. The cult of the
CEO-as-hero is dangerous.

Can the CEO Retain High-Quality Talent?

This one is subtler, but it can tell you a great deal about the firm you're ana-
lyzing. Some firms judge the quality of managers by the turnover rate of their
subordinates because turnover is seen as the ultimate acid test of the working
environment and employees’ views of a company’s potential. Extend this
view to the executive team: How often do officers turn over? What is the

tenure of key officers? Is executive hiring done from the outside? (All of this

109


110. ANALYZING A COMPANY—-MANAGEMENT

can be uncovered by reviewing several years’ worth of proxy statements.)
Long tenure is a great signal of intrinsic motivation and confidence in the
business, whereas a CEO who keeps forcing out immediate subordinates is
likely spending too much time on internal power struggles and not enough

on running the business.

Does Management Make Tough Decisions that Hurt Results but Give

a More Honest Picture of the Company?

If a management team makes decisions that actually hurt reported results,
you're in luck. Management teams that use restricted stock grants instead of
options—because the former has to be expensed, while the latter doesn't—or
who expense rather than capitalize items such as research and development or
software costs are the kinds of folks who are more interested in running the
business than playing numbers games. And those are precisely the kind of
people you want running the companies you own.

Running the Business
In addition to managers who are paid reasonably and are honest, you also
want folks who can run the business well.

Performance

The first stop is simply the financial performance of the company during the
tenure of the current management team. Look for high and increasing ROEs
and ROAs—but don’t forget to check whether increasing ROE was driven by
higher leverage, as opposed to improved profitability or asset efficiency.

Are there any big jumps in revenue? If so, the firm probably did an ac-
quisition, and you should check to see whether management paid a reason-
able price and whether the acquired firm wound up adding to shareholder
value. Most acquisitions do not pay off, so digging into past merger and ac-
quisition (M&A) activity is definitely worth your while.

Finally, look at the share count over a long period of time. If the number
of shares outstanding has increased substantially because of aggressive op-
tions programs or frequent equity issuance, the firm is essentially giving away
part of your stake without asking you. That’s not a great recipe for long-term

share performance.


RUNNING THE BUSINESS

Follow-Through

When management identifies a problem and promises a solution, does it ac-
tually implement the plan, or does it hope you forget about it? The same goes
for any “new strategic initiatives” that are announced: Does the firm go ahead
with a new plan once it’s announced, or does every year see the firm an-
nouncing a grand new strategy that’s never realized? One way to vet this is to
look at past annual reports and see what new initiatives were discussed three
to seven years ago. It’s fine if they weren't all successful, but where are they
now? Has management kept shareholders up to date on them, or do the ini-
tiatives just disappear from the radar screen? In the latter case, management is
probably spending more time hiring consultants with grandiose plans than

actually figuring out what’s broken.

Candor

Does the firm provide enough information to properly analyze the business,
or does it clam up about certain issues? Generally, management teams will talk
ad nauseam about parts of the business that are hitting on all cylinders, but
questions about a problem area are sometimes met with evasion or a straight,
“We don’t disclose that.”

For example, Merck changed the way it reported its drug sales figures in
2001, but it wouldn’t provide comparable data for past periods—which made
it difficult to get a clear picture of what was going on. Lucent was another
offender in this department because it grouped together high-growth and low-
growth product lines when it broke out segment data. It’s entirely proper for
firms not to report certain things, but selective reticence about problem areas

is never a good sign.

Self-Confidence

I generally applaud firms that do something markedly different from their
peers or from conventional opinion. It’s tough to take a pass on a hot
consulting fad when all of your golfing buddies are singing its praises or to
buy a beaten-down competitor when your industry is in the tank—but
these are both moves that can pay off in spades. Maintaining research and
development spending during an industry downturn is another good

example of self-confidence that shows management is more concerned with


ET2

ANALYZING A COMPANY—-MANAGEMENT

beating competitors over the long haul than beating its quarterly earnings

guidance.

Flexibility

Has management made decisions that will give the firm flexibility in the fu-
ture? These include simple decisions such as not taking on too much debt
and controlling fixed expenses (even in good years), as well as more strategic
decisions such as issuing equity when the stock is high. Attaching call options
to debt, retiring high-rate debt when the opportunity presents itself, and
buying back stock only when the price is low are also good examples of capi-

tal allocation decisions that evidence a solid operational hand on the tiller.

Investor's Checklist: Analyzing a Company—Management

> Evaluating management is a critical component of analyzing a stock. Look
for management teams that act like shareholders, rather than hired hands.

> Get compensation information from the proxy statement—SEC form
DEF-14A. Check out how much management is paid and whether pay
varies with the company’s performance. If a pay package makes you cringe,
it’s too high.

> Avoid companies that give loans to executives, have many related-party
transactions, or give out too many stock options. Look for executives that
have substantial stock ownership positions.

>» Make sure the company discloses enough information for you to properly
analyze the business. “We don’t disclose that” is often code for, “The news

is bad, so we'd rather not say.”


Avoiding Financial Fakery

As you’vE LIKELY figured out by now, picking great stocks is not a black-
and-white process. Unfortunately, neither is accounting. There are literally
dozens of techniques that are perfectly legal and aboveboard, but which have
the effect of fooling an observer into thinking that a firm has posted true op-
erational improvements when all it has really done is moved some numbers
around. You need to know how to identify what's known as aggressive ae-
counting so you can avoid the companies that practice it.

Even worse than aggressive accounting, of course, is outright fraud—the
hucksters of the world are naturally attracted to the stock market because it’s
the perfect arena for profiting from the greed and carelessness of others.
Knowing the signs of potential fraud can save you a lot of financial pain.

It’s not that hard, either. Although you might need a CPA to understand
exactly how an aggressive or fraudulent firm is exaggerating its results, you
don’t need to be an expert to recognize the warning signs of accounting chi-
canery. As long as you avoid the companies that bristle with red flags, you
wont be caught owning them when the SEC starts investigating.


114

AVOIDING FINANCIAL FAKERY

Six Red Flags

When youre giving a company the once-over, there are six major red flags to
watch out for. Though some of these issues can pop up for innocent reasons,
be sure you thoroughly investigate them before giving the firm a clean bill of

health—or your money.

Declining Cash Flow

Even if accounting gobbledygook makes your head spin, there is one very
simple thing you can do: Watch cash flow. Over time, increases in a com-
pany’s cash flow from operations should roughly track increases in net in-
come. If you see cash from operations decline even as net income keeps
marching upward—or if cash from operations increases much more slowly
than net income—watch out. This usually means that the company is gener-
ating sales without necessarily collecting the cash, and that’s a very good
recipe for a blowup down the road.

My favorite example of this is former high-flyer Lucent. Between 1997 and
1999, Lucent's net income soared from $449 million, to just over $1 billion, to
almost $3.5 billion—an incredible growth rate for such a large company. At the
same time, however, cash flow from operations was plunging precipitously,
from $2.1 billion in 1997 to $1.9 billion in 1998, to negative $276 million in
1999. Why? It’s a long and sordid story, but it boiled down to three big reasons:

1. Lucent was extending credit to anyone who could spell photon, which
meant it was booking many sales without receiving the cash. (Think back
to our hot dog stand example in Chapter 4—as long as a firm ships a
product and has reasonable certainty that it will eventually collect the
cash, it can post the sale.) Accounts receivable (A/R) ballooned from 20
percent of sales to 27 percent of sales between 1997 and 1999, a clear sign
that the firm was having trouble collecting the money it was owed.

2. Lucent kept building more gear than it could ship, which sent inventories
upward. (Remember, manufacturing something and then storing it in a
warehouse uses cash.) This effect showed up in the “increase in invento-
ries” line item in the firm’s statement of cash flows.

3. Lucent’s pension plan was pumping up net income with noncash gains.

If you do nothing else, watch cash flow like a hawk.


SIX RED FLAGS

Serial Chargers

Be wary of firms that take frequent one-time charges and write-downs. This
practice makes the historical financials muddier because every charge has a
long explanation and usually has various components that affect different
accounts—all of which need to be adjusted if you want to look at compara-
ble year-to-year financial results.

More importantly, frequent charges are an open invitation to accounting
hanky-panky because firms can bury bad decisions in a single restructuring
charge. Usually, the rationale for a charge is pretty vague, which means there’s
a fair amount of leeway for management.

When a firm takes a big restructuring, charge, it’s essentially improving fu-
ture results by pulling future expenses into the present. In other words, poor
decisions that might need to be paid for in future quarters—an unsuccessful
product that may need to be terminated or a bloated division that will need to
pay severance payments to redundant employees—all get rolled into a single
one-time charge in the current quarter, which improves future results.

If you run across a firm that has frequent restructuring charges, don’t ig-
nore them, despite the firm’s blandishments about what earnings would be
after excluding the charge. After all, if a firm dug itself into a deep enough
hole that it needs quarter after quarter of charges to make things right, those

charges are a normal cost of improving the business.

Serial Acquirers

As I mentioned earlier in the book, firms that make numerous acquisitions
can be problematic—their financials have been restated and rejiggered so
many times that it’s tough to know which end is up. Aside from muddying
the waters, acquisitions increase the risk that the firm will report a nasty sur-
prise some time in the future, because acquisitive firms that want to beat
their competitors to the punch often don’t spend as much time checking out

their targets as they should.

The Chief Financial Officer or Auditors Leave the Company

Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? is Latin for “who watches the watchmen?” And
when it comes to financial reporting, those watchmen are the chief financial
officer (CFO) and the corporate auditors. If a CFO leaves the company for

reasons that seem at all strange—or inexplicable—you should be on your
