
900

Daily Chart

Index
Scale

2003 Nasdaq Market Bottom

1550

1500

Follow-through
4th day

1450

1400

Day 1

1350

1250

Daily Chart
Volume (00)
19,600,000

NYSE Volume

14,700,000
9,800,000
4,900,000

December 2002

January 2003

February 2003

March 2003

The Big Money Is Made in the First Two Years
The really big money is usually made in the first one or two years of a normal new bull market cycle. It is at this point that you must always recognize,
and fully capitalize upon, the golden opportunities presented.
The rest of the “up” cycle usually consists of back-and-forth movement in
the market averages, followed by a bear market. The year 1965 was one of
the few exceptions, but that strong market in the third year of a new cycle
was caused by the beginning of the Vietnam War.
In the first or second year of a new bull market, there should be a few
intermediate-term declines in the market averages. These usually last a couple of months, with the market indexes dropping by from 8% to an occa-

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

1300

224 A WINNING SYSTEM
sional 12% or 15%. After several sharp downward adjustments of this
nature, and after at least two years of a bull market have passed, heavy volume without further upside progress in the daily market averages could
indicate the early beginning of the next bear market.
Since the market is governed by supply and demand, you can interpret a
chart of the general market averages about the same way you read the chart
of an individual stock. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and the S&P 500
are usually displayed in the better publications. Investor’s Business Daily
displays the Nasdaq Composite, the New York Stock Exchange Composite,
and the S&P 500, with large-size daily price and volume charts stacked one
on top of the other for ease of comparing the three. These charts should
show the high, low, and close of the market averages day by day for at least
six months, together with the daily NYSE and Nasdaq volume in millions of
shares traded.
Incidentally, when I began in the market about 50 years ago, an average
day on the New York Stock Exchange was 3.5 million shares. Today, 1.5 billion shares are traded on average each day—an incredible 150-fold increase
that clearly demonstrates beyond any question the amazing growth and success of our free enterprise, capitalist system. Its unparalleled freedom and
opportunity have consistently attracted millions of ambitious people from
all around the world who have materially increased our productivity and
inventiveness. It has led to an unprecedented increase in our standard of living, so that the vast majority of Americans and all areas of our population are
better off than they were before. There are always problems that need to be
recognized and solved. But our system is the most successful in the world,
and it offers remarkable opportunities to grow and advance to those who are
willing to work, train, and educate themselves. The 100 charts in Chapter 1
are only a small sample of big past investment opportunities.
Normal bear markets show three legs of price movement down, but
there’s no rule saying you can’t have four or even five down legs. You have to
evaluate overall conditions and events in the country objectively and let the
market averages tell their own story. And you have to understand what that
story is.

Additional Ways to Identify Key Market Turning Points
Look for Divergence of Key Averages

Several averages should be checked at market turning points to see if there
are significant divergences, meaning that they are moving in different directions (one up and one down) or that one index is advancing or declining at a
much greater rate than another.

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

For example, if the Dow is up 100 and the S&P 500 is up only the equivalent of 20 on the Dow for the day (the S&P 500 being a broader index), it
would indicate the rally is not as broad and strong as it appears. To compare
the change in the S&P 500 to that in the Dow, divide the S&P 500 into the
Dow average and then multiply by the change in the S&P 500.
For example, if the Dow closed at 9,000 and the S&P 500 finished at 900,
the 9,000 Dow would be 10 times the S&P 500. Therefore, if the Dow, on a
particular day, is up 100 points and the S&P 500 is up 5 points, you can multiply the 5 by 10 and find that the S&P 500 was up only the equivalent of 50
points on the Dow.
The Dow’s new high in January 1984 was accompanied by a divergence in
the indexes: the broader-based, more significant S&P 500 did not hit a new
high. This is the reason most professionals plot the key indexes together—to
make it easier to spot nonconfirmations at key turning points. Institutional
investors periodically run up the 30-stock Dow while they liquidate the
broader Nasdaq or a list of technology stocks under cover of the Dow run-up.
It’s like a big poker game, with players hiding their hands, bluffing, and faking.
Certain Psychological Market Indicators Might at Times Help

Now that trading in put and call options is the get-rich-quick scheme for
many speculators, you can plot and analyze the ratio of calls to puts for
another valuable insight into crowd temperament. Options traders buy calls,
which are options to buy common stock, or puts, which are options to sell
common stock. A call buyer hopes prices will rise; a buyer of put options
wishes prices to fall.
If the volume of call options in a given period of time is greater than the
volume of put options, a logical assumption is that option speculators as a
group are expecting higher prices and are bullish on the market. If the volume of put options is greater than that of calls, speculators hold a bearish
attitude. When option players buy more puts than calls, the put-to-call ratio
index rises a little above 1.0. Such a reading coincided with general market
bottoms in 1990, 1996, 1998, and April and September 2001, but you can’t
always expect this to occur.
The percentage of investment advisors who are bearish is an interesting
measure of investor sentiment. When bear markets are near the bottom, the
great majority of advisory letters will usually be bearish. Near market tops,
most will be bullish. The majority is usually wrong when it’s most important
to be right. However, you cannot blindly assume that because 65% of investment advisors were bearish the last time the general market hit bottom, a
major market decline will be over the next time the investment advisors’
index reaches the same point.

225

226 A WINNING SYSTEM
The short-interest ratio is the amount of short selling on the New York
Stock Exchange, expressed as a percentage of total NYSE volume. This ratio
can reflect the degree of bearishness shown by speculators in the market.
Along bear market bottoms, you will usually see two or three major peaks
showing sharply increased short selling. There’s no rule governing how high
the index should go, but studying past market bottoms can give you an idea
of what the ratio looked like at key market junctures.
An index that is sometimes used to measure the degree of speculative
activity is the Nasdaq volume as a percentage of NYSE volume. This measure provided a helpful tip-off of impending trouble during the summer of
1983, when Nasdaq volume increased significantly relative to the Big
Board’s (NYSE). When a trend persists and accelerates, indicating wild,
rampant speculation, you’re close to a general market correction. The volume of Nasdaq trading has grown larger than that on the NYSE in recent
years because so many new entrepreneurial companies are listed on the
Nasdaq, so this index must be viewed differently now.
Interpret the Overrated Advance-Decline Line

Some technical analysts religiously follow advance-decline (A-D) data. These
technicians take the number of stocks advancing each day versus the number
that are declining, and then plot that ratio on a graph. Advance-decline lines
are far from precise because they frequently veer sharply lower long before a
bull market finally tops. In other words, the market keeps advancing toward
higher ground, but it is being led by fewer but better stocks.
The advance-decline line is simply not as accurate as the key general market indexes because analyzing the market’s direction is not a simple total
numbers game. Not all stocks are created equal; it’s better to know where
the real leadership is and how it’s acting than to know how many more
mediocre stocks are advancing and declining.
The NYSE A-D line peaked in April 1998 and trended lower during the
new bull market that broke out six months later in October. The A-D line
continued to fall from October 1999 to March 2000, missing one of the market’s most powerful rallies in decades.
An advance-decline line can sometimes be helpful when a clear-cut bear
market attempts a short-term rally. If the A-D line lags the market averages
and can’t rally, it’s giving an internal indication that, despite the strength of
the rally in the Dow or S&P, the broader market remains frail. In such
instances, the rally usually fizzles. In other words, it takes more than just a
few leaders to make a new bull market.
At best, the advance-decline line is a secondary indicator of limited
value. If you hear commentators or TV market strategists extolling its

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

virtues bullishly or bearishly, they probably haven’t done their homework.
No secondary measurements can be as accurate as the major market
indexes, so you don’t want to get confused and overemphasize the vast
array of other technical measures that most people use, usually with lackluster results.
Watch Federal Reserve Board Rate Changes

Among fundamental general market indicators, changes in the Federal
Reserve Board’s discount rate (the interest rate the FRB charges member
banks for loans), the fed funds rate (the interest rate banks with fund
reserves charge for loans to banks without fund reserves), and occasionally
stock margin levels are valuable indicators to watch.
As a rule, interest rates provide the best confirmation of basic economic
conditions, and changes in the discount rate and the fed funds rate are by far
the most reliable. In the past, three successive significant hikes in Fed interest rates have generally marked the beginning of bear markets and impending recessions.
Bear markets have usually, but not always, ended when the rate was
finally lowered. On the downside, the discount rate increase to 6% in September 1987, just after Alan Greenspan became chairman, led to the severe
market break that October.
Money market indicators mirror general economic activity. At times I
have followed selected government and Federal Reserve Board measurements, including 10 indicators of the supply and demand for money and
indicators of interest-rate levels. History proves that the direction of the
general market, and also that of several industry groups, is often affected by
changes in interest rates because the level of interest rates is usually tied to
tight or easy Fed monetary policy.
For the investor, the simplest and most relevant monetary indicators to follow and understand are the changes in the discount rate and fed funds rate.
With the advent of program trading and various hedging devices, some
funds now hedge portions of their portfolio in an attempt to provide some
downside protection during risky markets. The degree to which these
hedges are successful again depends greatly on skill and timing, but one
possible effect for some managers may be to lessen the pressure to dump
portfolio securities on the market.
Most funds operate with a policy of being widely diversified and fully or
nearly fully invested at all times. This is because most fund managers, given
the great size of today’s funds (billions of dollars), have difficulty getting out
of the market and into cash at the right time and, most importantly, then
getting back into the market fast enough to participate in the initial power-

227

S&P 500 Index and Federal Reserve Board Discount Rate
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600

400

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60

40

20

15.00
14.00
13.00
12.00
11.00
10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00

FRB Discount Rate

6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00

1940 1942 1944 1946 1948 1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

228

S&P 500

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

ful rebound off the ultimate bottom. So they may try to shift their emphasis
to big-cap, semidefensive groups.
The Fed Crushes the 1981 Economy. The bear market and the costly, protracted
recession that began in 1981, for example, came about solely because the
Fed increased the discount rate in rapid succession on September 26,
November 17, and December 5 of 1980. Its fourth increase, on May 8, 1981,
thrust the discount rate to an all-time high of 14%. That finished off the U.S.
economy, our basic industries, and the stock market for the time being.
Fed rate changes, however, should not be your primary market indicator
because the stock market itself is always your best barometer. Our analysis
of market cycles turned up three key market turns that the discount rate did
not help predict.
Independent Fed actions are typically very constructive, as the Fed tries
to counteract overheated excesses or sharp contractions in our economy.
However, its actions and results clearly demonstrate how much our overall
federal government, not our stock markets reacting to all events, can and
does at times significantly influence our economic future, for good or bad.
In fact, the subprime real estate mortgage meltdown and the financial
credit crisis that led to the highly unusual market collapse of 2008 can be easily traced to moves in 1995 by the then-current administration to substantially
beef up the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) of 1977. These actions
required banks to make more higher-risk loans in lower-income areas than
they would otherwise have made. Failure to comply meant stiff penalties, lawsuits, and limits on getting approvals for mergers and branch expansion.
Our government, in effect, encouraged and coerced major banks to lower
their long-proven safe-lending standards. Most of the more than $1 trillion
of new subprime CRA loans had adjustable rates. Many such loans eventually came to require no documentation of the borrower’s income and in
some cases little or no down payment.
In addition, for the first time, new regulatory rules not only allowed but
encouraged lenders to bundle the new, riskier subprime loans with prime
loans and sell these assumed government-sponsored loan packages to other
institutions and countries that thought they were buying safe AAA bonds.
The first of these bundled loans hit the investment market in 1997. That
action allowed loan originators and big banks to make profits faster and
eliminate future risk and responsibility for many of those lower-quality
loans. It let the banks turn around and make even more CRA-type loans,
then sell them off in packages again, with little future risk or responsibility.
In time, the unintended result was a gigantic government-sponsored
pyramiding mechanism, with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac providing the

229

230 A WINNING SYSTEM
implied government backing by buying vast quantities of the more risky
subprimes; this led to their facing bankruptcy and needing enormous government bailouts. Freddie and Fannie’s management had also received
huge bonuses and were donors to certain members of Congress, who
repeatedly defended the highly leveraged, extremely risky lending against
any sound reforms.
Bottom line: this was a Big Government program that was started with
absolutely good, worthy social intentions, but with little insight and
absolutely zero foresight that over time resulted in severe damage and enormous unintended consequences that affected almost everything and everyone, including, sadly, the very lower-income people that this rather inept
government operation was supposed to be helping. It put our whole financial
system in jeopardy. Big Wall Street firms got involved after the rescinding of
the Glass-Steagall Act in 1998, and both political parties, Congress, and the
public all played key parts in creating the great financial fiasco.
The 1962 Stock Market Break. Another notable stock market break occurred in 1962.
In the spring, nothing was wrong with the economy, but the market got
skittish after the government announced an investigation of the stock
market and then got on the steel companies for raising prices. IBM dropped
50%. That fall, after the Cuban missile showdown with the Russians, a new
bull market sprang to life. All of this happened with no change in the
discount rate.
There have also been situations in which the discount rate was lowered
six months after the market bottom was reached. In such cases, you would
be late getting into the game if you waited for the discount rate to drop. In
a few instances, after Fed rate cuts occurred, the markets continued lower
or whipsawed for several months. This also occurred dramatically in 2000
and 2001.
The Hourly Market Index and Volume Changes

At key turning points, an active market operator can watch the market
indexes and volume changes hour by hour and compare them to volume in
the same hour of the day before.
A good time to watch hourly volume figures is during the first attempted
rally following the initial decline off the market peak. You should be able to
see if volume is dull or dries up on the rally. You can also see if the rally starts
to fade late in the day, with volume picking up as it does, a sign that the rally
is weak and will probably fail.
Hourly volume data also come in handy when the market averages reach
an important prior low point and start breaking that “support” area. (A sup-

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

port area is a previous price level below which investors hope that an index
will not fall.) What you want to know is whether selling picks up dramatically or by just a small amount as the market collapses into new low ground.
If selling picks up dramatically, it represents significant downward pressure
on the market.
After the market has undercut previous lows for a few days, but on only
slightly higher volume, look for either a volume dry-up day or one or two
days of increased volume without the general market index going lower. If
you see this, you may be in a “shakeout” area (when the market pressures
many traders to sell, often at a loss), ready for an upturn after scaring out
weak holders.
Overbought and Oversold: Two Risky Words

The short-term overbought/oversold indicator has an avid following among
some individual technicians and investors. It’s a 10-day moving average of
advances and declines in the market. But be careful. At the start of a new
bull market, the overbought/oversold index can become substantially “overbought.” This should not be taken as a sign to sell stocks.
A big problem with indexes that move counter to the trend is that you
always have the question of how bad things can get before everything finally
turns. Many amateurs follow and believe in overbought/oversold indicators.
Something similar can happen in the early stage or first leg of a major
bear market, when the index can become unusually oversold. This is really
telling you that a bear market may be imminent. The market was “oversold”
all the way down during the brutal market implosion of 2000.
I once hired a well-respected professional who relied on such technical
indicators. During the 1969 market break, at the very point when everything
told me the market was getting into serious trouble, and I was aggressively
trying to get several portfolio managers to liquidate stocks and raise large
amounts of cash, he was telling them that it was too late to sell because his
overbought/oversold indicator said that the market was already very oversold. You guessed it: the market then split wide open.
Needless to say, I rarely pay attention to overbought/oversold indicators.
What you learn from years of experience is usually more important than the
opinions and theories of experts using their many different favorite indicators.
Other General Market Indicators

Upside/downside volume is a short-term index that relates trading volume in
stocks that close up in price for the day to trading volume in stocks that close
down. This index, plotted as a 10-week moving average, may show divergence at some intermediate turning points in the market. For example, after

231

232 A WINNING SYSTEM
a 10% to 12% dip, the general market averages may continue to penetrate
into new low ground for a week or two. Yet the upside/downside volume
may suddenly shift and show steadily increasing upside volume, with downside volume easing. This switch usually signals an intermediate-term upturn
in the market. But you’ll pick up the same signals if you watch the changes
in the daily Dow, Nasdaq, or S&P 500 and the market volume.
Some services measure the percentage of new money flowing into corporate pension funds that is invested in common stocks and the percentage
that is invested in cash equivalents or bonds. This opens another window
into institutional investor psychology. However, majority—or crowd—
thinking is seldom right, even when it’s done by professionals. Every year or
two, Wall Street seems to be of one mind, with everyone following each
other like a herd of cattle. Either they all pile in or they all pile out.
An index of “defensive” stocks—more stable and supposedly safer issues,
such as utilities, tobaccos, foods, and soaps—may often show strength after a
couple of years of bull market conditions. This may indicate the “smart
money” is slipping into defensive positions and that a weaker general market
lies ahead. But this doesn’t always work. None of these secondary market
indicators is anywhere near as reliable as the key general market indexes.
Another indicator that is helpful at times in evaluating the stage of a
market cycle is the percentage of stocks in defensive or laggard categories
that are making new price highs. In pre-1983 cycles, some technicians
rationalized their lack of concern with market weakness by citing the number of stocks that were still making new highs. But analysis of new-high
lists shows that a large percentage of preferred or defensive stocks signals
bear market conditions. Superficial knowledge can hurt you in the stock
market.
To summarize this complex but vitally important chapter: learn to interpret the daily price and volume changes of the general market indexes and
the action of individual market leaders. Once you know how to do this correctly, you can stop listening to all the costly, uninformed, personal market
opinions of amateurs and professionals alike. As you can see, the key to staying on top of the stock market is not predicting or knowing what the market is
going to do. It’s knowing and understanding what the market has actually done
in the past several weeks and what it is currently doing now. We don’t want to
give personal opinions or predictions; we carefully observe market supply
and demand as it changes day by day.
One of the great values of this system of interpreting the price and volume changes in the market averages is not just the ability to better recognize market top and bottom areas, but also the ability to track each rally
attempt when the market is on its way down. In most instances, waiting for
