
184

XIII

"For you to deposit in your own bank. You will draw
your own checks. I want you to do your trading in our
office. I don't care whether you win or lose. If that money
goes, I will give you another personal check. So you don't
have to be so very careful with this one. See?"
I knew that the firm was too rich and prosperous to
need anybody's business, much less to give a fellow the
money to put up as margin. And then he was so nice about
it! Instead of giving me a credit with the house he gave me
the actual cash, so that he alone knew where it came from,
the only string being that if I traded I should do so through
his firm. And then the promise that there would be more if
that went! Still, there must be a reason.
"What's the idea?" I asked him.
"The idea is simply that we want to have a customer in
this office who is known as a big active trader. Everybody
knows that you swing a big line on the short side, which is
what I particularly like about you. You are known as a
plunger."
"I still don't get it," I said.
"I'll be frank with you, Mr. Livingston. We have two or
three very wealthy customers who buy and sell stocks in a
big way. I don't want the Street to suspect them of selling
long stock every time we sell ten or twenty thousand
shares of any stock. If the Street knows that you are
trading in our office it will not know whether it is your
short selling or the other customers' long stock that is
coming on the market."
I understood at once. He wanted to cover up his
brother-in-law's operations with my reputation as a
plunger! It so happened that I had made my biggest killing
on the bear side a year and a half before, and, of course,
the Street gossips and the stupid rumor mongers had
acquired the habit of blaming me for every decline in
prices. To this day when the market is very weak they say I
am raiding it.
185

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I didn't have to reflect. I saw at a glance that Dan
Williamson was offering me a chance to come back and
come back quickly. I took the check, banked it, opened an
account with his firm and began trading. It was a good
active market, broad enough for a man not to have to stick
to one or two specialties. I had begun to fear, as I told you,
that I had lost the knack of hitting it right. But it seems I
hadn't. In three weeks' time I had made a profit of one
hundred and twelve thousand dollars out of the twentyfive thousand that Dan Williamson lent me.
I went to him and said, "I've come to pay you back that
twenty-five thousand dollars."
"No, no!" he said and waved me away exactly as if I had
offered him a castor-oil cocktail. "No, no, my boy. Wait
until your account amounts to something. Don't think
about it yet. You've only got chicken feed there."
There is where I made the mistake that I have regretted
more than any other I ever made in my Wall Street career.
It was responsible for long and dreary years of suffering. I
should have insisted on his taking the money. I was on my
way to a bigger fortune than I had lost and walking pretty
fast. For three weeks my average profit was 150 per cent
per week. From then on my trading would be on a steadily
increasing scale. But instead of freeing myself from all
obligation I let him have his way and did not compel him
to accept the twenty-five thousand dollars. Of course, since
he didn't draw out the twenty-five thousand dollars he had
advanced me I felt I could not very well draw out my
profit. I was very grateful to him, but I am so constituted
that I don't like to owe money or favours. I can pay the
money back with money, but the favours and kindnesses I
must pay back in kind and you are apt to find these moral
obligations mighty high priced at times. Moreover there is
no statute of limitations.
I left the money undisturbed and resumed my trading. I
was getting on very nicely. I was recovering my poise and I
was sure it would not be very long before I should get back
186

XIII

into my 1907 stride. Once I did that, all I'd ask for would
be for the market to hold out a little while and I'd more
than make up my losses. But making or not making the
money was not bothering me much. What made me happy
was that I was losing the habit of being wrong, of not being
myself. It had played havoc with me for months but I had
learned my lesson.
Just about that time I turned bear and I began to sell
short several railroad stocks. Among them was
Chesapeake & Atlantic. I think I put out a short line in it;
about eight thousand shares.
One morning when I got downtown Dan Williamson
called me into his private office before the market opened
and said to me: "Larry, don't do anything in Chesapeake &
Atlantic just now. That was a bad play of yours, selling
eight thousand short. I covered it for you this morning in
London and went long."
I was sure Chesapeake & Atlantic was going down. The
tape told it to me quite plainly; and besides I was bearish
on the whole market, not violently or insanely bearish, but
enough to feel comfortable with a moderate short line out.
I said to Williamson, "What did you do that for? I am
bearish on the whole market and they are all going lower."
But he just shook his head and said, "I did it because I
happen to know something about Chesapeake & Atlantic
that you couldn't know. My advice to you is not to sell that
stock short until I tell you it is safe to do so."
What could I do? That wasn't an asinine tip. It was
advice that came from the brother-in-law of the chairman
of the board of directors. Dan was not only Alvin
Marquand's closest friend but he had been kind and
generous to me. He had shown his faith in me and
confidence in my word. I couldn't do less than to thank
him. And so my feelings again won over my judgment and
I gave in. To subordinate my judgment to his desires was
the undoing of me. Gratitude is something a decent man
can't help feeling, but it is for a fellow to keep it from
187

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

completely tying him up. The first thing I knew I not only
had lost all my profit but I owed the firm one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars besides. I felt pretty badly about it,
but Dan told me not to worry.
"I'll get you out of this hole," he promised. "I know I
will. But I can only do it if you let me. You will have to stop
doing business on your own hook. I can't be working for
you and then have you completely undo all my work in
your behalf. Just you lay off the market and give me a
chance to make some money for you. Won't you, Larry?"
Again I ask you: What could I do? I thought of his
kindliness and I could not do anything that might be
construed as lacking in appreciation. I had grown to like
him. He was very pleasant and friendly. I remember that
all I got from him was encouragement. He kept on
assuring me that everything would come out O.K. One day,
perhaps six months later, he came to me with a pleased
smile and gave me some credit slips.
"I told you I would puil you out of that hole," he said,
"and I have." And then I discovered that not only had he
wiped out the debt entirely but I had a small credit balance
besides.
I think I could have run that up without much trouble,
for the market was right, but he said to me, "I have bought
you ten thousand shares of Southern Atlantic." That was
another road controlled by his brother-in-law, Alvin
Marquand, who also ruled the market destinies of the
stock.
When a man does for you what Dan Williamson did for
me you can't say anything but "Thank you"—no matter
what your market views may be. You may be sure you're
right, but as Pat Hearne used to say: "You can't tell till you
bet!" and Dan Williamson had bet for me with his money.
Well, Southern Atlantic went down and stayed down
and I lost, I forget how much, on my ten thousand shares
before Dan sold me out. I owed him more than ever. But
you never saw a nicer or less importunate creditor in your
188

XIII

life. Never a whimper from him. Instead, encouraging
words and admonitions not to worry about it. In the end
the loss was made up for me in the same generous but
mysterious way.
He gave no details whatever. They were all numbered
accounts. Dan Williamson would just say to me, "We made
up your Southern Atlantic loss with profits on this other
deal," and he'd tell me how he had sold seventy-five
hundred shares of some other stock and made a nice thing
out of it. I can truthfully say that I never knew a blessed
thing about those trades of mine until I was told that the
indebtedness was wiped out.
After that happened several times I began to think, and
I got to look at my case from a different angle. Finally I
tumbled. It was plain that I had been used by Dan
Williamson. It made me angry to think it, but still angrier
that I had not tumbled to it quicker. As soon as I had gone
over the whole thing in my mind I went to Dan
Williamson, told him I was through with the firm, and I
quit the office of Williamson & Brown. I had no words with
him or any of his partners. What good would that have
done me? But I will admit that I was sore at myself quite as
much as at Williamson & Brown.
The loss of the money didn't bother me. Whenever I
have lost money in the stock market I have always
considered that I have learned something; that if I have
lost money I have gained experience, so that the money
really went for a tuition fee. A man has to have experience
and he has to pay for it. But there was something that hurt
a whole lot in that experience of mine in Dan Williamson's
office, and that was the loss of a great opportunity. The
money a man loses is nothing; he can make it up. But
opportunities such as I had then do not come every day.
The market, you see, had been a fine trading market. I
was right; I mean, I was reading it accurately. The
opportunity to make millions was there. But I allowed my
gratitude to interfere with my play. I tied my own hands. I
189

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

