Keeping a trading diary
As part of your trading spreadsheet or in addition to it, you should track the
reasons for every trade. Was the reason for the trade because of a signal from
your system? Because of a hunch? Because you saw an opportunity that was
too good to pass up? Also track how the trade worked out. Is your trading
system giving off good signals? Are you following them? Are your hunches
so good that maybe your system needs to be refined? Are you missing good
trades because you are following your gut and not the data in front of you?
Over time, some trading systems stop working because too many people
figure them out. If you can watch for that, you can tweak your system as you
go. The big guys do this, too; the downside of the high-frequency, algorithmic
trading that so many hedge funds use is that the algorithms have to be
rewritten all the time.
A trading diary gives you information to systematically assess your trading.
Start by writing down why you are making a particular trade. Do this when you
make the trade. (If you wait until later, you’ll forget, and you’ll change your logic
to suit your needs. That’s just what people do, you know?) Enter the information in a spreadsheet, jot something quick on a piece of scratch paper, or keep a
notebook dedicated to your trading. Your recording system doesn’t have to be
fancy, as long as you take the time to make the notes that you can refer to.
Some traders create a form and make copies of it and then keep a stack on
hand so that they can easily fill them out during the day. They even create predetermined indicators that match their strategies and that they can check off
or circle. At the end of the day, they collect their diary sheets into a three-ring
binder that they can refer back to when the time comes to evaluate their trading strategy and their performance.
Figure 16-3 offers an example of a trading diary. You can customize it for your
own trading strategy, including those indicators that matter most to you.
The trading diary form in Figure 16-3 is just an example. If your trading style is
so fast that you don’t have time to fill it out, don’t fret. Instead, come up with
some kind of shorthand that lets you keep a running tally of trades made based
on a signal from your system, trades based on your own hunches, and trades
based on other interpretations of market conditions. Then match your notes
against the trader confirmations from your broker to see how you did.

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance
Trading Diary
Date:
Time:
Security Name:

Symbol:

Market:

Price entered:
Quantity:

Long/short?
Leverage used?

long
yes

Indicators:
Price trend is
Volume is
Sector is
Market is
Technical Pattern:

rising
rising
rising
rising

falling
falling
falling
falling

rangebound
steady
rangebound
rangebound

rising
rising
rising
rising

falling
falling
falling
falling

rangebound
steady
rangebound
rangebound

short
no

Price closed:
Quantity:
Time:
Indicators:
Price trend is
Volume is
Sector is
Market is
Technical Pattern:

I initiated this trade because (check one):
The trading system signalled it
I had a hunch (explain below)
The market looked right, even though the signal didn't go off (explain below)
Other (explain below)

Figure 16-3:
A trading
diary should
be customized to your
own preferences.

I closed out this trade because (check one):
The trading system signalled it
I needed to cut my losses
I had a hunch (explain below)
The market looked right, even though the signal didn't go off (explain below)
Other (explain below)
Explanation and lessons learned:

After You Trade: Calculating
Overall Performance
Calculating performance seems easy: Simply use the balance at the end of the
year and the balance at the start of the year to find the percentage change.
But what if you added money to your investment in the middle of the year?
What if you took cash out in the middle of the year to buy a new computer?
Before you know it, you’re left with algebra unlike any you’ve seen since high
school and you’re stuck solving it if you want to see how you’re doing.

273

274 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
In addition to the increase in your assets, you want to track your volatility,
which is how much your gains and losses can fluctuate. Volatility is an important measure of risk, especially if your trading strategy relies on leverage (see
Chapter 9 for more information on that).

Reviewing types of return
The investment performance calculation starts by dividing returns into different categories: income, short-term capital gains, and long-term capital gains.
Although almost all a day trader’s gains come from short-term capital gains, I
go over the definitions of each so that you know the differences.

Income
When investors talk about income returns, they mean regular payments from
their investments, usually in the form of dividends from stock or interest payments on bonds. As a day trader, you may earn income on the cash balance
in your brokerage account but probably not from your trading activities.

Capital gains
A capital gain is the price appreciation in an asset — a stock, a bond, a house,
or whatever it is that you’re investing in. You buy it at one price, sell it at
another, and the difference is a capital gain. (Unless, of course, you sell the
asset for less than you paid, and then you have a capital loss.)
For tax purposes, capital gains are classified as either long-term or shortterm. Under the current tax law, any capital gain on an asset held for less
than one year is considered to be a short-term gain, and if the asset is owned
for one year or more before it’s sold, then it’s considered to be a long-term
capital gain. The difference isn’t semantic; long-term capital gains are taxed
at lower rates than short-term capital gains. You can read all about that and
then some in Chapter 15.
Income in tax terms is different from income in financial terms. Much of what
an investor would consider to be a capital gain, such as the short-term capital
gains that day traders generate, the IRS considers to be income.

Calculating returns
Give someone with a numerical bent a list of numbers and a calculator, and
she can some up with several different relationships between the numbers.
After the asset values for each time period have been determined, rates of
return can be calculated. But how? And over how long a time period? The
process gets a little more complicated because money is coming in and going
out while the asset values move up and down. The following sections outline
different calculations you can use to figure out your investment returns.

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance
Calculating compound average rate of return (CAGR)
The most common way to calculate investment returns is to use a timeweighted average. This method is perfect for traders who start with one pool
of money and don’t add to it or take money out. This is also called the compound average rate of return (CAGR). If you are looking at only one month or
one year, it’s a simple percentage. To calculate performance on a percentage
basis, you use this equation:

EOY − BOY
BOY
EOY represents the end of year asset value, and BOY represents the beginning of year value. The result is the percentage return for one year, and to
calculate it, you use simple arithmetic.
Now if you want to look at your return over a period of several years, you
need to look at the compound return rather than the simple return for each
year. The compound return shows you how your investment is growing. You
are getting returns on top of returns, and that’s a good thing. But the math
gets a little complicated because now you have to use the root function on
your calculator. The equation for compound annual growth looks like this:

√
N

EOP
−1
BOP

EOP represents the end of the total time period, BOP represents the beginning
of the total time period, and N is the number of years that you’re looking at.
The basic percentage rate of return is great; it’s an accurate, intuitive measure of how much gain you’re generating from your trading activities. As long
as you don’t take any money out of your trading account or put any money
into it, you’re set.

Calculating performance when you make deposits and withdrawals
You may be putting money into your account. Maybe you have a salaried job
and are day trading on the side, or maybe your spouse gives you a percentage of his income to add to your trading account. You may also be taking
money out of your day-trading account to cover your living expenses or to
put into other investment opportunities. All that money flowing into and out
of your account can really screw up your performance calculation. You need
a way to calculate the performance of your trading system without
considering the deposits and withdrawals to your trading account.
Here’s an example: You start day trading on January 1 with $100,000 in
your account. On May 1, your income tax refund from last year arrives, and

275

276 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
you add $1,000 of the money to your account and start trading with it. On
December 1, you take out $5,000 to buy holiday presents. At the end of the
year, your account is worth $115,000. How did you do?
As a day trader, you have a few methods at your disposal for calculating your
performance when you make withdrawals and deposits:
✓ The Modified Dietz method loses a little accuracy but makes up for it
with simplicity.
✓ The time-weighted rate of return isolates investment and trading
performance from the rest of the account.
✓ The dollar-weighted rate of return has many flaws but gives a sense of
what the account holder has.
Read on to see the return that would be calculated using each of these
methods.

Modified Dietz method
The Modified Dietz method is related to the simple percent change formula,
but it adjusts the beginning and ending period amounts for the cash inflows
and cash outflows. The equation for the Modified Dietz method looks like
this:

EOY − BOY − deposits + withdrawals
BOY + deposits − withdrawals
If you plug in the numbers from the example, you get

115,000 − 100,000 − 1,000 + 5,000
100,000 + 1,000 − 5,000
Do the math and you see that the result is 19.8 percent.
The advantage of the Modified Dietz method is that it’s so easy to do. You can
use it when you want a rough idea of how you are doing with your trading but
you don’t have the time to run a more detailed analysis. The key disadvantage is that it doesn’t consider the timing of the deposits and withdrawals.
It would generate the same answer if you took out $5,000 in May and put in
$1,000 in December, even though the amount of money you would have to
trade between May 1 and December 1 would be very different.

Time-weighted rate of return
The time-weighted rate of return shows the investment performance as a percentage of the assets at hand to trade. This method is the standard of trader
evaluation, but the math is much more complicated than with the basic

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance
percentage change or the Modified Dietz method. You need to calculate the
CAGR for each time period and then do a second calculation to incorporate
each of those over a longer period. Using the preceding example, you’d calculate one return for the first four months of the year, another for the next
seven months, and then a third return for the month of December. These
three returns would then be multiplied to generate a return for the year.
The general equation you use to figure the time-weighted rate of return looks
like this:

√(
)(
)(
) (
)
N
1 + rp1 1 + rp2 1 + rp3 … 1 + rpn − 1
N is the total number of time periods that you are looking at, and rpn is the
return for that particular time period. To make the calculations easier, you
can do it in a spreadsheet. Figure 16-4 shows the time-weighted return for
this example. As you can see, the result is 18.78 percent, a little below the
Modified Dietz return.

Figure 16-4:
Beginning of Period Account Value
Here’s an
Deposit/(Withdrawal)
example of
Adjusted Beginning Account Value
the timeTrading Earnings
weighted End-of-Period Account Value
rate of
return Period Percentage Return:
calculation. Annual Return:

January
$ 100,000
$
$ 100,000
$ 9,000
$ 109,000
9.00%

May
$ 109,000
$ 1,000
$ 110,000
$ 13,000
$ 123,000
11.82%

December
$ 123,000
$
(5,000)
$ 118,000
$
(3,000)
$ 115,000
-2.54%
18.78%

If you plan on adding to or taking money out of your account, you can make
your return calculations much easier by setting a regular schedule and sticking to it. Otherwise, you have to do calculations for fractional time periods. It’s
not impossible, but it’s kind of a hassle.
The time-weighted rate of return gives you the best sense of your trading performance, and its precision more than offsets the complexity of the calculation. You want to look at this number when you are deciding whether to
change or refine your strategy.

Dollar-weighted returns
The dollar-weighted return, also called the money-weighted return, is the rate
that makes the net present value of a stream of numbers equal to zero. That
calculation is also called the internal rate of return or IRR, and it is used for
other things than just return calculations. You can use it to determine what

277

278 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
the return is for a stream of numbers over time and to calculate returns when
you’re putting money into or taking money out of your trading account. And
if you have a financial calculator such as the Hewlett-PackardHP17BII+ or the
Texas Instruments BA2+, the calculations are pretty easy.
Ah, but there’s a catch! Although useful, the dollar-weighted method can misstate returns and occasionally shows nonsensical results if too many negative
returns appear in a series. And yes, day traders often have negative returns.
If you get a result showing a ridiculously large positive or a ridiculously small
negative return (like –15,989.9 percent, for example), you may want to try
another calculation.
Figure 16-5 shows the dollar-weighted rate of return using the same data used
in the two preceding examples.

Beginning of Period Account Value
Figure 16-5: Deposit/(Withdrawal)
Calculating Adjusted Beginning Account Value
the dollar- Trading Earnings
weighted End-of-Period Account Value
rate of
return. Period Percentage Return:
Annual Return:

January
$ 100,000
$
$ 100,000
$ 9,000
$ 109,000
9.00%

May
$ 109,000
$ 1,000
$ 110,000
$ 13,000
$ 123,000
11.82%

December
$ 123,000
$
(5,000)
$ 118,000
$
(3,000)
$ 115,000
-2.54%
12.10%

The result is 12.1 percent, lower than the other two examples because the
dollar-weighted return overstates the withdrawal and the loss in the last
month of the year. The withdrawals affect the account’s spending power,
offsetting the investment performance. But the overall account balance is up
more than 12.1 percent, even considering the deposit at the beginning of May.
The weight of the cash flows threw off this calculation.
Because of the problems with dollar-weighted returns, professional investors
who analyze investment returns usually prefer the time-weighted, compound
average approach. Still, the dollar-weighted return has some value, especially
for an investor who wants to know how the asset value has changed over
time. Because a day trader is usually both an investor and an account owner,
the dollar-weighted rate of return can show whether the investment performance is affecting spending power. This measure is particularly useful if you
are trying to decide whether to continue day trading.
Just as you have alternatives in calculating your performance, so too does
anyone trying to sell you a trading system or training course. Ask questions
about the performance calculation method and how cash flows and expenses
are handled. The numbers may not look so great once you grade the math
behind them.

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance

Determining the risk to your return
Now that you have return numbers from your profit and loss statements and
your return calculations, it’s time to perform black-belt performance jujitsu
and determine your risk levels. I’m not going to go into all of the many risk
and volatility measures out there, because believe me, the good editors of
the For Dummies books don’t want to proofread all the math. In fact, some
of these measures may be more math than you want to do. That’s okay. Even
if you look at just a few measures, you’ll have more information than if you
ignore them all.

Batting average — er, win-loss percentage
Baseball players are judged by how often they hit the ball. After all, they can’t
score until they get on base, and they can’t get on base without a hit or a
walk. The number of hits relative to the number of times at bat is the batting
average. It’s a simple, beautiful number.
Day traders often calculate their batting average, too, although they may
call it their win-loss percentage or win ratio. It’s the same: the number of
successful trades to the total number of trades. Not all trades have to work
out for you to make money, but the more often the trades work for you, the
better your overall performance is likely to be. If you have both good performance and a high batting average, then your strategy may have less risk
than one that relies on just a handful of home run trades amidst a bunch of
strikeouts.

Standard deviation
Want something harder than your batting average? Turn to standard deviation, which is tricky to calculate without a spreadsheet but forms the core of
many risk measures out there.
The standard deviation calculation starts with the average return over a
given time period. This is the expected return, the return that, on average,
you get if you stick with your trading strategy. But any given week, month,
or year, the return may be very different from what you expect. The more
likely you are to get what you expect, the less risk you take. Insured bank savings accounts pay a low interest rate, but the rate is guaranteed. Day trading
offers the potential for much higher returns but also the possibility that you
could lose everything any one month — especially if you can’t stick to your
trading discipline.
The explanation is a lot easier to understand after you take a gander at
Figure 16-6.

279

280 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Calculating Standard Deviation
Step One:
Find the expected return
Percentage
Return
January
(0.02)
February
0.01
March
(0.00)
April
0.09
May
0.01
June
0.01
July
(0.08)
August
0.02
September
0.03
October
(0.04)
November
(0.01)
December
0.01
Figure 16-6: Total
0.02
Calculating E(R)
0.0018

standard
deviation.

Step Two:
Subtract expected return
from each reported return

Step Three:
Calculate the square
of each difference

R-E(R)
(0.0211)
0.0079
(0.0040)
0.0849
0.0082
0.0082
(0.0818)
0.0182
0.0282
(0.0418)
(0.0118)
0.0049
Step Four:
Step Five:

Sum of the squares:
Average of the sum of the squares
Square root of the average of the
sum of the squares, also known as
standard deviation

(R-E(R))^2
0.0004
0.0001
0.0000
0.0072
0.0001
0.0001
0.0067
0.0003
0.0008
0.0017
0.0001
0.0000
0.0176
0.0015
0.0383

As this figure shows, you calculate standard deviation through a series of
steps:
1. Take every return over the time period and then find the average. A
simple mean will do. Here, there are 12 months, so I added all 12 returns
and then divided by 12.
2. Subtract the average from each of the 12 returns. This calculation
shows how much any one return differs from the average, to give you a
sense of how much the returns can go back and forth.
3. Square the differences you found in Step 2 (multiply them by themselves) to get rid of the negative numbers. When you add those up, you
get a number known in statistics as the sum of the squares.
4. Find the average of the sum of the squares.
5. Calculate the square root of the average of the sum of the squares.
That square root from this step is the standard deviation, the magic
number you’re looking for.
Of course, you don’t have to do all of this math. Almost all trading software
calculates standard deviation automatically, but at least you now know where
the calculation comes from.
The higher the standard deviation, the riskier the strategy. This number can
help you determine how comfortable you are with different trading techniques
you may be backtesting, as well as whether you want to stick with your
current strategy.

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance
In academic terms, risk is the likelihood of getting any return other than the
return you expect. To most normal human beings, there’s no risk in getting
more than you expect; the problem is in getting less of a return than you were
counting on. This is a key limitation of risk evaluation. Of course, a few periods of better-than-expected returns are often followed by a run of worse-thanexpected returns as performance reverts to the mean.
The truism that past performance is no indicator of future results applies to
risk as well as to return.

Using benchmarks to evaluate
your performance
To understand your performance numbers, you need one more step: what
your performance is relative to what else you could be doing with your
money. The following sections have the details.

Performance relative to an index
The most common way to think about investment performance is relative
to a market index. These are the measures of the overall market that are
quoted all the time in the news, such as the Standard & Poor’s 500 and the
Dow Jones Industrial Average. Not only are these widely watched, but many
mutual funds and futures contracts are designed to mimic their performance.
That means investors can always do at least as well as the index itself, if their
investment objectives call for exposure to that part of the broad investment
market.
One big problem is that day traders often look at the wrong index for the type
of investment that they have. They’ll compare the performance of trading in
agricultural commodities to the Standard & Poor’s 500 when a commodities
index would be a better measure. And the indexes assume that the assets in
question are held for the long haul rather than traded every few minutes or
every few hours.
If you aren’t sure what index to use, check a financial website such as Yahoo!
Finance (http://finance.yahoo.com/indices) or check out the Market
Lab section of Barron’s (www.barrons.com), a weekly financial publication put out by Dow Jones & Company, the same people who publish The
Wall Street Journal and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Both of these have
lengthy lists of different stock, bond, and commodity indexes covering the
United States and the world. You can find the one that best matches your preferred markets and use it to compare your performance.
