
Early in the eighteenth century, the attention of Europe was directed to a very remarkable
instance of fanaticism, which has been claimed by the animal magnetists, as a proof of
their science. The convulsionaries of St. Medard, as they were called, assembled in great
numbers round the tomb of their favourite saint, the Jansenist priest Paris, and taught one
another how to fall into convulsions. They believed that St. Paris would cure all their
infirmities; and the number of hysterical women and weak-minded persons of all
descriptions that flocked to the tomb from far and near was so great, as daily to block up
all the avenues leading to the spot. Working themselves up to a pitch of excitement, they
went off one after the other into fits, while some of them, still in apparent possession of
all their faculties, voluntarily exposed themselves to sufferings, which on ordinary
occasions would have been sufficient to deprive them of life. The scenes that occurred
were a scandal to civilization and to religion -- a strange mixture of obscenity, absurdity,
and superstition. While some were praying on bended knees at the shrine of St. Paris,
others were shrieking and making the most hideous noises. The women especially
exerted themselves. On one side of the chapel there might be seen a score of them, all in
convulsions, while at another as many more, excited to a sort of frenzy, yielded
themselves up to gross indecencies. Some of them took an insane delight in being beaten
and trampled upon. One in particular, according to Montegre, whose account we quote
[Dictionnaire des Sciences Medicales -- Article "Convulsionnaires," par Montegre.] was
so enraptured with this ill usage, that nothing but the hardest blows would satisfy her.
While a fellow of herculean strength was beating her with all his might with a heavy bar
of iron, she kept continually urging him to renewed exertion. The harder he struck the
better she liked it, exclaiming all the while, "Well done, brother; well done; oh, how
pleasant it is! what good you are doing me! courage, my brother, courage; strike harder;
strike harder still!" Another of these fanatics had, if possible, a still greater love for a
beating. Carre de Montgeron, who relates the circumstance, was unable to satisfy her
with sixty blows of a large sledge hammer. He afterwards used the same weapon, with
the same degree of strength, for the sake of experiment, and succeeded in battering a hole
in a stone wall at the twenty-fifth stroke. Another woman, named Sonnet, laid herself
down on a red-hot brazier without flinching, and acquired for herself the nickname of the
salamander; while others, desirous of a more illustrious martyrdom, attempted to crucify
themselves. M. Deleuze, in his critical history of Animal Magnetism, attempts to prove
that this fanatical frenzy was produced by magnetism, and that these mad enthusiasts
magnetised each other without being aware of it. As well might he insist that the
fanaticism which tempts the Hindoo bigot to keep his arms stretched in a horizontal
position till the sinews wither, or his fingers closed upon his palms till the nails grow out
of the backs of his hands, is also an effect of magnetism!
For a period of sixty or seventy years, magnetism was almost wholly confined to
Germany. Men of sense and learning devoted their attention to the properties of the
loadstone; and one Father Hell, a jesuit, and professor of astronomy at the University of
Vienna, rendered himself famous by his magnetic cures. About the year 1771 or 1772, he
invented steel plates of a peculiar form, which he applied to the naked body, as a cure for
several diseases. In the year 1774, he communicated his system to Anthony Mesmer. The
latter improved upon the ideas of Father Hell, constructed a new theory of his own, and
became the founder of ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

It has been the fashion among the enemies of the new delusion to decry Mesmer as an
unprincipled adventurer, while his disciples have extolled him to the skies as a
regenerator of the human race. In nearly the same words, as the Rosicrucians applied to
their founders, he has been called the discoverer of the secret which brings man into more
intimate connexion with his Creator; the deliverer of the soul from the debasing trammels
of the flesh; the man who enables us to set time at defiance, and conquer the obstructions
of space. A careful sifting of his pretensions -- and examination of the evidence brought
forward to sustain them, will soon show which opinion is the more correct. That the
writer of these pages considers him in the light of a man, who deluding himself, was the
means of deluding others, may be inferred from his finding a place in these volumes, and
figuring among the Flamels, the Agrippas, the Borris, the Boehmens, and the Cagliostros.
He was born in May 1734, at Mersburg, in Swabia, and studied medicine at the
University of Vienna. He took his degrees in 1766, and chose the influence of the planets
on the human body as the subject of his inaugural dissertation. Having treated the matter
quite in the style of the old astrological physicians, he was exposed to some ridicule both
then and afterwards. Even at this early period some faint ideas of his great theory were
germinating in his mind. He maintained in his dissertation, "that the sun, moon, and fixed
stars mutually affect each other in their orbits; that they cause and direct in our earth a
flux and reflux not only in the sea, but in the atmosphere, and affect in a similar manner
all organized bodies through the medium of a subtile and mobile fluid, which pervades
the universe and associates all things together in mutual intercourse and harmony." This
influence, he said, was particularly exercised on the nervous system, and produced two
states which he called intension and remission, which seemed to him to account for the
different periodical revolutions observable in several maladies. When in after-life he met
with Father Hell, he was confirmed by that person's observations in the truth of many of
his own ideas. Having caused Hell to make him some magnetic plates, he determined to
try experiments with them himself for his further satisfaction.
He tried accordingly, and was astonished at his success. The faith of their wearers
operated wonders with the metallic plates. Mesmer made due reports to Father Hell of all
he had done, and the latter published them as the results of his own happy invention, and
speaking of Mesmer as a physician whom he had employed to work under him. Mesmer
took offence at being thus treated, considering himself a far greater personage than Father
Hell. He claimed the invention as his own, accused Hell of a breach of confidence, and
stigmatized him as a mean person, anxious to turn the discoveries of others to his own
account. Hell replied, and a very pretty quarrel was the result, which afforded small talk
for months to the literati of Vienna. Hell ultimately gained the victory. Mesmer, nothing
daunted, continued to promulgate his views, till he stumbled at last upon the animal
theory.
One of his patients was a young lady named Oesterline, who suffered under a convulsive
malady. Her attacks were periodical, and attended by a rush of blood to the head,
followed by delirium and syncope. These symptoms he soon succeeded in reducing under
his system of planetary influence, and imagined he could foretell the periods of accession

and remission. Having thus accounted satisfactorily to himself for the origin of the
disease, the idea struck him that he could operate a certain cure, if he could ascertain
beyond doubt what he had long believed, that there existed between the bodies which
compose our globe, an action equally reciprocal and similar to that of the heavenly
bodies, by means of which he could imitate artificially the periodical revolutions of the
flux and reflux beforementioned. He soon convinced himself that this action did exist.
When trying the metallic plates of Father Hell, he thought their efficacy depended on
their form; but he found afterwards that he could produce the same effects without using
them at all, merely by passing his hands downwards towards the feet of the patient -even when at a considerable distance.
This completed the theory of Mesmer. He wrote an account of his discovery to all the
learned societies of Europe, soliciting their investigation. The Academy of Sciences at
Berlin was the only one that answered him, and their answer was anything but favourable
to his system or flattering to himself. Still he was not discouraged. He maintained to all
who would listen to him that the magnetic matter, or fluid, pervaded all the universe -that every human body contained it, and could communicate the superabundance of it to
another by an exertion of the will. Writing to a friend from Vienna, he said, "I have
observed that the magnetic is almost the same thing as the electric fluid, and that it may
be propagated in the same manner, by means of intermediate bodies. Steel is not the only
substance adapted to this purpose. I have rendered paper, bread, wool, silk, stones,
leather, glass, wood, men, and dogs -- in short, everything I touched, magnetic to such a
degree that these substances produced the same effects as the loadstone on diseased
persons. I have charged jars with magnetic matter in the same way as is done with
electricity."
Mesmer did not long find his residence at Vienna as agreeable as he wished. His
pretensions were looked upon with contempt or indifference, and the case of
Mademoiselle Oesterline brought him less fame than notoriety. He determined to change
his sphere of action, and travelled into Swabia and Switzerland. In the latter country he
met with the celebrated Father Gassner, who, like Valentine Greatraks, amused himself
by casting out devils, and healing the sick by merely laying hands upon them. At his
approach puling girls fell into convulsions, and the hypochondriac fancied themselves
cured. His house was daily besieged by the lame, the blind, and the hysteric. Mesmer at
once acknowledged the efficacy of his cures, and declared that they were the obvious
result of his own newly-discovered power of magnetism. A few of the Father's patients
were forthwith subjected to the manipulations of Mesmer, and the same symptoms were
induced. He then tried his hand upon some paupers in the hospitals of Berne and Zurich,
and succeeded, according to his own account, but no other person's, in curing an
opththalmia and a gutta serena. With memorials of these achievements he returned to
Vienna, in the hope of silencing his enemies, or at least forcing them to respect his
newly-acquired reputation, and to examine his system more attentively.
His second appearance in that capital was not more auspicious than the first. He
undertook to cure a Mademoiselle Paradis, who was quite blind, and subject to
convulsions. He magnetised her several times, and then declared that she was cured; at

least, if she was not, it was her fault, and not his. An eminent oculist of that day, named
Birth, went to visit her, and declared that she was as blind as ever; while her family said
she was as much subject to convulsions as before. Mesmer persisted that she was cured.
Like the French philosopher, he would not allow facts to interfere with his theory. [An
enthusiastic philosopher, of whose name we are not informed, had constructed a very
satisfactory theory on some subject or other, and was not a little proud of it. "But the
facts, my dear fellow," said his friend, "the facts do not agree with your theory." -- "Don't
they," replied the philosopher, shrugging his shoulders, "then, taut pis pour les faits;" -so much the worse for the facts.] He declared that there was a conspiracy against him;
and that Mademoiselle Paradis, at the instigation of her family, feigned blindness in order
to injure his reputation!
The consequences of this pretended cure taught Mesmer that Vienna was not the sphere
for him. Paris, the idle, the debauched, the pleasure-hunting, the novelty-loving, was the
scene for a philosopher like him, and thither he repaired accordingly. He arrived at Paris
in 1778, and began modestly, by making himself and his theory known to the principal
physicians. At first, his encouragement was but slight; he found people more inclined to
laugh at than to patronise him. But he was a man who had great confidence in himself,
and of a perseverance which no difficulties could overcome. He hired a sumptuous
apartment, which he opened to all comers who chose to make trial of the new power of
nature. M. D'Eslon, a physician of great reputation, became a convert; and from that time,
Animal Magnetism, or, as some called it, Mesmerism, became the fashion in Paris. The
women were quite enthusiastic about it, and their admiring tattle wafted its fame through
every grade of society. Mesmer was the rage; and high and low, rich and poor, credulous
and unbelieving, all hastened to convince themselves of the power of this mighty
magician, who made such magnificent promises. Mesmer, who knew as well as any man
living the influence of the imagination, determined that, on that score, nothing should be
wanting to heighten the effect of the magnetic charm. In all Paris, there was not a house
so charmingly furnished as Monsieur Mesmer's. Richly-stained glass shed a dim religious
light on his spacious saloons, which were almost covered with mirrors. Orange blossoms
scented all the air of his corridors; incense of the most expensive kinds burned in antique
vases on his chimney-pieces; aeolian harps sighed melodious music from distant
chambers; while sometimes a sweet female voice, from above or below, stole softly upon
the mysterious silence that was kept in the house, and insisted upon from all visitors.
"Was ever anything so delightful?" cried all the Mrs. Wittitterley's of Paris, as they
thronged to his house in search of pleasant excitement; "so wonderful!" said the pseudophilosophers, who would believe anything if it were the fashion; "so amusing!" said the
worn-out debauchees, who had drained the cup of sensuality to its dregs, and who longed
to see lovely women in convulsions, with the hope that they might gain some new
emotions from the sight.
The following was the mode of operation: -- In the centre of the saloon was placed an
oval vessel, about four feet in its longest diameter, and one foot deep. In this were laid a
number of wine-bottles, filled with magnetised water, well corked-up, and disposed in
radii, with their necks outwards. Water was then poured into the vessel so as just to cover
the bottles, and filings of iron were thrown in occasionally to heighten the magnetic

effect. The vessel was then covered with an iron cover, pierced through with many holes,
and was called the baquet. From each hole issued a long moveable rod of iron, which the
patients were to apply to such parts of their bodies as were afflicted. Around this baquet
the patients were directed to sit, holding each other by the hand, and pressing their knees
together as closely as possible to facilitate the passage of the magnetic fluid from one to
the other.
Then came in the assistant magnetisers, generally strong, handsome young men, to pour
into the patient from their finger-tips fresh streams of the wondrous fluid. They embraced
the patients between the knees, rubbed them gently down the spine and the course of the
nerves, using gentle pressure upon the breasts of the ladies, and staring them out of
countenance to magnetise them by the eye! All this time the most rigorous silence was
maintained, with the exception of a few wild notes on the harmonica or the piano-forte,
or the melodious voice of a hidden opera-singer swelling softly at long intervals.
Gradually the cheeks of the ladies began to glow, their imaginations to become inflamed;
and off they went, one after the other, in convulsive fits. Some of them sobbed and tore
their hair, others laughed till the tears ran from their eyes, while others shrieked and
screamed and yelled till they became insensible altogether.
This was the crisis of the delirium. In the midst of it, the chief actor made his appearance,
waving his wand, like Prospero, to work new wonders. Dressed in a long robe of lilaccoloured silk, richly embroidered with gold flowers, bearing in his hand a white magnetic
rod; and, with a look of dignity which would have sat well on an eastern caliph, he
marched with solemn strides into the room. He awed the still sensible by his eye, and the
violence of their symptoms diminished. He stroked the insensible with his hands upon the
eyebrows and down the spine; traced figures upon their breast and abdomen with his long
white wand, and they were restored to consciousness. They became calm, acknowledged
his power, and said they felt streams of cold or burning vapour passing through their
frames, according as he waved his wand or his fingers before them.
"It is impossible," says M. Dupotet, "to conceive the sensation which Mesmer's
experiments created in Paris. No theological controversy, in the earlier ages of the
Catholic Church, was ever conducted with greater bitterness." His adversaries denied the
discovery; some calling him a quack, others a fool, and others, again, like the Abbe Fiard,
a man who had sold himself to the devil! His friends were as extravagant in their praise,
as his foes were in their censure. Paris was inundated with pamphlets upon the subject, as
many defending as attacking the doctrine. At court, the Queen expressed herself in favour
of it, and nothing else was to be heard of in society.
By the advice of M. D'Eslon, Mesmer challenged an examination of his doctrine by the
Faculty of Medicine. He proposed to select twenty-four patients, twelve of whom he
would treat magnetically, leaving the other twelve to be treated by the faculty according
to the old and approved methods. He also stipulated, that to prevent disputes, the
government should nominate certain persons who were not physicians, to be present at
the experiments; and that the object of the inquiry should be, not how these effects were

produced, but whether they were really efficacious in the cure of any disease. The faculty
objected to limit the inquiry in this manner, and the proposition fell to the ground.
Mesmer now wrote to Marie Antoinette, with the view of securing her influence in
obtaining for him the protection of government. He wished to have a chateau and its
lands given to him, with a handsome yearly income, that he might be enabled to continue
his experiments at leisure, untroubled by the persecution of his enemies. He hinted the
duty of governments to support men of science, and expressed his fear, that if he met no
more encouragement, he should be compelled to carry his great discovery to some other
land more willing to appreciate him. "In the eyes of your Majesty," said he, "four or five
hundred thousand francs, applied to a good purpose, are of no account. The welfare and
happiness of your people are everything. My discovery ought to be received and
rewarded with a munificence worthy of the monarch to whom I shall attach myself." The
government at last offered him a pension of twenty thousand francs, and the cross of the
order of St. Michael, if he had made any discovery in medicine, and would communicate
it to physicians nominated by the King. The latter part of the proposition was not
agreeable to Mesmer. He feared the unfavourable report of the King's physicians; and,
breaking off the negotiation, spoke of his disregard of money, and his wish to have his
discovery at once recognised by the government. He then retired to Spa, in a fit of
disgust, upon pretence of drinking the waters for the benefit of his health.
After he had left Paris, the Faculty of Medicine called upon M. D'Eslon, for the third and
last time, to renounce the doctrine of animal magnetism, or be expelled from their body.
M. D'Eslon, so far from doing this, declared that he had discovered new secrets, and
solicited further examination. A royal commission of the Faculty of Medicine was, in
consequence, appointed on the l2th of March 1784, seconded by another commission of
the Academie des Sciences, to investigate the phenomena and report upon them. The first
commission was composed of the principal physicians of Paris; while, among the
eminent men comprised in the latter, were Benjamin Franklin, Lavoisier, and Bailly, the
historian of astronomy. Mesmer was formally invited to appear before this body, but
absented himself from day to day, upon one pretence or another. M. D'Eslon was more
honest, because he thoroughly believed in the phenomena, which it is to be questioned if
Mesmer ever did, and regularly attended the sittings and performed experiments.
Bailly has thus described the scenes of which he was a witness in the course of this
investigation. "The sick persons, arranged in great numbers and in several rows around
the baquet, receive the magnetism by all these means: by the iron rods which convey it to
them from the baquet -- by the cords wound round their bodies -- by the connection of the
thumb, which conveys to them the magnetism of their neighbours -- and by the sounds of
a pianoforte, or of an agreeable voice, diffusing the magnetism in the air. The patients
were also directly magnetised by means of the finger and wand of the magnetiser moved
slowly before their faces, above or behind their heads, and on the diseased parts, always
observing the direction of the holes. The magnetiser acts by fixing his eyes on them. But
above all, they are magnetised by the application of his hands and the pressure of his
fingers on the hypochondres and on the regions of the abdomen; an application often
continued for a long time-sometimes for several hours.

"Meanwhile the patients in their different conditions present a very varied picture. Some
are calm, tranquil, and experience no effect. Others cough, spit, feel slight pains, local or
general heat, and have sweatings. Others again are agitated and tormented with
convulsions. These convulsions are remarkable in regard to the number affected with
them, to their duration and force. As soon as one begins to be convulsed, several others
are affected. The commissioners have observed some of these convulsions last more than
three hours. They are accompanied with expectorations of a muddy viscous water,
brought away by violent efforts. Sometimes streaks of blood have been observed in this
fluid. These convulsions are characterized by the precipitous, involuntary motion of all
the limbs, and of the whole body: by the construction of the throat -- by the leaping
motions of the hypochondria and the epigastrium -- by the dimness and wandering of the
eyes -- by piercing shrieks, tears, sobbing, and immoderate laughter. They are preceded
or followed by a state of languor or reverie, a kind of depression, and sometimes
drowsiness. The smallest sudden noise occasions a shuddering; and it was remarked, that
the change of measure in the airs played on the piano-forte had a great influence on the
patients. A quicker motion, a livelier melody, agitated them more, and renewed the
vivacity of their convulsions.
"Nothing is more astonishing than the spectacle of these convulsions. One who has not
seen them can form no idea of them. The spectator is as much astonished at the profound
repose of one portion of the patients as at the agitation of the rest - at the various
accidents which are repeated, and at the sympathies which are exhibited. Some of the
patients may be seen devoting their attention exclusively to one another, rushing towards
each other with open arms, smiling, soothing, and manifesting every symptom of
attachment and affection. All are under the power of the magnetiser; it matters not in
what state of drowsiness they may be, the sound of his voice -- a look, a motion of his
hand -- brings them out of it. Among the patients in convulsions there are always
observed a great many women, and very few men." [Rapport des Commissaires, redige
par M. Bailly. -- Paris, 1784.]
These experiments lasted for about five months. They had hardly commenced, before
Mesmer, alarmed at the loss both of fame and profit, determined to return to Paris. Some
patients of rank and fortune, enthusiastic believers in his doctrine, had followed him to
Spa. One of them named Bergasse, proposed to open a subscription for him, of one
hundred shares, at one hundred louis each, on condition that he would disclose his secret
to the subscribers, who were to be permitted to make whatever use they pleased of it.
Mesmer readily embraced the proposal; and such was the infatuation, that the
subscription was not only filled in a few days, but exceeded by no less a sum than one
hundred and forty thousand francs.
