
movement on the Salomon trading floor. A man from corporates came at
verbal expression from a more novel angle. This man took a different,
more thoroughly intimidating approach to us. The Human Piranha had
rattled the front-row people, but to the back-row people he was just
weird. The man from corporates rattled everyone.
He arrived early one morning unannounced, about nine weeks into
the program. His name was . . . well, let's call him Sangfroid, for the ice
water that coursed through his veins. A mild British accent heightened
the chill that shot through the air when he spoke. He was sufficiently
tall to see out over the entire classroom, which was twelve seats across
and extended back perhaps fifteen rows. An aisle of steps ran through
the room, front to back. For a minute after he arrived, he said nothing. A
minute seems longer when it belongs exclusively to a tall, chilly man in a
gray suit staring at 127 wired trainees.
Sangfroid then walked up the aisle. At times like this the back row
inclined to craven panic. You could hear them whispering: "Why's he
coming back here? He can't do that. What. . . is ... he . . . doing: But he
stopped before he reached the back. He picked out someone sitting on
the edge of his seat in the middle of the room and asked, "What is your
name?"
"Ron Rosenberg," said the trainee.
"Well, Ron," said Sangfroid, "what is LIBOR today?"
LIBOR? LIBOR? A dozen back-row people whispered to the person next
to them, "What the fuck is LIBOR?" LIBOR is an acronym for London
interbank offered rate; it is the interest rate in London at which one
bank lends to another; and it is available at 8:00 A.M. London time, or
3:00 A.M. New York time That gave the trainee four whole hours to find
out the LIBOR rate before class began at 7:00 A.M. Along with every
other fact in the bond markets, Sangfroid expected us to have LIBOR on
the tips of our tongues.
"This morning," said Ron, "LIBOR is seven-point-two-five percent, which
puts it up twenty-five basis points from yesterday." Amazing. Sangfroid
had called on the one person in the class who actually knew the LIBOR
rate. At least half the class couldn't have told you what LIBOR meant,
much less where it had traded that day.
Nevertheless, Sangfroid took the answer in stride; he did not even
congratulate Rosenberg. He resumed his stroll toward the back of the

class, and the tension rose with each step.
"You," he said to a back-row person, "what is your name?"
"Bill Lewis," said the trainee.
"Bill, where is the TED spread this morning?" Sangfroid said, turning up
the heat. The TED spread was the difference between the LIBOR rate
and the interest rate on three-month U.S. treasury bills. The bill rate
became available only a half hour before class started. It didn't
matter. Lewis hadn't a clue to anything. With Lewis, ignorance was a
matter of principle. He reddened, bit his lip, and looked defiantly at
Sangfroid. "I don't know."
"Why not?" shot back Sangfroid. - "I didn't look at it this morning," said
Lewis.
Contact! This is exactly what Sangfroid had ventured into the back of
the room to find. Ignorance. Sloth. Lack of commitment to the cause.
This was unacceptable, he told us. A Salomon trainee had to be current
and competent, as Gutfreund liked to say. No wonder a very poor
impression of us was being formed on the trading floor. And so on. Then
he left, but before he did, he let us know that he would be stopping in
from time to time.
Sangfroid and the Human Piranha turned out to be two of my favorite
people on the forty-first floor. There was no bullshit about them. They
were brutal, but they were also honest and, I think, fair. The problems
on 41 were caused by people who were tough but unfair, otherwise known,
under the breath of many a trainee, as flaming assholes. You survived the
Human Piranha and Sir Sangfroid by simply knowing what you were about.
How, though, did you survive a trader who threw a phone at your head
every other time you passed his desk? How did a woman cope with a
married managing director who tried to seduce her whenever he found
her alone? The training program wasn't a survival course, but sometimes
a person came through who put the horrors of 41 into perspective. For
me it was a young bond salesman, just a year out of the training program
and at work on 41, named Richard O'Grady.
When O'Grady entered the classroom, the first thing he did was to have
the video that usually recorded events shut off. Then he closed the
door. Then he checked for eavesdroppers on the ledges outside the
twenty-third-floor windows. Only then did he sit down.
He began by telling us how he had come to Salomon. He had been one of

the firm's lawyers. The firm's lawyers, when they saw how good traders
had it, often ended up as traders themselves. The firm had actually
invited O'Grady to apply. He interviewed on a Friday afternoon. His first
meeting was with a managing director named Lee Kirn-mell (at this
writing a member of the executive committee). When O'Grady walked
into Kimmell's office, Kimmell was reading his resume. He looked up from
the resume and said, "Amherst Phi Beta
Kappa, star athlete, Harvard Law School, you must get laid a lot."
O'Grady laughed (what else do you do?).
"What's so funny?" asked Kimmell.
"The thought that I get laid a lot," said O'Grady.
"That's not funny," said Kimmell, a viciousness coming into his voice. "How
much do you get laid?"
"That's none of your business," said O'Grady.
Kimmell slammed his fist on his desk. "Don't give me that crap. If I want
to know, you tell me. Understand?"
Somehow O'Grady squirmed through this interview and others, until, at
the end of the day, he found himself facing the same man who had given
me my job, Leo Corbett.
"So, Dick," said Corbett, "what would you say if I offered you a job?"
"Well," said O'Grady, "I'd like to work at Salomon, but I'd also like to go
home and think it over for a day or two."
"You sound more like a lawyer than a trader," said Corbett.
"Leo, I'm not making a trade; I'm making an investment," said O'Grady.
"I don't want to hear any of that Harvard Law School clever bullshit,"
said Corbett. "I'm beginning to think you would be a real mistake. . . . I'm
going to walk out of here and come back in ten minutes, and when I come
back, I want an answer."
O'Grady's first reaction, he said, was that he had just made a
catastrophic error in judgment. Then he thought about it like a human
being (what was so refreshing about O'Grady was that unlike the other
men from 41, he seemed genuinely human). Salomon had invited him to
interview. Where did these butt-heads get off issuing ultimatums?
O'Grady worked himself into an Irish rage. Corbett was gone far longer
than he promised, making O'Grady even angrier.
"Well..." said Corbett, upon his return.
"Well, I wouldn't work here for all the money in the world," said

O'Grady. "I have never met more assholes in my entire life. Take your
job and stick it up your ass."
"Now I am finally beginning to hear something I like," said Corbett.
"That's the first smart thing you've said all day."
O'Grady stormed out of Salomon Brothers and took a job with another
Wall Street firm.
But that was only the beginning of the story. The story, O'Grady said,
resumed a year after he had told Leo Corbett where to stick his job
offer. Salomon had called him again. It had apologized for the way it had
behaved. It had been smart to do so because O'Grady became not only
an excellent bond salesman but also a rare and much needed example of
goodness on the trading floor (I think I once even saw him give spare
change to a beggar). The surprise was not that Salomon called him, but
that O'Grady had agreed to listen. The only thing history teaches us, a
wise man once said, is that history doesn't teach us anything. O'Grady
took a job with Salomon Brothers.
And now he was about to tell us what we wanted to know. "So you want to
know how to deal with those assholes, don't you?" he said. Trainees sort
of nodded their heads. O'Grady said he had discovered the secret
earlier than most. When he was just starting out, he said, he had an
experience that taught him a lesson.
He had been a flunky for a senior bond salesman namea Penn King, a tall
blond Big Swinging Dick if ever there was one. One day King told him to
find prices on four bonds for a very large customer, Morgan Guaranty.
O'Grady therefore asked the relevant trader for prices. When the
trader saw him, however, he said, "What the fuck do you want?"
"Just a few prices," said O'Grady.
"I'm busy," said the trader. Oh, well, thought O'Grady, /'// see if I can
find the prices on the Quotron machine.
As O'Grady fiddled with the keyboard of the Quotron—it resembles a
personal computer—Penn King demanded the prices for his customer. "I
told you to get the prices, goddammit," he said. So O'Grady race-walked
back to ask the trader again. "Fuck it," said the trader, "here, read it off
the sheets," and handed O'Grady a sheet listing bond prices. O'Grady
returned to his desk only to find that while there were plenty of prices
on the sheet, they weren't the prices he needed.
"Where are the goddamn prices?" asked Penn.

O'Grady explained what had transpired between himself and the trader
to that point.
"Then this is what you do, you hear me," said a completely pissed-off
Penn King. "You go over to that asshole and you say, 'Look, asshole, since
you were so fucking helpful the first time I asked, maybe you could give
me the goddamn prices for Morgan Guaranty.' "
So O'Grady went back to the trader. He figured he could edit the
request, you know, take out the part about the asshole and being fuckin'
helpful. He had his sanitized version in his mind.
"Look, I'm really sorry to be such a pain in the neck," he was planning to
say, "but Morgan Guaranty is one of our biggest customers, and we need
your help. . . ."
But when he reached the trader, the trader rose to his feet and
screamed. "What the fuck are you doing back here? I told you: / . . .
am . . . busy."
"Look, asshole," said O'Grady, forgetting the sanitized version, "since
you were so fucking helpful the first time I asked, maybe you would be
so kind to give me the goddamn prices now." The trader fell back in his
chair. O'Grady was, conveniently, about twice the size of the trader. He
stood over the trader and stared for about a minute. "Asshole," he
shouted again, for effect.
All of a sudden the trader looked spooked. "Pennnnn!" he half screamed,
half whined across the floor to O'Grady's boss. "What the fuck is it with
this guy?"
Penn gave an innocent little shrug as if to say he didn't have the faintest
idea.
O'Grady walked back to his seat, to a standing ovation from three or
four other bond salesmen who had watched the scene develop and a big
grin from Penn. Sure enough, not two minutes later, the trader came to
him with the prices.
"And after that," said O'Grady to a spellbound training program, "he
didn't fuck with me again."
As you might imagine, this threw the back row into frenzied delight; it
had them stomping on the floor like bleacher bums after a grand slam. It
drove a lump into the throats of the front row. O'Grady was by training
and disposition a refined and relaxed man. True, he had a rogue streak of
Irish in him, but if anyone was going to sidestep the Neanderthal

approach to life on 41, it would have been O'Grady. What was the moral
of the story? Easy. There was no getting around having to knock someone
down to win a seat on 41, even if you graduated Phi Beta Kappa from
Amherst and the Harvard Law School, -were a star athlete, and got laid a
lot. What was the secret to dealing with the assholes? "Lift weights or
learn karate," said O'Grady.
As if to confirm this impression, following on the heels of O'Grady came
the mortgage trading department. With the possible exception of
John Meriwether, the mortgage traders were the firm's Biggest
Swinging Dicks. The mortgage department was the most profitable area
of the firm, and the place trainees most desperately wanted to work. It
could afford to be nasty. It concluded the classroom stage of our
training.
The mortgage trading desks on 41 were between the elevators and the
corner in which I had chosen to hide. I had selected my corner with care.
It housed a friendly managing director and his small team of mostly
nonviolent persons. This managing director had, in effect, promised to
save me from Equities in Dallas. He also gave me temporary shelter. Each
day as I leaped off the elevator onto 41 and sprinted head down for the
cover of my MD, I had to decide whether to walk through the mortgage
trading desks. And each day I decided I had better not. The mortgage
traders emitted such evil vibes that I carved a wide loop around them
every afternoon. Even then I felt uneasy. They were known for hurling
phones at the heads of trainees and were said to have installed extralong cords to increase their range. I later found out that they were just
as likely to use the phone bombs on seasoned professionals and that
people who had been with Salomon Brothers for years and had
weathered every kind of abuse still refused to walk through the
mortgage department. Every firm on Wall Street has its baddest dudes,
and these were ours.
In spite of my craven panic in the presence of mortgage traders I was
curious about their business and their boss, Lewie Ranieri. All Salomon
trainees were curious about Ranieri. Lewie Ranieri was the wild and woolly
genius, the Salomon legend who began in the mail-room, worked his way
onto the trading floor, and created a market in America (and was
starting a similar one in Britain) for mortgage bonds. Ranieri was
Salomon, and Salomon was Ranieri. He was constantly being held out as an

example of all that was special about our firm. He was evidence that the
trading floor was a meritocracy. At Salomon Brothers, because of what
Ranieri had achieved, a great deal seemed possible that otherwise might
have not. I had never seen the great man himself. But I had read about
him. We had been told he would speak to us.
He didn't show. Instead he sent three senior mortgage traders to
represent his department. The three of them together could have easily
weighed nine hundred pounds. They stood together at the front of the
room in formation, the one in the middle smoking the biggest cigar I've
ever seen. Cheap, but large. He's the one I remember.
He didn't say anything, just grunted and laughed when a trainee asked a
question. Dozens of trainees wanted to trade mortgage bonds. So they
asked plenty of questions, but they got no answers. When once a trainee
asked something stupid, the man with the cigar gave the only response in
English I recall. He said, "So, you wanna be a mortgage trader." Then all
three of the traders laughed together and sounded like a fleet of
tugboats blowing their horns.
The sad student had wanted to be a mortgage trader. So had thirty-five
others. In the end, five were chosen. I was not, which was fine by me. I
was shipped to London to become a bond salesman. In due course I shall
return to my private education on the London trading floor. But here it is
time to follow the story of the mortgage traders, for not only were they
the soul of the firm, they were a microcosm of Wall Street in the 1980s.
The mortgage market was one of two or three textbook cases that
illustrated the change sweeping the world of finance. I followed our
mortgage traders closely from my seat in London, mostly because I was
intrigued that such awful-looking people could do so well for themselves.
I was fascinated by Ranieri. For several years running he and his traders
made more money than anyone on Wall Street. I didn't like them one bit,
but that was probably a point in their favor. Their presence was a sign of
the health of the firm, just as mine was a sign of the illness. If the
mortgage traders left Salomon, I figured, we'd had it. There would be
nothing remaining but a bunch of nice guys.
Chapter Five
A Brotherhood of Hoods
I don't do favors. I accumulate debts. —Ancient Sicilian motto
IT WAS January 1985, and Matty Oliva was fresh from Harvard

University and the Salomon Brothers training program. The good news
was he had landed a plum job on the mortgage trading desk. The bad
news was that for his first full year on the desk he would be an object of
abuse. The senior mortgage traders maintained that abuse led to
enlightenment. It purged trainees of pretension and made them realize
they were the lowest of all God's creations. The traders were to blame
for the awful thing about to happen to Matty Oliva.
A couple of traders regularly asked Matty to fetch their lunch. They'd
holler at him, "Hey, geek, how about some food!" In their less ornery
moments they said, almost politely, "About that time, ain't it, Matty?"
There was no need to be polite to Matty because Matty was a slave.
There was no need to tell him exactly what to get because as every
trainee knew, mortgage traders ate anything at any time.
Just as some people are mean drunks, mortgage traders were mean
gluttons. Nothing angered them more than being without food, unless it
was being interrupted while they ate. In other words, they were not the
sort of hyperthyroid fat people who meekly sip Diet Cokes all day and
prompt one to ask, "So how did he get fat, he never eats?" Nor were
they the sort of jolly fat people, like Ed McMahon, who are loved
because they don't threaten anybody. Mortgage traders were the sort
of fat people who grunt from the belly and throw their weight around,
like sumo wrestlers. When asked to find food, a trainee on the mortgage
desk simply brought back as much of everything as he could carry.
On that fateful January day the beleaguered Matty climbed the five
flights of stairs from the trading floor to the cafeteria. It was
demeaning to be seen by one's fellow trainees as a total mortgage slave.
The other trainees enjoyed the status of almost free men. Matty quickly
filled as many plastic trays as he could carry with fries, burgers, Cokes,
candy, and a couple of dozen chocolate chip cookies, products of a
kitchen known throughout Wall Street for the regular warnings it
received from the health inspectors of New York City. Then he sneaked
past the security guard without paying. Call it a small triumph. Call it an
assertion of self. Call it a little cry of freedom from a much abused soul.
Or simply call it economical. Dining and dashing was not unusual in the
Salomon Brothers cafeteria. Stealing food wasn't Matty's big mistake.
His big mistake was to brag to one of the fat traders how he had done it.
That afternoon Matty received a phone call from a man who claimed to

work for the "special projects division of the Securities and Exchange
Commission." The SEC, this man explained, had been granted jurisdiction
over Wall Street's cafeterias, and he was investigating a reported theft
of three trays of food from the Salomon Brothers cafeteria. Would
Matty know anything about that?
Ha-ha-ha, said Matty. Very funny.
No, said the officer, we're very serious. The ethical standards of Wall
Street have to be monitored at all levels.
Matty chuckled again and hung up.
Matty arrived the next morning to find Michael Mortara, a Salomon
Brothers managing director, waiting for him. Mortara was the head of
mortgage trading. It was Mortara who had spoken to our training
program. Wits on the Salomon trading floor did imitations of Mortara.
They ranged from sounding like Marion Brando in The Godfather to
sounding like Marion Brando in/4 Streetcar Named Desire.
Mortara looked upset. He asked Matty into his office. "Matty, I just got
a call from the special projects division of the SEC, and I don't know
what to do about it. Is it true that you have been stealing food from our
cafeteria?" he asked.
Matty nodded.
"What were you thinking? I really don't know what is going to happen
now. Look, go back to your desk, and I'll get back to you. This is a
problem," said Mortara.
The rest of the day Matty looked as frantic as a lottery winner who
had lost his ticket. Although he was a young, much abused trainee trader,
he was nevertheless on the verge of Big Swinging Dickhood. The
American mortgage market was growing faster than any other capital
market in the world, making trading mortgages the best job in the firm.
As it was the best job on the Salomon Brothers trading floor in 1985, it
was also quite possibly the best job on Wall Street since the Salomon
trading floor dominated Wall Street.
After two years of trading at Salomon, a young mortgage trader basked
in a steady flow of offers from Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, Goldman
Sachs, Drexel Burnham, and Morgan Stanley, all of which were desperate
to bottle the Salomon Brothers mortgage magic. These offers
guaranteed at least a half million dollars a year plus a cut of trading
profits. Matty was a first-year trader. By his fourth year, if he were

good at his job, he would be making a million dollars before taxes. It was
a good time and a great place to be twenty-two years old, and Matty,
through luck and effort, had put himself precisely where he wished to
be. Now this: busted by the SEC in the cafeteria. How serious could it
be? The other mortgage traders watched him fret, allowed him for a day
to mull over life's reversals.
The next morning Matty was told to report to Gutfreund's office. Matty
had never met John Gutfreund, norshouldhe have. "Gutfreund," one
mortgage trader explained to Matty, "doesn't fool around with low
people." If Gutfreund wished to see him, the theft was scandalous.
Gutfreund's office was about twenty yards away from Matty's seat. It
was normally empty. In the course of a long and happy career with
Salomon a person might never set foot inside. Bad things happened in the
darkness of that office, to people far more able to defend themselves
than Matty. Any hope Matty nourished about the reason for the meeting
died when he saw Mortara seated beside Gutfreund in the office. Matty
entered.
Gutfreund went on for some time about how unfunny it was to steal
cheeseburgers from the cafeteria. Then he said, "Matthew, I have just
concluded a long and painful meeting with the Salomon Brothers
executive committee, and we've decided"—long pause—"to let you stay
for now. All I can say now is that there are further issues we need to
iron out with the SEC in Washington. We'll be back to you."
All a man has in the markets is his word, his honor. The training program
heard that message each year from John Gutfreund. As Matty
was new to the business, he might even have believed it. In any case,
Matty figured his career was ruined. The theft would haunt him for as
long as he remained on Wall Street. Whenever the SEC came snooping
for insider traders or food snatchers, Matty would be a suspect. He'd
have a record. People would whisper his name.
When Matty returned to his seat on the mortgage desk, he appeared to
have witnessed the end of the world. For the twenty or so other
mortgage traders the sight was too much to bear. They tried to hide
their snickers behind their Quotron machines. Matty looked around him,
however, and saw not only that everyone was laughing but that everyone
was laughing at him. He had been made the victim of what was known in
the department as a goof. It had been Mortara's idea, but Mortara
