
Currencies versus Equities: The S&P 500 as Forex Indicator
The S&P 500 may be the most widely watched single barometer of risk appetite. That's not so
surprising, given that it has the largest market capitalization of any stock index and is the prime index
of the world's largest economy. However, if you trade at times of the day when the U.S. markets are
closed, you'd need to watch the major indexes for the markets that are open. For example, those
trading during the Asian session would want to keep an eye on the Nikkei, Shanghai, and Hang Seng
indexes at a minimum. The only warning with watching these is that they often simply play catch-up to
whatever happened the night before in New York, unless some significant news breaks while these
regions are trading.

Risk Currencies versus Safe Haven Currencies
Again, (it's worth repeating) as noted in Chapter 2, certain major currencies are referred to as the risk
currencies, because they tend to move in the same direction as other risk assets like these major
global stock indexes (not because they are any less safe a store of value). The risk currencies are,
ranked in order of riskiness (i.e., starting with the most correlated to other risk assets):

For example, when stocks are moving sharply higher, we would expect the AUD to be doing best,
followed by the NZD, CAD, and so on. In reality they rarely perform in that precise order, but that's
the general idea.
The other major currencies, referred to as safe haven currencies, tend to move in the opposite
direction of risk assets like global stock indexes (not because they are necessarily any safer as stores
of value). In times of fear, stocks and risk currencies tend to sell off, and these safe haven currencies,
along with other safe haven assets like AAA-rated bonds, tend to rise in value. The safe havens are,
ranked in order of how well they generally perform in times of fear (and how poorly they do when
risk assets are rising): the JPY, USD, and CHF.
Because currencies trade in pairs, in times of optimism (aka risk appetite) the classic pairs to buy
are those with a highly ranked risk base currency and safe haven counter currency, like the AUDJPY,
AUDUSD, NZDJPY, NZDUSD, EURUSD, and so on. Remember, pairs move up or down depending
on whether the base currency (the one on the left) is moving up or down relative to the counter
currency (the one on the right).
Similarly, in times of fear, traders do the opposite. Risk pairs like those just mentioned are shorted,
and traders go long on pairs with a relatively safe base currency versus its counter currency, like the
USDCAD.

WHY THESE RELATIONSHIPS MATTER
Here are reasons why these relationships are important.

They Give You a Fast, Big Picture
Just knowing how certain currencies and pairs are supposed to move relative to stocks, as
represented by the major global indexes like the S&P 500, is incredibly valuable for giving you a
quick big picture of how forex markets should be behaving.
For example, if during the Asian session you see that the major Asian indexes are up, you'd expect
to see the AUD, NZD, CAD, EUR, and GBP up versus the safe haven currencies, more or less in that
order. If not, that's something you may want to investigate if one of the currencies or pairs you're
watching is not behaving as it should. Sometimes the answer is obvious, sometimes not.
For example, if China comes out with great monthly data, that's usually very bullish for risk assets
given China's importance as a major growth engine. Risk currencies on the daily charts should be

strong, especially the AUD, because China is Australia's biggest export customer. If, however, the
AUD is weak that day, or weak against a specific currency, an AUD trader would want to know why.
Let's say on this day of great China data the AUDUSD is flat or down. Possible explanations
include that there was some bad Australian economic news, or there was some U.S. economic news
that raised expectations about U.S. interest rates that is helping the USD more than the Chinese data
helps the AUD. Those watching or trading a pair involving the AUD would want to check further in
order to know if the explanation influenced their current trading plan.

Divergences from Normal Correlations Can Be Significant
In the previous chapter we saw how divergences from normal correlations between trends of
momentum oscillators and an asset may warn of a coming trend reversal.
When trends of assets that normally correlate suddenly diverge, that kind of divergence can signal a
coming trend reversal for one of them, because divergences often mean that one of the markets hasn't
yet recognized a change in conditions. When it does, its trend will reverse and fall back into its
normal correlation with the other trend. Those who identify these divergences first and interpret them
correctly get advance notice of a trend change and a chance at big, easy profits.
For example, note how in the charts in Figure 9.2, during the period of July 4 to 8, 2011, the S&P
500 (top) was moving higher, suggesting rising risk appetite. Yet the EURUSD (bottom) trend, which
tends to move in the same direction as other risk assets like this index, was falling. Which market was
right, and which market was due for a reversal?
FIGURE 9.2 S&P 500 versus EURUSD Daily Charts, July 15 to 26, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Figure 9.2 is a great example illustrating why any investor or trader needs to be familiar with forex
markets, especially those involved with equities. Forex markets often lead equities markets. Those
watching the EURUSD had advance warning that the S&P 500 could be pulling back, which it soon
did. Those who understood the fundamental drivers of the EURUSD knew why.

They knew that the reason for this divergence in trends was a rising risk of a Greek sovereign bond
default, which could set off a wave of other sovereign defaults. Borrowing costs for other EU nations
with high debt/GDP ratios would rise beyond their means with perceived higher risk, pushing them
toward default as their normal bond payments became due. That in turn risked a wave of defaults
among the banks that held the bonds, and so risked another systemic banking crisis similar to that of
2008 when Lehman Brothers bank collapsed. Indeed that risk was rising for a variety of reasons.
This information was valuable in a number of ways. For example:
Currency traders who noted this divergence knew that market anxiety about Greece and the EU
was rising, and that could easily drag down all other risk assets and boost safe haven assets, as it
had in the spring of 2010.
These investors would thus be better prepared to short major indexes like the S&P 500 (and
other risk assets) once these indexes showed signs of reversing lower.
Traders viewing the EURUSD would rightly suspect the USD should be stronger versus other
currencies, given the extra push it would be getting from the EUR's decline.
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, one of the reasons that everyone needs some forex background is
that forex markets (perhaps due to their more international focus) often reflect changing conditions
before other markets do, certainly before the equities herd, who are typically the last to know
(perhaps because equities traders tend to focus on the national or regional stock exchange). That
advance knowledge can make you a better trader or investor, no matter what market you're in.
By the way, on July 13 the EURUSD also provided advance warning that the S&P 500 would be
heading higher. Note the strong upward candle, suggesting optimism about the EU crisis. Fears about
the EU had been pressuring the S&P 500, so it's not surprising that calming about the EU, as reflected
by the rising EURUSD, would soon bring a move up in the S&P 500. Stock traders smart enough to
follow forex trends had a profitable advantage in this case.
These examples highlight another key point about intermarket analysis: the cause/effect relationship
between asset classes can change.
Sometimes the EURUSD moves the S&P 500: In these examples markets in general were moving
with the EU crisis, so not surprisingly the EURUSD was leading the S&P 500. Most of the time,
however, the EURUSD will move with general risk appetite reflected by (but not necessarily caused
by) the moves in the S&P 500.
As we saw above, we can also see temporary changes in correlations between the S&P 500 and
oil. Usually oil follows the S&P 500 because signs of growth suggest rising demand for oil.
However, when oil prices really spike, both the correlation and driver of that correlation change
completely. Not only do oil and stocks start moving in opposite directions, but also oil prices drive
stock prices. That's because when oil prices spike too quickly, that acts like an added tax that drains
cash away from consumer and business spending and so limits growth.

The USD versus Equities
The USD is the most widely traded currency by far; as we saw in Figure 2.5 in Chapter 2, it's part of
over 80 percent of all forex pair volume. It is also usually the most popular counterpart for all other
currencies, so its strength influences everything in forex. That's why we're giving it some extra
attention.

As previously noted, USD tends to move in the opposite direction of major stock indexes like the
S&P 500. So if you see the major indexes rising, the USD is generally moving lower versus higherrisk currencies and other risk assets.
Why is this? In recent years the USD has behaved as a safe haven currency. The U.S. economy has
been struggling and the Federal Reserve has kept rates very low. Thus there has been little reason for
investors to hold low-yielding dollars when stocks and other risk assets have provided higher returns,
except in times of fear. So risk assets like stocks or higher-yielding currencies do better in times of
optimism, aka “risk on” environments. Similarly, when markets are scared, risk assets sell off as
demand rises for safe haven assets like the USD (as well as other safe haven assets like the JPY,
CHF, and AAA-rated bonds).

The USD and Stocks: Correlation, but Not Causation
Again, as previously noted (but well worth repeating) a common misconception, often repeated in the
popular financial media by writers who should know better (but don't because they don't watch how
currencies and stock indexes interact), is that the USD directly influences stocks, and that a weak
USD sends stocks higher and vice versa. This is incorrect, a confusion between correlation and
causation. While the two move in opposite directions, that's only because the USD is a safe haven and
stocks are risk assets.
The mistaken reasoning behind the supposed direct USD-U.S. stocks connection is that a higher
USD hurts U.S. exports and thus drives stocks lower. However, based on that reasoning, non-U.S.
stock indexes, like the DAX, Nikkei, or Shanghai, particularly of nations that export heavily to the
United States, should rise when the USD rises, because a strong dollar makes their exports cheaper.
Yet, in fact, global stock indexes tend to move in the same direction as US indexes (on a weekly if not
daily basis) opposite the USD.
Why? Because these, too, like U.S. stock indexes, are risk assets. Why the confusion about the
nature of the relationship between stocks and the USD? Probably from the sheer ignorance that comes
from having a single region market focus, like following only the U.S. financial markets or not having
a basic understanding of intermarket analysis. That can be a costly mistake.
Like we said at the start, everyone who manages one's own investments needs some forex (and
commodity, bond, and macroeconomic) background.

Currencies versus Currencies: How They Correlate
Like all the intermarket analysis topics we're introducing, currency correlations are a large and
worthy topic. So as time permits, learn how the pairs and currencies you trade behave relative to
others. To get started, use search terms like:
Common currency correlations.
USD correlations.
USDJPY correlations and currency pairs.
We already know that risk currencies should all move in the same direction, and so should the safe
haven group.
There are other important correlations between currencies, and you need to be aware of them

because when they break down, that can be a signal of changing conditions from which you can profit
if you understand what's happening before the rest of the crowd does. Here are just two examples.

Trade-Driven Correlations
If one nation does a large part of its foreign trade with another, that trade relationship will influence
the related currencies. As with many typical correlations, these don't always hold, especially in the
short term, but they are worth knowing. For example, a number of currencies have a degree of
positive correlation due to their close trade relationships of their respective economies. We've
already mentioned the AUD's strong connection to China because China is Australia's primary export
customer. Here are a few other trade driven forex correlations.
AUD versus NZD: Their correlation goes beyond their both being risk currencies. They tend to
be very highly correlated, even though their economies are quite different, because they are major
trading partners with each other.
USD versus CAD: While the CAD and USD are on different sides of the risk spectrum, the US
accounts for about 75% of Canadian exports. Thus a rising CAD versus the USD hurts Canadian
export revenues, and that fact limits the pair's volatility.
EUR versus CHF: About 60 percent of Swiss exports go to the surrounding Euro-zone and the
rest of Europe. So even though the CHF is a safe haven currency and the EUR is a risk currency,
when times in the EU are very bad, the CHF tends to drop, as we saw during both bouts of EU
debt crises in the spring of 2010 and latter part of 2011. The direct reasons were somewhat
different (in 2011 the CHF dropped on direct Swiss intervention to keep the CHF from rising too
much versus the EUR), but the underlying driver was the same. Switzerland needs to export to the
EU, and so a falling EURCHF hurts Swiss exports and growth.

Risk versus Safe Haven Currency Correlations
Of course, safe haven and risk currencies will tend to move in opposite directions. That means that
pairs comprised of currencies on extreme opposite ends of the risk spectrum tend to move most with
changes in risk appetite, because each half should be moving strongly in the opposite direction. For
example, take the AUDJPY. The AUD has tended to be the highest-yielding currency and hence the
highest-ranking risk currency. It's the first currency traders think about when considering a carry trade.
The JPY has tended to be the lowest-yielding currency and hence the most safe haven currency. It's a
classic funding currency, one that's sold in order to buy a higher-yielding currency (though the USD
has been competing for this role, too, with its ultralow yields). Thus the AUDJPY is a match of the
highest-ranking and lowest-ranking risk currencies, so we expect it to be especially sensitive to
changes in risk appetite. One way to play strong risk appetite is to be long the AUDJPY. However, in
times of fear, this pair can be heavily sold. The same can be said for the AUD or NZD versus other
safe havens like the USD and CHF.

USD and EUR: A Negative Correlation Driven by Both Risk and
Liquidity
The EURUSD is one pair everyone in any market needs to follow. Here are the key things to know

about it.
With its low yield and high liquidity (availability), the USD has been a safety currency in recent
years, especially in times of great fear when liquidity is the top priority, and the USD is the world's
most liquid currency by far. When big market-moving players need to be in cash, they can always get
dollars. In contrast, with its higher rate, the EUR is a risk currency. That alone would cause the two to
move in opposite directions.
However, their negative correlation is driven not only by risk appetite, but also by their being the
two most widely held currencies. After the USD, the EUR is the next most widely traded currency.
The EURUSD pair comprises almost a third of all forex trade. So every time three Euros are
bought, almost a dollar is sold, and vice versa. Thus these two currencies tend to push each other in
opposite directions like children on a seesaw; strength in one of these tends to bring weakness in the
other. They have a very strong, consistent negative correlation.
For example, during the July 4 to 8, 2011, period (shown in Figure 9.2), the EUR's weakness meant
the USD should be rising versus most currencies. In fact, the USD was flat to lower versus most other
major currencies, a distinct sign of short-term USD weakness that might well have kept you away
from going long the USD versus most other currencies.

Warning: The U.S. Dollar Index Isn't a Substitute for Studying Charts
You can't rely on the dollar index chart ( Figure 9.3) as a shortcut for assessing the USD's strength
versus other currencies, because the EUR is such a large component of the basket of currencies that
comprise this index.
FIGURE 9.3 U.S. Dollar Index Composition

Even though the USD was flat to lower against other currencies, the USD index was higher (see
Figure 9.4) because of the EUR weakness we saw in Figure 9.2.
FIGURE 9.4 USD Index Daily Chart, July 1 to 15, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

You need to look at the individual charts of the USD versus the other majors. That's not a big deal;
there are only seven other major pairs besides the EURUSD.
That strong negative correlation between the EUR and the USD means that you can't get a full
picture of either of these currencies by just looking at the EURUSD.
To get a better picture of the true health of each of these currencies individually—that is, to see
them in a way that is not as influenced by movements in the EURUSD—we can do two things. We can
compare each of these currencies either to other currencies or to gold.

Cross Currency Analysis
As noted back in Chapter 2 when we discussed the importance of cross currencies, we can check how
these two are faring against other currencies. For example (see Figure 9.5), in recent years one of the
favorite major currency hedges for the Euro in times of anxiety about the Euro-zone was the CHF, due
to Switzerland's healthier economy and smaller debt load compared to the United States or Japan,
homes of the other chief safe haven currencies. If the EURCHF was falling, that was a sign of EUR
weakness, regardless of what happened with the EURUSD. This correlation doesn't always work
because at times the Swiss central bank intervenes in currency markets to keep the CHF artificially
low versus the EUR. Fortunately we can get a read on currencies by looking beyond forex market.
FIGURE 9.5 EURCHF Monthly Chart, December 2008 to July 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Another way to get perspective on each of these currencies is to watch gold.

CURRENCIES VERSUS COMMODITIES
Now let's look at how we can use gold prices to help analyze the strength of the two most widely held
currencies, the U.S. dollar and the Euro.

Gold as a Barometer of the USD or EUR
When the normal market and intermarket correlations stop working or even reverse, that's usually a
sign that something important may be happening. For example, earlier in the chapter we saw how the
divergence between the EURUSD and S&P 500 told of trouble brewing. Back in Chapter 2 we
discussed how cross currency pairs could tell us much about the true health of a currency. Another
excellent indicator is gold, particularly for the USD and EUR. Normally we expect it to move in the
opposite direction of the USD (in which it's priced) or, during times of anxiety about the EUR, gold
can move opposite the EUR along with the USD as both move up as investors move out of the EUR
into these. More specifically, we watch for divergences from gold's normal correlation with the USD
or EUR.
The relationship of gold with currencies and other assets is a broad topic by itself, but here's some
must-know background on gold and its importance to forex traders and investors.
Unlike almost any other asset, gold is typically neither a safety nor a risk asset, though the popular
financial media have often called it both over the years (depending on how gold has been performing
in recent months). Instead it's a currency hedge for which demand rises when there are concerns about
inflation diluting the purchasing power of fiat currencies (particularly those most widely held, like the
USD and EUR). In other words:
In times of optimism (aka risk appetite), gold can either appreciate if markets believe growth
will lead to inflation, or it can fall if the desire for higher yields overrides inflation concerns and
investors move into more classic risk assets which they believe will provide better returns.
In times of pessimism (aka risk aversion) gold can either rise if markets believe that stalling
growth will lead to rising deficits and/or money printing that could ultimately cause inflation, or
it can also fall on fears of deflation or of a market crash that feeds demand for cash. In times of
panics, traders seek cash either in order to cover margin calls or other obligations or to be ready
to go bargain hunting. If pessimism turns to panic, then gold could either:

rise if markets are more concerned about the USD or EUR losing their purchasing power than
about near-term liquidity needs, as was the case at times from 2009 through 2011.
fall if markets are more concerned about liquidity than loss of purchasing power, as was the
case in late 2011.
Gold is very useful for assessing the health of the USD and EUR, because they're the most widely
held currencies and so any selloff in these tends to cause a rally in gold, the most popular fiat
currency hedge.
For example:
In the wake of the Great Financial Crisis that began in late 2007, the U.S. dollar's prior multiyear decline versus gold accelerated because markets feared that the U.S. would engage in
massive stimulus programs that risked devaluing the USD. The same thing happened to the EUR
versus gold during the same period, for essentially the same reason, a fear of loss of purchasing
power for the EUR.
The EU sovereign debt and banking crisis raised doubts about the very existence of the EUR.
When anxiety about the EU crisis was high, gold tended to do well. Throughout much of 2010 and
2011, plotting long-term strategy for the EURUSD was tough because the fundamentals of the
underlying economies for both currencies were terrible; it was a contest of which currency was
uglier, and there was no clear winner in the short term. However, gold benefited because both the
USD's and the EUR's underlying economies looked bad. I soon stopped trading the EURUSD and
found going long gold a far simpler way to make money.
Again, however, as noted above, there are exceptions to the rule that anxiety about the USD or EUR
is bullish for gold.
In particular, when markets aren't concerned about fading purchasing power, the major currencies
tend to gain against gold. That can happen due to:
Low inflation expectations, as we saw starting in late 2011. Concerns about the global economy
kept inflation fears low, and so gold began a multimonth downtrend.
Panic periods when markets fear a financial crisis, and liquidity becomes the top priority. We
saw gold sell off during times of peak anxiety about the US or EU. During these periods,
investors tend to sell gold in order to raise cash.
Investors seek cash for a variety of reasons. Some need to cover margin calls as they suffer losses
on losing positions they hold with leverage (borrowed funds). Others want cash ready either to take
advantage of the drop in asset prices for bargain hunting or out of fear of losing jobs, businesses, or
other income sources. Under these conditions, cash, especially the USD (in which gold is priced),
appreciates and gold drops.
Note the monthly gold chart in Figure 9.6 covering August 2008 through September 2011.
FIGURE 9.6 Gold Monthly Chart, August 1, 2008, to September 28, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
