
thinking and what the market is indicating about itself, you will eventually
be able to learn how to control your perception of the market activity in a
way that allows you the greatest amount of mental flexibility, where you
will be able to shift your perspective to flow with the markets and execute
your trades without hesitation. If you can't change or control what the
market is doing, then the only option you have left is to control yourself in a
way that allows you to perceive what the market may do next with increased
clarity and objectivity, requiring a thorough working knowledge of the
nature of your inner environment in relationship to the outer physical
environment.

75

CHAPTER 9

Understanding the
Nature of the
Mental Environment

Understanding yourself and learning how to function inside your mental
environment is not as difficult as you may think it is. It does, however,
require that you gain a thorough understanding of the general
characteristics of the mental environment, its component parts, and how
they work, which is exactly what this part of the book is designed to give
you.
The only reason why any of this would seem so difficult is because we
aren't taught how to do it when we are young. In fact, we are usually taught
exactly the opposite—that the mental environment is a mysterious place
that can't be understood. As a result, we end up defining mental
components in a haphazard fashion without ever really understanding the
relationship between the components, or the relationship these components
have with the outside physical environment in the ways that determine how
we experience our lives. So, if you are going to consciously transform or
adapt yourself to function more effectively as a trader, you will need a very
fundamental and practical understanding of the nature of these mental
components and how they operate. As will be explained in a moment, there
are vast differences in the characteristics of the mental environment (inner)
and physical environment (outer) in which our bodies occupy space.
Understanding these differences is a key ingredient in the process of
changing yourself.
As a simple example, the book you are reading exists on the outside of
you, whereas the label of book (i.e., your mind's perception of the book) or
any other thoughts or sensations you would experience as a result of that
76

label and the meaning you attach is all occurring on the inside of you.
Anything that goes on or that happens on the inside of you would
constitute your mental environment; all your experiences and memories of
those experiences, all your beliefs, all the emotional energy attached to
those beliefs, all your feelings, needs, wants, expectations, and goals, and
all your thoughts, regardless of whether or not you have expressed these
thoughts into the environment, make up your mental landscape.
However, before we explore the differences between the inner and outer
environments, I want to point out one characteristic common to the two.
They are both constructed of many independently functioning parts
("regions" would be a better word to describe the inner environment) that
cooperate to make up the whole. Most people are very familiar with their
body parts, even the ones en-closed within the body cavity. These parts are
made up of cells that have distinct functions. They operate independently
and cooperate with the other body parts. The sum total of these
cooperating parts is our body. A simple illustration would be that eyes are
not ears or lungs, they are distinct parts having unique functions within
the whole.
By the same token, the mental environment is composed of a number of
cooperative but independently functioning regions that make-up the whole
of who we are. For example, a belief is not a dream, nor is a thought an
emotion. Beliefs, dreams, thoughts, and emotions are all separate parts of
the mental environment that interact in the same manner (at least
conceptually) that your hands will interact with your eyes or your finger
with your nose or your lungs with your heart. I am pointing this out
because most people do not think of their mental environments in such
specific ways with highly refined distinctions among the various regions
and the ways the components within those regions function.
The following list provides some of the categories into which I have
divided the mental environment and the components associated with each
category that will be explained in the next five chapters.
Positively Charged Emotions: Love, happiness, joy, confidence,
peace, acceptance
Negatively Charged Emotions: Fear, anger, hatred, jealousy,
disappointment, confusion, impatience, stress, anxiety, betrayal
Illusions: Denials, rationalizations, intellectualizations, distortions
Beliefs
Intents: Goals, aspirations
Expectations: Wants, desires, demands
Needs
Dreams: Sleeping dreams, daydreams
77

Thoughts
Attractions
Memories
Creativity
Intuition
This is not intended to represent a complete list of components and
categories of the mental environment. However, it is comprehensive enough
to serve the objectives of this book, which is to give you enough of a
working knowledge of how they operate and interact to effect any changes
you determine are necessary to trade successfully.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE MENTAL (INNER)
ENVIRONMENT?
I am defining the mental environment as a place where all the sensory
information from the physical environment (sensory information being the
way in which the physical environment acts as a force on our eyes, ears,
nose, taste, and touch) gets sorted, categorized, labeled, organized,
associated with, and stored. Beliefs are formed and meanings get attached.
The mental environment is where our experiences of the outside world form
into a complex belief structure about the nature of the physical environment
and our relationship with it.
There are two things that I want you to note about this definition. First, it
is limited, because it doesn't take into account mental activities that generate
from within, exclusive of outside sensory information. This is something I
will expand on later. Second, I am not including the brain as part of the
mental environment, even though the activity of the mental environment
takes place inside of the brain. (Why I am not including it will become
clear in a moment.)
One of the first characteristics you may notice about the mental
components listed is that they are all intangible. You can't see, hear, touch,
taste, or smell them, at least not as they exist in the mental environment.
For example, no surgeon operating on living brain tissue has ever
encountered his patient's beliefs, thoughts, dreams, or memories, even
though he knew they were in there somewhere. Biochemists have
discovered DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) while working at the molecular
level of tissue make-up and as of yet have not encountered one of the mental
components listed earlier. Yet we know they exist because we can
experience the results of someone's beliefs or thoughts as they are expressed
outwardly in the physical environment through their behavior.
Now, for those of you who are asking yourself how do these mental
components exist if they aren't tangible and no one has ever directly
78

experienced them? The answer is, they exist as a form of energy (and
energy doesn't have mass). For example, light will pass through physical
objects or reflect off them, but light will not displace anything, and
electricity will pass through objects, not displace them. Entities made up of
atoms and molecules will displace one another as they move into each
other's space.
For a long time the scientific community believed that the atom was the
smallest, most fundamental building block of existence, only to discover
later that within an atom is energy. What scientists haven't figured out yet
is how does something that exists without mass (the energy within the
atom) become something that does have mass—the atom. In other words,
how does energy go from being non-physical to physical. Albert Einstein
was once asked to give his definition of matter and he said "Matter is
merely energy in a form that we can perceive by our senses." Even at the
atomic level the book you are now reading and the chair you are sitting on
to read it appear to your senses as if they are solid. However, that is not the
case at all. Our senses cannot perceive things as they exist at the atomic
level where everything is spinning and there is space between the atoms.
However, the point I am making is that all matter exists as energy at the very
deepest level of existence (within the atom), but not all energy exists as
matter, as with light and electricity.
In very general terms, mental energy, as it exists in its various, intangible
forms as beliefs, feelings, emotions, and so on has the potential to act as a
force on our behavior and consequently as a force on the outside physical
environment corresponding to the way in which this energy is expressed.
For example, mental energy in the form of a belief or memory of an
experience can motivate a person to walk across a room to change the
channel on his television set because he believes a program on another
channel is more worthwhile or pleasurable, bid the price of a stock higher
than the last price because he believes it serves his best interests, or motivate
masses of people to go to war to defend or promote whatever they believe
needs to be defended or promoted. These actions and their effects on the
environment are the result of this mental energy expressed outwardly.
WHAT IS EXPERIENCE?
We experience the world with our five physical senses. This is common
knowledge. But, when you get down to the very basics, what actually
happens to our experiences of the environment as they go from the outer
(physical) to the inner (mental) environment? What we see, hear, touch,
taste, and smell at a physical level is transformed into electrical impulses of
energy and is sent to the brain via the nervous system. That is, at the most
basic level, tangible experience of the outside world is transformed into
intangible electrical energy, meaning that the tangible medium where we
experience our lives (the physical environment) does not have the same
79

characteristics and properties of the medium that represents and stores these
experiences on the inside of us (the mental environment). We will examine
these differences on a more practical level in a moment.
If, at first, it seems preposterous to think that our experiences
(environmental information) are transformed into electrical energy, then
consider that we have been using an analogous form of technology
mechanically for years in the form of telephones and computers.
Computers store information, sounds, and images in a number of different
energy media. Telephones transport sounds and images in the form of
electricity, light, or microwaves. As common-place as all this is, there is still
something fascinating about a living process that transforms sensory
information (tangible experience) into electricity and stores it that way.
Everything that we have learned (as individuals) about the nature of our
existence is stored in our mental environment at an intangible level, in a
nonphysical reality (energy is real, yet it is nonphysical because it doesn't
consist of atoms and molecules, thus it can be said that energy exists in a
nonphysical reality).
Earlier, I did not include the brain as part of the mental environment
because it exists at the tangible level of atoms and molecules (physical
reality), whereas the mental environment (energy in the form of beliefs,
memories, emotions, and so on, about the nature of physical environment
resulting from our experiences) does not exist at this tangible level. To help
you understand this distinction between the brain and the mental
environment, consider that the brain exclusive of the mental environment
is no different from a computer that is not plugged into some electrical
power source. In this analogy, the mental environment would correspond to
the electrical energy that makes the computer run as well as store and carry
the various forms of information the computer is designed to handle and the
computer hardware (physical, mechanical, atoms, and molecules) would
correspond to the brain.
This is the reason why I stated in the beginning of the chapter that
there are vast differences between the mental and physical environments.
All the mental components I listed exist at the intangible level of energy
and, more important, function with the same properties and characteristics
of energy. To understand the nature of the mental environment, you need
to understand the characteristics of energy. Thus, what I intend to do next
is examine the properties and characteristics of typical energy forms like
light and electricity and then compare them to the characteristics of the
mental environment to establish a correspondence between the two.

80

Finally, in the next five chapters I will tie all this material together to give
you some very practical techniques to improve your ability to trade
effectively.
HOW DOES THE MENTAL ENVIRONMENT
CORRESPOND TO THE CHARACTERISTICS
AND PROPERTIES OF ENERGY?
Energy Is Nondimensional
As we already know, energy doesn't take up space in the physical
environment because it doesn't displace anything that does take up space.
This "no space" characteristic of energy gives it a nondimensional quality.
In other words, anything that doesn't take up space also won't have any
tangible dimensions of height, length, width, or circumference, at least not
in the ways in which we would normally think of these properties. This
nondimensional quality is probably the hardest concept to grasp about the
nature of energy, because even though energy is nondimensional, it can
take some form that is visible to our eyes. And anything that is visible
should have dimensions that we can measure. It may seem like an obvious
contradiction to say that energy can take a visible form and yet still not have
dimension, but it is not.
The best example to illustrate this is with holograms or holographic
photography. With a holographic process you can create a threedimensional image in light projected into space that can be seen with the
eyes, and it will appear to have length, width, and circumference. You
could even measure the length or width of the image; however, your hands
would pass right through the image if you tried, because there really isn't
anything there, at least not in a physical sense. Images in light have no
physical substance, so from a physical perspective, they also don't have any
dimension. (Relative to physical objects, energy doesn't have dimension.)
Memories or mental images (anything that we can see with our inner
eye, like visualizations, daydreams, or night dreams) could operate very
much like a hologram of laser light—an image of light that has no physical
substance—where space as it relates to distance or dimension is not a
consideration. The total area available inside of our skulls is quite small,
especially in relationship to what will fit from a mental perspective. We can
create mental images of any size or proportion, with none of the
dimensional limitations that exist in the physical environment because these
images, as an energy form, have no physical substance and thus exist in a
state of form without dimension, taking up "no space."
You can easily demonstrate this concept with a simple mental exercise.
Close your eyes and picture the last place where you went on a vacation.
Where did you stay? What side trips did you take? When you imagined
81

where you went, did you get up and move from your present location in
the physical environment. Did you imagine yourself getting up out of your
chair to make all the preparations that would be necessary for such a trip?
Did you get in your car and mentally drive each mile to your destination, as
you would if you were actually going? Probably not; the image of your last
vacation most likely just popped into your consciousness. It is as if you
were instantaneously transported to these locations, without regard to the
space or distance that you would need to travel to get there in the physical
environment. There was "no space" between your present location and the
image of the vacation spot you hold in your memories.
The nature of our dreams also illustrates this nondimensional
characteristic. First, there is no known limit to the type of dream
landscape we could find ourselves in. Dreams can be as varied and diverse,
if not more so, as the physical environment and all much larger than the
space available inside of our skull cavity. Furthermore, in our dreams we
can instantaneously change locations without actually traveling any
distance. For example, you could dream that you are in the basement of
your house and then in the next instant be in your living room, without
actually having walked up your basement stairs or through other rooms to
get to there.
Speed
The second characteristic the mental environment shares with energy is
speed. Energy travels at an incredibly high rate of speed. Light, for
example, travels at a rate of 186,000 miles per second, fast enough to
travel around the Earth approximately eight times in 1 second. This is so
fast that to our physical senses, it appears instantaneous or simultaneous.
What I mean is, it moves so fast that our physical senses cannot detect the
motion. Obviously, we can see the light, but we cannot actually see it moving
from any given source to some distant point. For example, when you turn on a
light in a dark room, does the room become illuminated in stages as the light
travels from its source to the walls? No, to our eyes the room fills with light
instantaneously, seeming to be everywhere at once, in a flash. Our eyes are not
constructed in a manner where we can make any distinctions in movement, so
it seems as if it doesn't move at all.
This instantaneous characteristic of light relates quite well to the mental
environment. As I pointed out earlier, dream travel can be and usually is
instantaneous. While you're having a dream, in one instant you could be in a
house and the next you could be on the other side of the world. There really isn't
any travel time between these dream locations. Whatever, mental mechanism
prompts the change, it creates a simultaneous transfer, probably taking as much
physical (clock) time as it does for light to fill up a dark room.
However, there is another mental characteristic (actually more of a
phenomenon) that best illustrates the speed at which the mental environment
82

operates. This is something that is not experienced by very many people, but
nevertheless reported by enough people in completely separate, unrelated
incidents to confirm its validity. What I am referring to is the phenomenon of
having one's life flash before one's consciousness in the form of a continuous
mental image, from birth to the present. Something like this usually only
happens in extreme life-threatening situations where the person believes that he
is only moments from death. In those few moments before the expected death, the
sights, sounds, tastes, smells, feelings, and emotions of one's entire life are
reexperienced.
Personally whenever I've read of or heard someone's recounting of such an
experience, it baffled me. I didn't understand how a person's whole life could
scroll before his consciousness in a matter of moments, when it took years to
experience. However, after a great deal of contemplation, it occurred to me that
the energy in which our experiences are stored moves at speeds that are so
incredibly fast that it would make our lives seem quite short in comparison, thus
making it possible for all our experiences to scroll by in moments, regardless of
how long it took actually to have the experiences.
All this might be a little easier to understand if you imagine, as I did,
experiences stored in a stream of light very much like what you would see
when you look at a distant star. There is a very good correlation here. For
example, scientists tell us that many of the closest stars to the Earth, other
than our sun, are so far away, that even at the incredible speed of 186,000
miles per second, it still takes the light emanating from these stars hundreds
of years to reach the Earth. This distance between the stars and Earth is so
vast that it creates a steady beam of light, billions of trillions of miles long.
So, when we look at any star other than our sun, what we are actually
seeing is the light that left it hundreds or even thousands of years ago, thus
what we are seeing is light from the star's distant past. Now, if we could travel
along this beam of light back to its source, what we would be seeing is light
from the star's more recent past (or future from the perspective of traveling
toward the star) the closer that we got to it, until we arrived at the star's
present. Light from the past, future (depending on one's perspective), and
present would exist simultaneously within that beam.
Now, imagine the sights, sounds, tastes, smells, feelings, and emotions of
our experiences stored in energy as a stream of memories that we can travel
along very much like this beam of light, where we can use our
consciousness to roam between the distant past to the more recent past up
to the present moment or project these memories out into the future. If the
energy in which our experiences are stored can move at speeds that are
equal to or approach the speed of light, then it would offer a credible
explanation as to how it is possible for one's whole life to scroll before one's
consciousness in a matter of moments. To illustrate this for yourself further,
imagine all your experiences stretched out like a beam of light that you
could travel along at the speed of light. At that speed, at even a couple of
seconds of travel time, you could get through a great deal of information. For
83

example, if we just arbitrarily decided that it took 10,000 miles of mental
energy stretched out to hold 1 year's worth of experience, then, at the speed
of light, you could get through almost 19 years of memories in 1 second.
Recognition of this phenomenon helps us to grasp one of the most
difficult concepts about the nature of the mental environment—that it
exists outside of time, as we know it. That is, our physical senses lock us
into perceiving an environment bounded by the limitations of time and
three-dimensional space. We have to experience each moment in a linear
sequence. We can't go backward and experience the past as it existed in the
physical environment; once it passes, it's gone forever. Nor can we move
ahead into the future. The past doesn't exist anymore, and the future
doesn't exist yet. What does exist are these seemingly endless sequences of
"now moments" in which we experience our lives. However, the mental
energy our inner components consist of operates outside of our normal
concept of time and space as it is experienced in the physical environment.
In the mental environment there are no spatial boundaries or time
constraints; we can think in any direction we please: past, present, or
future. And, theoretically, there would be no limits or boundaries as to how
much information could be stored.
Simply stated, time is a function of our perception of movement over
distance or three-dimensional space. In other words, to perceive time, you
need two key components: space that has dimensions, and movement. Both
these properties obviously exist in the physical environment. It has
characteristics of three-dimensional space consisting of length, height,
width or thickness, and circumference. Also the physical environment is in
constant motion. The sun, other stars, the planets, and their moons are all
in motion. And even though we can't directly perceive it, everything
physical is in motion at the atomic and molecular level. Everything is
spinning around something larger from the tiniest atoms and molecules to
the largest stars and solar systems, including the atoms and molecules in our
own bodies.
This spinning motion of the Earth and its orbit around the sun acts as a
force on the environment, changing day to night and night to day, creating
the weather and the seasons as well as an endless number of other
environmental cycles. All these cycles of environmental changes (including
our own bodily cycles of growth, age, respiration, digestion, and so on,
resulting from the movement of the atoms and molecules of our cells) act
as a force on our physical senses, causing us to experience a constantly
changing environment, one cycle after another, in straight linear fashion,
thus giving us our perception of time that is always moving forward. If we
couldn't perceive motion or some sort of movement over three-dimensional
space to act as reference points to measure this movement, then we
wouldn't be able to perceive the passing of time. For example, if we were
conscious but somehow fixed in a state of suspended animation where we
had no sensory input, no perception of movement of any kind, not even a
84
