
159

Summary

Head

Shoulder
2

Shoulder

4

Neckline
1

The dashed line represents the neckline
from the head and shoulders pattern.
The Elliott wave pattern develops with the
bounce from point 1 and then a retest of
that old support line is established when the
neckline fails at point 4.

A
3

This seems complex, but if the market trades back
above points 1 and 4, this would be a nice confirmation
that another cycle will begin to the upside!
5

FIGURE 8.17

Elliott waves in trending channels. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

terns can become. In using the theory in practice, you would look for a resumption of the uptrend to continue with a move above the neckline or the
dashed line where Points 1 and 4 intersect.
For further research on the theory of Elliott wave analysis, Elliott Wave
Principles by A. J. Frost and Robert Prechter would be helpful as would
any other writings by Prechter.

SUMMARY
With all the tools and techniques I have mentioned, you might almost feel
like a victim of information overload. That is true, but I believe it is helpful
to become familiar with the more popular techniques and get a feel for what
works for you, the individual investor. There are different types of technical
indicators for different types of market conditions and for different types
of traders.

160

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

Moving averages will eat you alive in trading range markets. Oscillators
such as stochastics and the relative strength index will crush you in steadily
trending markets. So what is the best trading technique to use? The answer
is there is no perfect solution or holy grail.
One thing I do know is that I can’t jump around from one system to another. If a system or method that has been consistent starts to fail and I abandon it and start to shop around for a new method, by the time I notice how
effective and accurate the new method is, that is about the time when it runs
cold. Stick to what works and when you run cold, take a break. Some of the
biggest and best players in the game have gone bust. Some have even run
years without a winning streak. What is important is that you can step back
and reevaluate what is going wrong. Sometimes you just need to paper trade
while you are retesting a system, method, or skills. Not only can paper trading help restore your confidence, but it also may keep your remaining working capital intact.
You can use these or many other tools or chart patterns to develop a
setup that informs you it is time to initiate a trade and execute a predetermined trading plan. That plan includes setting target levels for risk and
profit objectives. Pattern recognition, whether it is candles or traditional
chart patterns, is a learned technique that does take time to study. The benefit of pivot point analysis is that it is based on calculations and gives immediate target price levels as does Fibonacci work. Moving average studies
do offer a convincing alternative for a verifying technical tool, and stochastics can help determine the potential turn in trends.
These are what I personally look at when I am analyzing the markets on
a technical scope. I review what the pivot point analysis looks like on a daily,
weekly, and monthly basis. I look at the stochastic indicators beneath the actual bar charts and have an overlay of the 3-, 9-, and 18-period exponential
moving averages on each of those three time periods. I also include MACD
for short-, intermediate-, and long-term analysis. I examine bar charts and
candle charts for these three time periods and include these indicators along
with trend line analysis to help me in my price forecasting techniques.
Fibonacci is an easy tool as most software companies include the normal price correction ratios. It takes more specialized software to include the
features of projections and extensions. For futures traders, Gecko Software
provides an incredibly good graphic and detailed packaged product that includes many of the Fibonacci tools such as the arch, time count, retracement,
and extension tools a trader might want to explore.
These are a few of the favorite technical tools I use to supplement my
pivot point target numbers. They work for me. Maybe you will want to use
some or all of these techniques in your analysis as well.

CHAPTER 9

Market
Sentiment
What Traders
Are Thinking

A professional is one who does his best work when
he feels the least like working.
—Frank Lloyd Wright

right’s comment is a long-time favorite of mine because it applies
so well in the trading business. Trading demands discipline; it can
be emotionally draining, particularly if it is not your full-time job.
So we as traders or investors can fall into the trap of, “I don’t have time to
do my research so let’s see what others have to say.” If that has ever happened to you, then this chapter is for you. Finding out what “others have to
say” about the markets is a form of a getting a consensus of the market. Just
be careful to whom you are listening or whose advice you are following.

W

MARKET CONSENSUS AND CONTRARY OPINION
Because prices reflect the mass psychology of the marketplace, there always
seems to be a great deal of interest in finding out what the other traders are
doing. One means of getting this information is taking surveys or evaluating
newsletter opinions to measure the market’s sentiment or to find a market
consensus. The key is getting a true reading that accurately reflects the
sentiment.
In an uptrending bull market, a large portion of the market participants
are interested only in buying and will commit money for positions in the
market. If they become even more bullish and build up their positions, eventually they have no more resources to continue buying or no one may be left
161

162

MARKET SENTIMENT: What Traders Are Thinking

on the sidelines who wants to buy at the inflated price levels. When the market is overcommitted on the long side, it is said to be overbought. The buying
pressure to move prices higher subsides, sometimes after a last-gasp blowoff,
and the market becomes vulnerable to a reversal. The same is true on the
downside if the bears become overcommitted and the market becomes oversold. The ebb and flow of trading will bring markets back to normal.
Imagine that a boat is loaded with people, and they are all on one side.
When enough people fall off as it begins to lean, the boat will flip to the other
side. Essentially that motion is what can happen in the markets. When the
first batch of bulls start to take profits, it may cause an avalanche effect and
result in a sharply lower price correction. The exact opposite is true for
bear markets.

MARKET VANE
If everyone is long or bullish, how can prices move higher? As mentioned in
the previous section, that conclusion is the exact theory of market consensus
or contrary opinion. A report called The Market Vane Bullish Consensus
(P.O. Box 90490, Pasadena, California 91109) ranks a market’s past historical level of bullish and bearish conditions against current conditions. This
ranking can be very helpful in discovering whether prices have reached a
climax top or whether there is more room to move higher. Earl Hadady, who
was the founder of the Market Vane report, wrote a book titled Contrary
Opinion on the subject that can give you some insight on this concept and
market psychology.
Market Vane measures the market on a percentage ranking system based
on polling a certain number of analysts, assuming that these analysts will
influence a large number of people in making their trading decisions. The
ratings start with 0 percent as a measure of extreme bearishness and 100
percent as a measurement of extreme bullishness. If the number is closer to
the overbought figure of 100 percent, then the market is probably due for a
downward price correction. The opposite is true for bear markets when the
number is closer to 0 percent. Then prices could be susceptible to a price
reversal higher. For me, I look at the number when the percentage reaches
near 75 percent to 85 percent and a particular market has been trading in an
uptrend for a prolonged period of time.

COMMITMENTS OF TRADERS
One technique for gauging the consensus is to use the Commitments of
Traders (COT) report released weekly by the Commodity Futures Trading

Commitments of Traders

163

Commission (CFTC). This report reveals who is doing what in the futures
market or whose hands the market is in. Many investors who have traded
stocks and have never traded futures think of using the COT information as
being like insider trading. Well, not exactly.
The report breaks down the three main categories of traders and shows
their overall net positions. The first group is called commercials or hedgers,
the next group is the large speculators (sometimes categorized as the commodity funds), and the third group is the small speculators. Commercials
and large traders tend to have large positions and, as a rule, whenever they
trade above a certain number of contracts, these positions need to be reported to the CFTC. The number of allowable positions that needs to be reported varies by different futures contracts. If you compile the data and
subtract these figures from the total open interest provided by the exchanges, then the balance is assumed to be from the small speculators. The
data are taken from the close of business on Tuesday and released the following Friday at 2:30 p.m. for futures only and also for futures combined
with options.
To understand the importance of the COT report, it helps to know the
breakdown of the numbers and what they represent. Commercials are considered to be hedgers and could be producers or users of a given product.
Because they will or do own the underlying product, they are trying to
hedge their risk against adverse price moves in the cash market. When a
commercial entity fills out its account application, it usually discloses that
it is hedging. The exchanges recognize that hedgers are on the other side of
the market from a cash standpoint and can usually support their futures position financially. Therefore, they set lower margin rates for those accounts.
Commercials are considered to be the so-called smart money or the
strong hands because they are in the business of that commodity. They are
supposed to have the inside scoop, so to speak. For example, by having access to internal corporate inventory reports, global production estimates,
and projected customer needs, commercials have a better working knowledge of the fundamentals. Banks and institutions may have a better idea
about the direction of money supply and corporate debt, for instance, and
may want to hedge their exposure on current holdings against an upcoming
adjustment in interest rates. For the most part, they are using the futures market to lock in prices to produce a profit or to lower their costs on the cash
side of their positions.
The large traders category is considered to be the professional trader.
Commodity trading advisors or commodity pool operators who manage a
large fund are considered to be large traders if they hold a certain amount
of positions. An individual trader who holds a substantial position in the market may also be classified as a large trader. Traders who have more contracts than a designated amount need to disclose those positions to the

164

MARKET SENTIMENT: What Traders Are Thinking

CFTC. Each futures contract has a different number for its reportable limits. Just like margin amounts, that number can change on a moment’s notice.
The theory is that if you are a large trader, you are committing a large
amount of capital to a risky investment and have confidence in that position. You are either a very good trader who started small and built your
capital up, or you are a professional trader with a good track record. Either
way you look at it, professional traders with large reportable position limits are still speculating in the markets with the motive for profit. They are
well-financed and typically have large amounts of money to defend their
positions.
The last group is the small traders or speculators. These are regular
investors, mainly members of the public trading on their own or using recommendations from an advisory newsletter service or a broker or a combination of all three. It is estimated that 80 percent or more of individual
traders who enter the markets lose, so this is the category that you generally do not want to follow.
A couple of old sayings may explain why the preceding is good advice:
“Even a blind squirrel can find an acorn sometimes” and “a broken clock is
always right twice a day.” Even the little guys win once in a while. I have
found that a lot of individual investors have a good knack for calling market direction but have a hard time with timing when it comes to entering or
exiting the market. The problem is they are usually undercapitalized and
cannot defend their positions during periods of volatility.
One other difficulty is they sometimes refuse to take a profit when the
market gives it to them. Due to the very nature of the market’s moves, some
novice traders invest with a buy-and-hold mentality. For that reason the
sheer psychology and emotional makeup of individual investors needs to be
addressed before investing in the futures and options market. For some investors managing risk is not as hard as managing a winning trade.
There are many variables behind why the individual speculator is often
wrong in the markets and loses money. My concern here is that you realize
who represents what when it comes to the CFTC COT report. It is also important to understand and watch the behavior of the market from Tuesday
when the position reports are submitted to Friday’s close. This behavior can
change the interpretation of the numbers as the market participants have
had a chance to adjust their positions, making the report lose its importance
if market conditions have changed during that time period.
What you want to watch for in the COT report are the net positions for
each category. If you see a lopsided market position and prices are at an extreme high or an extreme low, this condition could signal a major turnaround
in price direction.
Here is an example of a situation to watch. The large traders are net
long, the commercials are net short, and the small speculators are extremely

Media Attention

165

long from a historical perspective or account for a large percentage of the
open interest. To add to this scenario, the market is at an extreme high or
has been steadily rising for a good period of time. Look out! A downside
correction could be around the corner. Once the CFTC releases the data, it
is like trying to run ahead of an avalanche; everyone is headed for the exit
door and nobody wants to be last, at least from the large traders’ perspective.
If they see that the market is vulnerable to a price correction, all it takes is
a few smart traders to start liquidating long positions and a sharp sell-off
could result. It is important to review the COT report to see whose hands
control the market.

