
The Sword Makers
Just as medieval knights shopped for the sharpest swords, modern traders shop for
the best trading tools. The growing access to good software and declining commission rates are creating a more level playing field. A computer allows you to speed up
your research and follow more leads. It helps you analyze more markets in greater
depth. We’ll return to computers and software in Chapter 21, “Computers in Trading,” â†œbut here it is in brief.
There are three types of trading software: toolboxes, black boxes, and gray boxes.
A toolbox allows you to display data, draw charts, plot indicators, change their
parameters, and test your trading systems. Toolboxes for options traders include
option valuation models. Adapting a good toolbox to your needs can be as easy as
adjusting the seat of your car.
In 1977, I bought the first ever toolbox for computerized technical analysis. It
cost $1,900 plus monthly data fees. Today, inexpensive, and even free, software places powerful tools at everyone’s fingertips. I illustrated most of the concepts in this
book using Stockcharts.com because I wanted my new book to be useful to as many
traders as possible.
Stockcharts.com evens out the playing field for traders. It is clear, intuitive, and rich
in features. Its basic version is free, although I used its inexpensive “members’ version”
for higher quality charting. I still remember how hard it was in the beginning and want
to show you how much analytic power you can have for free or at a very minimal cost.
What goes on inside a black box is secret.You feed it data, and it tells you what
and when to buy and sell. It is like magic—a way to make money without thinking. Black boxes are usually sold with excellent historical track records. This is only
natural because they were created to fit old data. Markets keep changing, and black
boxes keep blowing up, but new generations of losers keep buying them. If you’re
in the market for a black box, remember that there is a guy in Brooklyn who has a
bridge for sale.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

14. THE MARKET CROWN AND YOU

39

Gray boxes straddle the fence between toolboxes and black boxes. These packages are usually put out by prominent market personalities.They disclose the general
logic of their system and allow you to adjust some of their parameters.

Advisors
Some newsletters provide useful ideas and point readers in the direction of trading opportunities. A few offer educational value. Most sell an illusion of being an
insider. Newsletters are good entertainment. Your subscription rents you a pen pal
who sends often amusing and interesting letters and never asks you to write back,
except for a check at renewal time. Freedom of the press in the United States allows
even a convicted felon to go online and start sending out a financial advisory letter.
Quite a few of them do.
The “track records” of various newsletters are largely an exercise in futility
because hardly anybody takes every trade suggested by a newsletter. Services
that rate newsletters are for-profit affairs run by small businessmen whose wellbeing depends on the well-being of the advisory industry. Rating services may
occasionally tut-tut an advisor, but they dedicate most of their energy to loud
cheerleading.
I used to write an advisory newsletter decades ago: worked hard, delivered
straight talk, and received good ratings. I saw from the inside a tremendous potential
for fudging results. This is a well-kept secret of the advisory industry.
After looking at my letters, a prominent advisor told me that I should spend less
time on research and more on marketing. The first principle of letter writing is:
“If you have to make forecasts, make a lot of them.” â•›Whenever a forecast turns out
right, double the volume of promotional mail.

■■14. The Market Crowd and You
Markets are loosely organized crowds whose members bet that prices will rise or
fall. Since each price represents crowd consensus at the moment of transaction, traders are betting on the future opinion and mood of the crowd. The crowd keeps
swinging from hope to fear and from indifference to optimism or pessimism. Most
people don’t follow their own trading plans because they get swept up in the crowd’s
feelings and actions.
As bulls and bears battle in the market, the value of your open positions soars
or sinks, depending on the actions of total strangers.You can’t control the markets.
You can only set your position size and decide whether and when to enter or exit
your trades.
Most traders feel jittery entering a trade. Their judgment becomes clouded after
they join the crowd. Caught up in crowd emotions, many traders deviate from their
plans and lose money.

40

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Experts on Crowds
Charles Mackay, a Scottish barrister, wrote his classic book, Extraordinary Popular
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, in 1841. He described several mass manias, including the Tulip Mania in Holland in 1634 and the South Seas investment bubble in
England in 1720.
The tulip craze began as a bull market in tulip bulbs.The long bull market convinced
the prosperous Dutch that tulips would continue to appreciate. Many abandoned their
businesses to grow tulips, trade them, or become tulip brokers. Banks accepted tulips
as collateral and speculators profited. Finally, that mania collapsed in waves of panic
selling, leaving people destitute and the nation shocked. Mackay sighed, “Men go mad
in crowds, and they come back to their senses slowly and one by one.”
In 1897, Gustave LeBon, a French philosopher and politician, wrote The Crowd. A
trader who reads it today can see his reflection in a century-old mirror.
LeBon wrote that when people gather in a crowd, “Whoever be the individuals
that compose it, however like or unlike be their mode of life, their occupations, their
character, or their intelligence, the fact that they have been transformed into a crowd
puts them in possession of a sort of collective mind which makes them feel, think,
and act in a manner quite different from that in which each individual of them would
feel, think, and act were he in a state of isolation.”
People change when they join crowds. They become more credulous and impulsive, anxiously search for a leader, and react to emotions instead of using their intellect. An individual who becomes involved in a group becomes less capable of thinking for himself.
Group members may catch a few trends, but they get killed when trends reverse. Successful
traders are independent thinkers.

Why Join?
People have been joining crowds for safety since the dawn of time. If a Stone Age
hunter encountered a saber-toothed tiger, he had a very slim chance of coming out
alive, but if hunters went as a group, most were likely to survive. Loners got killed
and left fewer offspring. Since group members were more likely to survive, the tendency to join groups appears to have been bred into our genes.
Our society glorifies free will, but we carry many primitive impulses beneath the
thin veneer of civilization. We want to join groups for safety and be led by strong
leaders. The greater the uncertainty, the stronger our wish to join and to follow.
No saber-toothed tigers roam the canyons of Wall Street, but your financial survival is at risk. The value of your position rises and falls because of buying and selling
by total strangers. Your fear swells up because you can’t control prices. This uncertainty makes most traders look for a leader who will tell them what to do.
You may have rationally decided to go long or short, but the moment you put on a
trade, the crowd starts sucking you in.You start losing your independence when you
watch prices like a hawk and become elated when they go your way or depressed if
they go against you.You are in trouble when you impulsively add to losing positions
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

14. THE MARKET CROWN AND YOU

41

or reverse them. You lose your independence when you start trusting gurus more
than yourself and don’t follow your own trading plan. When you notice this happening, try to come back to your senses. If you can’t regain your composure, exit your
trades and go flat.

Crowd Mentality
When people join crowds, their thinking becomes primitive and they become more
prone to act on impulse. Crowds swing from fear to glee, from panic to euphoria.
A scientist can be cool and rational in his lab but make harebrained trades after
being swept up in the mass hysteria of the market. A group can suck you in, whether
you trade from a crowded brokerage office or a remote mountaintop. When you let
others influence your trading decisions, your chance of success goes up in smoke.
Group loyalty was essential for a prehistoric hunter’s survival. Joining a union can
help even an incompetent performer keep his job. The market is different: joining a
group tends to hurt you.
Many traders are puzzled why markets reverse immediately after they dump their
losing position.This happens because crowd members are gripped by the same fear—
and everybody dumps at the same time. Once the selling fit has ended, the market has
nowhere to go but up. Optimism returns to the marketplace, and the crowd forgets
fear, grows greedy, and goes on a new buying binge.
The crowd is bigger and stronger than you. No matter how smart you are, you
cannot argue with the crowd.You have only one choice—to join the crowd or to act
independently.
Crowds are primitive, and your trading strategies should be simple. You don’t
have to be a rocket scientist to design a winning trading method. If the trade goes
against you—cut your losses and run. Never argue with the crowd—simply use your
judgment to decide when to join and when to leave.
Your human nature leads you to give up your independence under stress. When
â•›
you put on a
trade, you feel the desire to imitate others, overlooking objective signals.This is why you need to
write down and follow your trading system and money management rules.They represent your
rational individual decisions, made before you entered a trade.

Who Leads?
An inexperienced trader may feel intense joy when prices move in his favor. He may
feel angry, depressed, and fearful when prices move against him, anxiously waiting
to see what the market will do to him next. Traders become crowd members when
they feel stressed or threatened. Battered by emotions, they lose their independence
and begin imitating other group members, especially the group leader.
When children feel frightened, they want their parents and other grown-ups to
tell them what to do.They transfer that attitude to teachers, doctors, ministers, bosses, and assorted experts. Traders turn to gurus, trading system vendors, newspaper
columnists, and other market leaders. But, as Tony Plummer brilliantly pointed out
in his book, Forecasting Financial Markets, the main leader of the market is price.

42

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Price is the leader of the market crowd. Traders all over the world follow the upticks
and downticks. Price seems to say to traders, “Follow me, and I’ll show you the way
to riches.” Most traders consider themselves independent. Few of us realize how
strongly we focus on the behavior of our group leader.
A trend that flows in your favor symbolizes a strong and generous parent calling
you to share a meal. A trend that goes against you feels like dealing with an angry and
punishing parent. Being gripped by such feelings, it’s easy to overlook objective signals that tell you to stay or to exit a trade.You may feel happy or frightened, bargain
or beg forgiveness—while avoiding the rational act of accepting reality and getting
out of a losing trade.

Independence
You need to base your trades on a carefully prepared plan instead of jumping in response to price changes. A proper plan is a written one. You need to know exactly
under what conditions you will enter and exit a trade. Don’t make decisions on the
spur of the moment, when you are vulnerable to being sucked in by the crowd.
You can succeed as a trader only when you think and act as an individual. The
weakest part of any trading system is the trader himself. Traders fail when they trade
without a plan or deviate from their plans. Plans are created by reasoning individuals.
Impulsive trades are made by sweaty group members.
You have to observe yourself and notice changes in your mental state as you trade. Write
â•›
down your reasons for entering a trade and the rules for getting out of it, including money
management rules.You
â•› may not change your plan while you have an open position.
Sirens were sea creatures of Greek myths who sang so beautifully that sailors
jumped overboard and swam to them, only to be killed. When Odysseus wanted to
hear the Sirens’ songs, he ordered his men to seal their ears with beeswax but to tie
him to the mast. Odysseus heard the Sirens’ song but survived because he couldn’t
jump overboard. You ensure your survival as a trader when on a clear day you tie
yourself to the mast of a trading plan and money management rules.

A Positive Group
You don’t have to be a hermit—steering clear of the crowd’s impulsivity doesn’t
mean you have to trade in total solitude. While some of us prefer doing it that way,
intelligent and productive groups can exist. Their key feature has to be independent
decision making.
This concept is clearly explained in a book, The Wisdom of Crowds, by a financial
journalist James Surowiecki. He acknowledges that members of most groups constantly influence one another, creating waves of shared feelings and actions. A smart
group is different: all members make independent decisions without knowing what
others are doing. Instead of impacting each other and creating emotional waves,
members of an intelligent group benefit from combining their knowledge and expertise. The function of a group leader is to maintain this structure and to bring
individual decisions up for a vote.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

15. PSYCHOLOGY OF TRENDS

43

In 2004, a year prior to reading TheWisdom of Crowds, I organized a group of traders along those lines. I continue to manage it with my friend Kerry Lovvorn—the
SpikeTrade group.
We run a trading competition, with each round lasting one week. After the market closes on Friday, the stock picks section of the website becomes closed to viewing by members until 3 p.m. on Sunday. During that time, any group member may
submit one favorite pick for the week ahead—without knowing what other group
members are doing. The picks section of the website re-opens on Sunday afternoon,
allowing all members to see all picks.The race begins on Monday and ends on Friday,
with prizes to winners.
Throughout the week members exchange comments and answer questions. The
site is built to encourage communication—except for weekends, when everyone
must work independently. The results of leading group members, posted on the site,
have been spectacular.
The key point is that all decisions about stock selection and direction must be
made in solitude, without seeing what the leaders or other members are doing. The
sharing begins after all votes are in. This combination of independent decision making with sharing brings forth “the wisdom of crowds,” tapping the collective wisdom
of the group and its leaders.

■■15. Psychology of Trends
Each price represents a momentary consensus of value among market participants.
Each tick reflects the latest vote on the value of a trading vehicle. Any trader can “put
in his two cents worth” by giving an order to buy or sell, or by refusing to trade at
the current level.
Each price bar or candle reflects a battle between bulls and bears. When buyers
feel strongly bullish, they buy more eagerly and push markets up. When sellers feel
strongly bearish, they sell more actively and push markets down.
Charts are a window into mass psychology. When you analyze charts, you analyze
the behavior of trading masses. Technical indicators help make this analysis more
objective.
Technical analysis is for-profit social psychology.

Strong Feelings
Ask a trader why prices went up, and you’ll probably get a stock answer—more buyers than sellers. This isn’t true. The number of shares or futures contracts bought and
sold in any market is always equal.
If you want to buy 100 shares of Google, someone has to sell them to you. If you
want to sell 200 shares of Amazon, someone has to buy them from you. This is why
the number of shares bought and sold is equal in the stock market. Furthermore,
the number of long and short positions in the futures markets is always equal. Prices

44

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

move up or down not because of different numbers but because of changes in the
intensity of greed and fear among buyers and sellers.
When the trend is up, bulls feel optimistic and don’t mind paying up. They buy
high because they expect prices to rise even higher. Bears feel afraid in an uptrend,
and they agree to sell only at a higher price. When greedy and optimistic bulls meet
fearful and defensive bears, the market rallies. The stronger their feelings, the sharper
the rally. The rally ends only when bulls start losing their enthusiasm.
When prices slide, bears feel optimistic and don’t quibble about selling short at
lower prices. Bulls are fearful and agree to buy only at a discount. While bears feel
like winners, they continue to sell at lower prices, and the downtrend continues. It
ends when bears start feeling cautious and refuse to sell at lower prices.

Rallies and Declines
Few traders are purely rational human beings. There is a great deal of emotion in the
markets. Most participants act on the principle of â•›“monkey see, monkey do.” â•›The
waves of fear and greed sweep up bulls and bears.
The sharpness of any rally depends on how traders feel. If buyers feel just a little
stronger than sellers, the market rises slowly. When they feel much stronger than
sellers, the market rises fast. It is the job of a technical analyst to find when buyers
are strong and when they start running out of steam.
Short sellers feel trapped by rising markets, as their profits melt and turn into
losses. When short sellers rush to cover, a rally can become parabolic. Fear is a much
stronger emotion than greed.2 Rallies driven by short covering are especially sharp,
although they do not last very long.
Markets fall because of fear among bulls and greed among bears. Normally bears
prefer to sell short on rallies, but if they expect to make a lot of money on a decline,
they don’t mind shorting on the way down. Fearful buyers agree to buy only below
the market. As long as short sellers are willing to meet those demands and sell at a
bid, the decline will continue.
As bulls’ profits melt and turn into losses, they panic and sell at almost any price.
They are so eager to get out that they hit the bids under the market. Markets can
drop fast when hit by panic selling.

Price Shocks
Loyalty to the leader is the glue that holds groups together. Group members expect
leaders to inspire and reward them when they are good but punish them when they
are bad. Some leaders are very authoritarian, others quite democratic and informal,
but every group has a leader—a leaderless group can’t exist. Price functions as the
leader of the market crowd.

Fear is three times stronger than greed, according to research cited by Prof. Daniel Kahneman, a
Nobel Prize winning behavioral economist, whose findings we’ll return to again in this book.

2

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

15. PSYCHOLOGY OF TRENDS

45

Winners feel rewarded when price moves in their favor, and losers feel punished when it moves
against them. Crowd members remain blissfully unaware that by focusing on price they create
their own leader.Traders who feel mesmerized by prices create their own idols.
When the trend is up, bulls feel rewarded by a bountiful parent. The longer an
uptrend lasts, the more confident they feel. When a child’s behavior is rewarded, he
continues to do what he did. When bulls make money, they add to long positions.
While new bulls enter the market, bears feel they are being punished for selling
short. Many of them cover shorts, go long, and join the bulls.
Buying by happy bulls and covering by fearful bears pushes uptrends higher.
Buyers feel rewarded, while sellers feel punished. Both feel emotionally involved, but
few traders realize that they are creating the uptrend and setting up their own leader.
Eventually a price shock occurs—a major sale hits the market, and there aren’t
enough buyers to absorb it. The uptrend takes a dive. Bulls feel mistreated, like children whose father slapped them during a meal, but bears feel encouraged.
A price shock plants the seeds of an uptrend’s reversal. Even if the market recovers and reaches a new high, bulls feel more skittish and bears become bolder. This
lack of cohesion in the dominant group and growing optimism among its opponents
makes the uptrend ready to reverse. Several technical indicators identify tops by
tracing a pattern called bearish divergence (see Section 4). It occurs when prices
reach a new high but the indicator reaches a lower high than it did on the previous
rally. Bearish divergences mark the ends of uptrends and some of the best shorting
opportunities.
When the trend is down, bears feel like good children, praised and rewarded for
being smart. They feel increasingly confident, add to short positions, and the downtrend continues. New bears come into the market. People admire winners, and the
financial media keeps interviewing bears during bear markets.
Bulls lose money in downtrends, making them feel bad. They start dumping
their positions, and some of them switch sides to join bears. Their selling pushes
markets lower.
After a while, bears grow confident and bulls feel demoralized. Suddenly, a price
shock occurs. A cluster of buy orders soaks up all available sell orders and lifts the
market. Now bears feel like children whose father has lashed out at them in the midst
of a happy meal.
A price shock plants the seeds of a downtrend’s eventual reversal because bears
become more fearful and bulls grow bolder. When a child begins to doubt that Santa
Claus exists, he’ll seldom believe in Santa again. Even if bears recover and prices fall
to a new low, several technical indicators will help identify their weakness by tracing
a pattern called a bullish divergence. It occurs when prices fall to a new low but an
indicator traces a shallower bottom than during the previous decline. Bullish divergences identify some of the best buying opportunities.
