
205

The Trade-A Personal Experience
In the course of conducting the interviews for this book, I came to realize that one of my primary
motives for the entire project was a quest for self-discovery. Although I have been a net profitable
trader over the years (substantially multiplying a small initial stake on two separate occasions), I
had a definite sense of failure about my trading. Given the extent of my knowledge and experience
about markets and trading, as well as the fact that on numerous occasions I had correctly
anticipated major price moves, I felt that my winnings were small potatoes compared to what I
should have made.
In one of my trips for this book, on one evening, I was interviewed at length about my trading by
Dr. Van Tharp, and the very next evening, I had a probing conversation about my trading with the
very perceptive Ed Seykota. This back-to-back experience caused me to focus intensely on the
flaws that had prevented me from reaching what I perceived to be my true potential as a trader.
As a result of this self-examination, I came to realize that one of my great errors had been failing to
exploit major price moves that I had correctly anticipated. Invariably, my initial position would be
far too small, given the potential I perceived in such trades. This mistake was then compounded by
a highly premature liquidation of the position. Typically, I would take profits on the first leg of the
price move, with the intention of reentering the position on a correction. The problem was that
subsequent corrections usually fell short of my reentry points and, refusing to chase the market, I
ended up watching the rest of the price move unfold while I was on the sidelines. I vowed to myself
that the next time such a situation would arise, I would make a concentrated effort to come closer to
realizing the true potential of the trade.
I did not have to wait very long. Two weeks later, while on a plane to Chicago to conduct some
further interviews, I was thinking about my review of the price charts the previous evening. I
recalled that I had come away with the distinct impression that precious metal prices were ready to
move higher, even though the foreign currency markets appeared vulnerable to further price
erosion. Suddenly, the trade I should have made became crystal clear. Given my combination of
expectations, a trade of long precious metals and short foreign currencies would be particularly
attractive. (Since these markets normally move in the same direction, the combined position
implied less risk than an outright long position in precious metals.) I made a mental note to
generate some charts on this trade at my first opportunity.
The next morning, I found a quote machine capable of generating price charts and sat down to
evaluate various price relationships. First, I looked at the interrelationships between silver, gold,
and platinum and decided that silver was my preferred buy among the metals. Then I reviewed the
interrelationships between the various foreign currencies and decided that the Swiss franc appeared
to be the weakest currency. Having made these two determinations, I then reviewed charts of the
silver/Swiss franc ratio for various time spectrums, ranging from ten years to one month.
This analysis led me to the conclusion that we were at the brink of a possible multiyear advance of
silver relative to the Swiss franc. Although I had intended not to trade because my traveling
prevented me from paying attention to the markets, the potential of the trade seemed so dynamic
that I had to put on at least a base position. To be done properly, a ratio trade requires
approximately equal dollar positions in each market. I quickly calculated that at the prevailing price
levels, it would require approximately three long silver contracts to balance one short Swiss franc
contract.
I looked at a short-term chart of the silver/Swiss franc price ratio. To my dismay, the price ratio had
already moved sharply in the direction of my intended trade since my realization about it the
previous morning. Even on that morning's opening, the trade could have been implemented at much
more favorable price levels. As I was trying to decide what to do, the silver/Swiss franc ratio
continued to move higher and higher. I decided that I had to act to prevent the possibility of
missing this trade altogether. I immediately called in an order establishing the minimum position of
long three silver contracts and short one Swiss franc contract. No sooner had I placed the order than
the price ratio seemed to reach its peak and began retreating. The ratio pulled back further during
the next two days. As it turned out, I had managed to implement the trade at the exact worst
possible moment in time since the inception of my idea. However, the silver/Swiss franc price ratio
206

quickly recovered, and a few days later I was well ahead.
At this point, I thought about my recent realization regarding my continued failure to adequately
profit from major price moves. I decided to maintain my position and, moreover, selected a reaction
point for doubling up the position. The correction came about a week later and I followed my game
plan. My timing proved good, as the trade once again rebounded in my favor—this time with
double the initial position. Given my account size (approximately $70,000 at the time), the long six
silver/short two Swiss franc position was about twice as large as the one I normally would have
held. My efforts to correct my aforementioned trading flaw seemed to be paying off, as the trade
raced in my favor during the following two weeks. Within a month of putting on the trade, my
account was up over 30 percent.
I now faced a dilemma: On the one hand, my new-found realization suggested that I hang on to the
trade for the long run. On the other hand, one of my other rales is that if you are ever lucky enough
to realize a very large profit on a trade very quickly, take it, because you will usually get an
opportunity to reenter the trade at considerably more favorable levels. The second rale came to
mind when the silver/Swiss franc price ratio began falling.
A cursory examination of the price charts suggested it might be prudent to take at least partial
profits. I should have done more analysis to reach a decision. However, the combination of having
undertaken a new job, while at the same time writing this book, left me with very little time and
energy to focus on other areas—trading included. Instead of doing the necessary work, I made a
snap judgment to stay with the trade.
The trade now moved swiftly against me, and within a week, I had given back a significant portion
of my earlier gains.
Although a week earlier, I had rationalized that my substantial profits would give me enough of a
comfort cushion in the event of a reaction, now that such a reaction had occurred, I found that I had
seriously misjudged my comfort level. Suddenly, I was concerned that I might give back all my
profits, and possibly even ride the trade into a loss. I could not decide whether to blow out of the
trade or stay with it as initially planned.
That night I had a dream. I was talking to a friend of mine, who is a developer of software for the
analysis of futures and options markets, but not a trader. In my dream, he had begun trading. We
were talking about trading and my current dilemma regarding the silver/Swiss franc position.
My friend commented on my predicament, "Everybody gets what they want out of the markets." I
replied, "You sound just like Ed Seykota." This sounded a bit odd to me, since as far as I knew, he
did not even know Seykota. To my surprise, he answered, "I have been talking to Ed Seykota for a
while and I have been winning in my trading ever since."
He had a sheet in front of him, with one of the columns indicating his month-to-month ending
equity. I glanced at the sheet and was astounded to see that the last figure exceeded $18 million. I
exclaimed, "Bert, you have made $18 million in the market! I hope you plan to take a few million
out for safekeeping." "No, I need all the money for trading," he replied. "But that is crazy," I said.
"Take $3 or $4 million out, and that way you will be sure then that no matter what happens, you
will come out way ahead." "I know what I am doing, and as long as I do my homework on the
markets every day, I am not concerned," he replied.
His answer had implied, quite correctly, that I did not diligently do my homework on the markets
every day. His point, although unstated, was quite clear: If I did my work on the markets every day,
I wouldn't have any trouble understanding why he did not need to pull out several million dollars in
profits from his account to feel confident that he would not lose back all his profits in trading.
"You say you don't have enough time each day to do your work on the markets. You are too busy
with your new job and writing your book. Here, letme show you something." He started citing
assumptions regarding the sales of my book, royalties per copy sold, and the total hours I had spent
writing the book. He then scribbled various calculations on a yellow pad. He arrived at a final
figure of $18.50 per hour. "Here," he said, "this is what you are making on your book." The tone of
his voice implied that I was crazy to jeopardize tens of thousands of dollars in my trading for such a
paltry sum. (Actually, the $18.50 estimate is probably wildly overinflated, but remember this was a
dream.)
It was no coincidence that this dream occurred the night after editing the section of the Marty
207

Schwartz interview dealing with his diligence in doing his daily homework on the markets. I
realized that there are no shortcuts. If you want to be a good trader, you have to do your work on
the markets every day. If there is not enough time, you have to make time. The costs for straying
from this daily discipline, in terms of lost profit opportunities as well as losses, can be very
substantial. The message my subconscious seemed to be crying out was: If you are going to be
serious about trading, you have to reestablish your time priorities.

208

Postscript-Dreams and Trading
The relationship between dreams and trading is a fascinating subject. Readers may look up
Seykota's and Tharp's comments on this matter. There was another interview in which this topic
was prominently discussed. In that instance, the trader decided to rescind his approval for use of
our conversation in the book. I was somewhat puzzled by his decision, since the chapter was
basically complimentary. "What could you possibly have found so offensive as to back out
completely?" I asked. "Absolutely nothing," he replied. "In fact, you made me sound almost
human." It turned out that he was upset about his inclusion in a recently published book and that he
was adamantly opposed to his appearance in any book. Even the offer of anonymity failed to
change his decision. I did, however, manage to get his permission to use the dream-related portion
of the interview. (The name references in the following conversation have been changed.)
In 1980, the year when corn set its record high, I was long the position limit. One night I had the
following dream. I'm talking to myself and I say, "Hey Jerry, where is corn going to?" "To $4.15."
"Where is corn now?" "$4.07." "You mean you are taking all that risk for an extra eight cents? Are
you crazy?" I woke up in a flash. I knew I had to get out of my entire corn position as soon as the
market opened the next day.
The next morning, the market opened up a little higher, and I started selling. The market moved a
little higher, and I sold more heavily. The market moved up some more. For a minute, I thought the
floor broker had executed my order backwards. He hadn't.
Anyway, a few minutes later, I'm completely out of my position and the phone rings. It's my friend
Carl, another good trader, who had also been long corn. He says, "Jerry, is that you doing all the
selling?" I tell him, "Yes, I just got out of my entire position." "What are you doing?" he shouts. I
say, "Carl, where is corn going to?" "About $4.15-4.20," he replies. "Where is corn now?" I ask
him. I hear an immediate click over the phone. He didn't even waste any time saying good-bye.
And was that the top of the corn market?
It might have gone up another day, but that was just about the high. Once it started falling, I could
never have unloaded a position of my size.
I found this trader's narration of his dream particularly fascinating, since I have occasionally had
similar experiences. Usually, I have found that when you feel strongly enough about a trade (either
getting in or getting out) to dream about it, the message should be heeded. Of course, like anything
else, this does not work all the time, but I believe it places the odds more in your favor.
As I interpret it, the dream is the means by which our subconscious penetrates the barriers we
sometimes erect in accepting the true analysis of a market. For example, if I am bullish and not in a
market, I might rationalize that it is prudent to wait for a reaction before entering the trade—even if
a realistic assessment would suggest that such a development is unlikely. This is because entering
the market at a higher price is a confirmation that, to some extent, I have already failed (that is, by
not buying sooner)—a distasteful acknowledgment. In such a case, a dream that the market was
going to run away on the upside might be the subconscious' way of breaking through mental
impediments.

209

210

Final Word
There is no holy grail to trading success. The methodologies employed by the "market wizards"
cover the entire spectrum from purely technical to purely fundamental—and everything in between.
The length of time they typically hold a trade ranges from minutes to years. Although the styles of
the traders are very different, many common denominators were evident:
1. All those interviewed had a driving desire to become successful traders—in many cases,
overcoming significant obstacles to reach their goal.
2. All reflected confidence that they could continue to win over the long run. Almost invariably,
they considered their own trading as the best and safest investment for their money.
3. Each trader had found a methodology that worked for him and remained true to that approach. It
is significant that discipline was the word most frequently mentioned.
4. The top traders take their trading very seriously; most devote a substantial amount of their
waking hours to market analysis and trading strategy.
5. Rigid risk control is one of the key elements in the trading strategy of virtually all those
interviewed.
6. In a variety of ways, many of the traders stressed the importance of having the patience to wait
for the right trading opportunity to present itself.
7. The importance of acting independent of the crowd was a frequently emphasized point.
8. All the top traders understand that losing is part of the game.
9. They all love what they are doing.

211

212

Appendix 1-Program Trading and Portfolio Insurance
One subject that has received widespread publicity in recent years is program trading. Perhaps
never in the history of financial markets has there been more criticism about a trading approach that
was less understood. I would venture a guess that less than one out of ten people opposed to
program trading even know the definition of the term. One source of confusion is that program
trading is used interchangeably to describe both the original activity and as a more general term
encompassing various computer-supported trading strategies (for example, portfolio insurance).
Program trading represents a classic arbitrage activity in which one market is bought against an
equal short sale in a closely related market in order to realize small, near risk-free profits, resulting
from short-lived distortions in the price relationship between such markets. Program traders buy or
sell an actual basket of stocks against an equal dollar value position in stock index futures when
they perceive the actual stocks to be underpriced or overpriced relative to futures. In effect,
program trading tends to keep actual stock and stock index futures prices in line. Insofar as every
program-related sale of actual stocks is offset by a purchase at another time and most program
trades are first initiated as long stock/short futures positions (because of the uptick requirement in
shorting actual stocks), arguments that program trading is responsible for stock market declines are
highly tenuous. Moreover, since the bulk of economic evidence indicates that arbitrage between
related markets tends to reduce volatility, the relationship between increased volatility and program
trading is questionable at best.
Portfolio insurance refers to the systematic sale of stock index futures as the value of a stock
portfolio declines in order to reduce risk exposure. Once reduced, the net long exposure is
increased back toward a full position as the representative stock index price increases. The theory
underlying portfolio insurance presumes that market prices move smoothly. When prices witness
an abrupt, huge move, the results of the strategy may differ substantially from the theory. This
occurred on October 19, 1987, when prices gapped beyond threshold portfolio insurance sell levels,
triggering an avalanche of sell orders which were executed far below the theoretical levels.
Although portfolio insurance may have accelerated the decline on October 19, it could reasonably
be argued that the underlying forces would have resulted in a similar price decline over a greater
span of days in the absence of portfolio insurance. This is a question that can never be answered. (It
is doubtful that program trading, as defined above, played much of a role in the crash of the week
of October 19, since the severely delayed openings of individual stocks, tremendous confusion
related to prevailing price levels, and exchange restrictions regarding the use of the automated
order entry systems severely impeded this activity.)

213

Appendix 2 - Options—Understanding the Basics*
There are two basic types of options: calls and puts. The purchase of a call option provides the
buyer with the right—but not the obligation— to purchase the underlying item at a specified price,
called the strike or exercise price, at any time up to and including the expiration date. Aput option
provides the buyer with the right—but not the obligation—to sell the underlying item at the strike
price at any time prior to expiration. (Note, therefore, that buying a put is a bearish trade, while
selling a put is a bullish trade.) The price of an option is called a premium. As an example of an
option, an IBM April 130 call gives the purchaser the right to buy 100 shares of IBM at $130 per
share at any time during the life of the option.
The buyer of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated price rise by locking in a specified purchase
price. The call buyer's maximum possible loss will be equal to the dollar amount of the premium
paid for the option. This maximum loss would occur on an option held until expiration if the strike
price was above the prevailing market price. For example, if IBM was trading at $125 when the
130 option expired, the option would expire worthless. If at expiration, the price of the underlying
market was above the strike price, the option would have some value and would hence be
exercised. However, if the difference between the market price and the strike price was less than
the premium paid for the option, the net result of the trade would still be a loss. In order for a call
buyer to realize a net profit, the difference between the market price and the strike price would have
to exceed the premium paid when the call was purchased (after adjusting for commission cost). The
higher the market price, the greater the resulting profit.
The buyer of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated price decline by locking in a sales price. Like
the call buyer, his maximum possible loss is limited to the dollar amount of the premium paid for
the option. In the case of a put held until expiration, the trade would show a net profit if the strike
price exceeded the market price by an amount greater than the premium of the put at purchase
(after adjusting for commission cost).
Whereas the buyer of a call or put has limited risk and unlimited potential gain, the reverse is true
for the seller. The option seller (often called the writer) receives the dollar value of the premium in
return for undertaking the obligation to assume an opposite position at the strike price if an option
is exercised. For example, if a call is exercised, the seller must assume a short position in the
underlying market at the strike price (since by exercising the call, the buyer assumes a long position
at that price).
The seller of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated sideways to modestly declining market. In
such a situation, the premium earned by selling a call provides the most attractive trading
opportunity. However, if the trader expected a large price decline, he would usually be better off
going short the underlying market or buying a put—trades with open-ended profit potential. In a
similar fashion, the seller of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated sideways to modestly rising
market.
Some novices have trouble understanding why a trader would not always prefer the buy side of the
option (call or put, depending on market opinion), since such a trade has unlimited potential and
limited risk. Such confusion reflects the failure to take probability into account. Although the
option seller's theoretical risk is unlimited, the price levels that have the greatest probability of
occurrence (i.e., prices in the vicinity of the market price when the option trade occurs) would
result in a net gain to the option seller. Roughly speaking, the option buyer accepts a large
probability of a small loss in return for a small probability of a large gain, whereas the option seller
accepts a small probability of a large loss in exchange for a large probability of a small gain. In an
efficient market, neither the consistent option buyer nor the consistent option seller should have any
significant advantage over the long run.
The option premium consists of two components: intrinsic value plus time value. The intrinsic
value of a call option is the amount by which the current market price is above the strike price. (The
intrinsic value of a put option is the amount by which the current market price is below the strike
price.) In effect, the intrinsic value is that part of the premium that could be realized if the option
were exercised at the current market price. The intrinsic value serves as a floor price for an option.
Why? Because if the premium were less than the intrinsic value, a trader could buy and exercise the
214
