 Private equity encompasses several long-term illiquid investment strategies. It began as a rebranding of leveraged buyouts after the 1980s. Private equity also includes venture capital, private growth capital, and distressed capital/special situations. The amount of private equity assets under management in 2012 was around $2 trillion, comparable to the amount in hedge funds. 
 Buyout funds have been much riskier than the S&P 500 and have historically had significantly higher excess returns. However, according to Higson and Stucke (2012), there has been a downward trend in buyout fund absolute returns over the 28 years ending in 2008. The excess returns of buyout funds have been driven largely by the performance of the top 10% of these funds. It would have been difficult to know ahead of time which ones these were going to be. 
 Over the past 40 years, venture capital funds have had annual gains of 13.4%, versus 12.4% for the S&P 500 Index and 14.4% for the S&P SmallCap Growth Index. Venture capital funds have had higher volatility, illiquidity, and survivorship risk. Only 60% to 75% of venture capital funds have survived more than 10 years. According to Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2013), since 2000 the average venture capital fund has underperformed public markets by about 5% over the life of the fund. 
 From 2001 to 2010, U.S. pension plans, on average, made 4.5% after fees from their investments in private equity funds. They paid an average of 4% each year in management fees, plus 20% of profits. This means fees amounted to about 70% of gross investment performance. Private equity funds usually require a five- to seven-year lockup period of invested capital. They have also been subject to widespread complaints of publishing inaccurate valuations. 
 Despite high fees, illiquidity, and variable performance, private equity is, by far, the Yale endowment’s largest asset allocation. Endowments, in general, are among the most prominent investors in private equity and hedge funds. Private equity funds, like hedge funds, are best left to institutional investors having superior due diligence capabilities. Even these investors may want to reconsider their level of commitment to these alternative investments. Barber and Wang (2011) did a 20-year study of university endowment performance from 1991 through 2011. They found that for the average endowment, factor models with only stock and bond benchmarks explain virtually all of the time-series variation in their returns and show no alpha. 
 ACTIVELY MANAGED MUTUAL FUNDS 
 We have seen that it is difficult for investors to profit from funds that charge annual fees of 2% of assets and 20% of profits, such as managed futures, hedge funds, and private equity. Let us look now at other forms of active management that do not charge such high fees. 
 More than 52 million households own mutual funds. Total U.S. assets in mutual funds now exceed $11.6 trillion. According to the Investment Company Institute (ICI), index funds make up 17.4% of domestic equity mutual funds, while actively managed equity funds make up 82.6%. 
 Researchers have extensively studied the performance of actively managed mutual funds since the 1960s. Jensen (1968) helped passive management gain a foothold with his study showing that the average mutual fund from 1945 through 1964 did no better than buying and holding the market. 
 Survivorship bias was a significant issue in these early studies. Through 2012, only 51% of actively managed mutual funds had survived over the preceding 10 years. One of the first comprehensive studies of mutual fund performance that considered survivorship bias was by Malkiel (1995). He found that, in aggregate, equity mutual funds from 1971 through 1991 underperformed their benchmark portfolios, both after and before management expenses. 
 Fama and French (2009) picked up where Malkiel left off. Using mutual fund data from 1984 through 2006, they discovered that few actively managed funds produced benchmark-adjusted returns sufficient to cover their costs, and it was hard to tell whether good performance was due to skill or to luck. The only thing predictable was that actively managed funds with high fees underperformed those with low fees, and both underperformed index funds having the lowest fees. 
 In a similar study, Barras, Scaillet, and Wermers (2010) studied 2,076 U.S. mutual funds from 1989 through 2006. Adjusting for data snooping bias, they concluded that the number of funds with skilled managers where active returns exceeded costs was statistically indistinguishable from zero. 17 They also found that the fraction of skilled managers declined from 14.40% to 0.60% from 1989 to 2006. The authors attributed this shift in performance to an increase in unskilled managers who nonetheless charged high fees with funds having high expense ratios. 
 According to Morningstar, the average annual expense ratio of an actively managed mutual fund is 1.41%, compared to 0.20% for a passively managed fund. Actively managed funds also have, on average, a portfolio turnover ratio of 83%, which adds an additional 0.70% per year in transactions cost expense. Furthermore, tax inefficiencies can add an additional 1% per year to the costs of owning an actively managed fund. Not accounting for possible negative tax consequences, Morningstar reported that at the end of 2012, after adjusting for survivorship bias, over 80% of large-blend mutual funds underperformed their benchmarks over the past 3, 5, 10, and 15 years. 
 Credit Suisse reported that the annual total return of the S&P 500 Index for the last 20 years ending in 2013 was 9.3%. The average actively managed mutual fund during this period earned 1.0% to 1.5% less than that, due to its expense ratios and transaction costs. The average returns investors earned was another 1% to 2% less than that, due to poor timing decisions. The overall return for investors in actively managed funds was 60% to 80% less than the market return over the past 20 years. 18 According to John Bogle, founder and former CEO of The Vanguard Group (now the world’s largest mutual fund company), “Selecting funds that will significantly exceed market returns, a search in which hope springs eternal and in which past performance has proven of virtually no predictive value, is a loser’s game.” 
 Vanguard has an interactive website where you can input an active fund’s expense ratio and see how your capital would grow at a 6% growth rate, compared to an index fund with an expense ratio of 0.25%. 19 If we input the average annual active fund expense ratio of 1.41%, at the end of 50 years we will have accumulated less than half the profits we would from using a low-cost index fund. 
 Warren Buffett once said: 
           Most investors, both institutional and individual, will find that the best way to own common stocks is through an index fund that charges minimal fees. Those following this path are sure to beat the net results (after fees and expenses) delivered by the great majority of investment professionals. 20 
 Buffett puts his own money where his mouth is. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway stock will go to charity after his death. For his heirs, Buffett has instructed the trustees of his estate to place 10% of what remains into short-term government bonds and 90% into a low-cost S&P 500 Index fund. 
 Researchers have been saying for many years that actively managed mutual funds offer no aggregate advantage over passively managed index funds. Passive index funds that were nonexistent in 1975 now account for almost 30% of the investment fund market. Yet actively managed funds still have more than twice the assets as passively managed ones. 
 OTHER ACTIVE INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT 
 There is more money actively managed outside than inside mutual funds. Pensions & Investments reported that the top 500 global asset managers held $62 trillion in assets under management in 2011, while the Investment Company Institute reported worldwide mutual fund assets of $23.8 trillion that same year. As for active investment management performance outside mutual funds, Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010) studied 4,617 domestic equity institutional products managed by 1,448 investment management firms from 1991 through 2008. They found risk-adjusted returns of these managers to be statistically indistinguishable from zero. The fees for active management came to 100% of the incremental returns earned over widely available passive alternatives. In the words of Eugene Fama, “After taking risk into account, do more managers than you’d see by chance outperform with persistence? Virtually every economist who studied this question answers with a resounding ‘no’.” 
 Whether through mutual funds or managed accounts, there is, in aggregate, little or no reward for bearing the additional costs of active management. This is logical, since all active managers have access to the same information when competing against one another for possible excess returns. It is therefore very difficult for an active manager to gain and retain a competitive advantage over his or her similarly qualified peers. For every buyer there is an equally well-informed seller, and both think they are making the correct decision. Benjamin Graham described the situation best many years ago when he said, “The stock market resembles a huge laundry in which institutions take in large blocks of each other’s washing.” 21 
 NONFUND INVESTING BY INDIVIDUALS 
 If active investment management and actively managed mutual funds offer no advantage over passive index funds, then how have individual investors done on their own? According to the 2014 “Quantitative Analysis of Investor Behavior,” issued annually by Dalbar, Inc., a Boston-based analytical firm, the average U.S. equity investor achieved an annualized return of 5.02% over the past 20 years, which is 4.2% less than the 9.22% average annualized return of the S&P 500 Index. Over the bull market of the past three years, the average U.S. equity investor gained 10.87% annually, which lagged the 16.18% annual return of the S&P 500 Index by 5.31%. 
 The average fixed-income investor had an annualized return of only 0.71%, which is 5.03% less than 5.74% return of the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index over the past 20 years. Both equity and fixed-income investors underperformed their markets over the past 1, 3, 5, 10, and 20 years. 
 We already know that much of this underperformance is due to investors making poor timing decisions due to their emotional responses to the markets. Investors sell after extended losses and are out when the market rises. Let us look now at some other studies so we can understand more about individual investor behavior. 
 Using data of 60,000 individual investors at a U.S. discount broker from 1991 through 1996, Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) found that investors are underdiversified. They hold portfolios that are highly volatile and stocks that are highly correlated. This increased volatility can aggravate investors’ poor timing decisions. 
 Using the same data, Kumar (2009) discovered that investors prefer to hold underperforming lottery-style stocks that are low-priced and have high volatility or high skewness. 22 The author determined that the typical investor could have improved his or her performance by 2.8% annually if he or she had simply replaced the lottery component of his or her portfolio with the nonlottery component. 
 Barber and Odean (2000) noted that the net stock market returns earned by average households lagged reasonable benchmarks by economically and statistically significant amounts. Individual investors turn over 80% of their portfolios annually. As we saw in Chapter 4 , investors trade too much due to overconfidence and the disposition effect that makes them greedy and fearful at the wrong times. Warren Buffett recommends doing the exact opposite of this: be greedy when others are fearful and fearful when others are greedy. 
 Weber et al. (2014), using data from an online European discount broker from 1999 through 2011, found that 5,000 individual European investors earned slightly negative risk-adjusted returns. Like their U.S. counterparts, European investors held only a few stocks, and these were often highly correlated. European investors also had a lottery mentality by preferring low-priced stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility or high idiosyncratic skewness. Eliminating some of these investor behaviors could have improved the average investor’s annual returns by 4% for underdiversification and by 3% for lottery stock preferences. 
 Individual investors are also at a disadvantage in terms of information and expertise. When Michael Steinhardt, the renowned hedge fund manager, was asked what the most important thing an average investor could learn from him, he replied, “I’m their competition.” 
 Warren Buffett said, “Investing is simple but not easy.” In summary, individual investors tend to 
          •    Respond overemotionally to market volatility 
          •    Hold high-volatility, lottery-style stocks and underdiversified portfolios 
          •    Be overconfident and overtrade their stock holdings 
          •    Be at an informational disadvantage 
 Given these tendencies, it would seem best for most investors to adopt instead a disciplined, rules-based approach, such as the one featured in this book. 
 BLOWIN’ IN THE WIND 
 Studies show that momentum works well with almost any asset class. 23 However, we can maximize our return through intelligent asset choice. Risk premium can serve as a tailwind to accentuate return and ensure that the odds of continuing success remain in one’s favor. U.S. stocks, with their 6.7% real return over the past 200 years, represent a strong and forceful wind that can fill the sails of our momentum model. Bonds, with a real return of 3.8%, are like a gentle breeze. Non-U.S. equities, with a risk premium somewhere between these two, are a steady zephyr. Commodities, hedge funds, private equity, and active investment management represent eddies, crosswinds, and head winds that may impede, rather than assist, our forward progress. 
 Today’s overemphasis on diversification often leads to mediocrity and unnecessary expense. (Alternative assets comprise 10% of pension fund assets but earn 40% of total fees paid.) Without discrimination, diversification can become “deworsification.” We shall see in later chapters that low-cost equity and fixed-income index funds, appropriately selected by dual momentum, are all that one needs for investment success. As Mae West once said, “Too much of a good thing can be … wonderful.”

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 6 
 SMART BETA AND OTHER URBAN LEGENDS 
          Things are seldom what they seem. Skim milk masquerades as cream. 
 – Gilbert and Sullivan 
 W E HAVE SEEN WHY WE want to focus on stocks and, to a lesser extent, bonds in our application of dual momentum. (If you do not understand that yet, please reread Chapter 5 .) The question then arises, are there better ways to participate in stocks than through traditional capitalization weighted indexes? 
 Smart beta is a catchall term for rules-based strategies that do not use conventional stock market index capitalization weights. According to Russell Investments, smart beta “includes transparent, rules-based strategies that are designed to provide exposure to market segments, factors, or concepts.” Smart beta attempts to deliver a better risk and return trade-off by using alternative weighting schemes based on measures such as volatility, dividends, and market risk factors. Among the best-known alternatives to capitalization weightings are the fundamentally weighted indexes developed in 2005 by Research Affiliates, a leader in the field of smart beta. It ranks stocks by sales, earnings, book value, and cash flow. Dimensional Fund Advisors came out at the same time with its similar Core Equity strategies based on fundamentally based weighting factors. Smart beta also includes equal-weighted funds in place of capitalization-weighted ones. 
 The global financial crisis of 2007−2008 that led to more interest in diversification and risk control was also an impetus toward smart beta strategies. Interest in smart beta has recently skyrocketed. According to State Street Advisors, smart beta ETFs attracted $46 billion in 2013 and over $80 billion during the preceding three years. Bloomberg reported $156 billion in smart beta products as of February 2014. 
 Smart beta is the fastest growing segment of the ETF space and grew at an impressive 43% pace in 2013, based on the combined assets under management of the top six managers. Four out of ten (excluding actively managed, leveraged, and inverse) U.S. equities ETFs are now smart beta funds. Institutional investors allocated three times as many assets to smart beta strategies in 2013 as they did the previous year. A Cogent Research study released in January 2014 indicated that one in four institutional investors now use smart beta ETFs, and nearly half of those not currently using them say they are likely to start using them within the next three years. 
 The first problem with smart beta is that, like unicorns, there is no such thing. Since beta is simply a portfolio’s sensitivity to movements in the overall market, it cannot be smart or dumb, although those who use it certainly can be. The expression smart beta makes as much sense as smart correlation , smart standard deviation , or smart Justin Bieber . Morningstar has now sensibly renamed smart beta as “strategic beta.” 1 
 SMART BETA CHARACTERISTICS 
 Amenc, Goltz, and Le Sourd (2009) and Perold (2007) show that fundamental indexation (a form of smart beta) is actually an active management strategy with a value tilt that is not necessarily superior to capitalization weighting. Chow et al. (2011) show that any apparent outperformance of alternative beta strategies over capitalization-based indexes is due to their exposure to value and small-cap factors. 
 Research Affiliates acknowledges that the value premium does indeed explain much of its indexes’ performance. Figure 6.1 is a price chart of the PowerShares FTSE RAFI US 1000 (PRF) ETF, based on the largest 1,000 fundamentally ranked companies by Research Affiliates, and the iShares Russell Mid-Cap Value (IWS) ETF from the time when PRF was launched in late 2005. Performance of PRF and IWS has been very similar, with IWS coming out a little ahead. 2 IWS has an annual expense ratio of 0.25%, versus 0.39% for PRF. Some other passively managed ETFs with factor tilts have annual expense ratios of only 0.07% to 0.12%. Smart beta investors in PRF are paying an additional fee for the construction of an index that is very similar to a traditional mid-cap value index. Other smart beta ETFs similarly match up well with lower-cost value and small-cap/mid-cap ETFs. 

 Figure 6.1 PowerShares FTSE RAFI 1000 and iShares Russell Mid-Cap Value 
 Looking now at equal-weighted indexing, the average market cap of the S&P 500 Index is about $58 billion, while the average market cap of the S&P 500 Equal Weight Index is only around $16 billion. The S&P 500 Index contains a substantially larger number of relatively smaller-cap stocks than larger-cap ones. Due to its equal dollar weighting, a much larger portion of the total dollars invested in the S&P Equal Weight portfolio is invested in these smaller-cap stocks. Figure 6.2 shows the Guggenheim S&P 500 Equal Weight (RSP) ETF matched up with the iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) small-cap ETF, starting in 1999 when RSP began. IWM outperforms RSP, which may be due largely to its annual expense ratio of 0.20%, versus 0.40% for RSP, and its lower annual portfolio turnover ratio of 19% versus 37%. 

 Figure 6.2 Guggenheim S&P 500 Equal Weight and iShares Russell 2000 
 Figure 6.3 shows the capital market line with the return and risk plotted for the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 500 Equal Weight Index, and the U.S. stock market separated into Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) size deciles. CRSP 1-2 is large cap, CRSP 3-5 is mid cap, and CRSP 6-10 is small cap. Annual return is on the horizontal axis, while annual standard deviation is on the vertical axis. We see that the S&P 500 Equal Weight Index lies between mid and small cap in its reward-to-risk profile, and that it offers a reward commensurate with its level of risk. Instead of paying a premium for the S&P 500 Equal Weight Index fund, investors could instead just buy a small- to mid-cap index fund. 

 Figure 6.3 S&P Indexes and CRSP Deciles Return Versus Volatility, 1990–2012 
 In addition, the weightings of equal-weight portfolios move continuously away from their target levels, which requires frequent rebalancing and substantially higher transaction costs. Frequent rebalancing also involves selling recent winners and buying recent losers, which goes against the momentum effect. 
 Back in the early 1970s, some of the early adopters of passive investing chose equal-weighted portfolios but gave up on that idea because of the issues of higher turnover, higher volatility, and having to invest large amounts in illiquid stocks. 
 Low volatility/minimum variance portfolios also suffer from very high portfolio turnover costs. Using data from 1967 through 2000, Hsu, Kaleshik, and Li (2012) replicated smart beta strategies as closely as possible using conventionally available products. Here are their annual portfolio turnover figures: S&P 500 Indexing 6.7%, Fundamental Indexing 14%, Equal Weight Indexing 22.9%, and Minimum Variance Indexing 49.2%. Low volatility/minimum variance can also have high tracking error, which measures how much a strategy return differs from its benchmark return. While low volatility and low beta strategies show some promise in academic tests, the problems of implementation with respect to portfolio turnover and tracking error may eliminate much of their advantage. 
 Sector concentration can be another problem for low volatility strategies. The S&P 500 Low Volatility Index invests in the 100 stocks of the S&P 500 Index having the lowest volatility over the preceding 12 months. It does not constrain sector weights, which can result in huge sector concentrations that cause large tracking errors. Right now, for example, 62% of the S&P Low Volatility Index is in three sectors, and 76% is in four sectors. There have been times in which over two-thirds of the index has been in only two sectors. Figure 6.4 shows how well PowerShares S&P 500 Low Volatility (SPLV), based on the S&P Low Volatility Index, matches up with just the defensive, low volatility SPDR Consumer Staples (XLP) sector. 
