
option and immediately offset the resulting market position, thereby realizing a net gain (assuming
that the trader covers at least transaction costs).
Options that have intrinsic value (i.e., calls with strike prices below the market price and puts with
strike prices above the market price) are said to be in-the-money. Options that have no intrinsic
value are called out-of-the-money options. Options with a strike price closest to the market price are
called at-the-money options.
An out-of-the-money option, which by definition has an intrinsic value equal to zero, will still have
some value because of the possibility that the market price will move beyond the strike price prior
to the expiration date. An in-the-money option will have a value greater than the intrinsic value
because a position in the option will be preferred to a position in the underlying market. Why?
Because both the option and the market position will gain equally in the event of a favorable price
movement, but the option's maximum loss is limited. The portion of the premium that exceeds the
intrinsic value is called the time value.
The three most important factors that influence an option's time value are:
(I) Relationship between the strike and market price—Deeply out-of-the-money options will have
little time value since it is unlikely that the market price will move to the strike price—or beyond—
prior to expiration. Deeply in-the-money options have little time value, because these options offer
positions very similarto the underlying market—both will gain and lose equivalent amounts for all
but an extremely adverse price move. In other words, for a deeply in-the-money option, the fact
that risk is limited is not worth very much, because the strike price is so far from the prevailing
market price.
(2) Time remaining until expiration—The more time remaining until expiration, the greater the
value of the option. This is true because a longer life span increases the probability of the intrinsic
value increasing by any specified amount prior to expiration.
(3) Volatility—Time value will vary directly with the estimated volatility [a measure of the degree
of price variability] of the underlying market for the remaining life span of the option. This
relationship is a result of the fact that greater volatility raises the probability of the intrinsic value
increasing by any specified amount prior to expiration. In other words, the greater the volatility, the
greater the probable price range of the market.
Although volatility is an extremely important factor in the determination of option premium values,
it should be stressed that the future volatility of a market is never precisely known until after the
fact. (In contrast, the time remaining until expiration and the relationship between the current
market price and the strike price can be exactly specified at any juncture.) Thus, volatility must
always be estimated on the basis of historical volatility data. The future volatility estimate implied
by market prices (i.e., option premiums), which may be higher or lower than the historical
volatility, is called the implied volatility.
*Adapted from Jack D. Schwager, A Complete Guide to the Futures Market (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, NY, 1984).

215

