
100 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

the prior belief is confirmed. The observer has fallen prey to the clustering illusion.
In contrast, if the observer has a prior belief that the process is random, it is more likely that they will fall prey to the gambler's fallacy.
Sooner or later a streak occurs, for example four heads in a row, which is
then followed by a tail. Although this would be quite normal in a random
process, the appearance of the tail reinforces the false belief that a tail
was due. Therefore, when a process is truly random both the observer
who thinks the process is nonrandom and believes that trends (clusters)
should occur and the observer who thinks the process is random and that
the trends should reverse will have their beliefs rewarded. In truth, when
a process is random both observers' expectations are false. Random
walks have no memory, and prior outcomes have no effect on subsequent
events.
The clustering illusion can also occur in a spatial context. The perception of illusory shapes in random data is simply another manifestation of a
false expectation about randomness. The false expectation is that random
data should not display any hint of organization or form. Any departure
from this expectation is interpreted, falsely, as a sign of a nonrandom
process at work. A case in which illusory spatial patterns in random data
encouraged the formation of erroneous perceptions occurred during the
World War II bombing of London by German V-I and V-2 missiles. 158 The
newspapers ran maps of missile impact sites, and readers had the immediate perception that the strikes were clustered. This gave rise to an equally
false, after-the-fact interpretation that impact patterns were evidence of
an effort by the Germans to avoid hitting certain parts of London, which in
tum spawned fallacious causal reasoning. Londoners came to believe that
these areas were spared V-2 attacks because they housed German spies.
However, a formal analysis of the missile impact sites showed that they
were entirely consistent with a random pattern.
A more recent example of illusory spatial clustering that fostered
erroneous causal reasoning was the so-called cancer-cluster hysteria in
California. People became alarmed if the number of diagnosed cases of
cancer of a particular type (e.g., lung cancer caused by asbestos) was far
above average in their community. It turns out that clusters can occur by
chance. What is not apparent to the statistically unsophisticated is this:
Given 5,000 census tracts in California and 80 possible environmental cancers, there will be some tracts in which the number of cancer cases will be
far above average simply due to chance. In some cases, such clusters really are attributable to environmental toxins, but not always and not
nearly as often as intuition would suggest.
This brings us back to TA and the appearance of orderly patterns like
double tops, head-and-shoulders bottoms, and so forth. The occurrence of

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

101

such shapes is not consistent with an intuitive notion of data produced by
a random process. Such data is erroneously presumed to be completely
haphazard and shapeless, so, we jump to the conclusion the patterns must
be the by-product of a nonrandom process that is not only amenable to visual analysis but that the patterns themselves are useful for making predictions. As Roberts showed, random walks can easily trace the patterns
that subjective technicians hold so dear.
In summary, people have a hard time telling when a set of data is random or not. Because the mind is predisposed to the perception of order
and adept at inventing stories that explain why that order exists, it is not
at all mysterious that the pioneers of TA would find patterns and trends
in price charts and then invent theories about why such patterns should
occur. Methods more rigorous than visual analysis and intuition are
needed to find the exploitable order that may exist in financial market
fluctuations.

THE ANl'ID01'E 1'0 ILLUSORY KNOWLEDGE:
THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
This chapter examined many ways we can be fooled into adopting erroneous knowledge. The best antidote ever invented for this problem is the
scientific method, the subject of the next chapter.

The Scientific
Method and
Technical
Analysis

T

1\S central problem is erroneous knowledge. As it is traditionally

practiced, much of TA is a body of dogma and myth, founded on faith
and anecdote. This is a consequence of the informal, intuitive methods used by its practitioners to discover patterns with predictive power.
As a discipline, TA suffers because it is practiced without discipline.
Adopting a rigorous scientific approach would solve this problem.
The scientific method is not a cookbook procedure that automates
knowledge discovery. Rather it is "a set of methods designed to describe
and interpret observed or inferred phenomena, past or present aimed at
building a testable body of knowledge open to rejection or confirmation.
In other words, (it) is a specific way of analyzing information with the
goal of testing claims."l This chapter summarizes its logical and philosophical foundations and discusses the implications of its adoption by
TA practitioners.

THE MOST IMPORTANT KNOWLEDGE OF ALL:
A METHOD TO GET MORE
"Of all the kinds of knowledge that the West has given to the world, the
most valuable is the scientific method, a set of procedures for acquiring
new knowledge. It was invented by a series of European thinkers from
about 1550 to 1700."2 Compared to informal approaches it is unsurpassed
in its ability to separate fact from falsehood. The dramatic increase in our
103

104 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

understanding of and control over the natural world over the last 400
years attests to the power of the scientific method.
The method's rigor protects us from the frailties of mind, which often
impair what we learn from experience using less formal methods. Although informal lmowledge acquisition works well for many of the obvious truths of daily living, sometimes what seems obvious is not true. It
was obvious to the ancients that the sun revolved around the earth. It took
science to show this was false. Informal observation and intuitive inference are especially prone to failure when phenomena are complex or
highly random. Financial market behavior displays both.
Historically, TA has not been practiced in a scientific manner, but this
is now changing. In academia and the business world, a new breed of
practitioners, lmown as quants, have been adopting a scientific approach.
Indeed, some of the most successful hedge funds are using strategies that
could be called scientific TA.
Unsurprisingly, many traditional TA practitioners have resisted this
change. Vested interests and habitual ways of thinking are hard to abandon. No doubt there was opposition when folk medicine evolved into
modern medicine, when alchemy progressed into chemistry, and when
astrology advanced into the science of astronomy. Rancor between traditional and scientific practitioners is to be expected. However, if history is
any guide, traditional TA will, in the end, be marginalized. Astrologers, alchemists, and witch doctors still practice, but they are no longer taken
seriously.

THE LEGACY OF GREEK SCIENCE: A MIXED BLESSING
The Greeks were the first to make an effort at being scientific, though
their legacy proved to be a mixed blessing. On the positive side of the
ledger was the invention of logic by Aristotle. The formal reasoning procedures he developed remain a pillar of today's scientific method.
On the negative side were his faulty theories of matter and motion. Instead of being generalized from prior observations and tested against
freshly observed facts, as is the practice in modern science, his theories
were deduced from metaphysical principles. When observations conflicted with theory, Aristotle and his disciples were prone to bending the
facts rather than altering or abandoning the theory. Modern science does
the opposite.
Aristotle ultimately realized that deductive logic was insufficient for
learning about the world. He saw the need for an empirical approach
based on inductive logic-observation followed by generalization. Its in-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

105

vention was his most significant contribution to science. However, he
failed in the application of his own invention. At his institution of higher
learning, the famed Lyceum in Athens, Aristotle and his students made
meticulous observations on a wide range of natural phenomena. Unfortunately, the inferences they drew from these facts were biased by Aristotelian dogma and often based on inadequate evidence. 3 There was too
much theorizing from too little evidence. When facts contradicted favored
first principles, Aristotle would contort the facts to conserve the principle.
Ultimately the Aristotelian legacy would prove to be an obstruction to
scientific progress. Because his authority was so great, his flawed theories
were transmitted as unquestioned dogma through the next 2,000 years.
This hindered the growth of scientific knowledge, or at least the sort of
lrnowledge that we now characterize as scientific. 4 In a like manner, the
teachings of TA's pioneers like Dow, Schabacker, Elliott, and Gann have
been passed along unquestioned and untested. Just as there is no room for
dogma in science, neither should there be in TA.

THE BIRTH OF THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION
"Science was the major discovery, or invention, of the seventeenth century. Men of that time learned-and it was a very revolutionary discovery-how to measure, explain, and manipulate natural phenomena in a
way that we call scientific. Since the seventeenth century, science has
progressed a great deal and has discovered many truths, and it has conferred many benefits that the seventeenth century did not know, but it
has not found a new way to discover natural truths. For this reason, the
seventeenth century is possibly the most important century in human
history."5
The revolution began in Western Europe around 1500 in an atmosphere of intellectual stagnation. At that time, all knowledge was based on
authoritarian pronouncements rather than observed facts. The doctrines
of the Roman Church and the dogma of Greek science were taken as literal truths. On Earth, objects were assumed to be governed by Aristotelian physics. In the heavens, the laws invented by the Greek
astronomer Ptolemy and later endorsed by the Church were thought to
rule. The Ptolemaic system held that the earth was the center of the universe and that the sun, stars, and planets orbited about it. To the casual
observer, the facts seemed to agree with the Church's orthodox theory.
Everyone was happy until people began to notice facts that conflicted with these accepted truths. Artillerymen observed that projectiles
hurled by catapults and shot from cannons did not fly in conformity with

.06 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Aristotle's theory of motion (Figure 3.1). The objects were repeatedly observed to follow arced paths-a distinct departure from the trajectory
predicted by Greek theory, which would have had them fall directly to
earth as soon as they left the apparatus. Either the theory was wrong or
the solders were deceived by their senses. The notion of testing the validity of a theory by comparing its predictions with subsequent observations
is fundamental to the modem scientific method. This was an early step in
that direction.
Also, at that time, observations of the heavens began to collide with
the Church's theory of an Earth-centered universe. Increasingly accurate
astronomical measurements revealed that planets did not move as the theory said they should. For a time, bewildered astronomers were able to
patch up the Church's theory to make it agree with observed planetary
paths. As discordant observations occurred, new assumptions were added
to the theory, in the form of smaller orbits revolving about a planet's principal orbit. These ad hoc fixes, called epicycles, permitted the theory to
account for the troublesome observations. For example, epicycles were
able to explain why planets were sometimes seen to move backwards
(retrograde motion) rather than follow a continuous path across the sky.
Over time, a succession of epicycle fixes transformed the fundamentally
incorrect theory of an Earth-centered universe into an unwieldy monstrosity of complexity with epicycles upon smaller epicycles upon even
smaller epicycles.
A landmark in scientific history took place when the telescope of
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) showed that four moons circled the planet
Jupiter. This observation contradicted Church orthodoxy that all celestial
objects must revolve around the Earth. Galileo's findings would have
called for the rejection of deeply held beliefs and the destruction of the
Church's view of reality. Religious authorities were not about to face these
facts. Though Galileo had originally been given permission by the Church
to publish his findings, it subsequently withdrew the permission and

Path

FIG HE 3..

~

- Path Predicted

by
Aristotelian Physics

Prediction versus observation.

Observed

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

107

found him guilty ex post facto. As punislunent, he was forced to give up
astronomy and live out his days under house arrest. 6
Eventually, the Church's theory of the heavens was replaced by the far
simpler and more correct Copernican model. It placed the sun at the center of the universe and managed to explain astronomical observations
with far fewer assumptions. Today we know that the sun is not the center
of the universe, but at the time the Copernican model represented a true
increase in man's knowledge of the heavens.

FAITH IN OBJECTIVE REALllY AND
OBJECTIVE OBSERVATIO S
Science makes a fundamental assumption about the nature of reality;
there is an objective reality that exists outside and independent of those
who observe it, and this reality is the source of the observer's sensory impressions. This faith is the basis of science's emphasis on observation. It is
properly characterized as a faith because there is no experiment or logic
that can prove the existence of an objective reality. For example, I cannot
prove that my perception of a red traffic signal is caused by a light that exists outside of myself rather than by something that arose entirely within
my own mind.
One might ask why we should make a big deal about a fact that seems
so obvious to common sense. Everyone can see there is a world out there.
However, in the eyes of science this issue is a mountain and not a molehill, and it points to an important difference between knowing scientifically and knowing intuitively. Science does not accept something as true
simply because it seems to be so. The history of science has shown repeatedly that the obvious is not necessarily true. Science assumes the
truth of an independent objective reality, not because it is self-evident, but
because it is consistent with a principle that shapes much of the scientific
enterprise-the principle of simplicity.
The principle says simpler is better. Thus, when judging which of
several theories is most likely to be true, when all theories are equally
good at fitting a set of observed facts, the principle of simplicity urges us
to accept the simplest theory. This is the theory that invokes the fewest
and least complicated assumptions. The principle of simplicity, also
known as Okaum's Razor, tells us to cut away a theory's excess complexity. The Copernican model of the universe was preferable to the
Church's model because it replaced a complex arrangement of epicycles
with one orbit for each planet. In a like manner, if a segment of market
history can be explained either as a random walk, which assumes very

108 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

little, or as an Elliott wave pattern that assumes waves embedded within
waves, golden ratios, Fibonacci sequences, and a host of other complexities, the random walk is the preferred explanation. That is, unless the
Elliott Wave Principle is able to make more accurate predictions than
the random-walk theory.
Assuming the existence of an external reality simplifies matters
greatly. To do otherwise would require a far more complex set of assumptions to explain why two people, observing the same phenomenon, will
come away with generally the same impression. Explaining why I see
other cars stopping when I see the traffic signal turning red is simple if I
assume that there really is a traffic light out there. However, without that
assumption, many more complicated assumptions would be required to
explain why other motorists stop when I do.
As a consequence of its faith in an objective reality, science holds
that objective and subjective perceptions are essentially different. My
objective observation of a red traffic signal and my subjective experience of being annoyed because it will make me late for work are not the
same. Objective observations can be shared with and confirmed by other
observers. For this reason, objective observations lend themselves to
the establishment of knowledge that can be shared with and confirmed
by others. Subjective thoughts, interpretations, and feelings cannot, and
this flaw alone is sufficient to disqualify subjective TA as legitimate
knowledge.

THE NATURE OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Albert Einstein once said; "One thing I have learned in a long life: that all
our science, measured against reality is primitive and childlike-and yet it
is the most precious thing we have."? Scientific knowledge is different
than wisdom gained by other modes of inquiry such as common sense,
faith, authority, and intuition. These differences, which account for science's higher reliability, are considered in this section.

Scientific Knowledge Is Objective
Science strives for maximum objectivity by confining itself exclusively to
facts about the world out there, although it is understood that perfectly
objective knowledge is never attainable. This eliminates from consideration subjective assessments that are inherently private and accessible by
only one person. Inner thoughts and emotive states cannot be shared ac-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

109

curately with others, even when that is the intent of an artist, poet, writer,
or composer. In Naked Lunch, William Burroughs attempts to convey his
personal experience of heroin. However, I will never know his experience
and may take away from those passages something quite different than
Burroughs's experience or that of someone else reading it. Scientific
knowledge is, therefore, public in the sense that it can be shared with and
verified by as many people as possible. This promotes maximum possible
agreement anlong independent observers.
Scientific knowledge is empirical or observation based. In this way
it differs from mathematical and logical propositions that are derived
from and consistent with a set of axioms but need not refer to the
external world or be confirmed by observation. For example, the
Pythagorean Theorem tells us that the squared length of the hypotenuse
of a right triangle, c, is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two
sides a and b or

However, this truth was not derived by studying thousands of examples of right triangles and generalizing from those many observations.
Rather, it is derived from a set of accepted mathematical postulates.
Scientific Knowledge Is Quantitative
The notion that the world is best understood when described in quantitative terms originated with the Greek mathematician Pythagoras [569
B.c.-approx. 475 B.C.]. It was his contention that both the world and
the mind are essentially mathematical. The importance science places
on quantification cannot be overemphasized. "Wherever mankind has
been able to measure things, which means transform or reduce them to
numbers, it has indeed made great progress in understanding them and
controlling them. Where human beings have failed to find a way to measure, they have been much less successful, which partly explains the
failure of psychology, economics, and literary criticism to acquire the
status of science."8
Observations must be reduced to numbers if they are to be analyzed
in a rational and rigorous fashion. Quantification makes it possible to apply the powerful tool of statistical analysis. "Most scientists would say
that if you cannot describe what you are doing in mathematical terms, you
are not doing science."9 Quantification is the best way to ensure the objectivity of knowledge and to maximize its ability to be shared with and
tested by all qualified practitioners.

aa 0 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
The Purpose of Science: Explanation
and Prediction
The goal of science is the discovery of rules that predict new observations
and theories that explain previous observations. Predictive rules, often referred to as scientific laws, are statements about recurring process, such
as 'event A tends to predict eventB,' but laws don't try to explain why this
happens.
Explanatory theories go further than predictive rules by telling us
why it is that B tends to follow A, rather than simply telling us that it does.
Chapter 7 will describe some theories advanced by the field of behavioral
finance that attempt to explain why the behavior of financial markets is, at
times, nonrandom. These theories give hope to TA and may explain why
certain methods of TA can work.
Scientific laws and theories differ with respect to their generality. The
most prized are the most general-that is, they predict and/or explain the
widest range of phenomena. A TA rule that is effective on all markets and
all time scales would have higher scientific stature than one that works
only on copper futures on hourly data.
Laws also differ with respect to their predictive power. Those that depict the most consistent relationships are the most valuable. All other
things being equal, a TA rule that is successful 52 percent of the time is
less valuable than one that works 70 percent of the time.
The most important type of scientific law is the functional relationship. It summarizes a set of observations in the form of an equation. The
equation describes how a variable that we wish to predict (dependent
variable) typically denoted by the letter Y, is a function of (Le., dependent
on) one or more other variables called predictors, usually designated by
the letter X. This is illustrated as
y= f(X)
