
Recession
or
Stagnation

Low
GDP

Deflation

Crude Oil
Low

Equity
Sell-Off

Decreased
Corporate
Profits

China
Global
Slowdown

Slowdown

36

Trading Binary Options

Step 2: Scan for Specific Fears
Every Sunday evening and Monday morning, the binary option trader should
ask and answer the question: Which fears dominate the market this week? The
answers will point to likely market directions. But how can the average trader
quickly and effectively extract information? How can the average trader obtain
accurate Internet searches about the opinion that dominates the markets? Fortunately, the rise of the Internet provides a medium that quickly transfers emotional information. Emotions spread like molecules in a medium, reactive and
diffuse. Emotions are transferred throughout the medium and converted into
opinions. The boundary between information and sentiment often becomes
blurred. This effect has been described as part of a cycle of market information
processing: “The market reports by the news services often consist of trading
participants’ perceptions and interpretations of the market, which are then
fed back to the traders in the market” (Oberlechner 2004, 137). The task of
binary option trader is to filter the enormous bag of words that populate the
social media and come to some conclusion about the intensity of sentiment
regarding the underlying markets. To accomplish this, the binary option trader
has to become a sentiment miner. Don’t let the term scare you away. In a very
real sense we are all sentiment and opinion miners every time we use language.

Step 3: Scan Headlines
Could the average binary option trader use sentiment mining to help shape
their trades? If so, what everyday tools can be used by the trader to accurately
extract market sentiment? It turns out that anyone can become a good sentiment miner using a few tips. First, the challenge is to spot occurrences of key
terms that are tagged to the fundamental forces being searched. The main
idea is to find the right terms. This is known in sentiment science as AdjectiveVerb-Adverb (AVA) combinations and using opinion lexicon (Qiu 2011).
Traders scanning the web often see frequent references to the terms fear
and greed. But these terms are too coarse and do not offer the granularity
needed by the trader to accurately sketch the vectors of market opinion. The
task is to classify sentiment that better correlates to opinions about expected
market direction. There are three major, general, directional sentiments that
characterize market emotions: bullish, bearish, and neutral. But to be helpful to the trader on a timely basis, these classifications need to be further
unpacked and detailed. The words “bullish” and “bearish” are still at too general a level. Being bullish or bearish is the result of a collection or the balance
of fears that make traders bullish or bearish or ambivalent. To successfully

Sentiment Analysis: New Predictive Tools

37

extract information from the social media about these forces requires a greater
level of precision in the use of keywords and efficiency in search and retrieval.
The average individual does not have the more advanced text mining tools
that are emerging. But some basic strategies are effective.
Overlooked by many traders is the value of scanning headlines. Headlines provide a sentiment activation frame to capture fundamental opinion.
They are effective because they are constructed by opinion leaders as devices
to attract readers. Headlines may not be accurate as to representing actual
economic data, but they are effective strength-attribute indicators that show
the pulse of opinion. Headlines trigger excitation waves that actually take the
shape of a contagion. Particularly in this age of the Internet, headlines that
appear and disappear throughout the day and night provide real-time samples
of sentiment trends. One headline is often replicated throughout the Internet, acting as a signal amplifier of sentiment.
The headline effect was very powerful when the rating agency Standard &
Poor’s announced its review of the U.S. government debt rating. The headline
was: Standard & Poor’s Puts “Negative” Outlook on U.S. Rating. The headline
triggered a big response throughout the market (Figure 3.6). The result was that
gold hit new highs in response.

1480

1485

1490

1495

1500
1505
Spot Price

1510

1515

Figure 3.6 Gold Rises on S&P Ratings Headline

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

38

Trading Binary Options

Step 4: Form Your Own Keywords for Search Retrieval
Beyond headlines, another critical tool in the hands of the binary trader
are keywords. Monitoring keywords enables a quick test of the emotional
strength of bullish and bearish sentiment on a 24/7 basis. While there are
an enormous amount of keywords, there are certain words that enable a very
effective sampling and mapping of the sentiment in the market. This is not
a trivial task. But following the latest text mining strategies, the trick is to
use words that are not subject to too much ambiguity and to filter out noise
words that give no added value to the search (Qiu 2011).
Let’s start with some initial suggested generic words that should be
used. They are: “risk appetite,” “risk aversion,” “U.S. dollar,” “Yellin,”
“Draghi,” “deflation,” “employment,” “wages,” and “inflation.” These
words are effective because they result in a high level of precision for
retrieving the sentiment that the market is focused on. Think of each
word as a landmark that is associated with an emotion. By using keywords, the trader is, in effect, doing shape science and finding the shape
of sentiment. In the context of the science of sentiment analysis, the challenge of correctly matching keywords to the correct sentiment the words
really reflect is called sentiment polarity text classification. The trader does
not want to mismatch.
The words therefore have to have what is called lexical cohesion. Luckily,
the use of words such as “risk aversion” and “risk appetite” have a high accuracy rate for retrieving and classifying the correct sentiment that goes with the
word. The words also have to have an ability to link to emotions that can be
categorized as positive and negative emotions. The positive emotions can also
be broken down into “positive, no doubt”; “positive, doubt”; “negative, no
doubt”; and “negative, doubt.”
Let’s apply this to the binary option trader scanning the web using keyword groups. Let’s combine keywords with a set of verbs that are usually
linked to emotions. For example, instead of the name of a key central banker
(Yellen, Draghi, Carney (the trader can enter: “Yellen fears,” or “Draghi
fears” (Figure 3.7). Using the group of words “inflation fears” or “U.S. dollar
fears” enables a quick grab of words relating to negative emotions about
the dollar. The result is a greater detection of emotions. As a general rule,
combine the name of a key leader with verbs such as “admits,” “declares,”
“warns,” “supports,” “denies,” and so on. The result is a retrieval of news that
carries with it a lot of information about the emotions involved. A good idea
for any trader would be to create his or her own table of opinion seed words,
or a verbal quadrant.

Sentiment Analysis: New Predictive Tools

39

These search strategies are flexible. It is a good idea to try different combinations to cast a wider net over the billions of words on the Internet. For
example, the trader could try:
Central Banker + Adjectives
Yellen
= fears, hopes, declares

Entering each combination of words results in a slightly different
grab, ensuring a wider and more diversified search. The effect is to provide a better match between the search and the retrieval of the emotion
involved.
Once an underlying binary option market is chosen, word searches
should become more targeted and specific. For example, if the currency pairs
were the subject of binary option trades for the week, specific searches using
the names of the key central bankers would be appropriate and effective.
For every binary option market there are specific keywords that should be
used. This is an area for which every trader can add his or her own ­creativity
and improve his or her effectiveness by constructing his or her own dictionary of market emotions. Here are suggested words for use at any time for
trying to gauge market sentiment. Start with any underlying market and
add the suggested keywords using the different word combination formula
(Figure 3.7).

Figure 3.7 U.S. Dollar Word Group

Fears

Risks

Inflation
Word Groups

Worries

Forecast

40

Trading Binary Options

underlying market + risk appetite
underlying market + risk aversion
underlying market + fears
underlying market + optimism
underlying market + doubts
underlying market + pessimism
underlying market + deflation
We can generalize the entire search process in one equation or algorithm.
It would be: underlying market + emotional adjective or adverb.
For example, for detecting U.S. dollar sentiment, a trader would generate
a search, possibly using the group of words, at different times: U.S. Dollar
Index risk appetite; U.S. Dollar Index risk aversion; U.S. Dollar Index fears;
U.S. Dollar Index doubts; U.S. Dollar Index optimism. The result is an ability to count the positive and negative news items relating to the U.S. Dollar
Index. This follows recent text mining and sentiment analysis methodology.
Peter Hafez of RavenPack, referring to this methodology, states, “One may
consider the sentiment ratio as the baseline for constructing market sentiment indices. As the ratio is measured as the count of positive to negative
news items, it indirectly takes into consideration changes in news volume”
(Hafez 2009).

Step 5: Create Your Own Risk Appetite/Risk Aversion Ranking
Since the words “risk appetite” and “risk aversion” are extremely effective as seed
words to retrieve market sentiment, the trader should always conduct a general
risk appetite and risk aversion search. By comparing the results of the search, the
ratio between risk appetite and risk aversion beliefs can be approximated.
After retrieving the results of using risk appetite and risk aversion, the next
step is to create your own sentiment ratio. The result is your own ability to
give a thumbs-up or thumbs-down assessment about the mood of the market.
The risk appetite/risk aversion ratio compares positive to negative sentiment
results from your own text searches. This is a good technique—until special
search engines can do a better job!
After doing a search for a good way to quantify the balance of risk appetite to risk aversion, you need to assign a number to the article or headline.
Ask yourself: Is the article retrieved positive or negative about the underlying
market? Keep score. This helps keep track of the strength of the sentiment.
A useful technique is to use a ranking range of –5 to +5. If the total sum is
positive, you have, in effect, a market that is risk positive.

Sentiment Analysis: New Predictive Tools

41

GOOGLE TRENDS AND WORD CLOUDS
Social media is becoming a source for sentiment analysis and even basic search
techniques and traders are beginning to use these tools to provide clues about
the shape of opinion related to an underlying market. Two of the most recent
tools are Google Trends and Word Clouds.
The millions of words in blogs, documents, and speeches form an unstructured
bag that needs to be made sense of by the trader. An established method is called
natural language processing to find patterns among the words. Word frequency
analysis is particularly effective. Another technique is detecting the presence or
absence of words. For example, when the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) issues a statement, any new phrase that occurs is carefully watched.
What is really important is a statement or remark that occurs only one time.
This is called a hapax legomena and in computer linguistics it is considered very
significant. It is also significant when it occurs in financial statements. An example
would be the word “deflation” suddenly appearing in a statement, but occurring
only one time. It would set off market reactions. Word frequency counters are
easily available and getting in the habit of conducting frequency analysis on key
statements will help reinforce a trader’s sense of the mood of the market.
Word clouds are also becoming popular and can become a very useful for
traders. Word frequency should be considered a fundamental indicator about
market mood and opinion. When applied correctly, they provide some additional perspective on changes in emphasis. They help the trader visualize what
concerns the market at that moment. Here is a word cloud generated from
the FOMC statement when they raised interest rates on December 16, 2015
(Figure 3.8). It clearly shows the focus on inflation rates as the key concern of
the FOMC. That word appeared very prominently.
FigUre 3.8 Word Cloud of FOMC Dec 16, 2015 Statement

42

Trading Binary Options

In recent years, word cloud software has become multilingual, and even
the Chinese trader can use word clouds to quantify sentiment. Traders can use
several word cloud generators, such as Wordle, Tagul, and WordItOut. They are
all accessible on the Internet.

references
Adamatzky, Andrew. 2005. Dynamics of Crowd-Minds. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing
Company.
Guang, Qiu, Bing Liu, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen. 2011. “Opinion Word Expansion and
Target Extraction through Double Propagation.” Computational Linguistics 37 (1): 9–27.
www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/coli_a_00034.
Feinerer, Ingo, Kurt Hornik, and David Meyer. 2008. “Text Mining Infrastructure in R.”
Journal of Statistical Software 25(5): 1–54.
Hafez, Peter Ager. 2009. “Construction of Market Sentiment Indices Using News Sentiment.”
White Paper. RavenPack International S.L. (August 28): 3. http://ravenpack.com/
research/indexsentpaperform.htm.
Miller, Rich. 2011. “Investors Favor Cash Over Commodities in Dim Poll Outlook.” Bloomberg
.com (May 12). www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-05-12/investors-shifting-to-cashfrom-commodities-as-outlook-dims-in-global-poll.html.
Moujahid, Adil. 2014. “An Introduction to Text Mining using Twitter Streaming API and
Python.” July 21. http://adilmoujahid.com/posts/2014/07/twitter-analytics/.
Oberlechner, Thomas. 2004. The Psychology of the Foreign Exchange Market. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Olson, Kenneth R. 2006. “A Literature Review of Social Mood.” The Journal of Behavioral
Finance 7 (4): 193–203.
Pang, Bo, and Lillian Lee. 2008. “Opinion Minding and Sentiment Analysis.” Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval 2 (1–2): 1–135. www.cs.cornell.edu/home/llee/omsa/
omsa.pdf.
Si, Mukherjee, Liu, Li, Li, and Deng. 2013. “Exploiting Topic-based Twitter Sentiment for
Stock Prediction.” http://www2.cs.uh.edu/~arjun/papers/stock_prediction_acl_13.pdf.
Xiaoxu, Fei, Huizhen Wang, and Jingbo Zhu. 2010. “Sentiment Word Identification Using
the Maximum Entropy Model.” Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering (NLP-KE), 2010. International Conference (August): 1–4, 21–23. http://ieeexplore
.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=5587811.
Yi, Jeonghee, and Wayne Niblack. 2005. “Sentiment Mining in WebFountain.” http://suraj
.lums.edu.pk/~cs631s05/Papers/sentiment_webfountain.pdf.
Wong, Felix Ming Fai, Zhenming Liu, and Mung Chiang. 2014. “Stock Market Prediction from
WSJ: Text Mining via Sparse Matrix Factorization.” http://arxiv.org/pdf/1406.7330.pdf.
Zhao, Yanchang. 2015. “Text Mining with R-Twitter Data Analysis.” R and Data Mining
Workshop, Deakin University, Melbourne. www.RDatamining.com.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 4

Tracking Fundamental
Forces That Impact
Markets
A Primer for Binary Traders

While finding the predominant sentiment for the markets is important for
selecting the direction of trading in the coming week, basic fundamental economic forces also affect the movement of prices. These forces are often in the
background, but remain important to monitor. The objective of this chapter
is to provide a basic understanding of the fundamental forces that a binary
option trader should know and track.
The relationship between economic fundamental forces and markets is
not linear. This means that tomorrow’s or next week’s price direction is not
directly predictable based on today’s or yesterday’s price patterns. Rather,
price action is more chemical in nature, similar to what chemists refer to as
a reaction-diffusion event, where an acid is dropped into a base and then the
reaction follows a non-linear path. The globalization of the world economy
promotes, of course, a gliding effect, in which a change in GDP growth,
inflation, interest rates, employment, wage growth, housing prices, in one
country, or market, generates ripples, and triggers a reaction and glides or cascades across the world. The gliding medium is the World Wide Web. A trigger event could be an earthquake, a sell-off in metals, a remark by a finance
minister, or many other exogenous events. The fact is that there is no place
43

44

Trading Binary Options

to hide in the world economy. Once an event occurs, what is predictable is
that there will be a reaction. The reaction varies in relationship to the level of
surprise. Expectations therefore are itself a major fundamental force. After the
reaction, the market digests the news and experiences a diffusion of original
impact of the surprise.
The Fundamental Forces

The trader should now fear gaining knowledge about fundamental forces.
Fortunately, we have filtered the key forces that shape market movements.
Let’s begin our tour of fundamental forces and relationships by reviewing the
most global of all forces—China. We then review the impact of commodity
markets, gold, the U.S. dollar, and other forces that need to be understood to
build skills in trading binary options.

China and the Global Markets
There is no doubt that economic expectations on China’s growth are and will
increasingly become key drivers in the global economy. The importance of
China in the world economy is partially reflected by the IMF granting reserve
status to the Chinese currency, the yuan, on November 30, 2015. Clearly the
Chinese economy is integrating into the global economy. The binary trader
should recognize the impact of economic news coming from China. The
binary option trader needs to monitor China economic news for a variety
of reasons. China is the world’s production hub. It imports resources and
exports consumer products for the rest of the world. First, if growth in China
is strong, it will directly affect the entire world economy. Some underlying
markets are more directly affected by China’s economic surprises than others.
For example, China imports key resources from Australia and therefore trading the AUD/USD, and the copper binaries should be considered first when
China economic data releases relate to these markets (Figure 4.1).
The selloff in the Shanghai market lead to “black” Monday on August 24,
demonstrating how the sentiment of fear cascades through markets.
Secondly, when markets open Monday mornings in Asia, watching
whether the Shanghai Index is bullish or bearish gives a powerful clue to
which markets binary traders should focus on as the week opens. A classic
example is the market actions in August 2015 (Figure 4.2) relating to China’s
devaluation of the yuan on August 11.

Tracking Fundamental Forces That Impact Markets

45

Figure 4.1 China Growth Expectations Affect Aussie and Copper Markets

Increase
Growth

Greater
Demand

Triggers

Increase
In Value

Drives

China

Aussie
Exports

AUD/USD

Figure 4.2 Shanghai Index Sell-Off and Fear Spreads to S&P 500

4000

SHCOMP Index (R1)
SPX Index (R2)
2100

3800
2050
3600
2000
3400
1950
3200
1900
3000

Aug 2
2015

Aug 9

Aug 16

Aug 23

Aug 30

46

Trading Binary Options

Trading China news is now possible at Nadex and IG by trading the
China A50 and at IG the China CSI 300 Index. These provide weekly, daily,
and intraday opportunities.

Global Growth and Commodity Markets
In reviewing global market conditions, the trader will notice that an overarching theme is global growth and global slowdown. A good way to look
at growth is to visualize it as a process of cause and effect. Global growth
or expectations of growth (Figure 4.3) generate inflation, higher consumer
prices, higher commodity prices, and increased interest rates. At some
point, the increased interest rates start slowing down the growth to damper
inflation.
In a scenario of a global slowdown, the key fundamental forces reverse.
Low GDP expectations lead to lower demand for crude oil, lower commodity
prices, and equity markets become less attractive. The big fear is no longer
inflation, but deflation. The fear of deflation applies directly to the Eurozone
and to Japan, both of which have had a difficult time generating growth.
Traders need to monitor economic data releases on inflation in these countries to detect any changes in the potential for pushing prices higher.

Figure 4.3a  Global Growth Fundamental Factors
GDP

Growth

High

Hyper

Inf lation

High
Consumer
Prices

China
HyperGrowth

High

High

Crude Oil Price

Commodity
Prices

Global
Inflation

Tracking Fundamental Forces That Impact Markets

47

Figure 4.3b  Global Slowdown Fundamental Factors

Recession
or
Stagnation

Low
GDP

Deflation

Crude Oil
Low

Equity
Sell-Off

Decreased
Corporate
Profits

China
Global
Slowdown

Slowdown

Commodity Markets as a Global Fundamental Force
Commodity markets will continue to be a valuable source for detecting profitable
opportunities in binary option trading. A rise or fall in commodities should be
used to select and shape binary option trades. Depending on the size of a move, a
drop or spike in commodities spills over into the equity markets. The collapse of
oil to historic lows during December 2015 is a case in point (Figure 4.4).
The binary trader looking to trade oil needs to understand and take a measure of the trend or pattern that is in place. After a surge down, the trader can
try to join the sentiment and predict that oil will go further down. This requires
good timing on choosing the expiration. However, it is more likely to predict
that after a surge down crude oil will not likely bounce back. It will take a shift
in global growth levels or a decline in oil production to be bullish on crude oil.
Beyond the overall fundamental forces, the binary option trader should
track specific correlations between different markets and instruments. The
value of being updated on correlations lies in reducing risk as well as augmenting profits. When trading several different underlying markets at one
time, if two or more were highly correlated, the trader has the risk of incurring a loss in all those markets that are correlated. Of course, the potential of
being correct increases and is augmented. Generally, reducing risk is achieved
by trying to trade have less correlated markets during the trading period.
