THE TREND
FOLLOWING BIBLE

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived the
market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether you are a novice
trader, a professional, or somewhere in between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

THE TREND
FOLLOWING
BIBLE
How Professional Traders Compound
Wealth and Manage Risk

Andrew Abraham

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Cover image: Andrew Liefer
Cover design: © Danin Tulic/iStockphoto
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)
646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by
sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not
be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither
the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages,
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If
this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products,
visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Abraham, Andrew.
The trend following bible : how professional traders compound wealth and manage risk /
Andrew Abraham.
pages cm. — (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-118-40774-5 (cloth); ISBN 978-1-118-42186-4 (ebk),
ISBN 978-1-118-43439-0 (ebk), ISBN 978-1-118-41763-8 (ebk)
1. Investment analysis. 2. Portfolio management. 3. Investments. 4. Risk management. I. Title.
HG4529.A27 2013
332.64'5—dc230
2012043888
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To my Family, Ruthie, Gabrielle,
Ariel, Micael, my mother, and all
those who supported me along my
journey of trend following, thank
you.

CONTENTS

Foreword

ix

Preface

xiii

Introduction
CHAPTER 1

My Journey as a Trend Follower

Get a Savvy Start

1

9

Can You Really Make a Living as a
Trend Follower?
CHAPTER 2

Getting the Most Out of This Method

25

CHAPTER 3

Why Trend Following?

35

CHAPTER 4

How Successful Trend Followers Trade

49

CHAPTER 5

Managing the Risks when Trend Following 81

CHAPTER 6

Your Complete Robust Trading Plan

95

CHAPTER 7

Trend Breakouts

107

CHAPTER 8

Trend Retracements

121

CHAPTER 9

The Trend Follower Mindset

137

CHAPTER 10

My Trading Journal

161

Conclusion

193

Disclosure

195

Index

197

vii

FOREWORD

I

’ve been trading for investors for over 30 years. My first fund, Tactical Commodity
Fund, started in mid‐1981. Tactical’s current program began in 1993 as an offshoot
of that first fund but with lower leverage and some evolutionary changes. I’ve learned
a lot over the years. I’ve seen a lot of markets, a lot of bull moves, a lot of bear moves.
And I can tell you I wish I had read this book 30 years ago. I would have made more
money, especially near the beginning. Do yourself a favor. Read it. Now.
My trading‐for‐investors career began not long after gold peaked around 870 and a
bit over a year before the S&P bottomed near 100. I subsequently watched gold drop
more than 70 percent over 19 years and then rally over 700 percent in the next 12. I
watched the stock market rally for over 17 years with just one big, brief pullback along
the way only to witness two retracements greater than 50 percent in the next 10 years.
I’ve seen almost too numerous to remember booms and busts in the commodity,
currency, and interest rate markets. I’ve seen things happen that everyone said never
would and watched as things didn’t happen that everyone said were inevitable. I’ve
traded and held positions in these markets nearly every single day since mid‐1981.
Tactical was one of the first systematic, computerized fund managers. We started
out on a Radio Shack TRS 80, before the first Apple. Historical data that costs pennies now took months to type in by hand. We ran Fourier transforms and proved
there were in fact no repeatable hidden cycles in the markets while everyone else was
still talking about them. We tested all the market lore to see what was true and what
wasn’t. We tested the early mechanical systems that were touted and found most of
them didn’t hold up. Indicators that people still use today we learned years ago don’t
really give you a statistical advantage.
I wrote my own back‐testing software and tested everything I could think of.When
personal computers advanced we bought the latest. For a number of years we had two
Sun workstations running 24/7 doing systems testing when those were state of the
art. Of course, now you can do the same things much faster on a laptop. But that was
then and this is now. We kept testing. We kept learning.

ix

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

x

I read every book I could get my hands on about trading. I listened to the old
traders. When I worked during summer breaks in college at a brokerage firm at the
Chicago Board of Trade I kept my ears open as the old‐timers related their adventures,
their successes, their failures. I tried to understand the psychology of the winners and
how it differed from that of the losers. I got the idea that the psychology of the trader
was as important if not more important than anything in success or failure.
I spent a lot of time learning things the hard way, a lot of trial and error, a lot of
hard knocks. Trading is still a lot of hard knocks. Drawdowns can go on seemingly
forever. You can have days, weeks, even months on end without much in the way of
profits. It can feel as if you are a punching bag or a movie double who takes all the hits.
But that’s the nature of the game, of the business.
Even after you’ve learned how to do it, you still take your hits. To succeed, you just
need to stand up every time you get knocked down. You need to have the confidence
that standing up is the right thing to do.You need to know when to stand back up and
how. And just by standing up again and again and staying standing as long as you can
before you get hit again, well, you can actually make more money than you lose over
the long run in trend trading. It’s quite an amazing process.
Very few people succeed in this process. The learning curve is too steep and the
correct psychology is too hard to implement. If you have any attachment to making
money, and who doesn’t, it is very tough to trade correctly.
This brings me to the book you hold in your hands. To reiterate: I surely wish I had
had it 30 years ago. It would have saved me a lot of work. And I would have made more
money, especially in the early years. More specifically, I would have lost less money
and that would have put me farther ahead today. Andy Abraham has written a gem. His
writing style is enjoyable, clear and entertaining. He covers all the main ingredients
needed for successful trend trading. He tells the truth.
What impresses me most about Andy’s writing is his honesty. He doesn’t sugarcoat
things. He doesn’t tell you it’s easy to make money. He tells you that you need patience
and discipline. (By the way, “Patience and Discipline” has been Tactical’s slogan since its
inception.) Andy tells you drawdowns and losses are part of the business. He presents
a track record of one of his own programs that he started just a few years ago that has
not made new highs in 17 months. That’s exactly how it works sometimes. What is so
refreshing is Andy’s honesty about it. The man has integrity.
A characteristic of those traders who have been successful over many years is honesty with respect to their trading.You need to understand your own psychology, where
you are mentally strong and weak, how you deal with baser emotions, particularly
fear and greed. If you lack honesty with yourself, you will almost certainly fail. Andy’s
honesty, more than anything, tells me he understands trading psychology and gives
me confidence he is qualified to teach others what he knows. I have yet to run across a
trading book that emphasizes the psychological aspect of trading better than this one.
This book is not a cookbook. It does not outline a mechanical system. It explains
the psychology needed to succeed in trend trading, gives some examples of traders

xi
FOREWORD

who have applied it, and sets out the underlying principles that should be followed for
success—trade the best markets, trade with the trend, bet small, use stop‐losses, cut
losses, ride winners, don’t overtrade, be patient, be disciplined.
As a bonus, Andy gives you the scaffolding for a particular methodology that works for
him as an example of everything he sets out in the basic rules. Just as you would never think
of moving into a new house that has been framed but before the roof, walls, and interior
are finished, you cannot and should not attempt to trade Andy’s “system” without doing
all the finishing carpentry.You need to do your own back‐testing—doable these days with
off‐the‐shelf software he describes—to fill in the parameter values and to learn how his
trade‐the‐best market portfolio ranker shuffles which market signals you take. For those
who don’t have a clue where to begin, Andy gives you his exact pattern to follow.Your own
back‐testing fills in the parameter blanks.
Andy advises everyone that they must trade a style that fits their personality. I believe very strongly that he is absolutely correct.You will not follow a system that does
not suit you. In his wisdom Andy thus does not give you all the parameter values for
the formulas in his personal trading scaffold. He wants you to do your own back‐testing, to find a methodology that you are comfortable with yourself and have confidence
in. When all is said and done, your approach may be identical to his with your own
parameter values. It may be significantly different. Regardless, you cannot develop the
confidence to pull the trigger after multiple losses in a row without having done the
work yourself. Guaranteed.
It’s a fair bet to say that any trend following methodology likely to succeed over
time will employ the general psychological and fundamental trading rules Andy outlines. The specifics of everyone’s approach will vary, but the broad principles outlined
here will be present in one form or another in virtually all robustly successful trend
following approaches. People say that markets have changed and new rules are needed
for the new game. I’ve heard that for over 30 years. The markets do change but the
underlying fundamental rules for success don’t seem to. They are all outlined here.
How great.
You are lucky to have picked up this book. If you are a seasoned trader, reviewing
the basic elements of winning psychology makes this book worth perusing cover to
cover. We can all use reminders, yours truly always. If you are new to trading, this
book can save you years of trial and error and monetary losses. This book is now on
my short list of recommended reading material for traders. I sincerely thank Andy for
having written it. Have fun reading it. I wish you all the best in your trading.
Dave Druz
Tactical Investment Management
CTA / CPO since 1981
Haleiwa, Hawaii
November 2012

P R E FA C E

I

wanted to write a book that I wished I could have read when I first began to trade.
This book is unique and I hope it will give you all the tools needed to help you
become a successful trader over time. I have had help along the way of my journey of
trend following. Writing a book that encompasses all aspects of trading is my way of
giving back and helping new and aspiring traders. By teaching and enlightening others
I know I will make a difference in many aspiring traders.
Hopefully you will learn from my mistakes and avoid the 18‐year learning curve I
have been on so far. The lessons I have presented in this book will help you achieve the
goals that you are seeking.
I wanted to share my insight—from the perspective of a professional who trades
for a living—what one goes through on a daily basis and what a trader needs to know
and internalize to become a consistent and successful trader over time. The majority
of books I have read over the years seemed to try to boost my confidence by demonstrating how easy trading success can be. Trading for a living is not easy by a long shot.
My goal is to illustrate the major issues and challenges that traders face. I would
assume there are those readers who would prefer to seek the “easy.” It really does not
exist! My purpose and goal was to dispute all the snake oil, hope, hype, unrealistic get
rich quick falsehoods. There is no easy money in the markets. You will have to work
hard to achieve success.You will make plenty of mistakes; however, look out the front
window and learn from your mistakes.
I would assume that many of you have picked up this book because you are hoping
to improve your trading. My goal is to give specific methods instead of vague generalities that can be used in your everyday trading and improve it. My goal is that you
instill in yourself that ultimately you are the only one responsible for your success or
failure. It is never the market, never the broker, or me, with my advice. I want you to
realize that the markets can be cooperative at times and giving, as well as also ruthless and unforgiving. No matter what stage of trading you go through, there will be
times of severe aggravation (if you let it). How you react to the realities of trading will

xiii

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

xiv

determine if you will be part of the 90 percent who lose money or the small group
of 10 percent who are consistent winning traders over time. My goal is to have you
be part of the 10 percent club of winners; however, it is up to you to truly internalize
what I am trying to instill in you.
Introspectively there were other reasons why I wrote this book. Writing about
trading actually helps me overcome the inherent difficulties of trading. No one is
immune to the difficulties of trading. Even money managers who have assets in
the hundreds of millions of dollars must face the mental challenges. I have had a
blog, TrendFollowingmentor.com, in which I speak and try to educate about trading.
Nothing is sugarcoated. I have been told by many colleagues that I focus almost too
much on telling readers how trading is difficult. The reality is that trading is hard. I
learned this fact the hard way. This is probably the complete opposite of what you
would have thought when you purchased this book.You probably thought you could
buy this book and be immediately on your way to making money. Trend following,
however, is like a marathon, and I hope it becomes a lifetime strategy for you.
On October 31, 2011, MF Global went bankrupt and shocked the futures markets.
It is not just the fact that MF Global went bankrupt but that over $1.6 bbillion of client
segregated funds supposedly “vaporized.” I was a client of MF Global and their predecessor EDF Mann since 1994. Along with many others, I was in shock about what
was allowed to transpire. This had never happened in the futures markets. Another
firm, Refco, blew up due to fraud and the next day clients were made 100 percent
whole. Not so in the case of MF Global. What helps me overcome this frustration was
to write. Over the Christmas holidays in 2011 I decided to write a book on trend following and trading for a living that would be different from all of the existing books
on the market.
It was partly due to a catharsis and in conjunction with the request by my oldest
daughter who has been trading with me since she was 13. She had asked me to teach
some of her friends how to trade. I had time on my hands and started to write.
My bookshelves are full of trading books. I have read books regarding Warren Buffett, Value Investing, and all the books you can ever imagine on technical trading, but
none of them got me to the point that 18 years of struggle did. I thought the more
books, the more successful my trading would be. This is why I really believe my book
will stand out among the many other trading books. I continued on this holy grail
search with trading systems and formulas. I was so overwhelmed with courses and
gurus. I could not figure out why everyone wasn’t rich. I could not understand why
more than 90 percent of traders fail. Many of these 90 percenters are engineers, pilots, and successful people in all types of fields. I read the various success stories of
traders in Market Wizards by Jack Schwager whom I called the 10 percenters and was
encouraged. There are other great books in recent years that focus on successful traders such as Michael Covel’s books Trend Commandments: Trading for Exceptional Returns,
Trend Following: How Great Traders Make Millions in Up or Down Markets, and The Little Book

1. Robust trading plan applicable to all time frames and markets.
2. Complete risk and money management.

xv
PREFACE

of Trading. There is a great deal of fantastic information to be gleaned from these books
and I strongly recommend them.
A driving force for me was to succeed in trading. I did not assume the lure of so‐called
“easy money’’; I did not assume it would be easy. I read about Larry Williams who in a
trading contest took $10,000 to approximately $1 million.I read in MarketWizards about
Michael Marcus who started with $30,000 and took that sum to $80 million. Richard
Dennis was also featured; he started with $400 and ran it up to over $200 million.These
numbers were amazing but also dangerous to novice traders like myself at the time. Everyone who trades wants to achieve these results. Just because someone else succeeded,
this might really help you.You do not hear of all those who failed and how long it took
the ones to survive to become successful.
Most traders have no concept of what is needed in order to achieve these lofty
goals. I assume that all too many traders think this is easy and instead of focusing on
what needs to be learned, they focus their time and energy on all the ways they could
spend their new‐found riches. Then there are those who invest all their time in search
of holy grail indicators and systems that aren’t.
In every business venture before one starts the norm is to make a business plan. To
the contrary, too many new traders are more focused and anxious to get rich rather
than to make a business plan. They think they do not have time for the plan. The lure
of easy money is a Pandora’s box of problems. The dangers of unrealistic expectations
are more than prevalent. Instead of focusing on all the dangers of trading, too many
are focusing optimistically on their new‐found easy wealth. I can humbly say I made
countless mistakes and I paid for these mistakes, but introspectively I was of the camp
seeking holy grail systems and indicators, which was a waste of time. These mistakes
were required learning lessons for me in order to become a consistent trader even
though I had people trying to help me. It is not just me. Behind all the glory of the Market Wizards was the reality. Richard Dennis, the teacher of the Turtles, lost 50 percent
of his and his investors’ accounts and has stopped trading. Michael Marcus borrowed
money from his mother and lost it before he internalized his mistakes! Larry Williams,
whose claim to fame was in a trading contest and book, How I Made One Million Dollars
LastYear Trading Commodities, lost a million dollars the following year.
There are countless stories of unknown traders who have blown up. They focused
too much attention on the easy profits they thought they would make. They had no
concept of risk management. They had no concept of hard work. Too many believed
they could buy a trading system or trading robot and find their proverbial retirement
in a box.
The reality of successful trading comes down to several basic tenets and the realization that you have to work hard:

3. The patience and discipline to follow the trading plan and follow the risk
and money management guidelines.
On my business card I have written on the back the tenets of successful trend following:
1. Trade with the trend.
2. Cut your losses.
3. Let your profits run.
4. Don’t let the big profits get away.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE
