
213

214 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading

Chapter 13

Researching Research Services
In This Chapter
▶ Figuring out where to get a trading education
▶ Supplementing your trading with research
▶ Checking out vendors before you spend your money

A

lot of people make big money in day trading, but they aren’t day traders.
They’re the people who have profitable businesses selling training
services, software, newsletters, and coaching. The problem is, their lessons
don’t often help their customers make a profit after these education costs are
figured in.
Why the discrepancy between the cost of the training and the value it generates for day traders? It could very well be because some traders who buy
these services aren’t cut out for day trading in the first place; after all, day
trading isn’t for everyone. In other cases, though, the traders fail to do good
research before plunking down the cold cash for training in a system that just
wasn’t very good.
You’ve already plunked down the price of this book. Consider that an investment! In this chapter, I cover some of the different services that day traders
may want to buy and give you advice on how to determine which ones are
worthwhile and which are not.

The Trade of Trading
Day trading is a career. Every career takes time to master, and practitioners
have to work to keep their skills up as the field changes. You’ll probably find
that you need some training to get started and more training to be successful, whether you’re trading futures, building bridges, or doing heart surgery.
The following sections outline some of the training options available to you.

216 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Let me be frank: Although I put a lot of information in this book about day
trading, I don’t include everything. This book is a starting point. The fact is,
because you can trade so many different assets in so many ways, no one
resource can give you all the information you need. A stock trader following a
news-based momentum strategy needs different services than a forex trader
looking at interest-rate discrepancies. That’s why my goal is not to teach you
about specifics but to point you to resources that can help you get started
and show you how to get the most value from the money you spend.

Enjoying freebies from the exchanges
and the regulators
Before you spend more money, check out what several different exchanges and
self-regulatory organizations offer for free to help you get started in trading.
Through these sources, you can find webinars, online courses, and plenty of
reading material that may give you all the information you need to get started.
After all, the financial industry wants people to trade — that’s how it makes
money — and it wants them to be successful, because that keeps the market
functioning. (Exchanges are businesses, like any other.) Going through such
free material first can give you a great sense of how suitable you are for a given
strategy and help you make better decisions about other types of training.
In this section I list a few resources that are particularly good for new
day traders.

Chicago Board Options Exchange Learning Center
The Options Institute of the Chicago Board Options Exchange offers a series
of great online tutorials, classes, practice accounts, and seminars that cover
exchange-traded options in great depth. Many are free, although some of the
more intensive programs that include live coaching carry tuition charges. The
CBOE also has a two-day seminar for experienced traders who want to come to
Chicago (a great city, although the weather is something else). The site includes
online toolboxes and calculators, not to mention a simulated trading game.
For more information, go to www.cboe.com/LearnCenter/default.aspx.

CME Group Education
The CME Group, a holding company for several different exchanges, offers
extensive and detailed free education programs on just about every aspect
of derivatives trading. Whether your interest is currency, grain, or options on
futures, the CME Group has videos, online courses, and white papers covering
basic vocabulary, advanced trading strategies, and current market commentary.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
It has a lot of information that you can use, whatever your strategy. And you
really can’t beat the price!
For more information, go to www.cmegroup.com/education/index.html.

Institute for Financial Markets
The Institute for Financial Markets is a nonprofit organization that provides
basic training programs for people working on the options and futures
exchanges. Many of its courses are inappropriate for day traders, who aren’t
going to be licensed and who do not have mandatory continuing education
requirements to maintain those licenses. But some of the options may be
helpful to you, so check them out after you see what the exchanges have to
offer. Recent offerings include the basics of derivatives and trading strategies.
For more information, go to www.theifm.org.

IntercontinentalExchange
Most of the training programs offered by the IntercontinentalExchange are
designed for employees of trading firms and take place at the exchange’s
offices, but they have offices all over the world. The ICE also has several
online seminars that can help you learn more about different products and
strategies. These seminars are aimed at traders with a little experience.
For more information, go to www.theice.com/KnowledgeCenter.shtml.

NASDAQ/OMX
Okay, if I’m being honest here, I have to admit that the stock exchanges want
to promote investing more than trading, because they want companies to
issue stock on their exchanges. The kind of high volatility that day traders
love puts off some starchy corporate officers. Hence, much of the information
on NASDAQ’s site is about how to select stocks for the long term. Still, some
information here may be useful to a prospective day trader, including data
descriptions that can help you with your strategies.
For more information, go to www.nasdaq.com/investing.

National Futures Association Investor Learning Center
The National Futures Association is the self-regulatory organization for the
agricultural and financial futures exchanges. This site includes tutorials on
trading futures and foreign exchange. This organization doesn’t have a lot of
tutorials, but those it does have are free and comprehensive.
For more information, go to www.nfa.futures.org/investor/
investorLearningCenter.asp.

217

218 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
New York Stock Exchange
The New York Stock Exchange, like NASDAQ, wants to court investors rather
than traders. Still, the exchange’s site has information on trading stocks,
bonds, and exchange-traded funds that can make you smarter on those
topics without spending a dime.
For more information, go to https://nyse.nyx.com/financial-literacy.

Hitting the road for conferences
Although day trading is a deskbound pursuit, you may want to get out into
the world to learn more about trading and research different companies with
products for day traders. Many of the exchanges and larger day-trading brokerage firms have their own seminars and conferences, but a few are open to
the public. There is great information to be had, but watch out: The game is
sometimes to sell you more than inform you.
Brokerage firms offering many seminars and training programs may have
higher commissions than firms offering less service, but the additional
expense may be worth it, especially as you’re getting started. You can find out
more about brokerage firms that work with day traders in Chapter 11.

The Money Show
The Money Show is a series of investment conferences held in different major
cities around the country. Some focus on specific topics, such as trading and
foreign exchange, while others run the gamut. Registration is free, which means
that when you show up people will try to sell you stuff. Although these vendors
can be distracting to an established trader, they can be helpful to new traders
looking to find out more about all the different software and services available.
Just make sure you’re getting information, not an opportunity to spend even
more money. These conferences also have high-profile speakers, so you can
learn from Wall Street celebrities. The Money Show website includes articles,
podcasts, and free online courses to help you learn more about trading.
For more information, go to www.moneyshow.com.

Trading Forum
The Trading Forum is sponsored by Traders’ Library, which sells research
materials and investing books. The conference isn’t cheap, but it covers specific trading strategies and information. It also offers a good introduction to
trading. Although a bit pricey, the information is worth the money, especially
if the conference happens to be close to where you live.
For more information, go to www.traderslibrary.com/conferences.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services

Taking training classes
Although not necessary, many day traders learn the game by enrolling in a
training program, ranging from a graduate-level certificate program offered
by Northwestern University to DVDs hawked on late-night infomercials.
No program can guarantee success, nor is any one program right for every
trader. I list a few bigger and better-known programs here, but check them
out to make sure they’re right for you — just as you would check out
programs that aren’t listed here.
The larger brokerage and research firms offer their own training courses, often
at little or no cost. Consider those as a first option, but keep in mind that their
introductory sessions may be sales pitches for more products and services.
Of course, other training programs may be disguised sales pitches, too. At
some point, you’re better off trading than training. The markets will school
you better than any webinar.
Plenty of great and legitimate training firms are out there — as well as a lot of
scammers. Run from anyone who guarantees your success, and don’t sign up
for a training program until you know what you need to learn. I include some
information about due diligence at the end of this chapter.

FX:1 Academy
FX:1 Academy offers in-person training courses in foreign exchange. The bad
news is that the courses take place in Asia, mostly in Singapore, which can
be an issue if you live in the United States. But if you’re interested in trading
currencies and find yourself in Asia, you may want to investigate its courses.
For more information, go to www.fx1academy.com.

Kapitall
Kapitall is a brokerage firm, but I list it here instead of with the brokers
in Chapter 11 because its services aren’t designed for active day traders.
However, it has services to help people learn about investing that may also
help you learn about trading, including games and competitions. Many of
these are free. If you’re interested in learning more about the stock market,
check it out.
For more information, go to www.kapitall.com.

Pristine
Pristine has a range of books and DVDs, online and in person classes, and
coaching services in English and Spanish, covering trading skills that work
in most markets. Its courses operate at different levels, with some requiring
extensive trading experience using specific software packages.
For more information, go to www.pristine.com.

219

220 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
TopstepTrader
TopstepTrader was founded by a veteran of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
to address the way people learn to trade in electronic markets. (The old
method, of working as a runner on the floor of the exchange, no longer works
now that the floors are disappearing.) It starts with two weeks of free practice trading. (It also offers paid trading courses.) If you do well enough in
the practice account, you can enter its trading combine, which is designed
to mimic the National Football League combine: You pay a deposit, which is
refunded if your trading adheres to certain risk and other parameters; you
receive research and coaching from experienced traders; and your performance is evaluated. If the coaches like what they see, you may be funded
to trade for TopstepTrader’s parent firm, Patak Trading, or you may be
recruited by another firm.
For more information, go to www.topsteptrader.com.

Trading Advantage
Trading Advantage, run by an experienced commodities floor trader, has a
ton of training options, ranging from telephone coaching and a virtual trading
room to books and DVDs. Some of the company’s programs are designed for
floor traders at the exchanges who need to learn to trade futures electronically in order to stay competitive, while others work for an average person
who wants to get started or who wants to improve his or her trading
prowess.
For more information, go to www.tradingadvantage.com.

Trader Kingdom
Run by a group of experienced traders, Trader Kingdom offers webinars, live
speakers, and coaching services, as well as a lot of free online educational
material on futures trading. If you’re considering futures markets, check out
the website to see the firm’s current offerings.
For more information, go to www.traderkingdom.com.

TradingSchool.com
TradingSchool.com, based in Los Angeles, has a series of online and in-person
classes covering trading psychology as well as trading in stocks, options,
financial futures, and currencies. The firm works with day traders as well as
money managers and other long-term investors.
For more information, go to www.tradingschool.com.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
The University of Trading
The University of Trading offers courses in options, equities, foreign
exchange, and financial and agricultural commodities online and at its offices
in Chicago. Students can hear lectures on different aspects of the markets
and have the opportunity to trade alongside experienced instructors. The
company trains professional traders, some of whom trade for themselves and
some of whom take jobs with others.
For more information, go to www.universityoftrading.com.

Getting the Research You Need
Day traders need a trading system, and they often rely on subscription
research services. That’s fine, as long as those systems are adding value over
and above their cost. Unfortunately, advising day traders is big business, and
there may be more money in that than in day trading. Before you call the 800
number given in the infomercial, read the advice I give here, which can help
you evaluate the service.
There are three main types of outside services:
✓ Price data are detailed, real-time price quotes from different markets.
✓ Chart services help traders identify profitable trends.
✓ Strategic research helps people develop a system for trading or follow a
system designed by someone else.
You may need all three, or none, depending on your knowledge of the financial markets and your trading style.
Many day traders find themselves subscribing to price quote and analytical
services. The following section is a listing of a handful of popular ones. It’s
not a definitive list, and my including them on this list is not an endorsement.
Rather, it’s a guide to get you thinking about what you may need and where
you can go to get it.
If you know you need outside pricing and data services, consider that when
you select a brokerage firm. Different firms have different software platforms,
and some can handle outside data feeds better than others. For more information on choosing a broker, refer to Chapter 11.

221

222 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
(Price) Quote me on that
Many brokerage firms offer day trading services. They all have services that
tell you what the prices are for any security at any time, but this doesn’t
mean that they have all the prices that you need for your strategy. If, for
example, you’re day trading common stocks, you may need a system that can
signal certain price patterns in any of the thousands of stocks trading at any
given day. If you’re trading options based on the value of underlying stock,
you may need that data as well. If you’re day trading international securities,
you may need real-time data, and your broker may only offer data with a
ten-minute delay in some markets.
Besides needing all the prices and related volume and market-maker data,
some strategies involve fast trading. Every second counts, and not all brokers
can deliver prices fast enough to make scalping profitable. One solution is
to get prices from a separate source that offers faster delivery. Other trading
strategies don’t require real-time prices on huge numbers of securities, but
they may involve a detailed analysis of end-of-day prices. To do that, you may
need more information than your broker can give you.
The following sections offer information on some of the different price quote
and data services out there.
The quote service can provide the data in real time only if you have enough
bandwidth to receive it. Make sure you have the fastest Internet service and
modem available in your area and consider having a second way to connect
to the Internet if your primary service goes down.

CQG
CQG pulls data from pretty much all of the world’s exchanges, making it
popular with people who are trading international securities. It also has data
on over-the-counter foreign exchange. Traders can buy historical data for
backtesting (see Chapter 16 for more), and they can add charting and order
routing capabilities to their CQG package. People who want to do even more
number crunching on their own can link the data to their Microsoft Excel
spreadsheets.
For more information, go to www.cqg.com.

DTN
Trading fuel or agricultural products? Then you may need more research
than most brokers can give you. DTN produces a huge range of data for farmers and drillers, and it has plenty of services for traders, too. The company,

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
owned by Schneider Electric, provides pricing and research for commodities traders, including meteorological research and hurricane-related energy
supply forecasts. Day traders active in stocks or financial futures are more
likely to use the company’s IQ data feeds, which allow users to track 1,300
prices simultaneously, and ProphetX, software that combines price data with
analytics that can track small market movements and can handle displays
on several different monitors at once.
For more information, go to www.schneider-electric.com/products
/ww/en/5100-software/5170-market-intelligence-software
/61659-dtn-quotes-online/?XTMC=DTN&XTCR=1.

eSignal
eSignal offers detailed prices, news, and trading alerts in most financial
markets, delivered to your computer or your phone. Its charting features are
more advanced than those offered by most brokerage firms. Especially useful
for traders who are looking at several different stocks, eSignal can help identify trading opportunities using a preferred strategy and scan the market for
other stocks that meet specified investment criteria. The company also offers
backtesting and real-time strategy testing, end-of-day analysis for traders
who don’t need real-time data, and add-on signals that support different
proprietary trading strategies.
For more information, go to www.esignal.com.

InstaQuote
InstaQuote, owned by Bank of America, has data designed for equity options
traders. It gives traders price quotes on both options and equities so that
they can identify price discrepancies and monitor valuation. It then connects
to the exchange’s electronic communications networks, allowing for direct
access trading. InstaQuote’s platform can work with several different brokerage firms’ accounts.
For more information, go to www.dafsoft.com.

Oanda
Oanda provides both foreign exchange trading services and data. It has
exchange rates for major currencies and small frontier markets. The data is
available — for a price — to those who want to use it with another brokerage
firm’s platform.
For more information, go to www.oanda.com.

223

224 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Charting your strategy
Almost all day trading strategies rely on technical analysis, which is the
process of identifying buy and sell opportunities based on the supply and
demand for a security. Technical analysts look at charts of price and volume
changes to identify changes in the trend. (I discuss technical analysis in more
detail in Chapter 7.) Some technical-analysis strategies are complicated and
require sophisticated charting. That’s why many day traders use software
that can turn price data into the information they need to make decisions.
Many users of these services get tripped up by the symbols and data displays.
Take the time to learn as much as you can about how the services work before
you trade in real time with real money; most of these providers offer seminars
or online tutorials that can help. Yeah, many of the features are obvious, but
you want to avoid costly mistakes.

MarketDelta
MarketDelta’s software provides detailed charting services that match different strategies over several time periods, in colors that make the data stand
out. The goal is to make price information more transparent and thus chart
information more accurate. The company mostly deals with professionals,
but some of its products are suitable for some day traders.
For more information, go to www.marketdelta.com.

Metastock
Metastock has several different charting and analytical packages, including
one for foreign exchange trading, another for people who day trade in stocks,
and a third for stock investors who are holding for longer than a single day. It
even has some fundamental research tools. Traders following specific strategies recommended by different market analysts can purchase add-ons that
give them the tools needed to trade effectively and participate in in-person
and online user groups. Some brokerage firms offer Metastock tools as an
alternative to the broker’s proprietary platform.
For more information, go to www.metastock.com.

NinjaTrader
A trading platform for active traders, NinjaTrader can be used instead of the
trading software offered by many brokerage firms, including several of firms
that deal with day traders. The service is best known for its charting capabilities in the foreign exchange and futures markets, but it can also handle market
scanning, automated trade execution, backtesting, and simulation trading.
For more information, check out www.ninjatrader.com.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
OmniTrader
OmniTrader is designed to automate technical analysis (read all about
that in Chapter 7), especially for stock traders. Traders can use it to set up
automatic trading systems or to help them make their own decisions during
the trading day. The system also includes money-management tools (money
management is discussed in Chapter 6), as well as simulated trading and
backtesting to help you find new strategies.
For more information, go to www.omnitrader.com.
