
JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

58

FIGURE 3.38

Page 58 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Bearish engulﬁng pattern formed after a swift move up

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Bullish Engulﬁng Pattern

A bullish engulfing pattern forms after a price decline. It is the bullish counterpart of the bearish engulfing pattern. The first candle has a bearish real body.
The second candle has a longer bullish real body that completely surrounds the
prior candle’s black real body (Figure 3.39).
Pattern Psychology In a declining market, price opens in the direction of the
trend but then makes an abrupt turnaround. The strong engulfing session sends
a clear message that the bulls have overtaken the bears. Many traders will react
to this prominent pattern. Concerned bears will scramble to cover their
positions, providing fuel for a rally.

FIGURE 3.39

Bullish engulﬁng pattern

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 59 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

59

The bullish engulfing pattern is similar to the piercing pattern except that,
rather than piercing deeply into the prior candle’s black real body, it completely
envelops it. In addition, the first candle’s real body need not be at least average
length or longer, as required by the piercing pattern. As a general rule, the bullish engulfing pattern is a stronger signal than the piercing pattern.
Chart Example Figure 3.40 shows a daily chart of Biomarin Pharmaceuticals
(BMRN). A strong bullish engulfing pattern formed on May 10, 2007. This
pattern was a major reversal signal for several reasons. First, it formed at prior
support at the April low (dotted line), which set up the potential for a bullish
Western double bottom pattern. Thus, the engulfing pattern formed a
candlestick pattern within the larger bullish pattern. Second, heavy volume
accompanied the engulfing session. Third, the prior day’s real body was very
small (a spinning top). Finally, the engulfing session was a long candle with a
shaven bottom. It not only enveloped the real body of the prior candle, but also
the real bodies of the three candles before it.
The Western Outside Day

In Western technical analysis there is a similar reversal bar pattern to the engulfing
pattern called an outside day (or outside bar on other time frames). In both instances,

FIGURE 3.40

Strong bullish engulﬁng pattern formed at support

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

60

8:57 AM

Page 60 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

there must be an identifiable trend to reverse. There are distinct differences, however, between the Japanese engulfing pattern and the Western outside day:
• The Japanese put the emphasis on the real bodies. The first candle of an
engulfing pattern must have a smaller real body than the second candle.
The upper and/or lower shadow of the first session can extend beyond
the range of the second session.
• The focus of the Western outside day is on the bar’s range from high to
low. The range of the first bar must be within the range of the second
bar. Therefore, the shadows of the first bar cannot extend beyond the
second bar’s range.
• The Western outside day does not indicate that the second bar must be
opposite in sentiment to the first bar. The Japanese engulfing patterns
must have real bodies of opposite color.
Because of the differences mentioned above, not all engulfing patterns
qualify as outside days, or vice versa. Figure 3.41 is an outside day because it
made a new high and its range surrounded the prior bar’s range. However, it
would not qualify as a bearish engulfing pattern because the smaller real body
is not surrounded by the following session’s long black real body. Conversely,
Figure 3.42 is a bearish engulfing pattern, but would not qualify as an outside
day because it did not make a new high, and therefore the range of the second
bar does not surround the previous bar’s entire range.
Like the engulfing patterns, a Western outside day can be a negative or
positive signal, depending on whether it is preceded by a price advance (bearish)
or a decline (bullish). Figures 3.41 and 3.42 both represent bearish signals after
upward moves. The outside day has stricter criteria, so the engulfing pattern
will draw your attention to impending reversals that may not be recognized using a standard bar chart.

FIGURE 3.41
day

Western outside

FIGURE 3.42
pattern

Bearish engulﬁng

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 61 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

61

Harami
As mentioned previously, doji and spinning tops, while important in their own
right as individual candlestick lines, are also components of other candlestick
patterns. The harami is one such pattern.
The harami can have bearish or bullish implications, depending on whether
it forms following a price advance (bearish) or a decline (bullish). It is a twocandle formation that is comprised of a small real body that forms within the
prior candle’s long real body.
Pattern Description and Criteria

The harami pattern includes the following criteria:
• The first candle has a long real body. Its color reflects the direction of
the trend: black in a downtrend and white in an uptrend.
• The real body of the second candle is significantly smaller than the
prior candle’s real body. In many instances it will be a spinning top.
• The second candle’s small real body can be either black or white.
However, in most instances, it is the opposite color of the prior real
body.
The following criteria will add strength to the harami pattern:
• The smaller the body of the second candle, the stronger the signal. A
very small body shows hesitation.
• If the second candle is a doji, it is interpreted as even more powerful
and is called a harami cross.
• If the small real body (or doji) forms after an unusually long candlestick
line, it increases the probability of a change in direction.
The harami pattern is the opposite of the engulfing pattern. Rather than
engulfing the first candle’s real body, the harami’s second candle forms within
the prior candle’s real body. Another important distinction between these patterns is that the engulfing pattern criterion requires that the two candles be of
opposite colors, whereas the second session of the harami can be either black or
white.
Although harami patterns may not typically be as strong as some other reversal patterns, such as the engulfing patterns or the morning or evening stars,
the appearance of a harami is an indication that the market may be losing momentum and should signal caution.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

62

Page 62 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Bearish Harami

A bearish harami forms after a price advance. The first candle’s long white real
body is followed the next session by a noticeably smaller real body, either black
or white, that resides within the prior candle’s longer body (Figure 3.43).
If the second candle is a doji, the pattern is referred to as a bearish harami
cross (Figure 3.44) and is a stronger signal. According to Steve Nison, in his
book Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New York Institute of Finance,
2001, p. 83): “A harami cross occurring after a very long white candle is a pattern a long trader ignores at his or her own peril.”
If the second candle’s small body gaps up open above the prior candle’s
long white body, it is not a harami pattern. It may be a hanging man or a bearish star pattern.
Pattern Psychology The bearish harami represents a shift from a session
where the leadership is clearly one-sided in favor of the bulls, to a session
where there is no real conviction by the bulls or bears. The second candle’s
lower close will cause some concern for the bulls. If price continues lower following the harami, many bulls will exit their long positions, increasing the bearish
sentiment.
Chart Example Figure 3.45 shows a daily chart of Corn Products International
Inc. (CPO). On June 28, 2007, a long bullish candle formed. Price gapped
down open during the following session and formed a doji (circled) within the
prior candle’s long white real body. Price stalled again the next day (a spinning
top) and then continued to decline.

FIGURE 3.43

Bearish harami

FIGURE 3.44

Bearish harami cross

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 63 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

63

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.45

Bearish harami cross formed in an uptrend

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Bullish Harami

A bullish harami forms after a price decline. It is the bullish counterpart of the
bearish harami. The first candle’s long black real body is followed in the next
session by a noticeably smaller real body, either black or white, that resides
within the prior candle’s longer body (Figure 3.46).
If the second candle is a doji, the pattern is referred to as a bullish harami
cross (Figure 3.47) and provides a stronger signal. According to Nison, the

FIGURE 3.46

Bullish harami

FIGURE 3.47

Bullish harami cross

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

64

Page 64 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

harami cross can call bottoms, but they tend to be more effective at calling
tops.
If the second session’s small body gaps down open below the prior candle’s
long black real body, it is not a harami pattern. It may be a hammer or inverted
hammer, or a bullish star pattern.
Pattern Psychology The bullish harami represents a shift from a session
where the leadership is clearly one-sided in favor of the bears, to a session where
there is no real conviction by the bulls or bears. The second candle’s higher close
will cause some concern for the bears and result in some short covering. If price
continues higher following the harami, more bears will cover their short positions,
providing fuel for a rally.
Chart Example Figure 3.48 shows a daily chart of Ship Finance International
Ltd. (SFL). On June 7, 2007, price gapped down open and fell sharply, forming
an unusually long bearish candle. The following session opened higher (circled)
and left a spinning top by the close of market, which formed a bullish harami
pattern.

FIGURE 3.48

Bullish harami formed after a sharp decline

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 65 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

65

The Western Inside Day

In Western technical analysis there is a bar pattern that is similar to the
harami called an inside day (or inside bar on other time frames). There are
distinct differences between the Japanese harami and the Western inside
day:
• The Japanese put the emphasis on the real bodies. The first candle of a
harami pattern must have a long real body and the second candle has a
small real body. The upper and/or lower shadow of the second candle
can extend beyond the range of the first candle.
• The focus of the Western inside day is on the bar’s range from high to
low. The range of the second bar must be within the range of the first
bar. The shadows of the second bar cannot extend beyond the range of
the first bar.
• The Western inside day does not indicate that the second bar must have
a short distance between the opening and closing prices (a small body).
Because of the differences mentioned above, not all harami patterns qualify as inside days, and vice versa. Figure 3.49 is an inside day, but would not
qualify as a harami because the small real body is not completely surrounded
by the prior candle’s long real body. Figure 3.50 is a harami, but would not
qualify as an inside day because the upper shadow extends beyond the high of
the first bar.
Like the harami patterns, a change in the direction of price may follow an
inside day. However, it is not as strong a signal as an outside day.

FIGURE 3.49

Western inside day

FIGURE 3.50

Bearish harami

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

66

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 66 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Stars
A star is formed when a candle with a long real body is followed by a small
real body, or a doji, that gaps away from the first candle. A star can be a bearish sign if it forms after a price advance, or a bullish sign if it forms after a
decline.
Pattern Description and Criteria

A star includes the following criteria:
• The first candle has a long real body. Its color reflects the direction of
the trend: black in a downtrend and white in an uptrend.
• The second candle gaps away from the real body of the first candle. Although this gap will sometimes leave a void on the chart (a true gap),
all that is required is that there be a gap between the two consecutive
real bodies that comprise the pattern; their shadows may overlap. (Gaps
are covered in detail in Part II.)
• The real body of the second candle is significantly smaller than the
prior candle’s real body, for example, a spinning top. The second candle’s small body can be either black or white.
• The second candle may form a doji, in which case it would be referred
to as a doji star.
The description of a star pattern sounds similar to a harami, but there is
an important distinction between the two. The second candle of a harami forms
within the real body of the first candle. The second candle of a star gaps away
from the prior candle’s real body. In other words, the real bodies of the two sessions of the star don’t touch, although their shadows may overlap. There may be
cases where the two bodies meet, or slightly overlap, that could be acceptable
variations, especially if the pattern forms at a point where price is overextended
or has reached a support or resistance area.
A bearish star is comprised of two candlestick lines that form after a price
advance. The first candle has a long bullish real body. The star is formed when
price gaps up open during the next session and leaves a small real body (Figure
3.51). The small real body is the star portion of the pattern; it can be either
black or white. If the session following the long candle is a doji, it is a stronger
signal referred to as a bearish doji star (Figure 3.52).
A bullish star forms after a price decline. It is the bullish counterpart of
the bearish star. The first candle has a long bearish real body. The star is formed
when price gaps down open during the following session and leaves a small real

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 67 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.51

Bearish star

FIGURE 3.52

67

Bearish doji star

body (Figure 3.53). The small real body can be either black or white. If the
second candle is a doji, it is a stronger signal referred to as a bullish doji star
(Figure 3.54).
A two-candlestick star pattern can stand on its own as a potential reversal
signal. However, it is best known as a component of other reversal patterns. For
example, the bearish shooting star pattern was discussed earlier in this chapter.
Two other well-known star patterns are the three-candle evening star and morning star formations. They both include either a star or doji star as the first two
candlestick lines in the pattern.
Pattern Psychology The presence of a star signals a loss of momentum and
may be followed by a change in price direction. The atmosphere changes from
one in which there is clear leadership in the form of a long bullish or bearish
real body, to a session in which there is a standoff between the bulls and bears.

FIGURE 3.53

Bullish star

FIGURE 3.54

Bullish doji star

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

68

8:57 AM

Page 68 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Evening Star

An evening star is a bearish three-candlestick pattern that forms after a price
advance.
Pattern Description and Criteria The evening star includes the following
criteria:
• The first candle has a long bullish real body.
• The second session gaps up open and forms a small real body creating
the star portion of the pattern. The gap need only be between the bodies of the first two candles; the shadows may overlap.
• The small real body can be either black or white, or a doji.
• The third candle has a bearish real body that intrudes deeply into the
first candle’s long bullish real body.
The deeper the intrusion of the third candle’s black real body into the first
candle’s long white real body, the more likely a reversal, especially if the third
session is accompanied by heavy volume.
An ideal pattern (Figure 3.55) would have the required gap between the
bodies of the first and second candles, and a gap between the bodies of the
second and third candles. However, ideal patterns are not very common.
There is often some overlap between the bodies of the second and third candles
(Figure 3.56). If the third candle’s real body envelops the star’s real body, it is
also a bearish engulfing pattern (as long as the star’s body is white or a doji). If
the star portion of the pattern is a doji, the pattern is referred to as an evening
doji star (Figure 3.57). The inclusion of a doji strengthens the signal.

FIGURE 3.55

Evening star (ideal)

FIGURE 3.56

Evening star

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 69 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.57

69

Evening doji star

Pattern Psychology Price has been advancing, and the formation of a long
white candle shows further evidence of the bulls’ dominance. That leadership
comes into question during the next session with the formation of the star and
the indecision that it signifies. A major shift in sentiment comes during the
third session, when a sharp sell-off erases much of the gains the bulls had
achieved during the first session’s rally.
Chart Examples Figure 3.58 shows a daily chart of Copart Inc. (CPRT). An
evening doji star formed from July 6 to 10, 2007 (circled). The pattern was very
strong for a few reasons. First, it included a doji in the formation. Second, the black
real body of the third candle penetrated very deeply into the first candle’s white real
body. In fact, it closed near the open of that candle erasing all of that session’s gains.
Finally, the pattern formed very near resistance at the June high (dotted line). Take a
closer look at the June high. It would have been an evening star as well except that
there were two candles in between the long candles rather than one. Those two
candles in between were both back-to-back bearish hanging man patterns.
Figure 3.59 shows a daily chart of ConocoPhillips (COP). An evening star
formed from July 12 to 16, 2007 (circled). It includes the required gap between
the real bodies of the first and second sessions. The bodies of the second and
third candles touch; however, that does not take away from the strength of this
setup. The third session was accompanied by very heavy volume, increasing the
chance that a reversal would follow, which it did.
Acceptable Variation In most texts on candlestick charting, the criterion for
the third candle of the evening star indicates that it should protrude deeply into
the long real body of the first session. I have never seen it written that, if the
third candle’s long black real body extends beyond the first candle’s long white

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

70

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 70 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.58 Bearish evening doji star formed in an uptrend
near resistance at the June high
Source: TeleChart 2007®

FIGURE 3.59 Bearish evening star formed after an uptrend.
Heavy volume increased the likelihood of a reversal
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 71 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

71

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.60

Evening star (variation)

real body (Figure 3.60), the signal is invalid. Thus, I
consider it to be an acceptable variation of the pattern.
However, it is important to note that with such a long
candle on the third session, there may not be an adequate
reward-to-risk ratio to enter a short position upon its
completion. Reward versus risk is discussed in Part II.
Chart Example (Variation) Figure 3.61 shows a daily
chart of McMoran Exploration Co. (MMR). The abovereferenced variation of an evening star formed from
April 13 to 17, 2007 (circled). There was a gap between
the real bodies of the first and second candles, as well as
between the second and third candles. The star portion
of the pattern was a hanging man. The third candle’s real
body extended well beyond the body of the first candle
and was accompanied by heavy volume.
Helpful Hint The “evening star” is a nickname for the
planet Venus, which is visible just before dark. As its
appearance shows, the formation goes from light to dark.
Think of the first candlestick line as daylight, the second
as dusk, and the black real body of the third candle as
darkness.

rewardto-risk ratio
A ratio used by
traders to
determine the
potential
reward (proﬁt)
compared to
the potential
risk (loss) if a
position is
taken in a
stock or other
trading
instrument.
The ratio is
calculated by
dividing the
potential
reward by the
potential risk.

Morning Star

A morning star is a three-candle pattern that forms after a price decline. It is the
bullish counterpart of the evening star.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

72

Page 72 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.61

Variation of the bearish evening star pattern

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Pattern Description and Criteria

The morning star includes the following criteria:
• The first candle has a long bearish real body.
• The second session gaps down open and forms a small real body creating the star portion of the pattern. The gap need only be between the
bodies of the first two candles; the shadows may overlap.
• The small real body can be either black or white, or a doji.
• The third candle has a bullish real body that intrudes deeply into the
first candle’s long bearish real body.
The deeper the intrusion of the third candle’s white real body into the first
candle’s black real body, the more likely a reversal, especially if the third session
is accompanied by heavy volume.
An ideal pattern (Figure 3.62) would have the required gap between the
bodies of the first and second candles, and a gap between the bodies of the second and third candles. However, ideal patterns are not very common. There is
often some overlap between the second and third candles (Figure 3.63). If the
third candle’s real body envelops the star’s real body, it is also a bullish engulfing
pattern (as long as the star’s body is black or a doji). If the star portion of the
pattern is a doji, the pattern is referred to as a morning doji star (Figure 3.64).
The inclusion of a doji strengthens the signal.
