
WHAT WOULD GRAHAM HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT INDEXING? [183]

different requirements. Again, Graham responded
bluntly: “At bottom that is only a convenient cliché or
alibi to justify the mediocre record of the past. All investors want good results from their investments, and
are entitled to them to the extent that they are actually
obtainable. I see no reason why they should be content
with results inferior to those of an indexed fund or pay
standard fees for such inferior results.”

“I see no reason why investors should be content
with results inferior to those of an indexed fund.”

The name Benjamin Graham is intimately connected,
indeed almost synonymous, with “value investing” and the
search for undervalued securities. But his classic book
gives far more attention to the down-to-earth basics of
portfolio policy—the straightforward, uncomplicated principles of diversification and rational long-term expectations, two of the overarching themes of the little book you
are now reading—than to solving the sphinxlike riddle of
selecting superior stocks through careful security analysis.
Graham was also well aware that the superior rewards he
had reaped using his valuation principles would be difficult
to achieve in the future. In that 1976 interview, he made this
remarkable concession, “I am no longer an advocate of elaborate techniques of security analysis in order to find superior

[184]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

value opportunities. This was a rewarding activity, say, 40
years ago, but the situation has changed a great deal since
then. In the old days, any well-trained security analyst could
do a good professional job of selecting undervalued issues
through detailed studies; but in the light of the enormous
amount of research now being carried on, I doubt whether
in most cases such extensive efforts will generate sufficiently
superior selections to justify their cost.”
It is fair to say that, by Graham’s demanding standards,
the overwhelming majority of today’s mutual funds, largely
because of their high costs and speculative behavior, have
failed to live up to their promise. As a result, a new type of
fund—the index fund—is now gradually moving toward ascendancy. Why? Both because of what it does—providing
the broadest possible diversification—and because of what it
doesn’t do—neither assessing high costs nor engaging in
high turnover. These paraphrases of Graham’s copybook
maxims are an important part of his legacy to that vast majority of shareholders who, he believed, should follow the
principles he outlined for the defensive investor.

“To achieve satisfactory investment results
is easier than most people realize.”

It is Benjamin Graham’s common sense, clear thinking, simplicity, and sense of financial history—along with

WHAT WOULD GRAHAM HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT INDEXING? [185]

his willingness to hold fast to the sound principles of longterm investing—that constitute his lasting legacy. He
sums up his advice: “Fortunately for the typical investor,
it is by no means necessary for his success that he bring
the time-honored qualities . . . of courage, knowledge,
judgment and experience . . . to bear upon his program—
provided he limits his ambition to his capacity and confines his activities within the safe and narrow path of
standard, defensive investment. To achieve satisfactory investment results is easier than most people realize; to
achieve superior results is harder than it looks.”
When it’s so easy—in fact unbelievably simple—to
capture the stock market’s returns through an index fund,
you don’t need to take extra risks—and wasteful costs—in
striving for superior results. With Benjamin Graham’s
long perspective, common sense, hard realism, and wise
intellect, there is no doubt whatsoever in my mind that he
would have applauded the index fund.
Don’t Take My Word for It
While Benjamin Graham’s clearly written commentary can easily be read as an endorsement of a lowcost all-stock-market index fund, don’t take my
word for it. Listen instead to Warren Buffett, his
(continued)

[186]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

protégé and collaborator whose counsel and practical aid Graham acknowledged as invaluable in the
final edition of The Intelligent Investor. In 1993,
Buffett, unequivocally endorsed the index fund. In
2006, he went even further, not only reaffirming
this endorsement, but personally assuring me that,
decades earlier, Graham himself had endorsed index
funds. Hear Mr. Buffett: “A low-cost index fund is
the most sensible equity investment for the great
majority of investors. My mentor, Ben Graham
took this position many years ago and everything I
have seen since convinces me of its truth.” I can
only add, after Forrest Gump, “And that’s all I have
to say about that.”

t

n

Ch

r S ev e n

ee

te
ap

“The Relentless Rules
of Humble Arithmetic”


Reprise

IF THE MESSAGE IN this book comes across as confident,
please understand that it is little more than common
sense. Even more, please understand that my confidence
in the index fund is buttressed by the conclusions of many
of the smartest, most experienced, most successful investors in the United States including Warren Buffett,
Charlie Munger, and Benjamin Graham, along with top
academics and endowment managers—Nobel Laureates
Paul Samuelson, William Sharpe, and Daniel Kahneman
and Princeton’s Burton Malkiel, Yale’s David Swensen,
Harvard’s Jack Meyer, and MIT’s Andrew Lo.

[188]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

To these independent experts add fund industry insiders like Magellan’s Peter Lynch, former Investment Company Institute Chairman Jon Fossel, Philadelphia money
manager Ted Aronson, hedge fund manager Cliff Asness,
fund supermarket king Charles Schwab, and analyst
Mark Hulbert. Then heed the similar advice of financial
journalists, from Tyler Mathisen and Jason Zweig of
Money magazine, to the Economist of London and its
neighbor The Spectato r; and Jonathan Clements and
Holman Jenkins, Jr., of the Wall Street Journal. Perhaps
even more important, don’t forget the convictions of intelligent investors—hundreds of corporate and government pension funds and millions of individuals, from the
very wealthy to the man on the street—who have put their
money where their mouth is, now investing some $5 trillion in index strategies.
That confidence is further buttressed by simply looking at the record, as discussed in chapter after chapter.
That record confirms the superiority of indexing—by a
wide margin—over the average stock fund (and the average bond fund as well) and—by an even wider margin—
over the average fund investor. Further, the superiority of
the index fund is based, not on the fleeting accomplishments of a tiny handful of funds (often achieved by money
managers who had ceased managing the funds’ portfolios
years earlier), but on the permanent accomplishments of

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

[189]

an all-market strategy where no money manager even enters the picture. Truly, the classic index fund is the only
mutual fund you can hold forever.
As John Maynard Keynes warned earlier in a different
context, historical returns are of no value unless we can
explain the source of those returns. In this context, let me
reiterate the two basic sources of the superior returns
achieved by the index fund: (1) the broadest possible diversification, eliminating individual stock risk, style risk,
and manager risk, with only market risk remaining; and
(2) the tiniest possible costs and minimal taxes. Together,
they enable the index fund to provide the gross return
earned in the stock market, minus a scintilla of cost.

The two sources of the superior returns of the
index fund: (1) the broadest possible
diversification; and (2) the tiniest possible costs.

Actively managed equity mutual funds as a group also
provide, as common sense tells you, a gross return equal
to the average return of the market. Today, holding almost 25 percent of all U.S. stocks, they trade largely
with one another, enriching on balance only the brokers
who receive the commissions on their vigorous trading of
portfolio securities (and who also happen to sell their

[190]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

shares) and the management companies that control
them, as a result impoverishing, as it were, the net returns
that the funds deliver to their investors.
Fund investment managers, distributors, marketers,
administrators, brokers, and investment bankers have garnered staggering rewards for themselves. But the high
prices they charge for their services, their high turnover
policies and the attendant transaction costs, and the excessive taxes that their investors incur have siphoned off an
enormous portion of the high real returns provided by the
stock market in the past. With the subdued real returns on
stocks that seem almost destined to prevail in the future
(discussed in Chapter 7), those same huge rewards to those
in the fund business will confiscate an even larger share—
indeed, the lion’s share—of the stock market’s real return.
On the one hand, it is as certain as the rising and setting of the sun that the large cost advantage that exists for
the index fund will continue in the years ahead. Price
competition among index funds will keep the expense ratios of the low-cost providers at a minuscule level. On the
other hand, marketing competition and the drive for profits among the giant financial conglomerates that hold dominion over the fund industry will create strong pressure
to maintain the high fee revenues generated by their actively managed funds where, tragically, investors too often
ignore the impact of the baneful fees that they pay.

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

[191]

It is at least theoretically possible that the fund industry
will at last turn from its present competition to raise prices
in order to serve the interest of fund sellers, to a new competition to cut prices and serve the interest of fund buyers. But
it’s impossible to imagine that the huge gap between the allin costs of the index fund and the all-in costs of the average
equity fund—a gap that has now reached some 2.5 percentage points per year—will be significantly reduced. And even
if the gap were slashed by one-half—which will only happen
(to use a wonderful barnyard metaphor for the inconceivable)
when pigs finally whistle—the classic index fund would remain the investment of choice.
There’s also no guarantee that fund investors will continue to suffer that additional loss of the 3 percentage
points per year of return that they have incurred in the past
through the twin penalties of market timing and fund selection. If investors, however, finally realize the error of their
ways, the negative impact of their counterproductive emotions could be substantially reduced in the years ahead. At
some point, after all, smart investors ought to figure out
for themselves that pouring money into hot funds in hot
markets, and pulling money out of those funds when they
turn cool, often in cold markets, is a loser’s game.
On the other hand, with the craze in trading ETFs, the
gap could get even larger. Whatever the case, it seems set
in stone that a substantial gap between the return earned by

[192]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

fund investors and the returns reported by the funds themselves will continue to exist. If you expect a substantial reversal of that trend, I would simply warn: don’t count on it.
But above all, I’m confident about the long-term success that lies in store for sound investment in business
through the classic index fund and those who invest in it,
because virtually the entire case that I present is based on
“the relentless rules of humble arithmetic.” Lest we forget,
let me again take you through these commonsense rules:
1. Over the long term, stock market returns are created by real investment returns earned by real businesses—the annual dividend yield on publicly held
U.S. corporations, plus their subsequent rate of
earnings growth.
2. Over the short run, illusory speculative returns,
caused by the impact of the change in the amount
investors are willing to pay for each dollar of corporate earnings, can increase or decrease investment
returns. But in the long run, the impact of speculative return washes out.
QED 1: In investing, the winning strategy for
reaping the rewards of capitalism depends on owning businesses, not trading stocks.
3. Individual businesses come and go. Given the rapid
pace of technological change we face today, along

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

[193]

with powerful new global competition, the failure
rate of individual corporations is hardly likely to
falter and may well increase.
The best protection for individual investors
from the risks inherent in individual stocks is the
broadest possible diversification.
QED 2: Owning businesss in the aggregate
through an all-market index fund is the consummate risk-reduction strategy. (Broad economic
risks to corporate earnings and dividends, however,
cannot be diversified away.)
4. As a group, all investors in the stock market earn
its gross returns. When the market provides an 8
percent return, investors divide up 8 percent
(before taking account of costs). What else is new?
5. While investors earn the market’s entire return,
they do not capture the market’s entire return.
Rather, they capture the market’s return only after
the costs of financial intermediation are deducted—
commissions, management fees, marketing costs,
sales loads, administrative expenses, legal expenses
and custodial fees, and so on. Unnecessary taxes
simply enlarge the gap.
QED 3: Gross market return, minus costs,
equals net return for investors as a group. (Again,
remember the Gotrocks family.)

[194]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

6. While all investors as a group must earn the market’s net return, mutual fund investors, betrayed by
their emotions (and by the fund industry) into serious errors in market timing and fund selection,
have done much worse. While that gap may shrink,
it is virtually inconceivable that it will be eliminated.
QED 4: Gross market return, minus costs,
minus timing and selection penalties, equals the net
return earned by mutual fund investors as a group.
Let me remind you again of the “4 Es” that you
read about in Chapter 5: The two greatest enemies of
the equity fund investor are expenses and emotions. In
that context, the index fund is the investment of choice
because all the other choices have serious problems.
These problems begin with the grossly excessive costs
that overwhelm the ability of all but the ablest (or luckiest) fund managers to outpace the index fund. But they
don’t end there, for the mutual fund industry has created for itself other problems that are wholly counterproductive to the interests of the investors that it seeks
to serve.

Common sense suggests
that fund owners should control their funds.

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

[195]

These problems include:
• The industry’s very structure, in which managers
control the funds that they serve under contract.
Mutual funds themselves are required under the
law to be governed by a board of directors that includes a majority of independent members who are
unaffiliated with the management company. While
common sense would suggest that the owners of
the fund should be in the driver’s seat of fund operations, they have been consigned to the rumble
seat, essentially powerless and voiceless.
• The overriding drive among fund managers is for
asset size, seemingly above all else, simply because
piling assets on assets results in fees piled on fees.
Yet the record shows that when small and midsize
funds capitalize on their flexibility and succeed in
generating exceptional returns, they draw immense
cash flows and become giant funds that are musclebound and inflexible, limited to a return that parallels the stock market (before costs)—pinned to the
earth, as it were, like Gulliver.
• The worship of the Great God Market Share,
which demands aggressive and costly marketing,
promotional, and advertising efforts not only to
build existing funds (easiest to do with those funds
that have provided superior returns in the past), but

[196]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

to bring out new funds with each change in the market environment. And so we had “Go-Go” funds in
the 1960s; “Nifty Fifty” (proven growth stocks)
funds in the 1970s; “Government-Plus” funds in the
1980s; and “New Economy” funds (notably in technology, telecommunications, or internet stocks) in
the late 1990s. Today, the popular favorites include
real estate funds, emerging market funds, and commodity funds. And we’ve added a whole new fillip:
the ability to trade these funds “all day long, in real
time” via the increasingly popular ETFs.
No business can forever ignore the interest of its
clients. The fund industry could do so during the 1980s
and 1990s only because it was blessed with the powerful
tailwind of financial markets that provided the highest returns in all history—18 percent from stocks, 80 percent
above the long-term average of 10 percent; 10 percent
from bonds, 100 percent above the long-term average of
5 percent. But while investors seemed willing to accept
the loss of a few percentage points from those enormous
returns (if they were even aware of the impact of those allin costs), they surely will not accept such a loss in the environment of sharply lower returns on stocks and bonds
alike that seem certain in the years ahead. And as investors come to rely on a measurement benchmark based
not on nominal returns, but on real returns, they will be

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

[197]

even more skeptical about the ability of the fund industry
to serve their interests.

No business can forever ignore
the interest of its clients.

The fund industry, finally, will be hoist on its own
petard—an explosion created by the lethal mix of a flawed
governance structure with a failed industry mission. Its
unremitting aim to build enormous assets through opportunistic marketing and “new product” adventurism, all
lumped on top of costs that cannot possibly be recouped
by superior performance. In a brutish world peopled by
smart, educated, experienced, and professional money
managers who are competing with one another, managers
as a group are inevitably consigned to average returns before costs; and after costs are deducted, they are destined
to be losers. The arithmetic is unarguable.
“Remember, O Stranger, arithmetic is the first of the
sciences.” The mutual fund industry has forgotten that simple rule. Unless it changes, the industry will begin a long decline, condemned to its fate by its willingness, even its
eagerness, to ignore the relentless rules of humble arithmetic. As more and more investors come to recognize the
simple commonsense truth of these humble realities, the
passively managed index fund is destined to become an even
more formidable competitor to its actively managed rivals.

[198]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Don’t Take My Word for It
Listen first to David Swensen, chief investment officer of Yale University, “Invest in low-turnover, passively managed index funds . . . and stay away from
profit-driven investment management organizations. . .
The mutual fund industry is a colossal failure . . . resulting from its systematic exploitation of individual
investors . . . as funds extract enormous sums from investors in exchange for providing a shocking disservice. . . . Excessive management fees take their toll, and
(manager) profits dominate fiduciary responsibility.”
Then listen to Holman Jenkins, Jr., of the Wall
Street Journal, “Will customers keep supporting the
enormous overhead required to sustain ineffectual,
unproductive stock picking across an array of thousands of individual funds devoted to every investing
‘style’ and economic sector or regional subgroup that
some marketing idiot can dream up? Not likely. A
brutal shakeout is coming and one of its revelations
will be that stock picking is a grossly overrated piece
of the puzzle, that cost control is what distinguishes a
competitive firm from an uncompetitive one.”
Then listen to Nobel Laureate in Economics
and Princeton professor Daniel Kahneman. His
life’s work explains that investors are prone to overconfidence, and that overconfidence causes us to
misinterpret information and let our emotions warp
our judgment. When it comes to investing, “I don’t

“T H E R E L E N T L E S S R U L E S O F H U M B L E A R I T H M E T I C ”

try to be clever at all. The idea that I could see what
no one else can is an illusion.” So he sticks with,
yes, index funds.
But for simple prose, hear this unmistakable endorsement from Warren Buffett: “By periodically investing in an index fund, the know-nothing investor
can actually out-perform most investment professionals. Paradoxically, when ‘dumb’ money acknowledges
its limitations, it ceases to be dumb. . . . Those index
funds that are very low cost . . . are investor-friendly
by definition and are the best selection for most of
those who wish to own equities.”

[199]

Ch

t er Ei g hte
en

ap

What Should I Do Now?


Funny Money, Serious Money,
and Investment Strategy

DEEP DOWN, I REMAIN absolutely confident that the
vast majority of American families will be well served by
owning their equity holdings in an all-U.S. stock-market
index portfolio and holding their bonds in an all-U.S.
bond-market index portfolio. (Investors in high tax brackets, however, would hold a very low-cost quasi-index portfolio of high-grade intermediate-term municipal bonds.)
While such an index-driven strategy may not be the best
investment strategy ever devised, the number of investment strategies that are worse is infinite. The rationale
for a 100-percent-index-fund portfolio remains as solid as
a rock. It’s all about common sense.

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[201]


While an index-driven strategy may not be the
best investment strategy ever devised, the number
of investment strategies that are worse is infinite.

But I also fear, again deep down, that very few investors will follow that approach—the essence of simplicity—for their entire investment portfolio. You must now be
as exhausted as I am by the unremitting pounding of my
theme that simplicity is the answer and that complexity
simply doesn’t work. But we investors seem all-too-willing
to ignore the verities described in this book. Instead of
index funds, we opt for costly active funds and trade them
to excess. Why? We are sold funds more often than we
buy them. We have far too much self-confidence. We
crave excitement. We succumb to the distraction that is
the stock market. We fail to understand the arithmetic of
investing, and the arithmetic of mutual funds.
I cannot tell you whether betting on a particular manager who pursues an active investment strategy will win or
lose in the future. But I can guarantee that it hasn’t worked
very well in the past. To be sure, there are lots of smart, engaging, purposeful money managers and financial advisers.
And all of the activity that seems endemic to the investment
business can be exciting and enticing. But after all is said
and done, there are no surefire solutions for investment suc-
