
Although profit targets keep you from getting to 225, they also
play a damaging role in the overall portfolio of a trend follower.
Trend followers need those home runs to pay for all their whipsaw
losses. If you are artificially creating a profit target for no other
reason than to be comfortable, you might be limiting the potential
for those big trends. This, in turn, limits your ability to cover all the
small losses you’ve incurred. If, as a trader, you had used profit
targets, how would you have ever been around to win the huge
profits from the big unexpected events I describe in Chapter 4?
So where in a trend do trend followers earn their profits? They
capture the meat, or middle, of a trend. They never get in at the
bottom, and they don’t get out at the top (see Chart 10.2).

265

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

Trend Peaks

x
Entry

Exit

x

Trend Starts
CHART 10.2: Trend Following Entry/Exit Example: The Middle

Your Trading System
When you mechanize a trend following trading system, you
take all your discretionary judgments and build them into the rules.
For example, if you know you are uncomfortable with a high level
of risk, you make a rule that sets a tolerable level of risk. If you want
to trade a currency-only portfolio, you make that a part of the rules
from the beginning. The idea is to “hardwire” all scenarios that you
could see in daily trading in advance across a portfolio. If a market
rises 100 percent in a day, you have rules that tell you what to do.
If a market loses 10 percent, follow your rules.
When you are in the heat of the trading battle, your rules for
entry or exit or how much you should buy must be precise. You
cannot afford to think about the rules as the situation unfolds. You
must have an unambiguous plan established in advance. It also
helps to be on the defensive as Larry Hite reminds:
“We approach markets backwards. The first thing we ask is
not what can we make, but how much can we lose. We play
a defensive game.”28
I have an included a sample trend following trading system in
Appendix F, “Trading System Example from Mechanica,” from Bob
Spear of Mechanica software.

266

The peripheral mishigas,
your attitude, wardrobe,
education, and expertise
mean nothing to the
market. From old-timer to
first-timer, it will chew
up a doctorate just as
easily as a drug
addict…in the markets
and indeed in life,
success starts with
realizing that one’s
opinion means nothing.
The market will move as
life will move, perfectly
unpredictable and with
the best laid plans going
horribly awry. We can’t
control the market just as
we can’t control the
future. So the winners are
simply those bestpositioned to benefit from
a future not yet seen.
Jonathon Hoenig, Portfolio Manager,
Capitalistpig Hedge Fund LLC

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ #1: How Much Money?
Ed Seykota was once asked how much money someone should
have before starting to trade. He responded, “Good money
management is equity invariant. I’d ask a trader who thinks he
needs a certain amount before he can trade exactly what amount he
would need to stop trading.” His point is that there is no dollar
amount too little or too big that allows you to sit back and assume
that your starting capital alone is some secret key to success.
Numerous factors related to the correct amount of starting
capital exist, not least of which is the personal discipline and ability
to stick with it. Anyone who promises a magic starting capital
number of how much is needed to “win” is not truthful. No one can
guarantee you profits. However, what if you have unlimited
resources? That should be to your advantage, right? However,
unlimited starting capital can be a benefit or a strike against you.
Jaromir Jagr, the famous hockey player, and William Eckhardt,
Richard Dennis’ longtime partner, have contradicting views on how
much is enough starting capital. Jagr sounds like a riverboat
gambler:
“Jaromir Jagr does not do moderation. This is a man who
doesn’t just play the stock market but romps through it; last
year, published reports estimated he took a hit [loss] of
anywhere from $8 million to $20 million in the dot-com
market. He doesn’t just have a girlfriend who is pretty and
bright; he has a girlfriend who is a former Miss Slovakia and
a second-year law student.”29
Jagr might be a great hockey player, but his trading approach is
leading him straight to the trading poor house. Backed by the
millions he made playing hockey, Jagr is exactly the type of trader
William Eckhardt avoided:
“I know of a few multimillionaires who started trading with
inherited wealth. In each case, they lost it all because they
didn’t feel the pain when they were losing. In those
formative first years of trading, they felt they could afford

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

267

to lose. You’re much better off going into the market on a
shoestring, feeling that you can’t afford to lose. I’d rather
bet on somebody starting out with a few thousand dollars
than on somebody who came in with millions.”30

FAQ #2: Trend Following for Stocks
One of the great myths regarding trend following is that it does
not work with stocks. That is wrong thinking. Trends in stocks are
no different than trends in currencies, commodities, or futures.
Chesapeake Capital, Jerry Parker’s trend following firm, for
example, has adapted its system to stock trading. Parker says his
system works well with stocks, particularly stocks in outlier moves
that are in single industries. He adds:
“Our expertise [is] in systematic trend following or model
development. So maybe we trend follow with Chinese
porcelain. Maybe we trend follow with gold and silver, or
stock futures, or whatever the client needs. We’re trading
these great systems, and testing, and making sure what we
do has worked in the past. And being disciplined, and
unemotional, and applying our methods to the futures
markets, but limiting our trading to this one group of
markets. We need to look at the investment world globally
and communicate our expertise of systematic trading.”31
Bruce Terry, president of Weston Capital Investment Services
and a disciple of Richard Donchian, dismisses out of hand that
trend following is not for stocks:
“Originally in the 1950s, technical models came out of
studying stocks. Commodity Trading Advisors (CTA)
applied these to futures. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
stocks were quiet and futures markets took off. That is how
the CTA market started. It has come full circle. People are
beginning to apply these models to stocks once again.”32
I am reminded of the opening line from a 1979 article from
“Managed Account Reports” that I found in research: “Trading
stocks and commodity futures by means of trend following
techniques is an art with a long history.”33

Robert Hormats, the vice
chairman of Goldman
Sachs International,
observed that to
understand and explain
globalization, it is useful
to think of yourself as an
intellectual nomad. In the
world of the nomad, there
is no carefully defined
turf.
Thomas Friedman36

268

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Finally, for this edition of Trend Following, I am including
extensive research materials that justify the use of trend following
techniques on stocks. Cole Wilcox and Eric Crittenden of Blackstar
Funds, LLC contributed this research. See Appendix A, “Trend
Following for Stocks.”

FAQ #3: Insight on Computers and Cur ve Fitting
Larry Hite has said that a computer can’t get up on the wrong
side of the bed in the morning, which is why he relies on computers
for his decision making and for his implementation of his trading
rules:
“If your boyfriend or girlfriend breaks up with you, you’ll
feel one way; if you get engaged, you’ll feel another way.”34
Hite said he would much rather have one smart guy working on
a lone Macintosh than a team of well-paid timekeepers with an
army of supercomputers. At the same time, however, Hite was
adamant that the real key to using computers successfully was the
thinking that went into the computer code. When someone asked
why even go the computer route if people power is so important.
Hite responded:
“[B]ecause it works—it’s countable and replicable. I’m a
great fan of the scientific method. And the other things are
not scientific. If I give you the algorithms, you should be
able to get the same results I did. That to me means a great
deal.”35
Whales only get
harpooned when they
come to the surface, and
turtles can only move
forward when they stick
their neck out, but
investors face risk no
matter what they do.
Charles A. Jaffe

However, challenges go along with back testing. Computer
technology can be easily used to over optimize or curve fit a trading
system and produce a system that looks good on paper alone. By
testing thousands of possibilities, anyone can create a system that
works in theory, as Barbara Dixon warns:
“When designing a system, I believe it’s important to
construct a set of rules that fit more like a mitten than like
a glove. On the one hand, markets move in trends, but on
the other hand, past results are not necessarily indicative of
future performance. If you design a set of rules that fit the
curve of your test data too perfectly, you run an enormous
risk that it will fizzle under different future conditions.”37

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

A robust trading system, one that is not curve fit, must ideally
trade all markets at all times in all conditions. Trend following
parameters or rules should work across a range of values. System
parameters that work over a range of values are considered robust.
If the parameters of a system are slightly changed and the
performance adjusts drastically, beware. For example, if a system
works great at 20, but does not work at 19 or 21, that system is not
robust. On the other hand, if your system parameter is 50 and it
also works at 40 or 60, your system is much more robust (and
reliable).
Trend trader David Druz has long championed robustness in
trading systems. He dismisses trades of short-term traders, who
fight for quick hitting arbitrage style profits, as noise. Traders who
focus on short-term trading often miss the longer-term trends—
those areas where long-term trend followers wait patiently for their
opportunities. To “wait,” you need complete faith in your trading
system. However, you are in serious trouble if all you think you
need is the latest hardware and software to succeed at trading.
Once again, Dixon makes it clear:
“Contemporary databases, software, and hardware allow
system developers to test thousands of ideas almost
instantaneously. I caution these people about the perils of
curve fitting. I urge them to remember that one of their
primary goals is to achieve discipline, which will enable
them to earn profits. With so many great tools, it’s easy to
change or modify a system and to develop indicators rather
than rules, but is it always wise.”38
It is hard not to get caught up in the hype of computer programs
for trading. They are advertised nonstop today on TV, from ads on
CNBC to dedicated half-hour infomercials promising the world
(“Investools,” “Trend Trading to Win,” etc.). You can spend several
thousand dollars to purchase fancy charting software that makes
you feel like you are the trader of your own fund, and it might turn
out great, but make sure you don’t fall into a false sense of security.
When describing his early trading successes, John W. Henry made
clear the key was philosophy, not technology:
“In those days, there were no personal computers beyond
the Apple. There were few, if any, flexible software packages
available. These machines, far from being the ubiquitous
tool seen everywhere in the world of finance and the world

269

I heard this story and I
think it’s true. Anyway,
it’s a pretty good story. It’s
about how the Air Force
trains pilots. When a
trainee made a good
landing, he would be
praised. When a trainee
made a bad landing, he
would be ridiculed. Well,
it was perfectly clear to
the general that the first
approach was lousy and
the second approach was
good. He had statistics
demonstrating that when
you praised a pilot who
made a perfect landing,
his next landing was not
likely to be as good.
Whereas, if you berated a
pilot who made a bad
landing, his next landing
was likely to be much
better. However, if you
think about it, it doesn’t
matter what you do
because landings are
most likely to be average.
If a pilot had an
exceptional landing, his
next landing was likely to
be average. If he had a
poor landing, his next
landing was likely to be
average, also. By slicing
the data and only looking
at what follows good
landings and praise, you
only see part of the
picture. You must
consider how data was
selected before you can
draw conclusions.
James Simons
The Greenwich Roundtable
June 17, 1999

270

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

at large today, were the province of computer nerds…I set
out to design a system for trading commodities. But things
changed quickly and radically as soon as I started trading.
My trading program, however, did not change at all. As I
said, it hasn’t changed even to this day.”39
One of Henry’s associates elaborated: “Originally all of our
testing was done mechanically with pencil and graph that turned
into lotus spreadsheets, which was still used extensively in a lot of
our day to day work. With the advent of some of these new
modeling systems like system writer, day trader and some of the
other things, we’ve been able to model some of our systems on these
products. Mostly just to back test what we already knew, that trend
following works.”40
Tom Basso sees the benefit: “You’ll find that the more you’re
computerized, the more markets you’ll be able to handle.
Computers leverage your time if you know how to use them.”41
Further, Richard Donchian’s timeless wisdom should give many
pause:
“If you trade on a definite trend following, loss-limiting
method, you can [trade] without taking a great deal of time
from your regular business day. Because action is taken
only when certain evidence is registered, you can spend a
minute or two per [market] in the evening checking up on
whether action-taking evidence is apparent, and then in
one telephone call in the morning, place or change any
orders in accord with what is indicated. [Furthermore] a
definite method, which at all times includes precise criteria
for closing out one’s losing trades promptly, avoids…
emotionally unnerving indecision.”
The obvious is always
least understood.
Prince Klemens von Metternich

Of course to reach the “minute or two” Donchian refers to takes
preparation time. After you test your system and are satisfied
enough with the results to begin trading, your work is not done.
System results must be periodically compared to actual results to
ensure that your testing closely reflects what is happening in real
time. It is also helpful to keep a journal to record how well you stick
to the processes of executing your system.
One trend trader, who was trained at Commodities
Corporation, wrote me: “Early in my trading career I found myself

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

hung up on the ‘need’ to be right rather than the ‘desire’ to make
money. I learned early that being ‘right,’ of having a high percentage
of winners, had very little to do with my overall trading success.
Those who have a need to be right with a high percentage of
winners will find themselves passing on their best trading
opportunities, assuming they use some degree of discretion in their
trade selections. One of my trading buddies enjoys a trading
success rate annually of around 15 percent winners with 50 percent
losers and 35 percent breakeven trades. In 2005, he made over 300
percent on his initial beginning of year trading capital [of] a sevenfigure account. This is a risk-reward numbers game and most who
think it is something else usually face a ‘forced awareness’ at some
point in their trading careers. To further emphasize my point,
everyone has seen ads on the Internet for systems being promoted
for say a 90 percent accuracy. I bet 3/4 of these systems are based
on a set of past criteria that have very little to do with their future
performance. Let’s say we do 100 trades in a calendar year. The
average winning trade makes a net $100 so we make a net $9,000
in the ‘winners.’ Now the bad news is the 10 losing trades are for
$1,000 so we lose a total of $1,000 for the year in a system that had
90 percent winners. Now, I realize this is a stretch from reality, but
mathematically this is what happens once a trader commits capital
to the so-called ‘sure thing’ trading systems!”
Trend follower Ken Tropin was even more specific: “In order for
a system to be successful, it has to be what I call robust. Robust
means that I can test that system in a market I designed it around.
Say I’m using it in the treasury bonds, and then if I switch that
market and I try that system in the Euro, it still works. And if I
change its parameters, it still works. And if I switch it over to corn—
something totally different than treasury bonds—it still works. And
if I look at some data that was out of sample from what I designed
it around, it still works. Then I have something that might be
interesting and have a chance of living in the future. Because the
nature of data is it changes a little all the time. And so the key to
success in systems trading is to have what I call a loose fitting suit.
I can’t have a suit that’s so tight and perfectly proportioned to me
that if I gain two pounds, it won’t fit the data anymore.”
Andrew Lo brings it back to simplicity: “The first [rule of
thumb] being that no matter how complex and subtle a strategy is
and no matter how sophisticated it might be, it has to be possible to

271

272

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

describe that strategy in relatively simple and intuitive terms to a
sophisticated investor. In other words, regardless of how subtle and
impressive and sophisticated the strategy is, I’ve never come across
anything that couldn’t be described in relatively straightforward
terms as to what the value added of that strategy was, whether it
was risk transfer, superior information, better executions, mean
reversion, and so on. So, I think that’s the first principle that I think
is obvious to many investors; but to some who are not as familiar
with quantitative methods, they may feel that they’re just not really
smart enough to understand. But, I think that’s just not the case.
The second rule of thumb is that you’ll never see a bad back test.
Now, again, this may be obvious to the experienced investor, but
there’s a very specific set of quantitative models that you can use to
be able to gauge the bias that comes about from selection. The fact
is that when I’ve talked with investors about doing due diligence,
I’ve often said that, you know, whatever back test you’d like to see,
I can certainly produce it for you. If you torture the data long
enough, it will basically tell you anything you want…”
Day trading is emotional
anesthesia—the frenetic
pace works well to keep
people preoccupied from
feelings they do not wish
to experience.
Thomas Vician, Jr.,
student of Ed Seykota’s

FAQ #4: Limitations with Day Trading
When you trade more or with higher frequency, the profit that
you can earn per trade decreases, whereas your transaction costs
stay the same. This is not a winning strategy. Yet, traders still
believe that short-term trading is less risky. Short-term trading, by
definition, is not less risky, as evidenced by the catastrophic
blowout of Victor Niederhoffer and Long Term Capital Management
(LTCM). Do some short-term traders excel? Yes. However, think
about the likes of whom you might be competing with when you are
trading short term. Professional short-term traders, such as Jim
Simons, have hundreds of staffers working as a team 24/7. They are
playing for keeps, looking to eat your lunch in the zero-sum world.
You don’t stand a chance.
Unfortunately, the flaws in day trading are often invisible to
those who must know better. Sumner Redstone, CEO of Viacom,
was interviewed recently and talked of constantly watching
Viacom’s stock price, hour after hour, day after day. Although
Redstone is a brilliant entrepreneur and has built one of the great
media companies of our time, his obsession with following his
company’s share price is not a good example to follow. Redstone
might feel his company is undervalued, but staring at the screen
will not boost his share price.

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

273

FAQ #5: A Good Example of the Wrong Way to View
a Trade
I wanted to end this chapter with a mini-case study about a
prominent player in the Chicago futures markets: Leo Melamed.
Melamed is Chairman Emeritus and senior policy advisor to the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange. He is recognized as the founder of
financial futures. At the close of 1999, he was named to the top 10
most important Chicagoans in business of the twentieth century.
Yet, with this tremendous resume and success, he is clearly not a
trend following trader as evidenced by excerpts from his book:
“The Hunt silver debacle also provided the setting for my
worst trade. My company partner George Fawcett and I had
become bullish on silver beginning in June 1978, when it
was trading around $5.00 an ounce level. We were right in
the market, and silver prices moved higher. In September
1979, silver reached the high price of $15.00 an ounce, and
the profit we were each carrying was substantial. George
and I had never before made that kind of money, it was
truly a killing. How much higher would silver go? Wasn’t it
time to take the profit? Large profits, as I learned, were
even more difficult to handle than large losses. I had a very
good friend…with special expertise in the precious metals
markets.…Since he knew I was long silver, I ventured to ask
him his opinion. ‘Well, Leo,’ he responded, ‘you have done
very well with your silver position and I really can’t predict
how much higher silver will go. But I’ll tell you this, at
$15.00, it is very expensive. On the basis of historical
values, silver just doesn’t warrant much higher prices.’ I
never doubted that he gave me his honest and best opinion.
I transmitted this information to George and we decided
that if nothing happened by the end of the week, we would
liquidate our positions and take our profits. That’s exactly
what we did. This was in late October 1979. So why was
this my worst trade when in fact it was the biggest profit I
had ever made up to that time? Because, within 30 days
after we got out of our position, the Hunt silver corner took
hold. It did not stop going higher until it hit $50.00 an
ounce in January 1980. George and I had been long silver
for nearly two years, and had we stayed with our position
