
2. Zero centering: Subtract the mean daily return from each day's return in the original sample.

238 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
3. Place the zero-centered data in a bucket.
4. Select a daily return at random from the bucket and note its value.
5. Place that return back in the bucket, and then thoroughly stir the
bucket (some statisticians prefer their samples shaken rather than
stirred).
6. Perfornl steps 4 and 5 exactly N - 1 more times (e.g., 1,230) creating
a total of N (1,231) randomly selected observations. This completes
the first bootstrapped sample.
7. Compute the mean return for the N (1,231) observations in the first
resample. This is one value of the bootstrapped mean.
8. Perform steps 6 through 9 a large number of times (5,000) yielding a
large number of bootstrapped means.
9. Form the sampling distribution of the means.
10. Compare the observed mean return of the rule to the sampling distribution and determine the fraction of the 5,000 means comprising the
sampling distribution that exceed the observed mean return of the
rule to determine the p-value. See Figure 5.12.

Monte Carlo Permutation Method (MCP)
Monte Carlo simulation, invented by Stanislaw Ulam (1909-1984), is a
general method for solving mathematical problems by random sampling.
The Monte Carlo permutation method for rule testing was developed by
Dr. Timothy Masters. He is the first to propose this approach as a way to

Null Hypothesis

0%
Average
Return

of
Tested
Rule

p-value = 0.04

o
FIGURE 5.12 Comparing the rule's mean return to the bootstrapped sampling
distribution of the mean.

239

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

produce the sampling distribution to test the statistical significance of a
rule's back-tested performance. It is presented as an alternative to White's
reality check.
Although the Monte Carlo method has been in existence for a long
time, it had not been previously applied to rule testing. This was made
possible by Dr. Masters' insight that the Monte Carlo method could generate the sampling distribution of a rule with no predictive power. This is accomplished by randomly pairing or permuting the detrended daily returns
of the market (e.g., S&P 500) with the ordered 13 times series representing
the sequence of daily rule output values. Recall that the Ho tested by the
Monte Carlo permutation method asserts that the returns of the rule being
evaluated are a sample from a population of returns that were generated
by a rule with no predictive power. The daily returns of such a rule can be
simulated by randomly pairing the rule's output values (+1 and -1) with
the market's price changes. The random pairing of the rule output values
with market changes destroys any predictive power that the rule may
have had. I refer to this random pairing as a noise rule.
The process of randomly pairing market-price changes with rule output values is illustrated in Figure 5.13. The daily time series of rule output
values are simply those that were produced by the rule that is being evaluated in their original order. After the sequence of output values has been
randomly paired with what is effectively a scrambled version of the market's history, the mean daily return of the noise rule can be computed.
This value appears in the grey box at the end of each row. To produce the
sampling distribution we need many such values.

Time Series of
Rule Output Values

+1

+1

+1

+1

-1

-1

·1

·1

-1

-1

Randomized SPSOO
-0.8 +0.3
Return,

-0.9 -2.6 +3.1 +1.7 -0.8 -2.6 +1.2 -0.4

Randomized Rule
Return,

-0.9 -2.6 - 3.1

-0.8 +0.3

Randomized SPSOO -0.4 +1.2
Return z
Randomized Rule
Return z

-0.4 +1.2

-1.7 +0.8 +2.6 -1.2

-2.6 -0.8 +1.7 +3.1

+0.4

-2.6 -0.9 +0.3 -0.8

-2.6 -0.8 -1.7 - 3.1 +2.6 +0.9 -0.3

+0.8

Randomized SPSOO
Return 3
-2.6 +1.7

-0.4 -0.9 -0.8

Randomized Rule
Return 3

-0.4 -0.9 +0.8 +0.8 -0.3 -1.2 +2.6 -3.1

FIGURE 5.13

-2.6 +1.7

-0.8 +0.3 + 1.2 -2.6 +3.1

Monte Carlo permutation method.

Mean
Return,

-0.62
Mean
Return z

-0.34
Mean
Return 3

-0.26

240 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
To produce additional values of noise rule mean returns, the same
time series of actual rule output values is paired with (permuted with) numerous scrambled (randomized) versions of market-price changes. The illustration shows only three Monte Carlo permutations but in practice it
would be done a large number of times, perhaps 5,000. The 5,000 values
for average return are then used to form the sampling distribution of the
mean return earned by a noise rule-a rule with no predictive power.

Pl'ocedure. The sequence of steps to generate the sampling distribution by the Monte Carlo permutation method is as follows:
1. Obtain a sample of one-day market-price changes for the period of
time over which the TA rule was tested, detrended as described in
Chapter 1.
2. Obtain the time series of daily rule output values over the back-test
period. Assume for this illustration that there were 1,231 such values, one rule output value for each day on which the rule was tested.
3. Place the market's detrended one-day-forward price changes on a
piece of paper. Place them in a bin and stir.
4. Randomly select a market-price change from the bin and pair it with
the first (earliest) rule output value. Do not put the price change
back in the bin. In other words this sampling is being done without
replacement.
5. Repeat step 4 until all the returns in the bin have been paired with a
rule output value. In this example there will be a total of 1,231 such
pairings.
6. Compute the return for each of the 1,231 random pairings. This is
done by multiplying the rule's output value (+1 for long, -1 for short)
by the market's one-day-forward price change.
7. Compute the average return for the 1,231 returns obtained in step 6.
8. Repeat steps 4 through 7 a large number of times (e.g., 5,000).
9. Form the sampling distribution of the 5,000 values obtained in step 8.
10. Place the tested rule's rate of return on the sampling distribution and
compute the p-value (the fraction of random rule returns equal to or
greater than the tested rule's return).

Application of Computer Intensive Methods
to Back-Test of a Single Rule
This section demonstrates the application of the two computer-intensive
hypothesis testing methods to a single rule: 91 day channel breakout l4 us-

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

241

ing the Dow Jones Transportation Index (input series 4) as the rule's input
series. This rule, which is designated as TT-4-91, and all others tested in
Part 1\vo of this book are described in detail in Chapter 8. The main point
for current purposes is to demonstrate the hypothesis test. The rule was
used to generate long and short signals on the S&P 500 index from November 1980 through June 2005. Over this period of time, the rule earned
an annualized return of 4.84 percent using detrended S&P 500 data to
compute the rule's daily returns. The expected annual return of a rule with
no predictive power is zero on detrended data.
Both the bootstrap and the Monte Carlo permutation methods were
used to test the null hypothesis that the rule has no predictive power. The
question is this: Is TT-4-91's +4.84 percent return sufficient to reject the
null hypothesis?
Testing Rule Performance Using Bootstrap: White's Reality
Check. To generate the sampling distribution of the average return, the

specific steps taken starting with the detrended S&P 500 data are:
1. Zero Centering the Daily Rule Returns: Because the rule generates a
positive return (+4.84 percent) on the detrended market data, the average daily return of the rule (approximately 0.0192 percent per day)
is subtracted from the return earned by the rule each day. This transformation creates a set of daily returns whose average value is zero,
thereby making the data conform to Ho- Note-this is not to be confused with the detrending of the S&P 500 data.
2. Resampling the Daily Returns: The zero-centered daily returns as
computed in the preceding step are sampled with replacement. This
must be done exactly 6,800 times (the number of observations in the
original sample) for the Bootstrap Theorem to hold true.
3. Compute the Mean Return: The mean daily return is computed for the
6,800 resampled returns. This is the first bootstrapped mean.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 5,000 times. This obtains 5,000 values for the resampled mean.
5. Create the bootstrapped distribution of resampled means.
6. Compare rule's +4.84 percent return to the sampling distribution to
determine the fraction of the sampling distribution's area that lies at
values equal to or greater than +4.84 percent per annum. This is done
by counting the fraction of the 5,000 bootstrapped means that have
values equal to or greater than this return.
Results: 11 0 Reiected-Rule Possibly lias Predictive Power.

Figure 5.14 shows the bootstrapped sampling distribution with the actual

242 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

0.12 , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,

TI-4-911
... +4.84% 1-----------------------------

0.10 ---------------------------------------..-.....-.--.--.-0.08 ---.------.--.-.-

--.-------.------.--.

0.06 ------.--------------------------------------0.04 -----------------------.------.--.-.-.-.

II

I(

p~~;~~e 1-------------------

0.02
I

-0.15
FIGURE 5.14

I

I

-0.10

I•.

I

-0.05

o

I

0.05

I

0.10

I

I

0.15

Bootstrapped sampling distribution for rule TI-4-91 and its p-value.

performance of rule TT-4-91 superimposed. The p-value of 0.0692 indicates that .069 of the 5,000 bootstrapped means were equal to or greater
than +4.84 percent. This means that if the rule's expected return were
truly equal to zero, about 7 times out of 100, the rule would earn a return
of +4.84 percent or greater simply due to chance (sampling variability).
Statisticians would regard such a result as possibly significant. As will be
seen in Chapter 6, the amount of searching that led to the discovery of the
rule, specifically whether the rule was found amongst a large group of
back-tested rules, can impact the p-value and the rule's significance. Consequently, the results quoted here assume that this was the only rule proposed for back testing.
l'esting Rule Performance with Monte ~arlo Permutation
Method. The following steps describe the process of applying the
Monte Carlo Permutation Method to a rule's back-tested performance:

1. The time series of daily rule output values is laid out in its proper sequence over the time period of the rule back test. As stated earlier
there will be 6,800 of these daily +1 and -1 values.
2. Each of the 6,800 detrended one day forward price changes is inscribed on a ball. These 6,800 balls are placed in a bin.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

243

3. The bin is shaken, and then, one at a time, the balls are drawn at random and paired with an individual rule output value. Thus, each of the
rule's daily output values is matched with a single one day forward
S&P 500 return. This is done without replacement until all balls have
been paired with a rule output value. Because there are exactly 6,800
daily market returns and 6,800 rule output values, the bin will be
empty when this step is complete.
4. Multiply each rule value (+1 or -1) by the associated S&P 500 return.
This gives the return that would be earned by the noise rule over the
next day. This step will produce 6,800 daily rule returns.
5. Average the 6,800 values obtained in step 4. This is the first Monte
Carlo permuted mean return for a noise rule.
6. Steps 3 through 5 must be repeated 5,000 times.
7. Produce the sampling distribution from the 5,000 Monte Carlo means.
8. Compare the return of the TT-4-91 rule with the sampling distribution
and determine the fraction of Monte Carlo means that equal or exceed
the return earned by the rule. This is the p-value.
Monte Carlo Results: Rule Possibly lias Predictive Power.
Confirming the bootstrapped result, the Monte Carlo method gives a p-value
that is almost identical.

ESTIMA1'ION
Estimation is the other form of statistical inference. In contrast to hypothesis testing, which is oriented to the acceptance or rejection of a claim
made about the value of a population parameter, estimation's purpose is
to approximate the value of the population parameter. In our case, it will
be used to estimate the expected return of a rule.

Point Estimates
There are two kinds of estimates: point and interval. A point estimate is a
single value that approximates the population parameter, for example the
rule has an expected return oj 10 percent. An interval estimate is a range
of values within which the population parameter lies with a given level of
probability. The following statement would exemplify this: The rule's ex-

pected return lies within the range 5 percent to 15 percent with a probability ojO.95.
Actually, we already have been making point estimates, but they have

244 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
not been described as such. Every time we compute a sample mean and
use it to approximate the population mean, we are making a point estimate. This fact is easily overlooked. Some commonly used point estimators are: the mean, median, standard deviation, and the variance. The
estimate is computed from a sample of observations taken from the population. In other words, a point estimate is a sample statistic. The formula
to compute a sample mean is shown in Figure 5.15.
The use of means (averages) is so ubiquitous in TA that it is taken for
granted, yet the sample mean turns out to be an elegant and powerful estimator. It provides a single value that is, in an important sense, the best
(most informative) estimate of the population's mean. This is an important fact.
Just how informative the sample mean is becomes clear when we
consider the criteria used to judge the quality of an estimator. Good estimators should be: unbiased, consistent, efficient, and suffldent. In terms
of these four criteria, it can be shown that the sample mean is the best estimator of the population mean. 15
An estimator is unbiased if its expected value is equal to the population value. Said differently, if an estimator is unbiased its deviations from
the true population value have an average value of zero. The sample
mean's deviations from the population mean are unbiased. This allows us
to say that a rule's mean return in a historical sample is an unbiased estimate of its mean return in the inunediate practical future.
Another criterion of a point estimator's goodness is its consistency.
An estimator is said to be consistent if its value converges to the value of

Sample Mean of Variable X

x

n

x-

n

Where Xi is an individual observation on variable X
FIGURE 5.15 Sample mean of variable X.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

245

the population parameter as sample size is increased. The Law of Large
Numbers tells us that this is so for the sample mean.
Estimators should also be efficient. This criterion relates to the width
of its sampling distribution. As mentioned earlier, an estimator is a sample
statistic, and thus has a sampling distribution. The most efficient estimator is the one that produces the narrowest sampling distribution. In other
words, the most efficient estimator has the smallest standard error. 16 Both
the sample mean and the sample median are unbiased and consistent estimators of the population mean for populations that are distributed symmetrically. However, the sample mean is more efficient than the sample
median. For large san1ples, the standard error of the mean is about 80 percent smaller than the sample median's standard error. 17
The final trait of a good point estimator is called its sufficiency. "An
estimator is sufficient if it makes such use of all the available sample data
that no other estimator would add any information about the paran1eter
being estimated."L8 The sample mean is sufficient in this sense.

Interval Estimates-The Confidence Interval
More informative than the point estimate is the interval estin1ate, also
known as a confidence interval. It is described in this section.
What 1)0 Confidence Intervals 'I'ell Us'! A point estimate has limited value because it conveys no sense of the uncertainty in the estimate
due to sampling error. The confidence interval solves this problem by
combining the infom1ation of the point estimate with the infonnation
about the estimator's sampling distribution.
A confidence interval is a range of values that surround the point estimate. The interval is defined by upper and lower values called bounds. In
addition, the interval is accompanied by a probability number that tells us
how likely it is that the true value of the population parameter falls within
the bounds of the confidence interval. By convention the probability is
stated as a percentage rather than a fraction. Thus, a 90 percent confidence interval for the mean has a 0.90 probability of enclosing within its
bounds the population's true mean value.
When thinking about what a confidence interval tells us, it is best to
think of what would happen if one were to construct a large number of 90
percent confidence intervals, each based on an independent sample of
data taken from the population. If this were to be done, about 90 percent
of the intervals would actually encompass the value of the population's
parameter. By extension, about 10 percent of the confidence intervals
would fail to include the population parameter. This is illustrated in Figure 5.16 for 10 confidence intervals. Ten is a small number, which I used to

246 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
True Population Mean

•

Means
&
90% Confidence
Intervals
For
10 Independent
Samples

FIGURE 5.16

!1

•

I

••

1

I

:. •I

I

Error
90% CI
Fails To
Enclose
Population
Mean

I

•I
•
•
1

I

•

1

90 percent confidence intervals (.90 probability correct).

keep the figure simple. The true, but unknown, population mean is indicated by the Greek letter Jl (mu). The sample mean is identified by the dot
within each confidence interval. Note that one of the confidence intervals
fails to enclose the population mean.
The researcher can choose whatever confidence level is desired. For
example a 99 percent confidence level contains the true population mean
with a probability of 0.99. Of course, there is a price to be paid for the
higher level of confidence-the interval is wider. In other words, the price
for higher confidence is reduced precision. Note in Figure 5.17, by increasing the confidence level to 99 percent, the error made by the 90 percent

True Population Mean

•

Means

&
99%

1

Confidence
Intervals
For 10
Independent
Samples

FIGURE 5.17

:.
•

.:

•
I

1-1----411.1-:-------jl

• •
• •

99% CI
Correct
Where
90% CI
Was
Wrong

99 percent confidence intervals (.99 probability correct).

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

247

confidence interval in Figure 5.16 has been eliminated. The reduced error
rate was accomplished by using a wider (less precise) confidence interval.
If a rule were to be back tested on one hundred independent samples
of data and a 90 percent confidence interval were constructed about the
mean return observed in each sample, approximately 90 percent of these
confidence intervals would contain the rule's true or expected return in
the population. Figure 5.18 shows a 90 percent confidence interval for a
rule that earned a 7 percent return in a back test. We can be certain, with a
probability of 0.90, that the rule has an expected return between 2 percent
and 12 percent.
l'he Conlidence Interval and Its Connection to the Sampling
Distribution. Confidence intervals are derived from the same sampling distribution that is used to compute the p-values for a hypothesis
test. Given what we have already leamed about sampling error (sampling
variability), it can be said that the value of a sample mean is equal to the
unknown value of the population mean, plus or minus its sampling error.
This relationship is shown by the upper formula in Figure 5.19. By rearranging the terms of this formula we get the lower formula in Figure 5.19.
It says that the value of the population mean is equal to the known value
of the sample mean plus or minus sampling error.
The bottom formula tells us that, although we do not know the precise value of the population mean, we can take the value of the sample
mean, which we do know, and the sampling distribution of the mean,
which we also know, and obtain a range of values that contains the population mean with a specified level of probability. In operational terms,
this tells us that if we were to repeat the following procedure 1,000

times-compute a sample mean and a 90 percent confidence interval-

Rule Return
Was 7% In
Historical Sample

7%
Rate of Return

FIGURE 5.18 90 percent confidence interval for rule back test.

248 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The known sample mean is
the unknown population mean with error

x = ~ +/- Sampling Error
The unknown population mean is
the known sample mean with error

~

= X +/-

Sampling Error

FIGURE 5.19 The known sample mean is the unknown population mean with
error.

the population mean would lie within approximately 900 of the 1,000 confidence intervals. This concept is illustrated when the procedure is repeated only 10 times in Figure 5.20. Note that one of the 10 confidence
intervals fails to include the population mean. The point of this section is
that the confidence interval's width is derived from the width of the sampling distribution.
As was said earlier, the confidence interval is based on the same sampling distribution that is used in the hypothesis test. However, in the case
of the confidence interval, the sampling distribution is simply shifted from
the position it occupies in a hypothesis test. In the hypothesis test, the
sampling distribution is centered at the hypothesized value of the population mean, for example, zero. In the case of a confidence interval, the sampling distribution is centered over the sample mean, for example, 7
percent. This concept is illustrated in Figure 5.21.
Generating Confidence Intervals with the Bootstrap. Bootstrapping can be used to derive confidence intervals. The procedure is almost identical to the one used to generate the sampling distribution for a
hypothesis test.
There are numerous methods for computing bootstrap confidence intervals. The one presented here, the bootstrap percentile method, is popular, easy to use, and generally gives good results. More sophisticated
methods are beyond the scope of this text.
It should be pointed out that the Monte Carlo permutation method
cannot be used to generate confidence intervals. This is because the
