
66

Inside the Currency Market

government dollar index is the Australian dollar. For this reason, the USDX
and the ofﬁcial Major Index have similarities. On a correlation basis against the
U.S. dollar, the euro, British pound, and Australian dollar correlate together in
movements but against the dollar in market movements while the Canadian
dollar, Japanese yen, Swiss franc, and Swedish krona all move together with the
U.S. dollar. The difference between the two indices is that the ofﬁcial Major
Index numbers released today represent one week prior’s results. So information collected today and factored are not released until one week later. For this
reason, any trade strategy should involve contemplation between both indices.
U.S. Major and Broad Index

This dollar index is called the Major Index and consists of seven currencies: the euro, Canadian dollar, Swiss franc, British pound, Australia dollar,
Japanese yen, and Swedish krona. The value of the Major dollar Index is
derived by its value of trade weights in the Broader dollar Index that consists
of 26 nations that includes the seven currencies in the Major Index. For the
Major dollar Index, weights are distributed as follows:
Country (Currency)

Weight

Euro zone (euro)

17.792

Canada (dollar)

14.701

Japan (yen)

8.265

United Kingdom (pound)

4.133

Switzerland (franc)

1.535

Australia (dollar)

1.280

Sweden (krona)

0.961

Rates are released as mid rates. For the Broader Index, weights are issued
not to include the original seven:
Country

Weight

Mexico

9.621

China

17.934

Taiwan

2.459

67

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices
South Korea

3.503

Singapore

1.910

Hong Kong

1.283

Malaysia

1.796

Brazil

2.096

Thailand

1.383

Philippines

0.559

Indonesia

0.988

India

1.579

Israel

1.170

Saudi Arabia

0.988

Russia

1.457

Argentina

0.565

Venezuela

0.551

Chile

0.849

Columbia

0.591

The Major and Broad Index is factored so it accounts for third-market
competition. So its exports, imports, and a third weight are factored to
capture third-market competition. The Federal Reserve publishes not only
the overall trade weights but import, export, and third weights for each
currency.
• Import weights for the Major Index are as follows: Euro  16.719,
Canada  16.784, Japan  9.046, United Kingdom  3.266, Swiss 
1.175, Australia  0.615, and Sweden  0.761.
• Export weights: Euro  17.993, Canada  23.606, Japan  5.862, United
Kingdom  4.328, and Sweden  0.761.
• Third Market competition weights: Euro  19.736, Canada  1.629,
Japan  9.106, United Kingdom  5.671, Swiss  2.562, Australia 
1.955, and Sweden  1.875.
• Real exchange rates are factored by the United States using Consumer Price
Indices by use of this formula:
E j,t  Pt/Pj,t

68

Inside the Currency Market

where P t and P j,t are CPI for the U.S. and economy j. The Major Index has a
base period from 2003 equal to 100.
CME Dollar

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange began trade of a new dollar index. The
index is based on a simple average. The weights are as follows: Euro 45.2840,
yen 22.1649, British pound 14.5479, Swiss franc 5.9359, Australian dollar
4.1163, Canadian dollar 3.6097, and Swedish krona 4.3414. The 2009 to
2010 multiplier was 34.9870792920 (CME Rulebook 2010).
International Monetary Fund: Role and Function in Trade

The IMF was born at the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference
at the Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944. The
IMF was charged with stabilizing exchange rates, securing ﬁnancial stability,
facilitating international trade, and fostering economic growth. Today, the
IMF claims 186 members, up from 45 in 1944.
After 66 years of existence and many years of growth, the IMF today
fulﬁlls the role as the foundation of the world economy due to its many years
as monitor, mentor, and facilitator. This role was accomplished due to the
multitudes of studies the IMF performed over its many years. Its country
studies are by far the most detailed in all aspects of any nation. The research
it performs and the quality of the research that is published periodically is
without question extraordinarily valuable. Yet it is the world role it facilitates
that is most important.
When nations revamped their TWIs, the IMF provided the model and
research. When nations report their TWI numbers every day, trade is monitored and reported to various nations by the IMF through invoices of imports
and exports that cross borders TWIs can be factored. All is accomplished electronically. When currencies went from a gold ﬁxed dollar to a free ﬂoat, the
IMF was instrumental in assisting nations through the transitional periods.
This role comes at a price to nations as they must pay dues, yet without the
IMF the world would be a very different place in its external and systemic
functions and operations because the IMF bails out nations whose ﬁnances
fall below international standards.
Imagine what the world would be like without the IMF. Thomas Hobbs’
Leviathan would be rectiﬁed and life would be nasty, short, and brutish.

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

69

The IMF’s TWI is the model for the world because it captures third-market
competition. It can monitor effectively the whole world’s trade by the use of
various weights assigned to each nation. What was learned from this early formed
model in the IMF’s history is a concept called exchange rate pass through.
Exchange Rate Pass Through and the U.S. Dollar

Exchange rate pass through says a change in the value of a nation’s currency
induces a change in the price of a nation’s imports and exports, a proven
methodology due to extensive records maintained by the IMF and thanks to
Linda Goldberg whose 2008 paper, “Vehicle Currency Use in International
Trade” I quote and summarize: “Every time a good or service crosses a nation’s
border, customs records the type of product, its value, and the currency used
to import or export. This invoiced information is transmitted to the IMF
who further transmits it to each nation so each nation can factor their TWI.
Currently, the U.S. dollar dominates the choice of currency in trade throughout South America, Asia, Australia, and Eastern Europe. The euro dominates
the remainder of the world.” For this and other reasons, the U.S. dollar and
euro are two of the most widely traded currencies in the spot market. The
choice of currency to be used in trade however is a matter of a clear and
broad choice. Nations aren’t locked into a particular currency. “They choose
the currency that favors their own exchange rate, one that will enhance their
proﬁts. This is why U.S. dollar indices factored today are held for release one
week later. The information is too sensitive for immediate release and can
skew markets.

Indicative versus Reference Rates

When a nation releases its trade weight effective exchange rate every day, this
is called by most of the world an indicative rate. The ECB refers to its trade
weight effective exchange rate as a reference rate. Both are slight semantical references. What is important is that the major nations factor their TWI
based on a set formula with set weights and a set ﬁxing time daily and released
at the same time as mid rates. For emerging-market nations such as Brazil, the
story is quite different because emerging-market nations lack a TWI. Instead,
they negotiate currencies based on currency spot auctions. The currency is
negotiated rather than an index price. The best example is found at the Bank
of Mauritius (intnet.mu). Indicative rates, as they are termed, work as follows.

70

Inside the Currency Market

Indicative rates for most of the world’s nations are negotiated through
bankers. An exact time is set every day that opens bid and ask prices for
currencies. This process, called Indicative Rate Surveys, lasts about 20 minutes depending on the nation but this time is strictly enforced by those that
administer this service. Normally an FX Committee or a particular nation’s
market committee administers this function. Once the exact time to close
bid and ask occurs, highest and lowest bids are thrown out and the remaining
bids are averaged to derive an indicative rate. This is the rate released at the
ﬁxing time every day so banks and markets must rebalance their structures
in order to meet these new funding and cost needs based on the negotiated
currency price.
This ﬁxing-time rate is also called mid rates because ﬁxing times generally
occur just after market openings in the respective nations. Mid rates refer to
middle rates between wholesale buy and sell quotes.
Banks that bid on currencies have various reasons for their bids and various means based on a bid or ask price. A bank may bid due to a trade-ﬁnance
transaction that awaits, dollar transactions may await, bids may be based
on spot prices or a spot price implied in an offshore nondeliverable forward
foreign-exchange market. Rates are then dealt in the interbank market. If a
spot auction fails in its ﬁrst attempt, another auction is held until a spot price
is established.
Major companies may use these rates for payments to another nation,
some transfer money, some buy travelers checks, some trade one currency for
another, others denominate bank accounts in various currencies, and others
adjust spot prices. Still others may plan future developments by locking in a
price in a ﬁnancial instrument. All markets adjust to the ﬁx. An indicative
rate can be released as an exchange rate or spot price.

Factor Exchange Rates

The formula is base – term or variable/ﬁxed. For New Zealand dollar/U.S.
dollar spot price, it costs 6830 at this time to buy one U.S. dollar. The reverse
asks how many dollars does it take to buy one New Zealand dollar. The formula is one U.S. dollar divided by 6830 New Zealand dollars for an exchange
rate of 0.000146.
The euro/U.S. dollar spot price traded at 2384 so 1 euro divided by 2384
is equal to 0.00419. It costs .00419 to buy one euro. Euro/New Zealand
dollar trades at 1.7667 so New Zealand dollar to euro is equal to 0.56602
New Zealand dollars to equal one euro. Are exchange rates overvalued or

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

71

undervalued? That would depend on prices of products, the cost of business at these rates, and how one viewed this question. Europeans may see
2384 euro to one dollar as expensive while an American may view this rate as
cheap. Bloomberg factors PPP over a yearly period to gauge prices between
nations.

Trade Weight Indices and Spot Trades

The foremost reason central banks switched from an arithmetic to a geometric calculation of TWIs is because they can track percent changes in the TWI
to percent changes in spot-currency pairs without affecting the base period.
Both coincide perfectly. This allows many possibilities to trade spot against
trade weight indices.
In the United States, the St. Louis Federal Reserve, through its Federal
Reserve Economic Data System called FRED, tracks the U.S. Broad Index
based on change, percent changes, and compounded rates of change. FRED
can be factored for any TWI against any currency pair using the same methodology. Charts can be constructed based on TWI to the most interested
pairs to a particular central bank. TWI prices would be listed on the left side
and currency prices across the bottom. Then draw a trend line to monitor
prices. Look at the most interesting pairs in this manner.
The Swiss want U.S. dollar/Swiss franc not to rise and not to turn weak
in price; they want Swiss franc/U.S. dollar to rise. Why? Businesses that earn
proﬁts in the United States can more easily repatriate their monies and earn
foreign reserves. Earnings in U.S. dollars means that the Swiss will earn more
in Swiss francs when the funds are transferred and this is an economic good
for Switzerland.
U.S. dollar pairs can be charted against any TWI based on percent
changes. The Bank of England charts its ERI among other methods based on
a probability scale of implied volatilities. British Bankers Association (BBA)
LIBOR and speciﬁc nation LIBOR can be tracked against any TWI.
Any policy rates can be tracked against any TWI. TWIs can be tracked
against each other and correlated. A TWI is an index and indices can be
tracked against any other index.
View correlation within one nation’s TWI as a one-point move up or
down in the TWI represents an X move in exchange rates. New Zealand once
factored its TWI against 90-day bank bills and the Monetary Conditions
Index. They found an X point move represented a Y move in the TWI. This
indicator is not published anymore.

72

Inside the Currency Market

TWIs ebb and ﬂow over the years. Current policy rates and TWIs are
currently low, so the abundance of liquidity that sits idle will eventually be
absorbed with higher rates that will send TWIs back up and in turn send
currency pairs back to trend. Think about the BOE’s ERI and the two most
interested pairs, British pound/U.S. dollar and euro/British pound.
A rising ERI can only send the British pound/U.S. dollar long and
euro/British pound short. Yet British pound/euro will go long along with
British pound/U.S. dollar. A rising CERI in Canada will send the Canadian
dollar/U.S. dollar long and U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar short. A rising TWI
in New Zealand sends New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand
dollar/Japanese yen long. Notice the positive correlation of base pairs. Yet
New Zealand dollar/euro doesn’t correlate with the base pairs, nor does it
properly correlate to a rising New Zealand TWI, so expect much volatility as
this pair settles into acceptable central bank and market ranges. Yet can New
Zealand sacriﬁce New Zealand dollar/euro in exchange for the proﬁts of New
Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen? The same
question applies to Australia. A rising TWI in Australia will send Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar and Australian dollar/Japanese yen long, but what about
Australian dollar/euro and Australian dollar/British pound—that doesn’t
correlate to a rising TWI nor to the two base pairs of Australian dollar/U.S.
dollar and Australian dollar/Japanese yen.
If TWIs are at high levels and economic times turn down, then the
reverse scenarios will hold. Previous longs become shorts. This is just a small
portion of the many possibilities that exist to proﬁtably trade currency pairs
against any TWI.
Conclusion

Effective exchange-rate indices and effective exchange rates are just another
means to trade spot currencies. The only difference is the index, but a currency
price factored within an index may prove to be a more powerful indicator as
to direction of a particular pair because it is gauged against other currencies in
the index. Each nation has various factors to achieve its desired trade and currency price goals due to the uniqueness of each nation. Indices are constructed
to reﬂect the economic parameters of each nation’s trade circumstances.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 4

Short-Term Interest Rates
and Money Market
Instruments
The purpose of this chapter is not necessarily to know how to trade repurchase
agreements although a full outline is presented. Instead, repurchase agreements
represent the shortest-term interest rate within a nation, the prime mover of a
spot price. These shortest-term interest rates can connect to a currency price
through factors of interest. Factors of interest for repurchase agreements represent the shortest-term deposit rates and deposit rates represent the bid side of
a currency pair. It determines the cost of money. A bid side rate represents the
ﬂoor for rates, so it is imperative to understand this market.
Repurchase Agreements

Repurchase agreements comprise two forms, a repo rate and a reverse-repo
rate. The reverse-repo rate can, depending on market conditions, represent an
ask side of a currency, a ceiling. But that is one currency. Each nation must
be understood due to the various factors to achieve its repo rate and the daycount factors of interest.
Crisis economic conditions forced not only the normally reported and
understood general collateral (GC) rate, but a government rate was established as borrowers were forced to borrow from central bank facilities. This
chapter outlines all the various aspects of the repurchase agreement market
from nation to nation. What was once a rate hidden from the market has, in
the last 10 years or so, become a regularly reported rate with updated rates
published periodically throughout any trading day.
73

74

Inside the Currency Market

What were once popularly known as repos since the inception of central
banks before World War I have now become known as repurchase agreements and reverse-repurchase agreements that serve a vital function of the
daily operation of banking systems throughout the world.
Traditionally, repos were employed as a monetary tool by central banks
to add or subtract liquidity from the banking system as needed to manage
the supply of money that ﬂowed through banks. This was conducted through
sales or purchases of respective nations’ treasury bonds, notes, and bills. When
central banks bought repos or bonds, they added liquidity, and they drained
liquidity when they reversed the transaction. This occurred traditionally when
rates were misaligned such as a misaligned Fed funds rate to other short-term
interest rates or, as in days past, when the discount rate was misaligned with
the prime rate to offer a U.S. example. The system was a simple process.
Central banks opened a bidding process to their primary bank dealers
registered with the central bank, currently 19 in the United States, a rate was
agreed upon, and the market acted upon this rate by a sale or purchase.
Repo and reverse-repo rates were reported daily in the ﬁnancial press.
Typically, both rates were reported along with the spread so any trader could
determine a direction to these shortest of short rates. A repo rate is always
higher than a reverse-repo rate.
Repo markets determine not only the direction of interest rates, but the
yield curve in ﬁxed-interest markets is also ascertained to serve as a guide to
longer term interest-rate instruments. Repo rates determine prices for swaps,
forwards, and ﬁxed-income products such as government bonds.
As time progressed and the popularity of repos increased to ﬁnance
operations, mortgaged-backed securities, stocks, commercial paper, corporate and municipal bonds, and government securities of all maturities were
offered as collateral in exchange for cash to ﬁnance an institution’s cash needs
on a daily basis.
Eventually clearing and settlement companies formed due to the automation of U.S. Treasury Market Auctions in 1993 and automation of Treasury
Open Market Operations in 1994 and increased in size due to the increased
number of transactions handled on a daily basis (New York Federal Reserve
2010). Australia switched to automation with passage of the 1998 Payment
Systems and Settlement Act (RBA 2010). This changed the repo market from
a bilateral transactional system to a match book or tri-party repo system where
orders were matched with secured computer connections by size of transaction, bid/ask, available participants, and rates. These were blind transactions
as neither party was familiar with their match.
The identiﬁcation of the transaction for a bond in the United States
is done by a CUSIP (Committee on Uniform Identiﬁcation Procedure)

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

75

number that is the nine-digit character identiﬁcation number on every bond
that is registered with the Committee on Uniform Identiﬁcation Procedure
as part of the CUSIP Service Bureau, which is also involved in clearing and
settling trades in the repo market. Other nations adopted similar identiﬁcation conventions. Those conventions are called ISIN numbers, termed the
international securities identiﬁcation number.
The Bank of International Settlements (BIS) reports in the December
2008 Quarterly Review by Peter Hordahl and Michael King that $10 trillion
in repos were transacted by the United States and euro zone in 2007 and
$1 trillion in the United Kingdom. The New Zealand Central Bank reports
7,000 daily transactions totaling about $40 billion daily. Yet this ﬁgure is the
total for swaps, ﬁxed interest, equities, and repo transactions. The Federal
Reserve’s 19 primary bank dealers reported $570 billion in daily average
trading volume in 2007. Repos became the newest and easiest source of
ﬁnance for all nations around the world in the last 12 years or so because
of the range of rates various banks and dealers charged based on the particular transaction and because the market was safe due to the collateralization
of the market.
Prior to the explosion of this market, central banks transacted repos based
on British Bankers Association (BBA) LIBOR. That was only one rate, today
many rates exist that form a viable market for dealers, banks, and broker dealers.
Money was earned by dealers based on the haircut, the fee charged to handle transactions. Haircuts depended on market risk and length of time in the
transaction. Down economic times saw shorter-dated repurchase agreements
with volatile repo rates, a boon for dealers. Crisis economic times saw a higher
demand for liquidity but lenders were skeptical, so haircuts and rates rose.
It is imperative for the currency spot trader to check longer-dated repurchase deals and turnover to gauge activity and determine where this market
may be headed. Shorter-dated deals and higher repo rates are a sign of economic downturns. Another method is check the spreads between the repurchase and the reverse repurchase, as wider spreads are an indicator of down
economic times as the cost to borrow increases. The unforeseen polemic to
this market materialized when economic calamity gripped the world in 2008,
interest rates dropped to near zero for many nations, and stimulus funding
was the order of the day to prop up failing economies and institutions. This
led to failed repo transactions when the price of loaned instruments lost their
value. In repo-market parlance this is called the fail, and fails occur all the
time but more so during crisis situations.
Dealers and banks then turned to lending only the safest and most liquid
securities. The golden system of ﬁnance for so many banks, central bankers,
and major companies froze and was limited to only the most credit-worthy
