 What early CAPM did was a linear regression between the excess return (return less the risk-free rate) of an asset (or portfolio of assets) and the excess return of the market index. A linear regression determines the relationship between two or more variables and provides measures that allow you to determine the accuracy of that relationship. 
 The beta coefficient of the CAPM regression equation tells you the sensitivity of an asset’s excess return to variations in the market’s excess return. In other words, it tells you how much the market’s movement contributes to your return. CAPM also tells you that the expected return on any security is proportional to the risk of that security as measured by its beta. 
 The intercept of the regression equation is the alpha. It is what you have left over once you remove beta from the equation. Alpha represents abnormal profits. It is what you earn in excess of the reward for assuming market risk. 
 Instead of having to deal with possibly thousands of inputs to construct optimal portfolios, with CAPM you only need information pertaining to your portfolio of stocks and the market index. If you diversify among a number of stocks spread out in different industries, you could target the expected return and volatility you want for your portfolio by targeting the average beta of your stocks. Equally important from an academic point of view, you could use CAPM to help determine a firm’s cost of capital and to measure investment performance on a risk-adjusted basis. An annual alpha of 1% means your risk-adjusted excess return is 1% a year. Using CAPM, you could judge investment management skill just by tracking a portfolio’s alpha. Economists also liked the fact that statistical significance could be associated with alpha and beta in the form of t-statistics and probability values. 
 They say there are two ways to gain a positive expected return. The first is by taking on known risk factors (beta). The second is by outsmarting everyone else (alpha). 
 There was just one problem with CAPM; it did not work very well in empirical testing. Returns of high beta portfolios were too low, and returns from low beta portfolios were too high. Much of the variation in expected return was unrelated to a portfolio’s beta. 
 In the early 1980s, I came across an academic paper that tried to explain commodity returns in terms of single-factor CAPM. This paper was actually used in a graduate-level finance class at Berkeley. I wondered at the time, “What does the stock market have to do with the price of tea in China, or the price of any other commodity?” I was also aware at the time of the statistical problems associated with CAPM. Financial market returns, in general, violate the standard linear regression assumptions of drawing from distributions that are independent and identically distributed. 6 
 CAPM ignored too many risks. Mark Twain reportedly said, “It ain’t what we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that just ain’t so.” Fischer Black said, “In the end, a theory is accepted not because it is confirmed by conventional empirical tests, but because researchers persuade one another that the theory is correct and relevant.” 
 By the 1990s, academics had more evidence that all was not well with CAPM. Future returns on low P/E, low book-to-market, and small-cap stocks appeared to be higher than predicted by their betas. This resulted in the seminal Fama and French (1992) study that expanded CAPM from a single factor to a three-factor model by adding value and size risk factors to the single market factor. This well-known study suggested that the book-to-market ratio and market capitalization could explain the cross-sectional variation in average equity returns better than just the market factor alone. So now, we had three factors instead of just one. Not long afterward, Carhart (1997) added a fourth factor representing cross-sectional momentum. 
 Academics then became factor happy. At least 82 of them have been published in leading academic journals. Searching diligently for explanatory factors is reminiscent of Procrustes, the Greek mythological figure who made his visitors fit his bed by either stretching them or cutting off their legs. 
 Data snooping biases can arise from focusing on anomalous data. Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2014), after applying to a variety of market risk factors a significance deflation adjustment for data mining bias, concluded, “… many of the factors discovered in the field of finance are likely false discoveries … . Echoing a recent disturbing conclusion in the medical literature, we argue that most claimed research findings in financial economics are likely false.” 7 
 CAPM was just not that reliable. For followers of CAPM, the real world was an annoying special case. Empirical tests showed that high beta and high volatility stocks did not give the return advantage that they should, according to three- or four-factor CAPM. Fama and French (2004) stepped forward and called CAPM “empirically vacuous.” They noted “whether the model’s problems reflect weakness in the theory or in its empirical implementation, the failure of the CAPM in empirical tests implies that most applications of the model are invalid.” 
 CAPM not only had empirical problems. It, along with other models of modern finance, also had theoretical issues. Financial models generally rely on two main assumptions. The first is that market prices adhere to a normal or lognormal distribution. 8 The second assumption of modern finance is that prices are independent of one another. Yesterday’s prices should have no influence on today’s prices. 
 Mandelbrot (2004) courageously challenged both these assumptions. He demonstrated that market prices do not follow a normal distribution, but rather one associated with unstable variance and fatter tails denoting a higher frequency of extreme events. Mandelbrot identified this as a Cauchy distribution. Others have called it a stable Paretian, Pareto-Levy, or Levy-Mandelbrot distribution. Whatever you call it, this distribution means that catastrophic drops in stock prices can happen more frequently than a normal distribution would suggest. 
 As for independence, Mandelbrot made a case that even if prices are not autocorrelated, their volatility is correlated over time. This means that big price swings tend to cluster, and it is likely that stocks will move by an above-average amount, even if we do not know the direction of the move. According to Mandelbrot, because the two main assumptions of modern finance are flawed, related models such as CAPM are also flawed. They understate market risk and the amount of capital financial institutions should hold to withstand market risk. 
 Unfortunately, many academics stopped paying attention to Mandelbrot’s financial concepts once they realized that these concepts challenged the usual assumption suspects, which had become part and parcel of most financial models. Mandelbrot’s unbounded, nonfinite variance calculations were also difficult to work with. 9 
 Despite their many empirical and theoretical challenges, linear factor models do give some indication of the relationship between risk and expected return. Researchers still routinely use linear three- and four-factor models to measure the performance and statistical significance of investment strategies. Factor models may have some value as a general guide to the strength and significance of a strategy. Therefore, we will use them in Chapter 8 as one way to confirm the results of our momentum model. 
 Warren Buffett, who rivals Yogi Berra as originator of some of the world’s best quotes, once said, “Beware of geeks bearing formulas.” In terms of developing models that can accurately explain and deal with the real world, financial economists have not been very successful. Researchers have tried to come up with a number of fixes along the way, such as resampling adjustments for MVO and a complicated array of additional factors for CAPM. Effective results are still questionable, at best. In the words of Robert Haugen (2010): 
           We can advance by developing radically new theories to help us understand what we now see in the data. Or we can go back, denying what is now readily apparent to most, bending the data through ever more convoluted processes until it screams its compliance with our preconceptions. 
 BLACK-SCHOLES OPTION PRICING 
 Other financial models may give us additional insight into the workings of modern finance. Option-pricing theory began in 1900 when Bachelier saw how options could control risk and tried to figure out how to price them. Bachelier reasoned that if an option was a “fair bet,” then it had to have a fair value. He was not entirely successful in computing fair option values, but he was not far off either. Subsequent efforts to price options were complex or awkward, and they often depended on individual risk preferences. 
 Since the time of Irving Fisher, economists have been enamored with the tidiness of equilibrium-based models. Inspired by Bachelier’s random walk ideas, Thorp and Kassouf (1967) came up with an equilibrium-based options model, but their published work did not discount back the expected value of an option at expiration. 
 It was Fischer Black and Myron Scholes who published the first complete equilibrium-based option-pricing model. It resulted in Nobel prizes, since the economic community loves equilibrium-based models. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model (the BS model) became a favorite and a showpiece among financial economists. 
 Option-pricing models can be useful in helping users transfer risk by using derivatives. Investors were quick to recognize this. In 1970, there was almost no trading in financial derivatives. By 2004, outstanding derivative contracts totaled $273 trillion. 
 Besides increasing the popularity of derivatives, pricing models also gave some users a false sense of security. As we will see in Chapter 4 , we tend to overweight our own skills and knowledge, which causes us to suffer from an illusion of control and underestimate the odds of bad events and unfavorable outcomes. 
 In addition to the near meltdown of the world’s financial system in 1998 due to the Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) debacle, derivatives contributed to the bankruptcy of Orange County, California, the collapse of Barings Bank, and, of course, the global financial crisis of 2007–2008. Warren Buffett referred to derivatives as “financial weapons of mass destruction.” 
 Institutional investors were slow to learn their lessons. Following the collapse of LTCM in 1998, Merrill Lynch warned that mathematical risk models “may provide a greater sense of security than warranted; therefore, reliance on these models should be limited.” 10 No one listened to them at that time. 
 However, we shouldn’t blame only the tools and not the workers who use them. One can make a case that these financial crises were due in large part to institutions using derivative models without exercising proper judgment or fully understanding their true risks. Derivative buyers of convoluted mortgage obligations should have listened to Nobel laureate George Akerlof who said, “If you are in a market and someone is trying to sell you something which you don’t understand, you should think they are selling you a lemon.” 
 The BS model had one interesting feature compared with other financial models. When people said, “Hey, finance isn’t rocket science,” financial economists could now answer, “Oh yes, it is!” Robert Merton (a Nobel laureate with a background in engineering mathematics) added Ito’s lemma to the BS model. Rocket scientists use Ito calculus to track the trajectory of rockets by breaking up the notion of continuous time into infinitely small pieces until it becomes a continuum. Not only did BS make economics look more like a science, it made it look like rocket science. Noble laureate Paul Krugman’s statement about economists could easily apply to financial economists: “As I see it, the economics profession went astray because economists as a group mistook beauty, clad in impressive looking mathematics, for truth.” In the words of Robert Heilbroner, “Mathematics has given economics rigor, but alas, also mortis.” 11 
 The biggest problem with the BS model is its inaccuracy when dealing with extreme price movement. The lognormal distribution of prices that underlies the BS model can underestimate the probability of risky events by a factor of 10. 
 Practitioners long ago replaced the BS model with a more realistic binomial pricing model, yet academics still count the BS model as one of the great discoveries of modern finance. In the words of Nobel laureate Robert Shiller, “Economics is usually some kind of story that we tell that we think approximates reality, but we can get carried away with our stories.” 
 PORTFOLIO INSURANCE—NOT! 
 Another hailed innovation of modern finance was portfolio insurance. This concept was developed by several finance professors who said investors should increase their long exposure when markets move up quickly and decrease their long exposure when markets drop quickly. This is supposed to create an effect similar to derivatives hedging. However, anyone with much practical experience could sense this might not be a good idea, since markets are short-term mean reverting. More often than not, they overreact to information, then reverse. 
 The public often reacts incorrectly by selling into weakness and buying into strength. Portfolio insurance does the same thing. For those who remember when they were the main sources of short-term market liquidity and price stabilization, stock exchange specialists and floor traders made a good living doing the opposite of portfolio insurers while trading against the public. 
 October 19, 1987, was the single worst day in stock market history. The S&P 500 dropped by 22% that day and by over one-third in a day and a half. Portfolio insurance reinforced that selling pressure. The 1988 Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanism, also known as the Brady Report, concluded that one-third of the selling that day was related to portfolio insurance. Portfolio insurance helped turn a market correction into a full-scale panic. Portfolio insurers packed up their bags following this market collapse and subsequent rebound (“mean reversion happens”) that gave them large whipsaw losses. 
 It also did not help advance the cause of efficient markets that prices could reflect values 20% lower than they had been just one day earlier. It was hard to say over both those days that the “Price Is Right.” 
 Belief in self-adjusting, rational markets may bear some responsibility for the global financial crisis of 2007–2008. As Paul Volcker said, “It’s clear that among the causes of the recent financial crises was an unjustified faith in rational explanations and market efficiencies.” Others have blamed the efficient market hypothesis for indifference to “irrational exuberance” and chronic underestimation of the dangers of asset bubbles breaking. Perhaps Volcker made some sense when after the last financial crisis he said that the only worthwhile financial innovation of the past 20 years was the automated teller machine. 
 BETTER LIVING THROUGH FINANCE 
 To be fair, there have been some useful things that have come from the world of finance over the past 75 years. First was the idea that to reduce substantially the company-specific risks inherent in holding equities, one should construct portfolios of at least 25 to 30 diverse stocks. Getting rid of diversifiable risk this way is as close as one can get to a free lunch with respect to investing. This realization helped spur the popularity of mutual funds and other pooled investment vehicles. According to the Investment Company Institute, there were only 170 mutual funds in 1965 with $35 billion in assets. By 2012, there were 7,596 funds with over $13 trillion in assets. 12 
 The second important finding of modern finance was greater awareness of the high price that investors pay for professional investment management. Much of the time, benefits do not justify the costs involved. Modern finance theory and empirical testing led directly to the development of index funds, which have been of great benefit to those who have been receptive to them. 
 The third important development in modern finance came from the field of psychology. Behavioral finance can explain many of the inconsistencies we see between financial theory and practice. It can also help investors better understand their unrewarded psychological tendencies and serve as a guideline for more enlightened behavior. 
 The fourth beneficial finding of modern finance is momentum as first presented in a systematic way by Cowles and Jones in 1937. Since then, researchers have validated its usefulness in hundreds of subsequent studies. While academics remained busy engineering more complex ways to model financial markets, simple momentum has stood the test of time as the premier market anomaly. 
 ________________ 
 * This and the next chapter are a bit wonkish. Some readers may wish to skip them and move on to Chapter 5 .

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 4 
 RATIONAL AND NOT-SO-RATIONAL EXPLANATIONS OF MOMENTUM 
          A theory is more impressive the greater the simplicity of its premises, the more different kinds of things it relates, and the more extended its range of applicability. 
 — Albert Einstein 
 I F YOU ASK MOST ACADEMICS about the effectiveness of momentum, they will likely say that it works very well. If you ask them why it works so well, you may get a blank stare. To say we really do not know why momentum works would make this a very short chapter. So instead, I will give a number of possible reasons that may explain why momentum works, even though the underlying answer is still that we do not exactly know. 
 There are several reasons why it may be a good idea to try to understand why and how momentum works. First, knowing this may give us more confidence in using momentum. 
 Next, knowing how and why momentum works could give some insight into how the markets in general function. This may be useful in helping us understand the psychological biases that affect investor behavior in general, as well as our own behavior and motivations as investors. 
 Third, understanding the basis underlying momentum can help us develop models that can better exploit the momentum anomaly. Finally, understanding how momentum works may give us a better understanding of whether momentum profits are likely to remain strong in the future. Momentum is the only anomaly that has persisted since its widespread publication beginning in the early 1990s. If we can identify deeply ingrained behavioral forces underlying momentum, we might have more reason for believing that momentum profits are likely to continue far into the future. 
 WHY MOMENTUM WORKS 
 There are two schools of thought as to why momentum works. The first is that high momentum profits are compensation for assuming greater amounts of risk. This is the rational explanation, which is a matter of cause and effect. If you assume more risk, you should receive more profit as compensation for bearing that risk. It is a view of the world that is in agreement with the idea of rational-based efficient markets. However, since common risk factors such as size and value do not explain momentum profits, we need to find new risk factors that have so far been undiscovered. 
 The second school of thought is that abnormal momentum profits exist not as compensation for risk, but rather because investors behave unexpectedly and irrationally in systematic and predictable ways. Under the tenets of behavioral finance, markets are not always efficient. It is human behavior that moves markets and not the universal information shared by market participants. Prices do not always reflect all available information because behavioral biases can cause prices to remain too high or too low for long periods of time. 
 I will explore both the rational and behavioral explanations for momentum. To complicate matters further, some experts say it is possible to characterize momentum profits as a combination of both rational and irrational factors. As we saw in Chapter 3 , the real world does not always conform neatly to how we wish to model it. 
 RATIONAL BASIS FOR MOMENTUM 
 One of the first attempts at a risk-based explanation for momentum was by Conrad and Kaul (1998). They postulated that cross-sectional variations in expected returns of individual stocks could account for momentum profits. Jegadeesh and Titman (2001), however, found estimation errors in the work of Conrad and Kaul. Jegadeesh and Titman also argued that post-momentum holding period reversals are not consistent with claims that momentum profits come from variations in expected returns. Grundy and Martin (2001) also showed that expected returns from time-varying risk factors do not explain momentum profitability. 
 RISK-BASED MOMENTUM MODELS 
 Chordia and Shivakumar (2002) identified some additional risk factors that they hoped would explain momentum profits. These were lagged macroeconomic variables related to the business cycle. Other explanatory risk factors were stochastic, episodic growth shocks, identified by Johnson (2002). Then came nonparametric, stochastic risks related to industry factors described by Ahn, Conrad, and Dittmar (2003), followed by fluctuations in aggregate liquidity identified by Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundbland (2005) identified consumption risk embedded in cash flows, while Sagi and Seasholes (2007) attributed momentum profits to firm-specific attributes like high market-to-book ratio, high revenue volatility, and low cost of goods sold. Liu and Zhang (2008) linked momentum profits to the growth rate of industrial production. 
 Countering the use of additional risk factors, Griffin, Ji, and Martin (2003) showed that macroeconomic risk variables do not explain momentum profits. Avramov and Chordia (2006) found evidence challenging time-varying macroeconomic variables and liquidity as explanatory variables of momentum. As we will see in a Chapter 9 , data mining and overfitting bias also weigh heavily against the search for additional factors that purport to explain momentum on a rational basis. 
 BEHAVIORAL BASIS FOR MOMENTUM 
