
206

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

the real-time ticker tape. In both cases, however, the smartest folks are
matching their buy and sell decisions to the flow of market energy in the
form of index futures, shock events, and relative strength oscillations.
I outlined a laundry list of differences between spectators and speculators in Chapter 7. Similar battle lines can be drawn between the mental
process of finding a good-looking pattern and the emotional process of
risking capital on that discovery. In the real world, the first skill set can be
taught to students in a matter of weeks or months. The second, however,
will take years or decades for the handful of folks who actually master it.
Sadly, everyone else will finally give up when they realize the elusive goal
is far beyond their capacity, willpower, or knowledge base.
Here’s an experiment. Go out and find 10 good traders. Then have 5
of them go long and 5 go short on the same financial instrument. As odd
as it might sound, all 10 traders can easily make money. This is a deep
Zen-like truth that’s tough for logical and linear brains to understand, but
your long-term success actually depends upon it. This paradox focuses
squarely on two gray zones that marginal traders would rather ignore:
• All price movement is bidirectional, with trends within trends
within trends.
• When you buy or sell is far more important than what you’re
buying or selling.
Survivalist traders internalize these twin commandments and incorporate their major impact into daily position management. They also
understand how a few moments of inattention or a lapse into mental
cheerleading can turn a surefire winner into a frustrating loser. After all,
that’s the nature of market timing, where windows of opportunity open
and close in rapid-fire succession. The vast majority of time, however, will
be spent dealing with the number one enemy of market players worldwide,
better known as mind-numbing boredom. Price action in all venues
oscillates between long periods of meaningless noise and relatively short
bursts of directional signals. The survivalist trader learns to recognize
which state is currently active and then adjust position management in
order to accommodate it. This bilateral mentality requires sitting on our
hands through broad stretches of nonopportunity and then jumping
around like crazed squirrels when the market finally wakes up and starts
to move higher or lower. As we all know, flipping this mental switch isn’t
an easy task, and we often find ourselves chasing old trends that have
died out or standing on the sidelines long after new trends have taken
control of the tape.

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

207

Traders need intimate familiarity with the intraday markets in order
to distinguish between periods of opportunity and nonopportunity. Even
setting stops on long-term positions will benefit from understanding
how intraday ranges affect the odds of those levels getting hit. Correct
interpretation of intraday price action starts with the flow of buying and
selling pressure, as observed in the index futures, and then considers the
impact of those oscillations on the patterns being traded in that session.
As with a puppeteer and his marionette, nearly invisible strings connect
the two entities, generating an intricate flow of movement, emotion, and
storytelling.

Building Intraday Skills
1.	Have a proactive plan for the first and last hours. Experienced
traders can play these periods aggressively, but newer traders
should just sit on their hands.
2.	Become a student of time of day tendencies. Markets tend to
trend within narrow time windows, while fakeouts take control
for the rest of the session.
3.	Choose a set of intraday indicators and then leave them alone.
Learn to interpret conflicting information rather than searching for
the perfect signal.
4. Stalk the NYSE TICK. Watch for intraday highs and lows that
might define an entire session. TICK has a life of its own and will
save your neck if you let it.
5.	Keep one eye on your positions and the other on the indices.
When a position moves more sharply than an underlying index, it
should continue to do so.
6. Look for breakouts and breakdowns of two- and three-day
trading ranges. These short-term swings will tell you if your
positions are trending or running in place.

Stops
Stop placement is a difficult trading skill to learn and a lifetime exercise in
frustration. Price bars overlap in all but the most dynamic markets, which
means your positions will crisscross the same levels over and over again

208

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

before trending higher or lower. This sideways chop undermines stop
placement when you’re trying to protect a small gain and the big prize
at the same time, because the two goals are often incompatible. In other
words, it’s easier to take a little money out of the market than to hold on
to a lot of it.
How often has this happened to you? You see a trade setup and jump
in at the perfect price. The position turns a profit in the early stages, but
you wind up losing every penny because your stop gets hit just before the
instrument reverses and moves sharply in your favor. Fortunately, you
can avoid getting shaken out of good positions by using one of two radically different approaches to stop placement:
• Place the stop well outside the market noise while at the same
time keeping the loss within risk tolerance.
• Place the stop in a lower time frame, using data gathered from the
short-term price action. Keep reentering, as needed, until the total
loss hits risk tolerance.
In Figure 9.1, Apple rallies to 133.50 in early May and pulls back for
nearly three weeks. It surges back to the high on May 26 and breaks out
the following morning. This price action initiates a new action-reactionresolution cycle that can be managed easily on the 15-minute chart.
The buying surge (action) stalls at 135 and gives way to a consolidation
(reaction) pattern. We want to buy the breakout, within the sideways
pattern, in order to take advantage of an expected follow-through rally
(resolution) over 135. The first buy signal comes when the stock jumps
out of narrow range (1) at 133 on May 28. It’s harder to trigger a failure
swing when price shifts from a low into a high volatility state, so “shortterm” stop A is placed just below the NR7 bar. The next buy signal comes
when the stock pushes above the two-day high at 135 (2). A fresh entry
in response to that breakout is likely to lose money, no matter where the
short-term stop loss is placed. The shakeout then continues for over a day,
with price spiking lower four times. The fourth downdraft posts a slightly
higher low (3), triggering a buy signal because it predicts that whipsaws
are finally coming to an end. We take a fresh entry and place a short-term
stop B just under the small hammer candle, which should work nicely if
our buy thesis is correct. The stock then gaps out of congestion, triggering
a clean breakout (resolution) that signals our fourth entry. Placing shortterm stop C just under the level where the gap would get filled makes
perfect sense because we expect an immediate momentum surge in line
with the dynamics of a resolution phase.

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

F I G U R E

209

9.1

Apple short-term stop losses.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

Most traders place their stops in the same old places, so they become
attractive targets for the smart money and their wickedly accurate
computer programs. To keep that big target off your back, learn to avoid
stops at common hot spots like trendlines, round numbers, and moving
averages. In fact, it’s best to avoid stop placements at any logical level
because they become magnets for stop gunning events, especially before
price jumps in the opposite direction. These frustrating “rinse jobs” seem
unfair to traders, but they’re a fact of life in our modern markets. Hey, no
one ever said this game was easy.
Stay in the trade as long as price action shows you’re right, but exit
immediately when proven wrong. Your stop loss needs to address this

210

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

potential failure because each position has a price that smacks us across the
face and tells us our point of view is no longer valid. For obvious reasons,
this is the natural location for the stop loss, which is then modified through
analysis of recent trading ranges to avoid getting caught in a rinse job. In
addition, your trading plan needs to confirm that stop placement matches
your intended strategy. For example, if you’re looking for a multiday
move, pull the stop back and risk more capital in the initial stages of the
new trade. Conversely, if you’re planning on a quick scalp, press the stop
against the advancing stock, futures contract, or currency pair, and just
take what the market gives you.
Divide your stop loss strategy into three risk segments: initial stop
loss, trailing stop, and exit stop. Then apply each technique at the appropriate time in the position’s evolution. This three-step process forces the
trader to identify the profit target before entering the position. As discussed in Part Two, each trade has an intended exit defined by the next
support or resistance level, reduced by interim barriers. This is your profit
target. In other words, your pretrade analysis looks at prior swings and
zeroes in on the price level you expect your position to reach within the
intended holding period. Simply stated, profit targets are vitally important
in the third and final stop phase because they tell you when to shift gears
and to aggressively protect profits.
The trading strategy for initial stop loss placement is very simple—
put it where the pattern is broken, if price gets there, or apply the shortterm strategy outlined in the Apple example. Every trade has a good
reason and a bad breaking point. For example, if you buy a stock because
it drops into a trendline, the stop loss needs to go on the other side of
the trendline because your assumption is proven wrong if price hits it. Of
course, this placement doesn’t work all the time because modern markets
routinely charge through trendlines, take out stops, and jump back across
support or resistance.
These rinse jobs give us just three logical stop modifications:
• Place the stop loss deeper in the pattern and take more risk.
• Take the loss at the logical price and reenter when the instrument
reverses.
• Find patterns where entry and stop loss are placed at nearly the
same price.
The most reliable placement strategy identifies lower-risk entry prices
that let stops stay outside the line of fire. Start by identifying supportresistance bands near the edges of common patterns. These price extremes

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

211

serve two purposes. First, they’ll tell you when your existing stop loss is in
mortal danger. More importantly, they’ll identify execution levels for new
positions. These extreme entries match up with exceptionally tight stop
losses that are out of harm’s way.
Don’t shift into profit protection mode until the time is right. This
means keeping your distance until the trend ejects in your favor through
wide range bars. It’s normal for price to wiggle between profit and loss in
the early stages of a new position. It’s your job to remain patient as long

F I G U R E

9.2

Stop gunning is a good way to lose money if already positioned and a great way to make it when coming off the
sidelines. Chevron sells off in a steady decline, finally gapping down (1) to 66 on June 22. Short sellers enter
the rectangle pattern (2) in the next week and place covering stop losses just above resistance at 67.25. Price
shoots through the top of the rectangle (3) on the first day of July, triggering those stops and filling the gap. The
next hour’s reversal signals a low-risk short sale entry (4) because the stop loss now can be placed less than a
point above the 60-minute high.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

212

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

as the technical pattern stays intact. A good trade is like tending a garden:
you need to give it a little love, pick the weeds, and let it grow. Eventually,
the instrument jumps away from your entry and ramps up or down to a
new price level. Now’s the right time to apply your first trailing stop by
dropping down to a shorter-term view. Pull up a 60-minute pattern to
place the trailing stop if you’re trading off the daily chart, or a 15-minute
pattern if you’re trading off a 60-minute chart. In either case, examine
recent action for rangebound bars between your initial entry and the
current price, placing the stop just behind one of these congestion zones.
Why place your trailing stops at these levels? Look at it this way. A
breakdown on the daily chart will begin with a reversal on the 60-minute
chart, while a breakdown on the 60-minute chart will begin with a reversal
on the 15-minute chart. Using this zoom-in stop methodology, you keep a
bigger piece of your hard-earned profit if the dominoes start to fall and the
market turns against you. Once established, move the trailing stop each
time that price ramps to a new level and deposits a sideways pattern on
the intraday chart. Continue this process until the position reaches about
75% of the distance between the entry and the profit target. Then shift to
the third and final phase, pulling your trailing stop aggressively behind
advancing price.
It makes absolutely no sense to risk dollars in order to make pennies,
but this is exactly what happens when price approaches a profit target.
You originally chose this level because of significant support or resistance,
but there’s no guarantee your trading vehicle is going to hit the price dead
on before reversing hard. So, it makes sense to draw in your trailing stop
to guard the profit in case the market turns around earlier than expected.
Transitional price behavior near a profit target can also give you an
opportunity to squeeze the last dime out of your position. After placing
your final trailing stop, enter a second stop above the market on a long
position or below the market on a short position, right at the profit target.
Using this predatory approach, you’ll get filled immediately if price
charges into its final destination. And, while counting your profits, you’ll
be amazed at how often you’ve caught the exact reversal price while you
watch other traders crash and burn in the ensuing turnaround.

Survivalist Stop Strategies
All of us study the same trading books when we start playing the financial markets. Unfortunately, these classic tomes lecture us on stop loss

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

213

techniques that don’t work anymore. The problem lies in a broad
assumption that technicians are a trading minority and can safely place
stop losses just behind common support or resistance levels. Legions of
new traders follow these instructions to the letter, entering at identical
locations. On the surface at least, the activity makes sense because these
inflection points follow the natural rules of risk management. Sadly, no
one ever tells these folks they’re being led to slaughter. Simply stated,
financial instruments will gravitate toward price levels that will hurt the
most traders over time. A strong trend can overcome this diabolical force
for a few days or a few weeks, but that’s usually the exception to the rule.
The rest of the time, this target-on-back magnetism is the overriding
influence on short-term price direction.
Every fund, institution, and survivalist trader knows there’s a pool
of liquidity sitting at common stop levels, waiting to be tapped. It’s even
dangerous for defensive stops placed outside of obvious support and
resistance levels, because dumb money stops triggered at big numbers can
start a domino effect that takes out orders for many ticks beyond the initial
casualties. You’ll avoid a ton of trouble by locating common stop levels
before taking the trade. After these magnetic targets are identified, go back
and see what happened the last few times that advancing or retreating
price hit them. Were there big spikes through support or resistance that
quickly reversed? If so, commonly placed stops aren’t likely to survive.
The only effective way to avoid these slash-and-burn dynamics is to
keep stops far away from all attractive levels. This is easier said than done
because stop placement forms the core of our trading plans, and when
losses can’t be taken at expected levels, everything else must change to
accommodate the new risk equation. In other words, the altered trade
that responds to this added danger must be taken at a more advantageous
price level vis-à-vis the new stop loss. It makes perfect sense that traders
can’t change their stop losses without also changing their entry prices.
Therein lies the problem. We want to place stops that won’t get hit, but we
don’t want to change the way we enter our positions. In fact, most traders
are so reactive they’d rather lose money by chasing stupid entries than
deal effectively with the inevitable rinse job. As I noted in Part Four’s discussion on anticipation versus reaction, the most common entry technique
reacts to a breakout or breakdown, following the crowd into the position.
It’s a fact of life that many traders never learn any other market strategy.
Sadly, there are just a handful of ways to defend against the rinse job when
using this reactive style to enter the market, because positions are taken
far above or below support-resistance levels. In turn, it’s the most direct
path to failure for most market players.

214

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

If you insist on playing the reactionary momentum game, flat dollar
or short-term moving average stop losses are the only methodologies that
make sense. For example, you take a breakout position and place the stop
20 cents, 50 cents, or a dollar behind your entry, based on the maximum
loss you’re willing to take if it gets hit. There isn’t much rhyme or reason
to the process because it isn’t based on the technicals of the pattern
you’re trading. Moving average stops are more proactive because they’re
responding to real-time price action. This method is even simpler—just
pull up an 8-bar SMA on the 15-minute chart, and exit the trade if price
violates it. For larger-scale breakouts, or if your stops are getting hit too
often, use the 8-bar SMA on the 60-minute chart instead of the 15-minute
chart.
Whenever possible, avoid percentage-based stop losses such as 5%,
10%, or 50%; they say absolutely nothing about the current market or
trade risk you’ve just assumed. For example, you enter a position where a
volatile stock is moving 11% each day, on average. This means your 10%
stop is at risk due to market noise and absolutely nothing else. A percentage-based stop loss also gives the illusion that you’re controlling risk
without addressing the true nature of risk in the first place. This is vitally
important because reward and risk are joined at the hip. Simply stated,
if you don’t get one right, the other won’t be right either. In reality, there
is a measurable risk based on the specific pattern and the price you enter
the trade. Each position has a different risk profile, with your entry price
telling you exactly how much it can wiggle around and still get to the final
goal or profit target. You need to include this standard deviation data in
your stop planning, or you’ll take maximum loss after maximum loss until
you wash out of the markets.
The most reliable stop-sensitive strategies force traders to get positioned very close to their initial failure targets. This requires waiting for
a deep pullback that may never come, or using stop loss magnetism as
an entry tool. In other words, stand aside until the commonly placed
stops are run, and then jump in as soon as momentum fades. This entry
technique was highlighted in the Chevron example earlier in this chapter.
This type of entry isn’t for the faint of heart because it triggers during
periods of high volatility, but it will work with surprising reliability. After
a long-side entry, place the stop loss one tick below the rinse job extreme. It
shouldn’t get hit because magnetism has taken out one side of the market
and generated a short-term imbalance that should trigger mean reversion
dynamics. And, ironically, the rinse job often precedes the start of a strong
trend in the opposite direction, which makes it a valuable leading indicator
in addition to its role in finding superb trade entry levels.

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

215

Overnight Holds
I was a committed day trader through most of the 1990s, like so many
folks in those happier days. I made the switch over to swing trading late
in the decade for a number of logical reasons. First, the frenetic pace of
day trading drove me absolutely crazy. Practitioners of this anxious art
are forced to make critical decisions in a noisy environment, overwhelmed
by bad data. Thanks, but no thanks. Second, I’m more confident in my
trading edge when holding positions for a few days rather than flipping
them every few minutes or hours. Realistically, I still do a fair amount of
day trading, but it’s evolved into a defensive strategy during periods of
increased risk, or when overnight opportunities become scarce. Curiously,
many current day traders confess they’d rather be swing trading but
believe that holding positions overnight is too risky. In my view, they’re
dead wrong.
Learn how to use the overnight markets to your advantage, and don’t
be fooled into thinking there’s too much risk in holding positions at the end
of the day. In fact, most profits are created between the close of one session
and the start of the next one. While it’s true that day traders avoid the
uncertainties of the overnight markets, the sword cuts both ways because
every instrument thrusts away from an entry price as a function of time.
As a result, intraday profits tend to be a lot smaller than overnight profits.
Micro holding periods also frustrate attempts to raise winning percentages
because day traders need to exercise perfect timing over and over again. In
contrast, overnight traders can survive tons of whipsaws and losses and
still book substantial profits. Realistically, day traders can control losses
more efficiently than overnight traders, but the practice unravels this
market edge through higher noise levels and transaction costs.
Of course, there are legitimate risks when carrying positions overnight.
News shocks can trigger nasty gaps, while earning surprises can hurl stocks
into unexpected places. This danger is especially high in rangebound or
conflicted markets. However, you can overcome the majority of overnight
risks with a good trading plan. Above all else, stay informed and don’t
get blindsided by economic releases, options expiration, or other cycles
that impose their will on market direction. And never, ever hold a position
through an earnings report unless you’re protected by options hedging.
You don’t know how the report will move the company’s stock, regardless
of your high or low expectations, so the only logical path is to stay on the
sidelines and let other traders assume the risk. However, as I noted in
Part Two, it’s perfectly OK to trade into earnings because that speculative
period is often filled with dumb money and great opportunities.
