when the underlying is near the strike price?
6. Will a short dated at-the-money option have a greater or a lesser
theta than a longer dated at-the-money option of the same strike?
7. Should the value of an at-the-money long time spread rise or fall as
the underlying price hovers near the strike price of the spread?
8. Long time spreads have (limited) (unlimited) risk and (limited)
(unlimited) reward potential.
9. What do long time spreads have: positive or negative gamma; positive or negative vega; and positive or negative theta?
10. If you buy the ATM time spread and the underlying moves significantly in either direction, the spread will decrease, or narrow in
value (assume no change in volatility). True or false?

Chapter 6 Exercise Answer Key
1. Short, long
2. True
3. Long
4. XYZ August/June 110 put time spread delta  0.35  (0.45)  0.10
5. Long
6. Greater
7. Rise
8. Limited, limited

187

188

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

9. Negative gamma, positive vega, positive theta.
10. True. The at-the-money time spread is the most expensive.

CHAPTER 6 QUIZ
1. Calculate the vega of the following short call time spread:
XYZ (June) 110 call vega  0.05
XYZ (July) 110 call vega  0.10
2. If implied volatility levels are low, and the forecast is for a sideways
market in an underlying, a long time spread might be a strategy to
employ to take advantage of this situation. True or false?
3. Which is bullish, a long or a short time spread with a strike above
the current price?
4. Would the term structure of implied volatility of a stock that has
gone through a recent slow period favor a long or a short time
spread strategy?
5. If the term structure of implied volatility shows a sharp upward
slope, would this indicate that short-dated implied volatilities are
much lower or higher than longer-dated implied volatilities?
6. Assume that the market has been moving sideways for some time
and that implied volatility levels are low. A trader decides to purchase the calendar spread with the strike price at exactly the price of
the underlying. Determine the following:
Delta: positive, neutral, or negative
Gamma: positive, neutral, or negative
Theta: positive, neutral, or negative
Vega: positive, neutral, or negative
7. An investor anticipates that XYZ is going to rally from 130.00 to
140.00 in thirty days. He notices that implied volatility levels of
all the options expiring in thirty days are high compared to the
volatility of all options expiring in sixty days. To capture this move
with a limited-risk strategy, would he buy or sell the sixty-day
option and buy or sell the thirty-day option at the 140.00 strike?
8. An investor holds a long June/July call time spread. At expiration,
if the underlying is above the strike price, the short June call will be
exercised. What position is he left with?
9. To create a long jelly roll spread, do you need to combine a long or a
short call time spread with a long or a short put time spread?
10. If the call time spread ask price minus the put time spread ask price
is less than the value of the jelly roll, is the call time spread expensive
or cheap?

Chapter 6 Quiz

Chapter 6 Quiz Answer Key
1. 110 call vega  0.05  (0.10)  0.05
2. True
3. Long
4. Long
5. Lower
6. Neutral, negative, positive, positive
7. Buy sixty-day, sell thirty-day
8. Synthetic long put
9. Long call time spread, short put time spread
10. Cheap

CHAPTER NOTE
1. Assuming no early exercise considerations

189

Option Spread Strategies: Trading Up, Down, and Sideways Markets
by Anthony J. Saliba with Joseph C. Corona and Karen E. Johnson
Copyright © 2009 by International Trading Institute, Ltd.

7

Ratio Spreads

CONCEPT REVIEW
Volatility skew: A graphic representation of implied volatility levels
associated with different strike prices, the curves’ shape is often
referred to as a “smile” or “smirk.”
Congestion: An area where a security trades below resistance and
above support levels.

STRATEGY OVERVIEW
Ratio spreads strategies can be used when one forecasts a complex
market scenario, involving market direction, implied volatility levels, and
timing. They may be especially effective for contratrend trading.
The term ratio spread is used when referring to any structure that involves the purchase of an option that is underwritten by the sale of a greater
number of further out-of-the-money options of the same class and expiration cycle. For example, buying one March 100 call and selling two March
110 calls is a call ratio spread; buying one June 90 put and selling three June
75 puts is a put ratio spread.
The ratio of the ratio spread is determined by the number of further
out-of-the-money options sold per nearer-the-money option purchased.
Common ratios used by ratio spreaders are 1 to 2 (two sold for every one
purchased), 2 to 3 (three sold for every two purchased), and 1 to 4 (four sold
for every one purchased). However, any ratio may be used. Depending on
the ratio used, the strikes involved, the time to expiration, and implied
volatility levels, the spread could be executed for a debit, even money, or
a credit.

191

192

Chapter 7

Ratio Spreads

