
How do you handle a losing period?
How do you lose money? It is either bad day trading or a losing position. If it's a bad position that
is the problem, then you should just get out of it.
Is that what you do?
Yes. I either liquidate it or neutralize it, because then you are back afloat. When you are in a boat
that springs a leak, you don't drill another hole to let the water out.
What if your trading losses are due to your making bad decisions? What do you do then?
Take a day off. If I get myself all wound up, I like to lay out in the sun and bake for a while and let
all the strenuous stuff go out of my head.
What are the elements of good trading?
Clear thinking, ability to stay focused, and extreme discipline. Discipline is number one: Take a
theory and stick with it. But you also have to be open-minded enough to switch tracks if you feel
that your theory has been proven wrong. You have to be able to say, "My method worked for this
type of market, but we are not in that type of market anymore."
Trading rules you live by.
I scale in and scale out of my positions, so that I can spread out my risk. I don't like to do all of a
large order right up front.
What else?
Always respect the marketplace. Never take anything for granted. Do your homework. Recap the
day. Figure out what you did right and what you did wrong. That is one part of the homework; the
other part is projec-tive. What do I want to happen tomorrow? What happens if the opposite
occurs? What happens if nothing happens? Think through all the "what-ifs." Anticipate and plan,
rather than react.
When you made your first few million, did you sock some of it away to limit your worst case
possibility?
No. My trading strategies were growing and I needed new capital. Then after I made some more, I
started putting money into other investments: real estate, stores, exchange seats, and things like
that. Then when the market crashed I hate to use that term on Monday, October 19,1 realized that I
didn't have a big chunk of cash anywhere, so I took a couple of million dollars out of the flow and
bought T-bills. Then, a few weeks later, I used the money to buy an annuity.
I guess because your trading style is so focused on limiting losses, the first time you felt the
need for a safety net was when the market seemed to be saying that a catastrophe could occur
and have nothing to do with you.
Yes. What happens if you have $10 million in your trading account, but they shut down the game?
How do you set goals?
Until recently, I set goals on a monetary level. First, I wanted to become a millionaire before I was
thirty. I did it before I was twenty-five. Then I decided I wanted to make so much a year, and I did
that. Originally, the goals were all numbers, but the numbers aren't so important anymore. Now, I
want to do some things that are not only profitable, but will also be fun. For example, I'm currently
working on setting up a trading company and a software company. I also want to do the family-type
thing.
How do you judge success?
I used to judge success as being the best in your field, like Bruce Springsteen in rock music. In my
industry, it would have to be dollar-wise. Now, I think it is more quality of life. A lot of people
think I'm a success, but I don't feel like I'm a success. I really don't. I feel like I've made a lot of
money, and I've been successful at this one area in my life. I help the needy, but I don't have that
family fulfillment. How do you judge success? I don't know. All I know is that all the money in the
world isn't the answer.
You thought it was at one time.
Yes I did. And to be honest, money is important because it is influential. See that guy standing over
193

there? I don't know him from Adam. But say he came over to talk to us. If he made a really bad
first impression on me, I might not have much respect for him. But if you then told me that guy is
worth $50 million, and he made it on his own, that would completely change my opinion of him.
That may not be fair, but that's the way it is.
How does trading affect your personal life?
I'm able to handle it well from a business standpoint, but from a social standpoint it clobbers me. It
doesn't allow me to give the time to women and friends that they require. People like to just sit and
talk sometimes. Unless it is about business, like this with you, I'm out of here.
Are you always that conscious of time?
Yes. Most people aren't. They say, "Well, don't you ever just sit home and watch TV?"
Do you?
Well, I might have the TV on, but my head is always on trading. Last night I came back from a
dinner date at midnight. I was tired and wanted to go to bed, but I was up until 2:00 A.M. figuring
out trades. It's an addiction. I used to be much worse. I got lots of grief from former girlfriends
because I would take my work with me on dates. I don't do that any more, but I'm always still
thinking about trading.
What makes you different?
I think I can do anything, and I'm not afraid of hard work. Right now, for example, I'm working on
a deal with a French bank to put together a trading company. I can't wait until this venture starts up,
so that I can start working with these kids, training them to be traders. I don't know exactly how
much the bank is going to give me, but I could have hundreds of millions to work with. I love that
type of challenge.
It is important to realize that many of the great traders interviewed in this book were not
immediately successful. Saliba's initial trading experience was so disastrous that it brought him to a
near suicidal state of mind. However, what these traders share is a sense of self-confidence and
persistence. In the case of early failure, these traits are enough to lead to eventual success. Besides
allowing him to make a comeback from his early poor start, Saliba's persistence also came into play
at other points in his trading career. For example, many others faced with the type of constant
ridicule that Saliba was subjected to in the Teledyne pit might have abandoned their strategy.
This same Teledyne example also illustrates another important characteristic of the superior trader:
the maintenance of rigid risk control, even in difficult circumstances. It must have been very
tempting for Saliba to trade a larger position size in the Teledyne pit when he was being derided as
"one-lot." Instead, he maintained his discipline and continued to trade small until his capital had
grown sufficiently to allow him to increase his position size.
Working hard and examining many different scenarios so that he is prepared for all contingencies is
a critical element of Saliba's success. By anticipating all the "what-ifs," he can take advantage of
situations such as the October 19 stock slide, instead of being immobilized by such events. For
many people, the concept of a great trader conjures up an image of someone using a shoot-fromthe-hip approach, moving in and out of markets with great agility and a near sixth sense. The reality
is far less glamorous. In the majority of cases, exceptional traders owe their success to hard work
and preparation. In fact, similar to Tony Saliba, many of the very successful traders will do their
"homework" every night, not allowing leisure or other business from interfering with their daily
regimen of market analysis. When they stray from that discipline, it usually ends up costing them
money. In Saliba's own words, referring to a recently missed trade due to his failure to have his
orders in while on a business trip, "It cost me ten grand, and all those little ten grands can add up."

194

Part V-The Psychology of Trading

195

Dr. Van K. Tharp-The Psychology of Trading
Dr. Van K. Tharp is a research psychologist who received his Ph.D. from the University of
Oklahoma, Health Sciences Center, in 1975. He has spent his career studying how stress affects
human performance. His strongest interest is in the psychology of winning—especially as winning
applies to the markets. In 1982, Dr. Tharp developed his Investment Psychology Inventory, a test
that measures winning and losing traits. Thousands of investors and speculators—myself
included—have taken this test, which includes a written evaluation and a ten-minute phone
consultation. Dr. Tharp has written five books on successful investing which provide the core of his
investment course. He is a contributing editor for Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
and has also written numerous articles for other financial publications. Dr. Tharp is a frequent guest
on financial television and radio programs, and has spoken at many investment conferences.
Dr. Tharp currently devotes himself full time to counseling traders from his office in Glendale,
California, and continuing his research on trading success. A recent focus of this research has been
interviewing and studying top traders so that he could create a model for success. His basic theory
is that by teaching the winning traits of the top traders (not specific trading methodologies), he can
dramatically improve the performance of less successful traders and investors. In his most recent
project, he is attempting to turn his most successful clients into "supertraders" by extending his
normal program of two two-day sessions into an ongoing semiannual process.
After I interviewed Dr. Tharp, he asked whether he could do a video tape interview of me as part of
his ongoing research. Since I thought such an interview might be helpful in improving my own
trading performance, I eagerly agreed. The interview lasted for over four hours. Dr. Tharp has a
particularly probing questioning style. After an initial response to a question, he would ask, "What
else?" and repeat this process several times. When I could no longer think of any additional
responses, he would have me shift the direction of my gaze (he later explained this instruction was
intended to facilitate accessing different parts of my brain), and sure enough I would think of
another point I had somehow overlooked. I felt that this interview yielded some important personal
insights. (One of these self-realizations is briefly discussed in the next chapter.)
I would have liked to provide my personal impression of Dr. Tharp's basic course, which includes
five books and four tapes. However, although I reviewed the material briefly as background for this
chapter, the combination of simultaneously working at a full-time job and writing this book did not
leave me with enough time (or energy) to give the course the serious attention it calls for—a
personal project I plan for later. I can, however, attest to the fact that one of the traders interviewed
in this book served as a subject in Dr. Tharp's project on modeling success and was duly impressed
with his intellect and insight into successful trading.
How did you first get interested in the connection between psychology and trading?
My primary research interest after graduate school was how various drugs affect human
performance. After receiving my Ph.D. in psychology, I spent about eight years doing fairly
standard psychological research. For example, I helped standardize the current Field Sobriety Test
Battery that police throughout the country are still using. While I was doing that, I also learned how
to lose money trading options. In fact, I lost money so fast and so consistently that when I finally
got out of the market, I had to conclude that the losses had something to do with me. During that
same time period, I enrolled in a class in prosperity at the local Church of Religious Science. One
of the principles taught in that class is that what happens to you reflects your mindset. I had read a
lot on the psychology of trading, and while I considered most of that information to be "folklore," I
wanted to test it out. I decided to do so by developing my Investment Psychology Inventory, a test
to measure investment strengths and weaknesses, as a creative project for that class. No one in the
class would take it, so I sent it to R. E. McMaster, the editor of a newsletter to which I was
subscribing. McMaster took it and then offered it to his subscribers. Overall, I received close to a
thousand responses and that really roused my interest in this area as a career.
What did you learn in analyzing the responses to your test? Were there any major surprises?
I had several measures of success built into the test, so I could rank the responses according to
"success level." The investment literature suggested ten different areas that might be important. As
196

a result, I designed questions to measure each of those areas. I did a number of statistical analyses
of the data and found a significant correlation between each area and investment success. In
addition, I found that those ten areas could be grouped into three major clusters, which I label the
psychological factor, the management and discipline factor, and the decision-making factor.
Although I've since refined the test, I still use the same three major clusters. In addition, I still keep
the ten original areas, and I've added an extra one—intuition.
What are the eleven areas you measure?
Well, the psychological factor has five areas. These include a well-rounded personal life, a positive
attitude, the motivation to make money, lack of conflict, and responsibility for results. Motivation
to make money is not significantly correlated with success, but I keep it in the test because lack of
such motivation plus high conflict is very significant.
There are three factors in the decision-making area. These include a solid knowledge of technical
factors in the market, an aptitude for making sound decisions without common biases, and the
ability to think independently. Incidentally, knowledge of technical factors has little relationship to
success based on the test scores.
Also, there are three management-discipline factors. One needs risk control and the ability to be
patient, hi addition, I also include intuition in this category. Although I have not found any
relationship between intuition and trading success, I keep the factor in the test because it is interesting to me.
Given those areas, what are the characteristics of the losing trader?
The composite profile of a losing trader would be someone who is highly stressed and has little
protection from stress, has a negative outlook on life and expects the worst, has a lot of conflict in
his/her personality, and blames others when things go wrong. Such a person would not have a set of
rales to guide their behavior and would be more likely to be a crowd follower, hi addition, losing
traders tend to be disorganized and impatient. They want action now. Most losing traders are not as
bad as the composite profile would suggest. They just have part of the losing profile.
You now consult with many traders. How did you get started in that?
After I started using the test regularly, people began to ask me what to do about their particular
problems. Since investment psychology is a rather unique area of study, I found I didn't know how
to respond to many of their questions. As a result, I decided to write a pamphlet on each of the ten
areas—both to learn about the areas myself and to provide investors with a source of help. The first
pamphlet turned into a book. I decided at that point to cover the subject matter in five workbooks
which would constitute a course in the psychology of investing/trading. After I finished the second
workbook, I started training in Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP). NLP is really a science of
how to duplicate success, and I was able to incorporate a number of those techniques into my
course. The development of the course naturally led to a private consulting service.
Have your ideas and concepts changed from what they were early in your research?
I designed the test to predict who could win and who couldn't. Now, I believe that anyone can win
if they are committed to do so. Primarily, it's just a matter of learning how.
Too many people get stuck by the beliefs they hold, yet they continue to cling to those old beliefs.
My beliefs, in contrast, are constantly evolving, and I think it's because I value them according to
their utility. Thus, I'm willing to admit most of my beliefs are probably wrong. For example, there
may be people who could not be successful in trading even if they were committed to doing so. But
right now, it's most useful for me to believe that anyone can win. When I hold that belief, I am
much more effective at helping people become winners.
Could you provide some specific case examples of people who succeeded or failed in
consultation?
One trader who came to me hadn't been able to trade for over a year. He wanted me to get him
trading before he did the full consultation. As a result, I had him drop by one morning for about
forty-five minutes. I gathered some information and made an educated guess that he had a conflict
problem. He then went through an exercise that took about ten minutes. It took him two weeks to
mentally integrate the results of that exercise, but after that he was trading again. He'd spent a lot of
197

money and done a lot of things to correct the problem and none of it had worked. Yet, it only took a
ten-minute exercise and two weeks of integrating the results to solve his problem.
I tried that with another person who was unable to afford my consulting fee, for whom a simple
exercise of that nature didn't work. His problem had nothing to do with his investing. Although he
was in his late forties, he was still a little boy in that he couldn't accept adult responsibilities. He
still lived with his mother, and his whole lifestyle supported being a child. The only reason he
wanted to trade was to be able to continue that lifestyle. I doubt that I could have helped him
without a major commitment on his part to change his lifestyle, which he was unwilling to give.
Another client made minor adjustments after two days of consulting. He was reluctant to do the
follow-up because he thought it would probably be superfluous. But he eventually decided to do it.
I spent another two days listening to him talk and then we did a simple exercise together. At the end
of that exercise, he was a totally changed person (although it probably took him a week to integrate
the effects of that exercise). He called me two months later and said he had made over $650,000
trading in the markets.
In the case of a trader who uses a nonquantifiable approach (for example, "I buy or sell
whenever I get a feeling about the market's impending direction from the chart patterns"),
how do you distinguish whether trading problems are related to lack of skill or to
psychological impediments to success?
Before I take someone on as a client, I need to know that they have some sort of methodology that
they think works. I determine what evidence they have of that. Can they, for example, convince
me? Have they tested that methodology? Does their testing amount to a hindsight evaluation, or is
it based on actual trading signals that one can follow. I also am convinced that it is difficult to make
money day trading or trading in a short time frame, so I am skeptical about anyone who wants me
to help them day trade successfully.
At the same time, I think that lack of skill is, in itself, a psychological impediment to trading.
People don't develop a systematic approach or don't test their approach because of poor judgment,
lack of goals, internal conflict, etc. So, perhaps the area they need help in is overcoming internal
resistance to developing a systematic approach to the market. If somebody came to me and said that
was the problem they wanted help with, I would have no problem at all accepting that person as a
client.
What are the primary psychological impediments that keep most people from being winning
traders? How can they deal with each of those problems?
What typically happens is that when people approach the markets, they bring their personal
problems with them. The markets are a natural place to act out those problems, but not to solve
them. Most people end up leaving the markets, but a few decide that they need a system to trade
more effectively. Those people who do adopt a systems approach usually just end up transferring
their problems from dealing with the market to dealing with their system of trading.
One of the basic problems that most traders face is dealing with risk. For example, two primary
rales to successful speculative trading are: Cut your losses short and let your profits ran. Most
people cannot deal with those two rales. For example, if making money is important to you—as it
is to most people who play investment games—then you will probably have trouble taking small
losses. As a result, small losses turn into moderate losses, which are even harder to take. Finally,
the moderate losses turn into big losses, which you are forced to take—all because it was so hard to
take a small loss. Similarly, when people have a profit, they want to take it right away. They think,
"I'd better take this now before it gets away." The bigger the profit becomes, the harder it is to resist
the temptation to take it now. The simple truth is that most people are risk-aversive in the realm of
profits—they prefer a sure, smaller gain to a wise gamble for a larger gain—and risk-seeking in the
realm of losses—they prefer an unwise gamble to a sure loss. As a result, most people tend to do
the opposite of what is required for success. They cut their profits short and let their losses run.
If you think of trading as a game and that a mistake is not following the rales of the game, then it
becomes much easier to follow these two rales. You should review your rales at the beginning of
the day and review your trading at the end of the day. If you followed your rales, even if you lost
money, pat yourself on the back. If you didn't follow your rales, then mentally rehearse what you
198

did and give yourself more appropriate choices in the future.
The second majorproblem people have is dealing with stress. Stress really takes two forms: worry
and the biological fight/flight response. Our brains have a limited capacity for processing
information. If your mind is preoccupied with worry, that worry takes up most of the decision
space, and you don't have enough capacity left to perform effectively.
One aspect of the fight/flight response is that it causes people to narrow their focus. They revert to
earlier well-practiced response patterns. For example, a common decision that people make under
stress is not to decide. They do what they did when they were a beginner. They do what their
broker advises. In short, they do anything simple. Simple solutions are rarely correct. When people
are stressed, they also tend to be crowd followers. The behavior of others provides a simple
example to follow. Crowd followers don't have to make decisions, but crowd following is a sure
way to lose money in the markets.
A second important effect of the fight/flight response is that it causes people to expend more
energy. When faced with stressful events, people give more effort to the few alternatives they do
consider. They keep on doing what they were doing—only they do it harder. Putting more energy
into trading decisions does not help you make more money. Instead you will tend to make quick,
irrational choices, which use up some of that excess energy. You probably put more energy into a
losing position by actively resisting closing it out. The result is a bigger loss. In summary, the
fight/flight response will decrease your performance by causing you to narrow your choices and
concentrate more energy on the remaining alternatives.
The solution for dealing with stress is to work on the causes and to develop stress protectors. I
would recommend that people with this problem go into a stress management program. Also, it is
important to understand that many stressful events are such because of the way you perceive them.
Change those perceptions and you will change the event itself. For example, winners typically
differ from losers in their attitude about losses. Most people become anxious about losses, yet
successful speculators have learned that an essential ingredient to winning is to make it OK to lose.
Since most people in our culture are taught that only winning is acceptable, most investors must
change their beliefs about losses to become successful.
The third major problem that people have is dealing with conflict. People have different parts of
themselves, each of which has a positive intention. For example, someone might have a part to
make money, a part to protect him from failure, a part to make him feel good about himself, a part
which looks after the welfare of the family, etc. Now, once you establish these parts, you usually
allow them to operate subconsciously. What happens is the parts continually adopt new behaviors
to cany out their intentions. Sometimes, those new behaviors can produce major conflicts. This
model of conflict is one of my most useful beliefs. I'm not saying that people actually have parts,
but it is very useful in helping people solve their trading problems for me to believe that. You just
have to make them aware of their parts and then conduct a formal negotiation between the parts so
that each part is satisfied. If possible, you also want to integrate the parts so that they join together.
I find the concept of people having different parts in conflict with each other a little difficult
to conceptualize. Could you provide an example?
I worked with a floor trader whose father was fairly successful. His father was not a good model for
him, however, in that he was an alcoholic. As a result, he developed a part to protect himself from
being like his father. He could make about $75,000 per year trading, but if he made any more than
that, this part kicked in to make sure that he would not become too successful. He was the one who
made $650,000 in about two months after we had completed the parts negotiation.
Are you implying that some people actually want to lose on a subconscious level because it
fulfills some other positive intention? How common is that?
Half the traders I work with have problems of this nature. I think it's very common.
So far, you've cited poor risk attitudes, stress, and conflict as impediments to trading success.
Are there any other major problems people have with the markets?
A fourth major problem is that many people allow their emotions to control their trading. In fact,
most trading problems appear to involve emotional control in some manner. I know of at least ten
methods of helping people control their mental states. An easy method that people can adopt right
199
