
Figure 2.1 Test of a timing system.

Our first test was on Soybean prices from 4/29/75 through 1/1/87, and it looked at all possible
combinations of short-term averages from 5 to 50 days against the longer term or second average from 10 to
60 days.

25
The best result, during this time period shown here used a 5-day average against a 2 5-day average. This
time-based "system" made $40,075 with 54 profitable trades out of a total of 153. Wow, have we
discovered a money machine',
Figure 2.2 shows what would have taken place had we traded this system from 1/1/87 through
4/23/98. The results are not promising. Whereas our accuracy at 31 percent winners on 163 trades has
improved, we actually lost money, $9,100 to be specific and along the way suffered a drawdown (how
much the system went against you before getting back in the black) of $2 8,612. Putting up $2 8,612 to lose
$9, 100 is hardly a good wager, The average profit per trade was $-55. What happened to the original
cyclical or time influence? Beats me!
Reversing the process, I checked to see what two moving averages worked best in the second time
period from 1/1/87 into April 23, 1998 (see Figure 2.3). The best combination was a 25-day moving
average against a 30-day. This made $34,900 with a nice 59 percent accuracy. This system made S234 per
trade and had a drawdown of $13,962. This too, is not a good bet.
Applying the best case results back on the earlier data, out of sample, produced a loss of $28,725, as
shown in Figure 2.4. Forward, backward., the time or length or cycle of the moving average that worked in
one time period does not work in another time period.
"Perhaps," you query, "The problem is not that time does not work but that Soybeans do not trend
enough."
What appears next is the best case study of a moving average crossover system on the British Pound, a
very trending market. From 1975 to 1987, the best such crossover system was a 5-day average versus a
45-day, making a most impressive $135 443

Figure 2.2 What might have happened.

26

Figure 2.3 Testing another time period
Data
POUND
Calc Dates
01/01/98

BRITISH
67/99
01/01/87 -

Num. Conv. P. Value Comm
Slippage
Margin
FormatDrive:\Path\FileName
-------------------------- --------------------------------------------------26
4 $ 6.250 $ 50
$0
$
3,000
CSI C:\GD\BACK67\FO03.DTA
ALL TRADES - Test 1
Total net profit$45,287.50
Gross profit$134,175.00
Gross loss
$-88,887.50
Total # of trades104
Percent profitable
31%
Number winning trades 33
Number losing trades 71
Largest winning trade $17,262.50
Largest losing trade
$-4,575.00
Average winning trade $4,065.91
Average losing trade
$-1,251.94
Ratio avg win/avg loss 3.24
Avg trade (win & loss)$435.46
Max consecutive winners
3Max
consecutive losers12
Avg # bars in winners 54
Avg # bare in losers 13
Max closed-out drawdown
$-29,100.00Max
intra-day drawdown
$-29,450.00
Profit factor 1.50
Max # of contracts held
1
Account size required $32,450.00
Return on account139%

Figure 2.4 Applying best case results
The next time period, 1987 through 1997, the same system made money all right, $45,287 as Figure
2.5 shows, but suffered a $29,100 losing spell! Not such a hot bet. The best crossover to use on this current
set of 10year data was a 20/40, which cleaned up making $121,700, the problem is it only made $26,025 on
the first time period and got tagged with a $30,000 drawdown. Sorry, the problem was not beans or the
pound, the problem is that time based studies simply do not hold up. Using time exclusively as a
consideration in speculation is one of the surer ways I know of getting a free pass to the poorhouse.

27
.

Figure 2.5 Using this system on the next time period.
I have duplicated this study at various times, on wildly different sets of data and have yet to see the best
cyclical-based approach to trading be even close to being the best in the next test on out-of-sample data.
My advice is to forget cycles of time, they are the will-o'-the-wisp of Wall Street.
There are cycles (maybe it is a pattern) to the way price moves that you can quickly see on any chart,
any time frame, any market, any country in the world where I have traded. Once you understand these
patterns, you will be better able to align yourself with where prices will most likely go.
Over the years, I have codified and identified three cycles and now refer to them as (1) small
range/large range, (2) moving closes within ranges, and (3) closes opposite openings.
It is time for your first lesson in chart reading; we will begin with a study of changing ranges. When I
refer to ranges what I am talking about is the total distance traveled by a stock or commodity in a day, week,
month, year, it could even be in one minute. Think of range as the price distance traveled in whatever time
period you are using. For all three cycles you will learn, the rules work equally well in any time frame. The
rules I have uncovered are universal to markets as well as time frame references.

The Natural Cycle of Range Change
On any given day, the range of price in a commodity can do anything. That is what causes so much
chartist confusion. But over any time period you want to study, you will notice a clear-cut, precise cadence
to range activity.

28
At all times, all markets, ranges fluctuate from-and this is critical-a series of small ranges to a cluster of
large ranges.
The cycle continues repeating itself year in and year out; small ranges are followed by large ranges,
large ranges are followed by small ranges. This is clockwork, this is the basic key to profitable short-term
trading.
This seemingly obvious cycle is so powerful and important to us because speculators must have price
change to make money. The greater the change, the greater the potential for profit. If there is no, or little,
price change, a speculator is simply stuck in the mud as price fails to trend.
That is why short-term traders need explosive price moves over a few hours or days. Without this, we
will wither on the vine. Got it? I hope so, because here comes the fascinating part. What usually attracts the
public or uninformed to a market is large price change. They, usually incorrectly, think the current large
change will continue.
You now know better.
Large ranges give way, most often, to small ranges. Your objective is to establish a position in advance
of large price change. It is a classic sucker play to see a market that has been hot, with large ranges for a day
or two, pull in the public just before a sideways or congestion move. Most short-term traders are losers. The
reason they are is that they go from one hot market to the next because they have no understanding of how
the drunken sailor swaggers, how prices move across the great wasteland of their chart books.
On the other hand, we who are the knowledgeable few, play just the opposite game. We look for
markets that have been volatile in the past and are known for large daily ranges, but have recently produced
small daily ranges because we know a large-range day is out there not too far away!
You can eliminate the madness of charts by laying low on the sidelines, carefully waiting until ranges
have dwindled, dried up. Once that part of the natural cycle is about over, it is time for short-term fireworks.
By the same token, large-range days tell us we may soon get stuck in the mud of small ranges where we
cannot make money. This is certainly no time to overstay our welcome. Let me prove this point with some
charts. Figure 2.6 shows gold in the September 1997 to January 1998 time frame.
Do yourself a big favor. Mark off all the large-range days you see in this time period. Then study the
size of the ranges just prior to these explosive up-and-down days. See what I see? We were given ample
warning of virtually every large-range day by the shrinkage of ranges a few days earlier.
Voila! We are on the edge of a major market discovery here. I know-I have not yet told you how to tell
in which direction these ranges will take off, but don't get ahead of the teacher. For now study every chart
you can so that you can imprint on your brain, your very speculative spirit, the first undeniable short-term
truth of the market:
Small ranges beget large ranges. Large ranges beget small ranges.

29

Figure 2.6 Comex Gold (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).
Look at Figure 2.7, which shows the always volatile S&P 500 from October 1991 through January
1992. Grab a pencil, mark off the days with smallest ranges on the chart and then note what happened
shortly thereafter ... a large-range day or two or even three, then a contraction of ranges, small to big, big to
small-on and on it goes as it always has. Always will.
Our next study in speculative technique is that of Coffee (Figure 2.8), a fast-paced market, ripe with
opportunity for the trader with an understanding of the truth. Again, mark off the small-range days, then
observe what follows: large-range days when we can make money while the public gets all lathered up about
these days hopping aboard only to lose patience as the ranges contract into decaffeinated days and the
supposed opportunity evaporates. Just about the time most of the public has been bored out of their positions
... zingo! ... away go prices, switching gears back to large ranges.
Finally, I'd like you to take a close and hard look at Figures 2.9 and 2.10, which are for markets not
traded in the United States, the Australian Dollar and the Nikkei (the Japanese answer to the Dow Jones
Industrial average).
If you are still not convinced that we have uncovered a major cycle to price movement-a cycle without
time-I am next presenting three charts of

30

Figure 2.7 S&P 500 Index (daily bars). Graphed by the Navigator
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.8 Coffee (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

31

Figure 2.9 Australian Dollar (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.10 Nikkei Stock Index (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

32

Figure 2.11 S&P 500 Index (5-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.12 S&P 500 Index (30-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

33

Figure 2.13 S&P 500 Index (60-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).
the S&P 500 (see Figures 2.11, 2.12, and 2.13). In Figure 2.11, each bar reflects the high, low, and close of
every 5-minute time period for two days, chosen at random. As you can see in almost a glance, the large bars
are preceded by smaller bars. Figure 2.12 shows the use of a 30-minute bar to capture the markets swings
for a full week. Again the facts speak for themselves, virtually every long-range bar, the only place we
short-term traders make our money, has been set up by one or a series of small ranges. Figure 2.13 is based
on hourly bars and again the phenomenon is present. It takes no tea reader or mumbo jumbo spin-doctor to
hype or stretch these facts. What's there is there, always has been and always will be-we are continually
alerted to those moneymaking, large-range bars by the early warning of small ranges.

The Importance of the Open to Low or High of the Day
Here is the second absolute truism about large-range days, those big blast-off days we short-termers
simply must have to come out ahead; large-range up close days usually open close to the low and close on
the high. Large-range down close days open around the high of the day and close near the low.
This means you must take two things into consideration in your trading. The first is that if we are
"aboard" a day that we think will be a

34
large-range up day do not look for a buying point very far below the open. As I said, large-range up days
seldom trade very much below the opening price of the day. This means you must not look for much of a
buying opportunity below the opening price.
By the same token, if you think you have a tiger by the tail-the possibility of a large-range day-and
price dips very much below the opening the probability of a large-range up close is greatly reduced.
This is a major insight into profitable short-term trading. Do not blow it off. Here are several studies to prove
the validity of this concept. Figure 2.14 shows on the horizontal scale the distribution of the difference from
the opening to the close of all days in Treasury Bonds from 1970 to 1998.
The vertical scale reflects the net change for all days, that is, the open minus the close. The fewer price points
below the open (the zero horizontal line) and the closer those price points are to the zero line, the more days
there are with positive-and large-open-to-close patterns. As you read the scale moving to the right, the farther
below the zero line the price points are. The fewer positive price points we see above the zero line.
Looking on the left side of this chart we see that large-range profitable
closes seldom have large open minus close values. This trend is clear as the mass of data slants from left to
right, that is, the profitable side of trading.

Figure 2.14 Distribution of dollar value of open to close versus (open-low)
as percentage of yesterday's range-T-Bonds.

35
The large opens to closes are pulled down by large opens to lows. This is also convincing proof
the markets are not random. If they were, the distributions of highs minus opens, would be the same as
opens minus the lows. This data, as simple as it might seem, reveals a powerul fundamental truth of
becoming a successful speculator.
Figure 2.15 shows three different lines; the top one represents the probability that the close will be
greater than the open, dependent on the bottom scale of the open minus the low. At the point I have
marked, the data tell us that about 87 percent of the time we will close above the open if the dip from
the open to the low is less than 20 percent of the day's range.
The next line coming down the chart only deals with days that the distance from the open to the
close would have made a trader more than $500. At the point I have marked on this line, we see that
about 42 percent of the time we closed above the open by an amount making $500 or more if we did
not take more than a 10 percent dip below the opening. Finally, the third and bottom line represents
days that closed with more than $1,000 of profits above the opening. These are the biggest range days
in the bond market.
At the point marked, we see that 15 percent time, we get these huge blast-off days if there is a dip
less than 10 percent.

Figure 2.15 Probability of dollar value of open to close versus (open-low)
as percentage of yesterday's range-T-Bonds.

36
BY the same token, there is an almost zero chance of getting a large blast-off close above the opening if
price has dipped 70 percent to 80 percent below the opening.
This is true of all three lines; again telling us the greater the price swings below the open, the less of a
chance we have of a positive open to close. This proves my rules:
1.

Don't try to buy big dips below the open on expected up close days.

2.

If long and prices fall much below the open on expected big up close days, "get out."

3.

Don't try to sell big rallies above the opening on expected large down days.

4.

If short and prices rally much above opening on expected large down days, "get out."

Don't try to argue with these statistics, they are the laws of gravity controlling how stock and
commodity prices move. The tabulations shown here can be replicated in any freely traded market, thus
representing a universal truth of how, on average, trading transpires during any given day. Yes, you will
occasionally see large-range days that work both sides of the opening, but that is the exception, not the norm.
The averages are against bucking this law. As a trader, I want as much going for me as I can. My winning
trades don't come from luck, they come from having the tables tilted in my favor.

Where the Trend Is with You-The Second Power Play Price Pattern
Is the market in an up- or downtrend? Will prices most likely go up or down from here? Indeed, is there
anything that might help us understand what is in store for future price activity? These are big questions, the
answers the uninformed and those unwilling to think and study, have failed to find since trading began.
just as we have learned that, generally speaking, small ranges set up large ranges, there is another
fundamental design to the way prices of stocks and commodities move across the march of time in any
country, any time frame.
Thus we begin your first lesson in understanding trend analysis in the marketplace. The basic principle
is that as prices move from a low to a high there is a shift from where the close is in each day's range.
Remember, it makes no difference whether we are using 5-minute, hourly, or weekly charts. The same rule
applies.

37
As a market low is made the close of the day, or time period, is right at or very close to the low of that day's
range. Then seemingly out of nowhere, a rally begins, and as this rally unfolds, there is a marked
relationship change. The change is that the further along this uptrend matures, the higher the close will be on
the daily bars. Figure 2.16 presents a stylized view of this relationship change.
Markets bottom with price closing on the low of the daily range, while they top out when closes are at
or near the high of the daily range.

The uninformed think "smart money" comes into the market with buying thus reversing the trend.
Nothing could be further from the truth. As MY long-time friend Tom DeMark says, "Markets don't
bottom because of an influx of buyers, they bottom because there are no more sellers."
We can look at this relationship of buyers to sellers at work on virtually every day or bar that takes
place. My operating rule, which I first wrote about in 1965, is that sellers in any time period are represented
by the price swing from the high of the day to the close, while buying is represented by the close

Figure 2.16 The relationship changes as a rally occurs.

38
minus the low. My point is that the distance price closes off the low tells us the power of the buyers, the
distance from the high to the close illustrates the impact sellers had on prices.
This understanding came from the work I did in trying to understand the OBV (On Balance Volume) charts
Joe Miller and Don Southard were keeping at Dean Witter. Back then, traders, or just old duffers looking for
a free cup of coffee and a place to chat, would sit around looking at the flow of prices on the ticker tape, a
trade-by-trade display of each trade made during the day.
There were two noteworthy old codgers, Jack and Murray, who appeared daily to dispense their
wisdom of the ages. Since they had been around longer than us, we hung on to their every word. Murray, the
older of the two, had been a board room marker boy during the crash of 1929 and frequently recounted how
he had marked down the price of the stock of Bank of America exactly 100 points on the first day of the
crash! You could just see young Murray at the boards, writing down, in chalk the last price B of A traded at,
then erasing to replace that value with a lower one. Murray said the biggest price mark down was 23 points
from one trade to the next!
His story fit right in with the other oldsters' redundant favorite saying, which still rings in my ears.
Jack would tell us at least once a day, "What you don't want to do is catch falling daggers," and then he
would add, "You wait until they stick in the floor and stop quivering, then and only then do you pick them
up. That's the best lesson I've learned in over 50 years of watching people lose money."
For short-term traders, I took this to mean that I should not try to buy market sell-offs, should not stand in the
way of freight trains. I lost lots of money thinking I could tell when price had "bottomed" and would turn
around for the day. My early trading accounts are pretty convincing proof that I could not perform that
magic.
I eventually learned not to try to pick tops and bottoms, but it wasn't until years later that I fully understood
what was really going on in the market and how I could take advantage of this market truth. My account
balance had convinced me of the folly of buying abject weakness but I did not know why. I do now.
The next chart should make this lesson in speculation come alive for you, so you don't have to waste time or
money learning the way I did. Figure 2.17 illustrates how prices traded during an actual market day in
Coffee; on the right-hand side, the chart shows the way the bar for the full day appeared.
Price opened, dipped to a low, rallied to make the high of the day, then got hit by selling until the close. You
have been aware that every day there is a battle between buyers and sellers; now you know how and where to
look for the buyers and sellers. More importantly, you have learned about shifting

39

Figure 2.17 Coffee (15-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

relationships: that the higher the close is on a bar the closer we are to a top, while the lower the close is
on a bar, the closer we are to a bottom. Here are two of my rules:
1.

Most all market highs can be found to occur at or shortly after a market closes right on the

high of the day.
2.

Most all market lows can be found at or shortly after a market closes right on the low of the

day.
Got it? Good, now let's look at actual examples of my theoretical concept at work. I will begin
with Figure 2.18, a chart of the Treasury Bond market from 1992. Look at the price turns, which are
pretty easy to see, then focus on the terminal high and low days, at or just before, the end of each upand downswing. See it? There it is, the end of the uptrend could be foretold by the mere fact the daily
closes were near the highs of the day, the lows, or end of the downtrend, foretold by closes near the low
of the day.
This is not an isolated occurrence, nor is it limited to daily charts, as the next few examples will
show. Figures 2.19 through 2.23 show, in sequence, a 15-minute chart of the S&P 500, then an hourly
chart, a daily chart, a weekly chart, and finally a monthly chart. In each instance, you

40

Figure 2.18 Day T-Bonds (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.19 S&P 500 Index (1 5-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).
