just flip a chart upside down to predict price movement in very active markets. But smaller thrusts
through range constriction show less variation from uptrend to downtrend. Here the crowd behaves
in a more rational manner as it moves in and out of positions. The smaller doses of greed and fear
look alike through these zones.
Consider the difference between uptrends and downtrends in the development of trading tactics.
Stocks tend to fall farther and faster than they rise. Volume builds rallies, but markets will fall from
their own weight. Greed burns out faster than fear, which must be healed over time. Fear induces
panic selling more reliably than greed induces panic buying. Momentum traders duck for cover
quickly at new highs, but value investors routinely exercise great patience at new lows.
Many active traders never sell short. The upward price bias of the secular bull market teaches
painful lessons to short sellers who don’t apply defensive strategies. And the esoteric concept of
selling stock before ownership confuses narrow logic although it follows common tactics that buy
low and sell high. Many neophytes attempt a few short sales, get burned, and never look back. They
fall into popular upside momentum strategies and never play any other setup.
Long-term market success depends on the ability to adapt to diverse trading conditions. Many
Pattern Cycle phases signal profitable short sales opportunities. As with long positions, these setups
align according to the trend-range axis. Classic strategies sell tests of old highs within ranges and
use bear rallies to execute lower-risk entries in downside momentum markets. Smart short sellers
also focus the ET through several time frames and build profits through 3D charting techniques.
Direct access execution revolutionizes short sale swing trading. For years, brokers relied on
inefficient inventory handling that forced delays while excellent opportunities were lost. Short
sellers had to overcome slow service and long phone calls to get permission to borrow shares. New
interfaces now display available shares in real-time, and modern ECNs trigger fast executions when
placing orders above the current inside bid. Once these are filled, swing traders can manage short
positions as easily as long ones.
Swing traders must sell short within the context of the larger bull market. While the normal holding
period will be short term, never underestimate the public buying power that drives modern
markets. Always use 3D charting to examine major indices in the view above the intended
execution. Avoid selling short near major market support levels. Also remember that indices tend to
shift direction frequently as corrections build. An expanding selloff on a 5-minute Nasdaq chart
rarely offers a safe environment for short sellers unless they operate through a very small execution
window.
Trends depend on their time frame. Swing traders can safely sell short into corrections that last only
a few bars or days. But these brief entries require very careful planning. Review other time frames
to avoid trend relativity errors, and examine the pattern closely to pick the optimum entry points.
Once a selloff is set into motion, buyers pull away and make execution more difficult. Wait for a
pullback entry or get more consistent results by taking a position in narrow-range bars just prior to
the break. Classic contraction against a S/R barrier offers a great tool to locate short sales as well as
long positions.
Countertrend short sales require advanced trading skills. First build a profitable history of selling
into downtrends and rangebound markets. Intermediate declines within uptrends can produce
outstanding results. But the underlying buying power restricts safe execution to a few well-marked
setups. Newer traders consistently sell short too early into these patterns and get ripped apart.

Experience builds the required patience to wait for the perfect countertrend opportunity. Sell
breakdowns from one S/R level to the next. This requires defensive execution, precise
measurement, and immediate profit taking. Use a Fibonacci line tool after a sharp uptrend thrust to
identify the 38%, 50%, and 62% retracements. Cross-verify with time of day, horizontal S/R, and
Bollinger Band extremes. Move quickly and without hesitation. At times these pullbacks will turn
into larger trend changes. For example, a sharp thrust through the 62% retracement signals a
possible first failure opportunity. If still short, keep the active position into the 100% level.
Bulls and greed live above the 200-day MA, while bears and fear live below. This popular reference
level defines whether broad-scale strategies are trend or countertrend in nature. Rallies tap a larger
pool of potential buyers above this important average, while corrections tap a larger pool of sellers
below it. One-to-three day swing traders can execute long and short strategies through these broad
conditions without special considerations. But longer-term position traders must exercise defensive
tactics and precise execution if they choose to enter against this major average. Try instead to apply
classic trend-following methods in this holding period. Sell the pullback, follow it down, and place
cover stops to lock in profits during bear markets. Reverse strategy and direction in bull phases.
Short-term participants have few commonly agreed-upon alternatives to the 200-day MA. Rely on
Pattern Cycles rather than moving averages to identify the market stage for the time frame of
interest. Then apply first rise/first failure and Fibonacci retracements to pinpoint multi-trend bullbear cycles. Simple 13- and 20-day MAs offer good trend analysis but don’t mark long-term
resistance when broken. Use the 50-day MA to signal intermediate resistance for declining
stocks. This common setting triggers excellent short sales on the daily chart, and the shorter time
period ensures many more tests than the broader 200-day MA.
Some stocks never participate in the market’s broad upward movement and can be sold short all the
way to oblivion. These natural position trades provide excellent opportunities for swing traders as
well. The most obvious strategy awaits bear rallies in sustained downtrends. Allow the stock to
reach overbought levels on a 14-day RSI. As it tops out, watch for a reversal pattern to print on the
chart below the time frame of interest. If the trade arises on the daily chart, look for a double top or
similar breakdown on the 60-minute view and use that level as the trigger for execution. Chapter 13
discusses these short sale tactics in more detail.
Short selling requires peaceful coexistence with the short squeeze. This time-honored practice relies
on herd behavior. Position the sale ahead of, behind, or against the crowd to avoid these painful
bear rallies. Squeezes erupt after downward price expansion invites latecomers with very bad timing
to sell short. These volatile events end as quickly as they begin. They can carry further than routine
pullbacks after upside breakouts due to the market’s long-side bias. Keep in mind that short squeeze
tops offer one of the best sale entry levels available. Shorts can fuel rallies up to a point in
downtrends. Further price gains then require real demand.
Chasing downside momentum destroys trading accounts as efficiently as its long-side twin. Insiders
generate squeezes very quickly to block natural trade exits and force serious damage. Participants
who jump on board near the end of sharp selloffs have little experience and much fear motivation.
Underlying retail optimism forces stomachs to turn more violently with ill-timed shorts than
unprofitable long positions. They quickly cover in a panic that feeds on itself as price bars shoot
skyward. Swing traders should capitalize on this popular insider shakeout and not suffer from it.
Enter short sales on pullback rallies to reduce risk and increase potential reward. Sell into the end of
a short squeeze just as buying power fades. The squeeze alone will not force a 100% retracement of
the last downward thrust most times. That takes real buying demand. They usually fail below 62%
of the prior decline unless real longs emerge. Observe major S/R as the squeeze progresses, and

watch for reversals near the 50% and 62% retracement levels of vertical rallies. These can uncover
excellent short sales, and upticks will always be easy to find.
Channels and trendlines provide excellent short sale entry points as well. Draw a line across the top
of declining lower highs to locate these important levels. Make sure to toggle between arithmetic
and log scale—these lines appear on one or the other but not both at the same time. Watch as price
moves up toward the line. Does the level converge with other key S/R or major moving averages?
Does price strike the top Bollinger Band while it turns downward? If so, cross-verification signals a
potential short sale ET.
FIGURE 4.8
This sudden @Home short-covering rally lasted only one hour but destroyed many trading careers. Price rose 11 points
on an unsubstantiated rumor while insiders pushed the squeeze through several strong resistance levels. Only the
continuation gap at 24 was finally able to contain the rocketship. Price dropped as quickly as it rose once the short fuel
dissipated.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Intraday short sales require far more precision than longer ones. Fortunately, the time frame reduces
the impact of investor participation. The swing trader can concentrate on S/R, TMs, classic patterns,
and range bar examination. Find the best short sale ET available but also control risk by pulling
orders that do not fill immediately. Use multi-day intraday charts for 3D examination and exercise
strong defense during the first and last hours. These time zones trigger the majority of intraday
squeezes due to the heavy volume participation.

FIGURE 4.9
Parallel price channels and TMs fill the charting landscape to help swing traders locate low-risk short sale entry. Note
how support becomes resistance after JDS Uniphase fails the late February gap at 120. Then the same thing occurs after
violation of the earlier gap at 110. In both cases bear rallies then push price into the declining channel top for a highodds short sale.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Cut losses immediately and recognize errors quickly when short. Use supplementary technical tools
to choose wise exits. Thirteen- and 20-bar daily Bollinger Bands point to clean cover zones when
price strikes or violates the bottom band but the barrier remains horizontal. Hammer and doji
reversal candlesticks predict that the next bars will go against the position. For intraday shorts, use a
5-8-13 (Fig. 2.11) and follow the same bar-expansion strategy that exits long-side trades.

TIME FRAME
Pick a holding period early in the game and stick with it until a better one comes along. Align all
trades to this single time frame until self-discipline allows strict management of multiple strategies.
Simultaneous positions that rely on different time frames raise the odds of trend relativity errors and
allow weak-minded participants to turn trades into investments. Successful swing trading requires
time specialization. Each Pattern Cycle subset marks unique trends and conditions. Learn the
important characteristics for a chosen holding period and use them to improve performance.

Choose time frame wisely and for the right reasons. Swing trading must align with personal
lifestyle or it can trigger very bad losses. Avoid intraday trading completely until advanced skills
produce consistent profits through longer holding periods. Day trading hypnotizes many novices
with sexy software, pretty colors, and subliminal advertising. But most market participants lack the
time and resources to manage profitable intraday positions. Neophytes dream about the freedoms
associated with day trading but forget to accept the risks. Ninety percent or more fail and lose large
amounts of capital that could have attracted substantial profits in longer time frames.
Part-time intraday traders catch a few quick gains on their lunch hours and proclaim mastery of the
art. Or they tap relatively brief momentum markets and believe their good times will last forever. If
this sounds familiar, stop immediately and find an appropriate strategy that fits well with current
responsibilities. Only time and commitment will lead to consistent performance. Very short-term
positions require great effort to trade well, and successful players may spend 30 or more nonmarket
hours per week examining new setups and tactics. There are no profit shortcuts in the modern
markets.
Intraday Pattern Cycles produce more opportunities than daily ones. Swing traders can access
setups in many small time frames throughout each session. But quick positions produce smaller
average gains with higher transaction costs. Two strategies respond to this unpleasant characteristic.
Shorten the time frame further and try to overcome very small reward through high-volume
scalping techniques. Or lengthen the holding period to tap swing trade tactics that capture larger
movement within this volatile environment. Both methods work well in the right hands and fail
miserably in the wrong ones.
Intraday trading requires constant examination of range and range breakout. Success demands
accurate prediction and precise timing. Learn to read the cycles and memorize the numbers in
longer time frames before applying these skills to very short-term markets. Always enter trades in
the direction of the highest odds at the time and exit immediately when proven wrong. Understand
the narrow time window in which intraday traders must execute. Tiny whipsaws that few investors
notice on daily charts incur sharp losses on 5-minute and 60-minute bars.
Level II access allows very short-term scalping strategies that work well with Pattern Cycles. In this
time frame, classic ETs lose importance as players rely on observed order flow among market
makers and ECNs. Few market participants should scalp. This risky strategy requires advanced
skills and fast reflexes. Positions held between 30-minutes and 2 hours offer optimal profit
conditions for most intraday traders. Use this popular zone to apply classic tactics with highly
predictive outcomes.
Two classic time frames attract most swing traders. The 1–3-day hold aligns positions to an
underlying S&P futures buy-sell cycle. The 1–3-week hold parallels natural trend development on
the daily chart. Both styles demand less time than intraday trading but offer dramatic profit
opportunities with controlled risk. They also closely match common Pattern Cycle phases.
The 1–3-day swing measures an ideal holding period for many participants. The American markets
tend to print 3-day mini-trends. Three strong bars often follow three weak ones. Three trending days
precede 3 days of congestion. Find a recent reversal and count through swings to see how this
natural pivot works under current conditions. This cycle expands and contracts as markets evolve.
Instead of direct application, develop a sharp sense for natural market swing reversals and tune
individual entries to these high-profit points.
Align positions correctly to this 1–3-day phase and catch large pieces of each move. This active
style requires aggressive management and careful observation of open positions. Apply the same

strategies as the intraday trader but use longer chart views to locate ETs and exit points. Sixtyminute and daily charts work well for these overnight positions. Trade frequently but control risk
with tight stop losses that focus on primary chart landscape features.
The 1–3-week position aligns to a monthly buy-sell cycle that grabs a large price swing without
aggressive position management. It fits well into a lifestyle not obsessed with the financial markets.
Use the daily and weekly charts to organize profit opportunities and focus on closing prices. Ignore
intraday volatility to avoid trend relativity errors. Manage profit and loss through physical stops.
Protect gains with trailing stops that give positions adequate wriggle room. Then set stop losses
based on natural breakdown zones and walk away.
Position traders have more time to consider promising setups and ideal strategies. They also seek
higher individual profits, execute less frequently, and incur lower transaction costs. While intraday
traders profit from single direct price thrusts, longer positions allow a greater variety of
countertrend pullback strategies. Lock in a profit with a trailing stop and allow the stock to retrace
when the charting landscape shows a strong trend. Then sit back and enjoy another sharp primary
wave.
Consider time frame before every trade execution. Careful analysis must conclude that the setup
works within the chosen holding period. This frustrating process will filter out many promising
opportunities, but avoid chasing them. Successful tactics apply only to the swing trader’s natural
time tendency and can fail miserably if they miss their target. Market cycles exhibit polarity
between adjacent trends. When holding periods compress or expand, they shift out of phase and can
trigger opposite outcomes. Test new time frames slowly to ensure that proven tactics still function
within the chosen cycle.
Look for setups that also work well in the time frame above the targeted holding period. These will
exhibit few reward barriers, good support, and timing that converges with the smaller view. Follow
larger-scale charts closely after execution and exit quickly if conditions change. For example, 1minute scalpers follow important S/R features of the 5-minute chart while 1–3-day swing traders
examine reward on the daily chart but execute patterns on the 60-minute bars.
Learn to decipher many subtle relationships between trends. Price movement occurs within shortterm, intermediate, and long-term time frames. But these trends rarely synchronize with each other
and often generate considerable friction. This flips price action through wavelike motion and may
eventually force a reversal to relieve the stress. These volatile mechanics also create opportunity.
Examine two adjacent trends and locate a good setup within the shorter one. Then add a lower
dimension and time actual execution to price movement below the one that shows the trade.
Trading tools work through all time frames. Apply Bollinger Bands, Fibonacci retracements, and
trendline channels to all chart views. Use this versatility to unleash tremendous predictive
information. Toggle time frames to uncover tool convergence that cross-verifies promising setups.
This confluence often locates major multi-point profit events. For example, when both daily and
weekly Bollinger Bands converge at a single breakout number, odds increase that price will reverse
right at that level.
Trend relativity errors steal more profits than any other trading mistake. An excellent position for
one holding period often fails in the next larger or smaller time frame. Natural price waves that
generate through multiple trends must align with reward targets and the chosen time frame. Make
sure that strategies always focus on the right elements for that setup.

Investors make frequent relativity errors, but their broad position timing often forgives mistakes.
Swing traders that miss their time frame will wash out of the markets quickly. Shorter holding
periods spawn more critical time errors than longer ones. Short-term trends generate very noisy
signals that trigger early positions. High transaction costs and lost opportunity also take their toll on
these misinformed entries. Control this tendency through longer-term charts that capture broader
price movement and filter errors.

LOADING THE GUN
Plan the trade; trade the plan. Swing traders must define a personal style, write it down, and update
it frequently. Without one, they don’t know what it is and will fail the next time their wallet really
depends on it. The personal style defines trading rules, holding periods, stock vehicles, execution
criteria, and a series of filters that describe specific conditions under which to stand aside. Others
may have good ideas on what belongs in each column. But only the swing trader’s money is at risk,
and no one else can make those important decisions.
FIGURE 4.10
Different time frames tell different trend tales. Sun Microsystems stands on the brink of major decline during a
severe correction on the daily chart. But the 5-minute chart shows the same stock ready to print a solid double
bottom while the 1-minute view illustrates a pull back in a strong uptrend. Use the chart above the setup’s time
frame to establish reward:risk and the one below to fine-tune trade timing.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Create a personal identity before the trade. Choose an appropriate holding period, since it defines so
many other strategic considerations. This decision must look at both experience and available
capital. Match positions to other lifestyle considerations and free time. New swing traders should
also manage risk by applying longer time frames and smaller share commitments.
Review your major goals for participation in the financial markets. Is excitement or financial return
more important? Must the profits pay household expenses or just the next family vacation? If no
obvious goals appear, trade small until they do. The markets direct talented participants toward the
trading styles that offer the greatest profits. Where they begin on that path may not be where they
end up.
Trade small accounts wisely or they will disappear quickly. Avoid the tendency to overtrade a small
amount of capital in the hopes of building it up quickly. Concentrate on applying the limited cash
into promising opportunities rather than flipping it repeatedly and incurring heavy transaction costs.
Decide whether or not to use the account’s margin. Realize that margin increases both reward and
risk. Trade with your head, not over it.
Define entry and exit rules. Start with reward:risk parameters and list conditions that must be met
before taking a position. Many swing traders will not consider entry unless it shows a minimum 3:1
reward:risk. Short-term opportunities also depend upon the execution zone (EZ). This focal band
surrounds the execution target and requires undivided attention as price bars move into it.
Intermarket analysis and ticker interpretation then decide whether the ET warrants entry. Use rules
to define exactly what must occur in the EZ before execution. Examine time of day, technical
convergence, and underlying market sentiment to decide the minimum external support required for
a position entry.
Focus on a specific price range for the current strategy. Then trade the right number of shares for
each setup, regardless of account size. Opportunities that repeatedly cross-verify at a single point
demand more shares than positions with lower odds for success. Limit total shares to manage risk
and always reduce share size when trying out new tactics or time frames. Decide whether or not to
scale in and out of positions. Consider doing it for one side of the trade but not the other.
TABLE 4.1
Typical Personal Trading Plan
• Trade price range > $12
• Holding period: 1–2 hours
• Enter: break of 2-day high
• Enter: S/R break
• Enter: Adam and Eve double bottom
• Enter: 62% retracement
• Exit: Touch of top Bollinger Band
• Exit: Break of 13-Bar MA on 5-minute
chart
• Exit: Return into first hour range
• Filter: No entry on negative TICK
• Filter: No entry from 11:45am EST to
12:45pm EST
