
74

SOLON'S

WARNING

The nerdy types at the International Monetary Fund had been taken
for a ride by the Russian government who cheated on their account. Let
us remember that economists are evaluated on how intelligent they
sound, not on a scientific measure of their knowledge of reality. However, the price of the bonds was not fooled. It knew more than the
economists, more than the Carloses of the emerging market departments.
Louie, a veteran trader on the neighboring desk who suffered much
humiliation by these rich emerging market traders, was there, vindicated.
Louie was then a 52-year-old Brooklyn-born-and-raised trader who over
three decades survived every single conceivable market cycle. He calmly
looked at Carlos being escorted by a security guard to the door like a
captured soldier taken to the arena. He muttered in his Brooklyn accent:
"Economics Schmeconomics. It is all market dynamics".
Carlos is now out of the market. The possibility that history may
prove him right (at some point in the future) has nothing to do with the
fact that he is a bad trader. He has all of the traits of a thoughtful
gentleman, and would be an ideal son-in-law. But he has most of the
attributes of the bad trader. And, at any point in time, the richest traders
are often the worst traders. This, I will call the cross-sectional
problem:
at a given time in the market, the most profitable traders are likely to be
those that are best fit to the latest cycle. This does not happen too often
with dentists or pianists - because of the nature of randomness.

John the High-Yield

Trader

We met John, Nero's neighbor, in Chapter 1. At the age of 35 he had
been on Wall Street as a corporate "high-yield" bonds trader for seven
years, since his graduation from Pace Graduate Business School. He rose
to head up a team of ten traders in record time - thanks to a jump
between two similar Wall Street firms that afforded him a generous
profit-sharing contract. The contract allowed him to be paid 20% of his
profits, as they stood at the end of each calendar year. In addition, he
was allowed to invest his own personal money in his trades - a great
privilege.

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

75

FIT

John is not someone who can be termed as principally intelligent, but
he was believed to be endowed with a good measure of business sense.
He was said to be "pragmatic" and "professional". He gave the
impression that he was born a businessperson, never saying anything
remotely unusual or out of place. He remained calm in most
circumstances, rarely betraying any form of emotion. Even his
occasional cursing (this is Wall Street!) was so much in context that it
sounded, well, professional.
John dressed impeccably. This was in part due to his monthly trips to
London where his unit had a satellite supervising European high-yield
activities. He wore a Saville Row tailored dark business suit, with a
Ferragamo tie - enough to convey the impression that he was the
epitome of the successful Wall Street professional. Each time Nero ran
into him he came away feeling poorly dressed.
John's desk engaged principally in an activity called "high-yield"
trading, which consisted in acquiring "cheap" bonds that yielded, say
10%, while the borrowing rate for his institution was 5.5%. It netted a
4.5% revenue, also called interest rate differential - which seemed small
except that he could leverage himself and multiply such profit by the
leverage factor. He did this in various countries, borrowing at the local
rate and investing in "risky" assets. It was easy for him to amass over $3
billion dollars in face value of such trade across a variety of continents.
He hedged the interest rate exposure by selling U.S., U.K., French, and
other government bond futures, thus limiting his bet to the differential
between the two instruments. He felt protected by this hedging strategy
- cocooned (or so he thought) against those nasty fluctuations in the
world's global interest rates.

t h e QUANT w h o k n e w c o m p u t e r s a n d

equations

John was assisted by Henry, a foreign quant whose English was
incomprehensible, but who was believed to be at least equally
competent in risk-management methods. John knew no math, he relied
on Henry. "His brains and my business sense", he was wont to say.
Henry supplied him with risk assessments concerning the overall
portfolio. Whenever John felt worried, he would ask Henry for another

76

SOLON'S

WARNING

freshly updated report. Henry was a graduate student in Operations
Research when John hired him. His specialty was a field called
Computational Finance, which, as its name indicates, seems to focus
solely on running computer programs overnight. Henry's income went
from $50,000 to $600,000 in three years.
Most of the profit John generated for the institution was not
attributable to the interest rate differential between the instruments
described above. It came from the changes in the value of the securities
John held, mostly because many other traders were acquiring them to
imitate John's trading strategy (thus causing the price of these assets to
rise). The interest rate differential was getting closer to what John
believed was "fair value". John believed that the methods he used to
calculate "fair value" were sound. He was backed by an entire
department that helped him analyze and determine which bonds were
attractive and offered capital appreciation potential. It was normal for
him to be earning these large profits over time.
John made steady money for his employers, perhaps even better than
steady. Every year the revenues he generated almost doubled as compared to the previous year. During his last year, his income experienced a
quantum leap as he saw the capital allocated to his trades swell beyond
his wildest expectations. His bonus check was for $10 million (pretax,
which would generate close to a $5 million total tax bill). John's personal
net worth reached $1 million at the age of 32. By the age of 35 it had
exceeded $16 million. Most of it came from the accumulation of bonuses
- but a sizeable share came from profits on his personal portfolio. Of the
$16 million, about $14 million he insisted in keeping invested in his
business. They Allowed him, thanks to the leverage (i.e., use of borrowed
money), to keep a portfolio of $50 million involved in his trades, with
$36 million borrowed from the bank. The effect of the leverage is that a
small loss would be compounded and would wipe him out.
It took only a few days for the $14 million to turn into thin air - and
for John to lose his job at the same time. It all happened during the
summer of 1998, with the meltdown of high-yield bond values. Markets
went into a volatile phase in which nearly everything he had invested in
went against him at the same time. His hedges no longer worked out. He
was mad at Henry for not having figured out that these events could
happen. Perhaps there was a bug in the program.

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

77

His reaction to the first losses was, characteristically, to ignore the
market. "One would go crazy if one were to listen to the mood swings of
the market", he said. What he meant by that statement was that the "noise"
was mean reverting, and would likely be offset by "noise" in the opposite
direction. That was the translation in plain English of what Henry
explained to him. But the "noise" kept adding up in the same direction.
As in a biblical cycle, it took seven years to make John a hero and just
seven days to make him an idiot. John is now a pariah; he is out of a job
and his telephone calls are not returned. Many of his friends were in the
same situation. How? With all that information available to him, his
perfect track record (and therefore, in his eyes, an above average
intelligence and skill-set) and the benefit of sophisticated mathematics,
how could he have failed? Is it perhaps possible that he forgot about the
shadowy figure of randomness?
It took a long time for John to figure out what had happened,
owing to the rapidity with which the events unfolded and his state of
shellshock. The dip in the market was not very large. It was just
that his leverage was enormous. What was more shocking for him
was that all their calculations gave the event a probability of 1 in
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 years. Henry called that a "ten
sigma" event. The fact that Henry doubled the odds did not seem to
matter. It made the probability 2 in 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
years.
When will John recover from the ordeal? Probably never. The reason
is not because John lost money. Losing money is something good traders
are accustomed to. It is because he blew up; he lost more than he
planned to lose. His personal confidence was wiped out. But there is
another reason why John may never recover. The reason is that John
was never a trader in the first place. He is one of those people who
happened to be there when it all happened.
Following the incident, John regarded himself "ruined"; yet his net
worth is still close to $1 million, which could be the envy of more than
99.9% of the inhabitants of our planet. Yet there is a difference between
a wealth level reached from above and a wealth reached from below.
The road from $16 million to $1 million is not as pleasant as the one
from 0 to $1 million. In addition, John is full of shame; he still worries
about running into old friends on the street.

78

SOLON'S

WARNING

His employer should perhaps be most unhappy with the overall
outcome. John pulled some money out of the episode, the $1 million he
had saved. He should be thankful that the episode did not cost him
anything - except the emotional drain. His net worth did not become
negative. That was not the case for his last employer. John had earned
for the employers, New York investment banks, around $250 million in
the course of the seven years. He lost more than $600 million for his last
employer in barely a few days.

the traits they

shared

The reader needs to be warned that not all of the emerging market and
high-yield traders talk and behave like Carlos and John. Only the most
successful ones - alas, or perhaps those who were the most successful
during the 1992-1998 bull cycle.
At their age, both John and Carlos still have the chance to make a
career. It would be wise for them to look outside of the financial
markets. The odds are that they will not survive the incident. Why?
Because by discussing the situation with each of them, one can rapidly
see that they share the traits of the acute successful randomness fool.
What is more worrisome is that their bosses and employers shared the
same trait. They, too, are permanently out of the market. We will see
throughout this book what characterizes the trait. Again, there may not
be a clear definition for it, but you can recognize it when you see it. No
matter what John and Carlos do, they will remain fools of randomness.

A Review of Market Fools of Randomness
Constants
Most of the traits partake of the same Table P.l right-column-leftcolumn confusion; how they are fooled by randomness. Below is a brief
outline of them:

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

79

An overestimation of the accuracy of their beliefs in some measure,
either economic (Carlos) or statistical (John). They never considered that the fact that trading on economic variables has worked
in the past may have been merely coincidental, or, perhaps even
worse, that economic analysis was fit to past events to mask the
random element in it. Carlos entered the market at a time when it
worked, but he never tested for periods when markets did the
opposite of sound economic analysis. There were periods when
economics failed traders, and others when it helped them.
The U.S. dollar was overpriced (i.e. the foreign currencies were
undervalued) in the early 1980s. Traders who used their economic
intuitions and bought foreign currencies were wiped out. But later
those who did so got rich (members of the first crop were bust). It is
random! Likewise, those who "shorted" Japanese stocks in the late
1980s suffered the same fate - few survived to recoup their losses
during the collapse of the 1990s. At the time of writing, there is a
group of operators called "macro" traders who are dropping like
flies, with "legendary" (rather, lucky) investor Julian Robertson
closing shop in 2000 after having been a star until then. Our
discussion of survivorship bias will enlighten us further, but, clearly,
there is nothing less rigorous than their seemingly rigorous use of
economic analysis to trade.
A tendency to get married to positions.
There is a saying that bad
traders divorce their spouse sooner than abandon their positions.
Loyalty to ideas is not a good thing for traders, scientists - or
anyone.
The tendency to change their story. They become investors "for the
long haul" when they are losing money, switching back and forth
between traders and investors to fit recent reversals of fortune. The
difference between a trader and an investor lies in the duration of the
bet, and the corresponding size. There is absolutely nothing wrong
with investing "for the long haul", provided one does not mix it with
short-term trading - it is just that many people become long-term
investors after they lost money, postponing their decision to sell, as
part of their denial.

80

SOLON'S

WARNING

No precise game plan ahead of time as to what to do in the event of
losses. They simply were not aware of such a possibility. Both
bought more bonds after the market declined sharply,, but not in
response to a predetermined plan.
Absence of critical thinking expressed in absence of revision of their
stance with "stop losses". Middlebrow traders do not like selling
when it is "even better value". They did not consider that perhaps
their method of determining value is wrong, rather than the market
failing to accommodate their measure of value. They may be right,
but, perhaps, some allowance for the possibility of their methods
being flawed was not made. For all his flaws, we will see that Soros
seems rarely to examine an unfavorable outcome without testing his
own framework of analysis.
Denial. When the losses occurred there was no clear acceptance of
what had happened. The price on the screen lost its reality in favor of
some abstract "value". In classic denial mode, the usual "this is only
the result of liquidation, distress sales" was proffered. They
continuously ignored the message from reality.
How could traders who made every single mistake in the book become
so successful? Because of a simple principle concerning randomness.
This is one manifestation of the survivorship bias. We tend to think that
traders make money because they are good. Perhaps we have turned the
causality on its head; we consider them good just because they make
money. One can make money in the financial markets totally out of
randomness.
Both Carlos and John belong to the class of people who benefited
from a market cycle. It was not merely because they were involved in the
right markets. It was because they had a bent in their style that closely
fitted the properties of the rallies experienced in their market during the
episode. They were dip buyers. That happened, in hindsight, to be the
trait that was the most desirable between 1992 and the summer of 1998
in the specific markets in which the two men specialized. Most of those
who happened to have that specific trait, over the course of that segment
of history, dominated the market. Their score was higher and they
replaced people who, perhaps, were better traders.

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

Naive Evolutionary

FIT

81

Theories

This story illustrates how bad traders have a short- and medium-term
survival advantage over good traders. Next we take the argument to a
higher level of generality. One must be either blind or foolish to reject
the theories of Darwinian self-selection. However, the simplicity of the
concept has drawn segments of amateurs (as well as a few professional
scientists) into blindly believing in continuous and infallible Darwinism
in all fields, which includes economics.
The biologist Jacques Monod bemoaned a couple of decades ago that
everyone believes himself an expert on evolution (the same can be said
about the financial markets); things have gotten worse. Many amateurs
believe that plants and animals reproduce on a one-way route towards
perfection. Translating the idea in social terms, they believe that
companies and organizations are, thanks to competition (and the
discipline of the quarterly report), irreversibly heading towards
betterment. The strongest will survive; the weakest will become extinct.
As to investors and traders, they believe that by letting them compete,
the best will prosper and the worst will go learn a new craft (like
pumping gas or, sometimes, dentistry).
Things are not as simple as that. We will ignore the basic misuse of
Darwinian ideas in the fact that organizations do not reproduce like living
members of nature - Darwinian ideas are about reproductive fitness, not
about survival. The problem comes, as everything else in this book, from
randomness. Zoologists found that once randomness is injected into a
system, the results can be quite surprising: what seems to be an evolution
may be merely a diversion, and possibly regression. For instance, Steven Jay
Gould (admittedly more of a popularizer than a genuine scientist) found
ample evidence of what he calls "genetic noise", or "negative mutations",
thus causing the wrath of some of his colleagues (he took the idea a little
too far). An academic debate ensued, plotting Gould against colleagues like
Dawkins who were considered by their peers as better trained in the
mathematics of randomness. Negative mutations are traits that survive in
spite of being worse, from the reproductive fitness standpoint, than the
ones they replaced. However, they cannot be expected to last more than a
few generations (under what is called temporal aggregation).

82

SOLON'S

WARNING

Furthermore, things can get even more surprising when randomness
changes in shape, as with regime switches. A regime switch corresponds
to situations when all of the attributes of a system change to. the point of
it becoming unrecognizable to the observer. Darwinian fitness applies to
species developing over a very long time, not observed over a short term
- time aggregation eliminates much of the effects of randomness; things
(I read noise) balance out over the long run, as people say.
Owing to the abrupt rare events, we do not live in a world where
things "converge" continuously towards betterment. Nor do things in
life move continuously at all. The belief in continuity was ingrained in
our scientific culture until the early twentieth century. It was said that
nature does not make jumps-, people quote this in well-sounding Latin:
natura no facit saltus. It is generally attributed to the eighteenth-century
botanist Linnaeus who obviously got it all wrong. It was also used by
Leibniz as a justification of calculus, as he believed that things are
continuous no matter the resolution at which we look at them. Like
many well-sounding "make sense" types of statements (such dynamics
made perfect intellectual sense), it turned out to be entirely wrong, as it
was denied by quantum mechanics. We discovered that, in the very
small, particles jump (discretely) between states; they do not slide
between them.

c a n e v o l u t i o n be f o o l e d by r a n d o m n e s s ?

We end this chapter with the following thought. Recall that someone
with only casual knowledge about the problems of randomness would
believe that an animal is at the maximum fitness for the conditions of his
time. This is not what evolution means; on average animals will be fit,
but not every single one of them, and not at all times. Just as an animal
could have survived because its sample path was lucky, the "best"
operators in a given business can come from a subset of operators who
survived because of over-fitness to a sample path - a sample path that
was free of the evolutionary rare event. One vicious attribute is that the
longer these animals can go without encountering the rare event, the
more vulnerable they will be to it. We said that should one extend time
to infinity, then, by ergodicity, that event will happen with certainty -

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

83

the species will be wiped out! For evolution means fitness to one and
only time series, not the average of all the possible environments.
By some viciousness of the structure of randomness, a profitable
person like John, someone who is a pure loser in the long run and
correspondingly unfit for survival, presents a high degree of eligibility in
the short run and has the propensity to multiply his genes. Recall the
hormonal effect on posture and its signaling effect to other potential
mates. His success (or pseudo-success owing to its fragility) will show in
his features as a beacon. An innocent potential mate will be fooled into
thinking (unconditionally) that he has a superior genetic makeup, until
the following rare event. Solon seems to have gotten the point; but try to
explain the problem to a naive business Darwinist - or your rich
neighbor across the street.

SIX

SKEWNESS AND ASYMMETRY

We introduce the concept of skewness: why the terms "bull" and
"bear" have limited meaning outside of zoology. A vicious child
wrecks the structure of randomness. An introduction to the
problem of epistemological opacity. The penultimate step
before the problem of induction.

The Median Is Not the Message
he writer and scientist Steven Jay Gould (who, for a while, was my
role model), was once diagnosed with a deadly form of cancer of
the lining of the stomach. The first piece of information he received
about his odds of making it was that the median survival for the ailment
is approximately eight months; information he felt akin to Isaiah's
injunction to King Hezekiah to put his house in order in preparation for
death.
Now a medical diagnosis, particularly one of such severity, can
motivate people to do intensive research, particularly those prolific
writers like Gould who needed more time with us to complete a few
book projects. The further research by Gould uncovered a very different

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

85

story to the information he had initially been given; mainly that the
expected (i.e., average) survival was considerably higher than eight
months. It came to his notice that expected and median do not mean the
same thing at all. Median means roughly that 50% of the people die
before eight months and 50% survive longer than eight months. But
those who survive would live considerably longer, generally going about
life just like a regular person and fulfilling the average 73.4 or so years
predicted by insurance mortality tables.
There is asymmetry. Those who die do so very early in the game,
while those who live go on living very long. Whenever there is
asymmetry in outcomes, the average survival has nothing to do with the
median survival. This prompted Gould, who thus discovered the
concept of skewness, to write his heartfelt piece "The Median is Not
the Message". His point is that the concept of median used in medical
research does not characterize a probability distribution.
I will simplify Gould's point by introducing the concept of mean (also
called expectation) as follows by using a less morbid example, that of
gambling. I will give an example of both asymmetric odds and
asymmetric outcomes to explain the point. Asymmetric odds means
that probabilities are not 50% for each event, but that the probability
on one side is higher than the probability on the other. Asymmetric
outcomes mean that the payoffs are not equal.
Assume I engage in a gambling strategy that has 999 chances in 1,000
of making $1 (event A) and 1 chance in 1,000 of losing $10,000 (event
B), as in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1
Event
