
Identifying Trends and Trading Ranges
Technical analysis helps you identify trends, discovering when one begins
and ends. Our style of trading, position trading, looks for the persistent trend,
a trend that lasts for at least several weeks to several months, perhaps even
longer. Day traders and swing traders who buy and sell in the shortest of terms
also look for trends to trade. In fact, the distinction between a day trader,
a swing trader, and a position trader is the length of the trend that each is
hoping to find. Swing trading and day trading are discussed in Chapters 16
and 17, respectively. If you’re really interested, check out Swing Trading For
Dummies by Omar Bassal and Day Trading For Dummies by Ann C. Logue
(both published by Wiley).
Following trends is an effective trading strategy, especially for new traders. To
follow trends successfully, you first need to identify and distinguish between
stocks and markets exhibiting trends and their counterparts, trading within
specific price ranges.

Identifying a trading range
Stocks are either trending up or down or trading within a confined price
range. The latter are said to be range bound or stuck in a trading range, never
trading higher than the high nor lower than the low during a specific time
frame. You also hear range-bound stocks described as consolidating or
building a base. Although some subtle distinctions may exist among these
terms, we nevertheless use them interchangeably.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
In general, we’re not interested in trading range-bound stocks. Trading
ranges can persist for long periods of time. Some may even last for years. For
a position trader, having money in a range-bound stock represents wasted
opportunity. You won’t lose money, but you won’t make any either. Instead,
we are interested in identifying range-bound stocks because they have the
potential to begin trending. We patiently watch these stocks for a signal
indicating the trading range may end and a trend may begin. Stocks that
break out of a long-lasting trading range often begin trends that can be traded
profitably.
Trading ranges are easy to spot after the fact, but anticipating when a stock
is about to enter or exit a trading range is nearly impossible. For this and
other reasons, range-bound stocks are difficult to trade, especially for new
traders. Some short-term traders are able to trade range-bound stocks
successfully, so it isn’t impossible, but we encourage you first to become a
proficient trend trader before attempting to trade stocks stuck in trading
ranges. Tools you can use in trading-range situations are described in
Chapter 11. In Chapter 10, we discuss what to do if a stock you own stops
trending and becomes range bound.
Identifying a trading range is best done visually. Figure 9-8 shows a chart of
Time Warner, Inc. (TWX) stock in a range-bound pattern.

Figure 9-8:
Time
Warner
stock gets
stuck in
a trading
range.

Time Warner spent more than nine months trading between $13.50 and
$16.50. Notice how the price moves up and down but always between those
levels, never making much progress one way or the other. Also notice the
lines drawn on the chart near $13.50 and $16.50. These lines show support
and resistance levels, respectively, and are discussed in the “Support and
resistance: Not just for undergarments” section later in this chapter.

137

138 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Spotting a trend
Now contrast the Time Warner chart in Figure 9-8 with the chart of Ryanair
Holdings (RYAAY) in Figure 9-9. RYAAY appears quite different from the
range-bound stock. Notice the steady stair-step march upward as the stock
rises higher and higher.
Even in a strong upward trend, stocks rarely go straight up. You often
see some reversals and mini-consolidations in a trend that cause the
stair-stepped look.
That stair-stepped upward march is an identifying characteristic of an uptrend.
Although defining it quantitatively is possible, seeing an uptrend on a chart is
easy and that’s the way it often is done. As long as a stock price continues to
reach higher intermittent highs, and its new lows don’t fall below previous
lows, the uptrend remains intact. Chapter 10 discusses trends and these
stair-step patterns in more detail.

Figure 9-9:
Ryanair
Holdings
PLC stock
exhibits
and upward
trend
pattern.

Stocks can also downtrend; a series of lower highs and lower lows is as much
of a trend as its upward-bound counterpart. See Figure 9-10, a chart showing
Comerica, Inc., in a downtrend.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)

Figure 9-10:
Comerica’s
stock in a
downtrend.

Time frame matters
The time frame of your chart determines your trading perspective.
You may notice that the price lines of a range-bound stock are made up of
many small trends. If you look at an intraday chart of Time Warner stock
(TWX) that spanned the 25 or so days of trading from April 14, 2008, through
May 15, 2008, TWX appears to be in an uptrend.
In fact, TWX was in a trend during that period. However, when you step back
and observe a broader historical record of TWX’s trading pattern by looking
at the daily and weekly charts, you can easily see that the multi-day trend
actually was confined within the prevailing trading range.
Although short-term swing traders and day traders make a living basing their
trading on these mini- and microtrends, doing so isn’t our cup of tea. We
caution you that consistently trading range-bound stocks profitably is very
difficult to do.

Searching for Transitions
A stock can transition from a downtrend to an uptrend in several different
ways. It can, for example, fall precipitously, turn on a dime, and begin heading
higher. Furthermore, a stock can fall, bounce around in a trading range for a
while, and begin a new trend — up or down — as it breaks from the trading
range.

139

140 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Although turning on a dime from downtrending to upward trending sometimes
presents profitable trading opportunities, these transitions are difficult to
identify, and are even more difficult to base a trade on. Additional tools of
technical analysis to unearth these transitions are explained in Chapters 10
and 11. Rather than trying to score big on sharp transitions, we recommend
searching for stocks making the transition to trending after a period of
range-bound trading lasting at least six to eight weeks, preferably longer.

Support and resistance: Not
just for undergarments
The transition from range-bound to trending is relatively easy to identify
visually and is the easiest to trade profitably. To find the transition, you must
be familiar with the concept of support and resistance. You will see support
and resistance used in many contexts. For example, they are used to identify
a trading range, as discussed in this section. They are also used to help
identify when a trend has reached its end, as we discuss in Chapter 10.
For an example of how support and resistance levels are shown on a chart,
refer to Figure 9-8, the chart showing TWX stuck in a trading range. The
support line shown on this chart is at approximately $13.50; the resistance
line is shown near $16.50.
Support is always the lower trading-range boundary; resistance is always the
upper trading-range boundary.
When technicians talk about support, they mean the price where buyers are
willing to buy enough stock to stop the price from falling. Said another way,
when sellers see enough buying interest at the support price, they may still
be willing to sell, but, as for now, they’ll sell only if they can coax buyers to
raise their bids. Buyers are now eager to buy, so they’re willing to bid a little
more to complete the transaction. The result: Prices end their descent and
begin heading higher.
The reverse is true as the stock price approaches the resistance level. Buyers
begin losing interest as the stock reaches elevated prices. Eager sellers must
lower their offer (asking) price to complete the transaction, which causes
prices to stop rising and begin falling.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
Support levels and resistance levels often are determined visually by means of
a chart. Knowing the exact price where lines of support and resistance need to
be drawn is difficult, and traders may differ on where to draw these lines.
Some choose the extreme, plotting intraday highs and lows of a trading range
during a specific time frame to establish those levels. We prefer using closing
prices on a daily or weekly bar chart to define the upper and lower boundaries
within the trading range. If you’re analyzing an intraday chart, use the last
trade price on each bar when drawing the support and resistance levels. In
my opinion, closing prices (or last prices) have more significance and better
represent the consensus of traders and investors. Ultimately, the choice is
yours.
Let us caution you that technical analysis is not an exact science. And as
such, thinking of support and resistance levels as areas of support or zones of
resistance is probably better than viewing them in terms of specific prices or
single lines on a chart, even though that’s how they appear.

Finding a breakout
A stock remains stuck in its trading range as long as it bounces between
zones of support and resistance. Short-term traders may be interested in
these movements, but as a position trader, you’re looking for a more
substantial trend, so you must wait for something to change the status quo
and cause the stock to break out of its trading range.
A breakout sometimes signals the transition of a stock trading within a range
to a new uptrend or downtrend. When breaking out to the upside, we want to
see the resistance zone violated by a significant amount, certainly by more
than 5 or 10 cents. More important, we want to see the stock trade through its
resistance zone on much higher volume than the average. Ideally, volume
needs to be at least 50 percent higher than average. More volume is even
better.
Figure 9-11 shows a chart of Baxter International, Inc., stock (BAX) and is a
textbook example of a stock breaking out of a trading range. BAX had been
trading within a narrow range from mid 2005 through June 2006. We drew
the support line just above $34.50 and the resistance line near $38.00. The
support and resistance levels were tested several times in 2006.

141

142 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Resistance

Breakout Gap

Support

Line showing average volume

Breakout

Figure 9-11:
Baxter
International,
Inc., stock
breaks out
of its trading
range.

Higher than Average
Breakout Volume

On July 20, 2006, BAX opened well above its previous close, traded through
the zone of resistance and closed at $38.88. This pattern — where a stock’s
opening price is well above its previous close and moves up, breaking out of
its trading range — is called a breakout gap, which we discuss more fully in
Chapter 10. Although not a requirement for a stock to break out of its trading
range, a breakout gap does bolster the case for this rise in prices to be a
transition from trading within a range to a new uptrend. Trading volume
was almost 8 million shares, or almost triple the average daily volume of 2.7
million shares.
As the chart shows, BAX continued to trade higher. Although you cannot see
it in Figure 9-11, BAX continued its rally through May 2007.
The BAX breakout was an almost picture-perfect setup for a trading opportunity.
Baxter is a leading stock in a leading industry. The stock built a solid tradingrange base and broke out on higher-than-average volume. Then BAX went
on to rally for almost a year. Nice. We discuss ways to identify when a trend
has come to an end, and when to close your trade to realize your profits, in
Chapter 10.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
Waiting patiently for winning patterns
We can hear the gears grinding from here. Yes, it’s a nice trade . . . but you’re
probably saying to yourself, “Couldn’t I have bought BAX for about $35.00
several times between February 2006 and June 2006? Why wait until the
breakout drives my entry price up?”
The answer: Finding a good trading signal is important; avoiding bad trading
signals is more important.
Foretelling the future is hard. Of course hindsight is going to tell you that
buying BAX at $35.00 would’ve earned you more money than buying it above
$38. But when the price was $35.00, how could you know that BAX wouldn’t
stay in its trading range for many more months or years? Or how could you
tell that BAX wasn’t going to break out of its trading range to the downside,
and start trending lower?
It happens. In fact, if the stock had traded below its zone of support, technical
analysis would’ve suggested a potential opportunity to sell BAX short.
Another important reason for waiting for a breakout is that when you enter
a trade, you need an exit strategy. Exit strategies are discussed more fully in
Chapters 12 through 14, but for now, know that you need technical signals to
show you when to exit your position, the same way you needed them to enter
the position in the first place. If you’re trying to buy stocks at the bottom and
then sell them at the top, few signals are available to tell you whether your
entry signal has failed.

Fine-tuning your trading-range breakout strategy
Three ways you can fine-tune your trading-range breakout strategy are
✓ Observing that breakouts from long trading ranges tend to result in more
profitable buying and selling than breakouts from shorter trading ranges.
✓ Understanding that breakouts from tight trading ranges, where price
fluctuations are confined to a relatively narrow price range, usually result
in better trades than when trading-range price fluctuations are wide.
✓ Waiting for a short while — at least one day, possibly two or three — to
confirm the trading range breakout can be helpful. Waiting to see whether
the stock falls back into the trading range before you take a position can
save you from a negative market reaction. Running into a wave of selling
immediately after a breakout is not uncommon, and the way the stock
reacts to that selling is just as important as the breakout itself.

143

144 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Consistently snagging the lowest price is nearly impossible, regardless of
whether you use technical analysis, fundamental analysis, a Ouija board, or
follow the best prognosticators in the business. Technical analysis can help
you find transitions, but it can’t tell the future. As a technician, you never
(almost never) buy your stocks at their lowest prices, and you rarely exit your
positions at the highest prices.
However, if you wait for a solid trading signal, you can ride the middle part of
the trend for a large portion of the move. Try not to be greedy. The middle
part of the trend is a very profitable place to trade.

Sipping from a cup and saucer
Another widely followed transitional formation is called a cup and handle.
In a cup and handle formation, a stock’s price levels form a rounded curving
bottom that looks a bit like a cup or a saucer, which often is followed by a
modest shakeout formation that, if you use your imagination, looks a bit like
the handle on a coffee cup.
Figure 9-12 shows a chart of the Apple, Inc., stock (AAPL) that illustrates the
cup and handle formation.

Breakout Gap
Resistance

Breakout

Figure 9-12:
Apple, Inc.,
stock prices
show a cup
and handle
pattern.

Cup
Line showing average volume

Handle
Higher than Average Breakout Volume

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)
The entry strategy for this pattern is similar to that used for the trading
range breakout. The trigger occurs when the stock price breaks above the
handle on high volume. In the Apple example, it occurs in late April, and is
accompanied by a small breakout gap.
Notice that the stock traded in a very narrow range during the next couple of
days, retesting the former area of resistance. As often is the case, that former
resistance level actually provided support after it was crossed. You’ll see this
phenomenon occur frequently.
The cup and handle is a reliable trading pattern, but that doesn’t mean the
pattern never fails. It does, and you need an exit strategy for when it does,
just like every other trade. Exit strategies are discussed in Chapter 12.

Deciding what to do with a double bottom
Another transition pattern that often leads to profitable trading opportunities
is the double bottom. Visually, a double bottom looks like a “W” on the chart,
so it is very easy to see. However, a double bottom doesn’t need to form a
perfect “W” to be valid. In fact, we actually prefer the right-hand trough to be
a little lower than the left-hand trough. When a minor new low forms, it tends
to shake out the weakest owners of the stock and makes it much easier for
bulls to drive the price higher.
Figure 9-13 shows a well-formed double bottom on the Newmont Mining
Corp. (NEM) stock chart. The left-hand trough occurred in June 2007; the
right-hand trough in August 2007.
The entry criteria for this pattern are similar to that of the trading-range
breakout. In this case, the trigger point occurs when the stock breaks above
the mid-point peak between the two troughs. This peak is sometimes called
the pivot point. Ideally, higher-than-average volume confirms the trigger.
The trigger price on the chart is just below $43.00, which corresponds to
the $42.91 close on July 24. The stock gapped above the trigger point on
September 6 with a volume of more than 15 million shares. That’s 50 percent
more than the average daily trading volume.
Also notice the bullish single-day bar pattern on the breakout. The stock
pulled back to test resistance at the mid-point close price, and then rallied.

145

146 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Bullish Single Day Bar
Resistance

Mid-point Peak

Breakout

Figure 9-13:
Newmont
Mining
Corp. stock
reaches a
double
bottom.

Support

Higher than Average Breakout Volume

Line showing average volume

An alternative double-bottom strategy
One scenario where aggressive traders may want to anticipate the formation
of a double-bottom pattern is when the “W” is particularly deep and the pivot
is many points away from the trough. When that happens, taking a position
as the stock is forming the right-hand trough sometimes makes sense.
If the price holds near or just below the left-hand trough, and volume confirms
the reversal, then aggressive traders can enter a position. You may also want
to enter a position if signals from other single-day patterns confirm the
reversal. The risk is relatively small, and the potential reward is relatively
large. If the stock falls below the lowest low, you’ll know your trade has failed
and you must exit. Otherwise, hold the position until the stock tests the pivot
point (see previous section).
Using the NEM chart in Figure 9-13 to illustrate this strategy, the buy trigger
occurred on August 16 when NEM showed the single-day reversal pattern at
the bottom of the trough. Your entry point would be the next trading day,
and your stop would be below $37.60, the low for that reversal bar.

Chapter 9: Reading Bar Charts Is Easy (Really)

Looking at other patterns
Many other reversal patterns are published in technical analysis books and
magazines, but the ones in the preceding few sections, we believe, are the
most reliable.
Inexperienced traders always want to find the Holy Grail, that pattern or
indicator that enables them to profitably trade the turn-on-a-dime “V” pattern.
In truth, however, “V” bottoms don’t happen all that often. And when they do,
many reasons express why it’s probably not the best trading opportunity
available to you. If you talk shop with other traders, you’re certain to hear
them discuss many esoteric patterns. We know them, but we rarely trade
them. The simple techniques we’ve shown you in this chapter will enable you
to trade profitably. There’s no need to look for the esoteric when the simple
does the job just as well.

147

148 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis

Chapter 10

Following Trends for Fun and Profit
In This Chapter
▶ Spotting uptrends and downtrends
▶ Finding areas of support and resistance within a trend
▶ Identifying gaps
▶ Understanding continuation and retracement patterns
▶ Planning for failed trading signals

T

echnical analysis helps you identify new price trends and look for
endings to existing trends. Being able to identify those two extreme end
points means you can develop a powerful, profitable trend-following trading
system. Technical analysis can also help you evaluate the persistence of
a trend, which is useful for finding secondary entry points and generating
short-term trading signals.
In this chapter, we discuss trading strategies for several trend-following
techniques. In addition, methods for identifying continuation patterns,
retracement patterns, and reversal patterns are discussed, together with
strategies for dealing with the inevitable failed trading signal.

Identifying Trends
Identifying a trend is relatively straightforward. Instinctively, you know it
when you see it. Visual techniques and calculated indicators both can be
used to identify trend signals. We discuss visual identification techniques in
this chapter. We cover calculated indicators in Chapter 11.

150 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
A steadily rising or falling stock is a trending stock. But if you watch stocks for
any period of time, you know that they rarely go straight up or down. Instead,
you see a stair-step effect in which a stock rises several steps and then falls
back. Talking about a trend as a series of intermittent highs interrupted by
intermittent lows makes good sense. So an uptrend, then, is a series of higher
intermittent highs and higher intermittent lows. Conversely, a downtrend is a
series of lower intermittent highs followed by lower intermittent lows.
Figure 10-1 shows a price chart of Polycom Inc. stock (PLCM) exhibiting a
series of higher intermittent highs and higher intermittent lows. (From here
on out, for simplicity’s sake, we call these higher highs and higher lows.)

Higher highs

Figure 10-1:
Polycom’s
stock
reaches
higher
intermittent highs
and higher
intermittent
lows.

Higher lows

The PLCM example shows the type of trends that you hope follow the
breakout patterns we discuss in Chapter 9. As long as the pattern of higher
highs and higher lows continues, you can participate in a profitable trade.
Figure 10-2 shows a downtrending price chart of American International
Group’s stock (AIG) that identifies its series of lower highs and lower lows.
You may recall hearing about the government bailout of AIG during the credit
crisis. You may also notice that the company’s stock performance signaled
trouble long before the credit crisis began.
