
Table 4-1

Monthly Professional versus Nonprofessional Fees

Exchange

Professional

Nonprofessional

Difference

American Stock Exchange

$30.20

$1.00

$29.20

NASDAQ (Level II)

$56.00

$10.00

$46.00

New York Stock Exchange

$127.25

$1.00

$126.25

Option Price Authority

$32.25

$3.00

$29.25

Factoring in what you’ll be trading
Another consideration for your choice of charting software is what you’ll be
trading. Some packages are better equipped for handling stocks, and others
are more compatible with futures or commodities. There’s an 80-percent rule
that you can use here. Get the software that’s appropriate for 80 percent of
the trading you’ll actually be doing, not the trading that you hope to get into
in the future.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 69

Chapter 4: Using Electronic Resources to Create Full Charts
You may want to see if international markets are available if you think you
may expand in that direction in the future. Also, if you’re considering trading
options, the differences can be pretty dramatic. Make sure your focus is on
how the software works with your markets of choice.

Considering a few charting
package options
To give you an idea of the charting packages available for individual traders
and investors, in this section, I highlight three of the most popular package
options. By no means are these the only options available, but they’ve been
around for quite some time, enjoy a wide user base, and offer conferences or
classes where you can discover more about using the packages.
Each of the charting packages discussed in this section offer some sort of
free trial. Take advantage of these risk-free test runs and don’t limit yourself
to just these three.

eSignal
I’m not sure if it’s a positive or a negative, but the variety of offerings from
eSignal can be a bit overwhelming. The company has several products that
run the gamut of sophistication from programs for amateurs to intricate software made for the pros. The best way to illustrate the breadth of its product
line is to examine its products’ price range: Basic eSignal is as low as $95 a
month, while the most expensive product — Advanced GET — can run more
than $1,500 a month.
For novice purposes, focus on eSignal, the flagship product. It’s more than
adequate if you’re just getting started with charting and trading. It also covers
all domestic markets and allows you the choice of real-time or delayed data.
And eSignal also offers free seminars all over the country where you can find
out more about the product and charting in general, even if you don’t use
eSignal.
As a positive, the eSignal brand offers a full suite of very professional products, and as you work your way up to being a very successful full-time trader,
you can also move your way up its product line. More information on eSignal’s
products can be found at www.esignal.com.

MetaStock
MetaStock is actually a product of Reuters, which I discussed earlier in this
chapter. MetaStock offers what it calls real-time or end-of-day data, but it

69

08_178089 ch04.qxp

70

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 70

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
actually charges for its software platform, which starts at around $499. It also
adds a monthly fee starting at $59.
The software is very expensive but very powerful and may be the most professional offering out there for individuals. MetaStock certainly has versatility
going for it — the program covers virtually every market you would even
consider trading in the world.
Check out MetaStock at www.equis.com.

TradeStation
One of the nice features that TradeStation has is the ability to back test trading strategies. One of the best methods for determining a trading plan is to
back test your trading ideas. This process involves taking historical data and
seeing what would’ve happened if you had applied and traded a set of rules
to this data — sort of an “If I would’ve known then what I know now” approach.
TradeStation’s back testing feature uses a programming language called
EasyLanguage. It takes some time to master, but it has a wide user base, and
classes are frequently offered online and at various sites across the country
to teach this programming language.
After you find the strategies that allow you to retire young, you can use
TradeStation’s automated trading feature to implement these strategies. This
function allows you to set up some trading systems in advance of when you
want them to become active, and TradeStation takes care of the rest. It’s a
great option if you work during the day but still want to get in on some short
term trading.
Go online to www.tradestation.com for info on TradeStation’s charting
package.
In addition to offering a very solid, easy-to-use charting software package,
TradeStation is also a brokerage firm. It’s actually a publicly traded brokerage
firm, so you can trade with it or trade its stock, which has the symbol TRAD.
You may be thinking, “Why do I care if it’s also a brokerage firm?” Well, this is
useful to know because if you use its brokerage arm for trading, you actually
get to use their charting package free of charge (as long as you conduct a
minimum number of trades each month; otherwise, the base price is $249
per month).

09_178089 pp02.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 71

Part II

Working with
Simple Candlestick
Patterns

09_178089 pp02.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

M

Page 72

In this part . . .

any traders get interested in candlestick charting
because of the usefulness of candlestick patterns
for figuring out what a market or security is going to do
next. In fact, there’s a good chance that you picked up this
book with hopes of tapping into the potential of candlestick
patterns. If that’s the case, you’re going to love Part II.
This part is loaded with explanations of simple — one- or
two-stick — candlestick patterns. I explain how to identify
the patterns on a candlestick chart and how you can use
them to make wiser trading decisions. All the discussions
center on real world examples, so you can quickly see
how these patterns play out in a variety of markets.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 73

Chapter 5

Working with Straightforward
Single-Stick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Taking advantage of purely bullish single-stick patterns
 Understanding bearish single-stick patterns and their uses

I

t’s time to begin diving into individual- and multi-period candlestick patterns. Many patterns give buy and sell signals, and some serve as a headsup that a big move is on the horizon (although it’s not always clear just what
that big move will be!)
Most candlestick patterns are valid based only on the market activity of the
previous few days. For instance, some patterns indicate a change in trend.
Using one of these without knowing about the previous trend wouldn’t be
very useful. Usually, the context in which you find a pattern tells you a great
deal about what you should do based on that pattern. There are, however,
some single-stick patterns that are considered either bullish or bearish regardless of the context, and those patterns are what I focus on in this chapter.
This chapter explores the signals that may be given off from single-stick candlestick patterns, some bearish and some bullish. (The constructions of these patterns are covered back in Chapter 3 if you need to have a quick look at what’s
behind these patterns.) I demonstrate what may have happened during a particular day trading-wise to result in the formation of a significant single candlestick on your chart. (I say significant, because candlestick patterns are often
used to forecast future price action.) I give examples of a candlestick signal
working well and also cases where the pattern may not give such a positive
signal. If you know how to recognize and trade on these examples, they should
provide some reliable tools that you can add to your trading toolbox.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

74

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 74

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

The Bullish White Marubozu
The most bullish of patterns is the long white candle. It represents a day
during which the bulls controll trading and push prices higher from the opening to the closing. As the price moves up, sellers come in, but not enough to
keep the price from continuing its rise. Any time sellers show up during this
day, the buyers buy from them, and prices move higher. With the long white
candle closing near the high, odds are the bulls aren’t done with their buying
and will be back for more on the following day. There just wasn’t enough
supply of stock by sellers to keep the buyers from pushing the price up.
The Japanese term for a long white candle is the white marubozu. There’s a
slight difference between a marubozu and a long white candle: The long white
candle may have some wick exposed on both ends. A true white marubozu
has either the opening price equal to the low for the day, the closing price
equal to the high, or both. A long white candle may not have the open equal
to the low or the close equal to the high, but its open should be near the low
and the close near the high. A true white marubozu has either the opening
price equal to the low for the day, the closing price equal to the high, or both
leaving no wick.
The Japanese names given to certain candlestick patterns or individual
candlesticks can reveal important characteristics. Loosely translated, marubozu means bald or little hair. These single-stick patterns earned their name
because they don’t have much of a wick on either end of the candlestick. The
sticks are bald!
Due to the baldness, the marubozu is a unique type of white candle. There
are several specific types of long white candles. Although they all depict bullishness during the day, there are some unique characteristics to keep an eye
out for, which are covered in this section.

Understanding long white candles
One common feature of the long white candle (see Figure 5-1) is an open near
the low of the day and a close near the high of the day. This indicates that
buying has taken place throughout the day.
Figure 5-2 is an instraday chart of the price action that results in a long white
candle on a daily chart. An instraday chart is a chart that depicts the price
action during a time period that is less than a day, such as on a 5-minute or
30-minute basis. Each candlestick represents the price action for this subperiod of a day. The day that corresponds to Figure 5-2, which is the price
action of a single day made up of 30-minute pricing periods, features an opening price near the low of the day and a closing price near the high of the day.
A textbook long white candlestick has a long candle with no wick, but that
doesn’t happen very often, and long candles that have a little wick on either
or both ends are still considered long white candles.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 75

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Figure 5-1:
A long
white candle.

Figure 5-2:
A 30-minute
chart that
produces a
long white
candle on a
daily chart.

75

10_178089 ch05.qxp

76

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 76

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
To figure out if you’re looking at a long white candle, determine the area covered by the difference between the close and the open. If it’s at least 90 percent
of the area covered by the difference between the high and low, you have a
long white candle.
For the day in Figure 5-2, the bulls were in charge from the beginning of the day
to the end. There’s just no disputing this, because the price does nothing but
go higher over the course of the day, and the close is near the high of the day;
the bulls will probably stay in charge for the near future. It’s just that bullish.
You usually have the chance to act on such a case because there may be some
trading below the closing price of the long white candle in the next couple of
days, and you can place a buy order lower than the closing price but within the
range of the long white candle to try to get an attractive entry point.
On a long white candle day, a lot of price action is covered in a very short
amount of time. Stocks — and markets for that matter — don’t move in one
direction without some sort of move in the opposite direction. This normal
retracing of prices gives you a chance to act on this bullish signal.

The long white candle signaling an uptrend
Check out Figure 5-3, where you can see a few days where the price action is
lower than the high of the long white candle. After seeing this bullish signal,
you have several days to buy.
Sometimes signals don’t work, and it’s critical that you recognize this. With
long white candlesticks, the low price on the candlestick is a good support
level.
Support is a level where if market conditions are consistent, buyers are
expected to support the price of a security. If this support doesn’t hold, whatever buy signal you’re dealing with has changed, and the signal shouldn’t be
acted on. In that case, you should exit your position fairly quickly. You may
take a small loss, but getting out before prices fall even lower prevents you
from taking a much larger loss later on.
Look again at Figure 5-3, where I point out the low of the day on the long white
candle and also note that the price doesn’t trade below that support level over
the next few days. If you watch that stock and see that the support level is
broken, you should consider that the bullish signal failed and no longer valid.
I can’t stress enough that when a signal is no longer valid, any trades based
on that signal should be exited, and no new positions based on it should be
undertaken. Many small losers turn into big losers when the small loss isn’t
quickly realized and corrected.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 77

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns
The long white candle failing as a long signal
What happens when the support level revealed by a long white candle is
broken? Take a look at Figure 5-4. This chart shows a nice long white candle
and then a quick violation of its support level. The failure of this stock to
hold support means that the long white candle on the chart doesn’t mean
bullish action is going to continue!

Figure 5-3:
A long
white candle
followed
by a nice
buying
opportunity.

Figure 5-4:
A chart
showing the
failure of a
long white
candle to
hold support
and the
resulting
price action.

77

10_178089 ch05.qxp

78

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 78

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
How do you cope with a failed signal? Take preemptive action. Place an order
that triggers when a signal fails. This process is known as a stop order. When
you’re trading long, stop orders are known as sell stop orders or sell stops. A
sell stop is placed below the current market price of a stock and triggered
when the price reaches this level. For example, if a stock is trading at 51, you
can place your sell stop order at 50. As long as trading stays over 50, nothing
will happen. However, once the price hits 50, a sell order is executed, protecting you against further drops in price. Use stops when initiating positions to
minimize the damage caused when a signal turns bad.

Identifying the three variations
of the long white candle
There are three versions of the long white candle. Although slightly different
in appearance, the three variations of the long white candle or marubozu
single-day pattern all represent a day during which the bulls were in control
from the open to the close.

The white marubozu
The first is the most bullish of them all: a long white candle with no wick.
The day begins on the low and finishes on the high. This results in a white
marubozu, or as my three-year-old would call it, a white rectangle. Check
out Figure 5-5 for the result.

Figure 5-5:
A white
marubozu.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 79

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns
The closing white marubozu
The second version of the long white candle is another white marubozu, which
is known as the closing white marubozu. On this single-stick pattern, the
close is equal to the high, so there is no wick on top of the stick. Figure 5-6
is a closing white marubozu.

The opening white marubozu
The third variation of the long white candle is the opening white marubozu.
This pattern’s opening price is equal to the low of the day, and as a result,
there’s no wick on the bottom. Figure 5-7 is an opening white marubozu.

Figure 5-6:
A closing
white
marubozu.

Figure 5-7:
An opening
white
marubozu.

79

10_178089 ch05.qxp

80

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 80

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

The Bullish Dragonfly Doji
The doji is a type of candlestick pattern with variations and is created when
the open and close are equal, so there’s essentially no stick on the candlestick. Dojis are almost all wick. Take a look at Figure 5-8, which includes a
few different types of dojis. As you can see, a doji looks more like a cross or
a t than a pattern on a candlestick chart.

Figure 5-8:
A variety
of dojis.

Loosely translated, doji means blunder or mistake. It’s said that the pattern
got its name because a whole day’s worth of trading just to end up back at
the starting point seems like a goof, but price action isn’t ever a mistake, so
I’m not crazy about that explanation.
Although there are several varieties of dojis, you can count on them all to be
fairly frustrating for traders. For a doji to be created, a day must begin and
end with the same price, so a whole lot of trading takes place, but when it’s
all said and done, the price is right back where it started. Dojis are differentiated by the location of the open and close on the wick — where trading
begins and ends on a given day.
At first glance, dojis may not seem very exciting, but don’t be fooled. Doji patterns are usually associated with a market turn, even though they depict a
day where the battle between bulls and bears is fairly equal. Even though the
battle for the day is a draw, one side soon overpowers the other. It’s like a
prolonged tug of war that ends when one team is violently yanked into the
mud. For the tug of war that’s a doji pattern, that yank in price action usually
occurs sometime in the next few days or even on the following day.
Although dojis do indicate some indecision, in some instances, a doji may be
more bullish or bearish depending on the price action. A dragonfly doji is one
of those cases. It is fairly bullish in nature due to the price action that is behind
this pattern.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 81

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Recognizing a dragonfly doji
The dragonfly doji is unique in that three of the four candlestick components —
the open, high, and close — are equal. A dragonfly doji comes from a day
when a stock opens, trades down during the first part the day, and then at
some point starts to trade back up, eventually closing on the high (which is
also the open). In terms of bears and bulls, on a dragonfly doji day, the bears
initially decide they’re going to rule the day, and the resulting lower prices
lead the bulls to decide it’s time to buy. The bulls then take over and push
the price up as they dominate the rest of the day, until the price is right back
where it started. Refer to Figure 5-9 for a classic example of a dragonfly doji.
For an illustration of the inner workings of a day that results in a dragonfly
doji, check out Figure 5-10. This figure features a 30-minute chart of the price
action that occurs over the course of a day to cause a dragonfly doji. The
bears dominate the first half of the day, but the bulls take over in the afternoon, and the result is a close equal to the open — all that struggling during
the day for nothing.

Figure 5-9:
The
dragonfly
doji.

Figure 5-10:
The bullish
significance
of the
dragonfly
doji.
Bullishness

81

10_178089 ch05.qxp

82

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 82

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
The price action behind a dragonfly doji bodes very well for those hoping
that prices go higher, because a price at which people buy aggressively has
been set at the low end of the wick. The low of a dragonfly doji day is considered a near-term support level, because it’s clear that buyers came in at that
level and turned the trend from down to up.
The length of a wick from the high to low doesn’t have to be any specific distance to qualify as a dragonfly. However, the wick length can signify the amount
of bullish significance a dragonfly doji has for future price action. Put simply,
the longer the wick, the more bullish the pattern. Figure 5-11 illustrates this
point.
Figure 5-11 displays price action that creates a dragonfly doji on a daily chart.
Dragonfly dojis appear when the open and close are very near or equal to the
high, so the beginning and ending of this chart are equal. The price action
during this day is very interesting. The bears take over from the open and
push the price down. Eventually, though, lower prices entice buyers and they
get aggressive, pushing the price back up to the open and settling on the high
of the day.

Figure 5-11:
Intraday
action that
results in a
dragonfly
doji on a
daily chart.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 83

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Trading based on a dragonfly doji
You can make smart trades based on the dragonfly dojis you see in your
charts. Two charts can help:
 One in which a dragonfly doji indicates a nice buying opportunity
 One in which a dragonfly doji fails pretty badly
First the good one. Much like the long white candle I discuss earlier in this
chapter, the dragonfly doji helps you establish a solid support level to buy
with confidence. In Figure 5-12, notice how the bottom end of the dragonfly
doji wick works as a support level, which is held as the security remains bullish for several days. The dragonfly doji appears after some range trading, and
it’s followed by a quick breakout of prices that reach new highs. Although the
first day following the dragonfly doji shows an opening price lower than the
previous close, the dragonfly’s low price isn’t violated, and the signal remains
valid. Sticking with this valid signal leads to some nice profits!

Figure 5-12:
A dragonfly
doji that
pays off.

83

10_178089 ch05.qxp

84

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 84

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Now for a dragonfly doji that doesn’t work out too well. The dragonfly that
appears in Figure 5-13 looks promising, but it’s followed the next day with a
low that’s lower than the bottom of the dragonfly’s wick. And as you can see,
the next moves are even lower.
The low of the dragonfly doji is a significant support level, but when that
level is violated, it negates the dragonfly’s buy signal. When a level is violated, get out as soon as possible.
