
CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

261

range (2) and get shaken out immediately by a sudden reversal. You then
redraw the breakout trigger line (2A) to acknowledge the whipsaw. The
early failure attracts sellers who drop price into the reverse break line
in the late morning hours. The stock breaks down (3) and surges into
the gap fill line (4) right after midday. Support kicks in right on schedule,
lifting price back into resistance at the reverse break (5), where it stalls
for an hour and then jumps back into the early range. This failure of a
failure buy signal should yield even higher prices, but the market closes
before price can rally into the other end of the early range.
The stock then gaps for the third day in a row, but this time around
it’s a down gap that finds support just above the gap fill line of the prior
session. The opening selloff triggers a fast-moving market in which
buyers fill the gap in the first 20 minutes. The recovery keeps on going,
reaching 18.70 and stalling out. This buying spike yields a crazy quilt
of signals, with the reverse break line now marking the location of our
next entry trigger (6) rather than a failure line, because it’s situated
higher than the gap fill line. This paradox looks less bewildering on a
two-minute chart because the gap gets filled well before the end of the
first hour.
Ironically, few easy buy signals trigger during these three gap days. In
fact, you wind up losing a little money for all of your hard work. However,
price dynamics after the gaps work out as expected in each session.
With these reliable mechanics now hardwired into your consciousness,
you’re ready to master a broad variety of gap patterns that confuse and
confound other market players.

This page intentionally left blank

SIX
P A

R

T

Managing Risk
and Reward

This page intentionally left blank

11

C

H

A

P

TE

R

The Nature of Losing

N

ew traders come into the financial markets with a single-minded goal:
to make lots of money. Regrettably, the market knows you’re coming,
understands your greed, and has erected perfectly diabolical mechanisms
to ensure your objective is never reached. In fact, the obliteration process
is so complete that nearly 90% of all traders eventually lose their stakes
and wash out. Even old pros suffer the wrath of this perfect destruction
engine, wiping out years of hard work and careful knowledge accumulation. The evaporation of nearly $40 trillion in U.S. retirement savings in
the 2008 crash tells us that wealth destruction isn’t limited to a small cadre
of speculators and other short-term market players. In reality, long-term
investors are nothing more than traders playing very long time frames.
And since boom and bust dynamics persist through all market cycles,
bad karma eventually catches up with every strategy and point of view,
whether you’re a day trader or a deep-pocketed value investor.
On the other hand, the trading loss is an absolute prerequisite
for taking consistent profits out of the market. In truth, even the most
265

266

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

successful strategy carries just a small mathematical edge, which ensures
that many stop losses will get hit in the process of wealth creation. Subconsciously, most of us try to avoid losses, thinking these are aberrations
on the road to profits, but that just isn’t true. In fact, it’s our job to embrace
losses and the vital lessons they teach us about current market behavior.
Just like small children touching hot stoves, we get actionable data from
trading losses about the quality of the ticker tape and how our strategies
need to adapt in order for us to make money.
The requirement for constant losses on the road to profits is more
than many traders can handle because our emotional hardwiring takes
each loss personally, magnifying the negative aspects of our personalities.
This isn’t a huge problem for well-adjusted individuals who cope well
with the broad swath of life’s challenges, but it can be a game breaker for
marginal individuals with self-esteem issues or an inability to cope with
adversity. In addition, nearly all traders have spouses, siblings, neighbors,
or authority figures who disapprove of their market activities because of
the media’s negative portrayal or the legitimate fear that core wealth is
being placed at risk. This combination of internal pain and external disapproval forces many traders to operate in an adverse environment in which
each loss becomes an affirmation of personal inadequacy and the next
topic for discussion at the family dinner table. In both cases, profitability
becomes a more distant goal, while giving up and moving on becomes the
only pain-ending alternative.
Hopefully, Part Four made it crystal clear why adequate capitalization
is so important if you want to trade the markets successfully. In a nutshell,
the myriad obstacles faced by new traders become far less daunting when
(a) the trading account is large enough to withstand large drawdowns, and
(b) trading risk comprises a relatively small share of total wealth. That’s
why market mentors tell us to trade only the amount of capital we can
afford to lose. This isn’t idle advice. And, as peculiar as it sounds, no one
should enter the trading game with the objective of earning a living from
it. That comes later, after you’ve proven to yourself and everyone else that
you can make money and then hold onto it for long stretches. Until that
magical day comes, your only job is to trade well and not worry too much
about paying the bills.
The next axiom represents the single most important piece of advice
I can give to the survivalist trader. Simply stated, your long-term success
depends on cutting losses rather than chasing profits. Because this is true,
knowing when you’re wrong is the most profound skill you can learn in
market speculation. Consider the three aspects of this defining statement:

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

267

• Your razor-sharp focus needs to be on the loss side of the equation.
This is better known as risk management.
• Profits come as a result of risk-based activities, not because you’re
trying to make money.
• You can’t cut losses efficiently until you can recognize the exact
moment you’re wrong on every bad trade.
Unfortunately, traders participate in the markets for many reasons
that have nothing to do with profitability. It’s a psychological thing in
which secondary reinforcement, rather than a narrow focus on the bottom
line, guides our hand. Clearly, this endeavor sets off measurable physiological changes, like the adrenaline rush when we enter the market, the
exhilaration when something goes our way, and the crushing sensation
when we incur big losses. Ironically, riding a roller coaster at your favorite
amusement park will mimic each of these specific sensations. While longterm profitability is our stated goal for trading the markets, many nonfinancial impulses come along to undermine our discipline. At the top of the
list: it feels damn good to take on financial risk, whether or not we make
money, so we seek out this behavior even when there’s no opportunity.
Not surprisingly, this is the primary cause of overtrading and mediocre
performance.
Here are three more reasons we trade, even when it doesn’t help our
bottom lines. First, trading supports our social lives because we have an
exciting subject to discuss with friends, neighbors, and first dates. Second,
it makes us feel powerful, even if we’re total losers in the rest of our lives.
Finally, it relieves boredom by filling our brains with extraordinary hopes
and dreams.
To reiterate a key principle, most traders will eventually fail due to
a lack of discipline rather than a lack of knowledge. I’ve taught hundreds
of students over the years, and understanding this key piece of wisdom
is their greatest challenge because new traders believe there’s a holy grail
that, once found, will unlock all of the market’s mysteries. Nothing could
be further from the truth, and to twist Einstein’s famous observation, successful trading is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration.
Long-term profitability also requires that we make our peace with the
vagaries of the financial world, including a middleman system that rarely
favors the little guy. In return, this acceptance opens the doors to improved
performance, year after year. No, it isn’t good enough to be focused on
skillful action just part of the time. Taking money out of the markets
demands absolute precision in all of your actions, from Monday’s confused

268

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

open to Friday’s closing bell. Sadly, even a momentary lapse in concentration can trigger dire consequences. This is especially true in a modern
day environment that’s unforgiving to traders at all experience levels.

The Performance Cycle
Every market participant goes through winning and losing periods. In
a down cycle, mediocre traders will lose as much as or more than the
profits they book in an up cycle. Meanwhile, good traders take defensive
measures during down cycles and hold onto the majority of their up cycle
gains. This profit reserve sets the stage for the next up cycle, in which
they build even greater returns ahead of the next down cycle. Of course,
good traders go through bad drawdowns at times, while mediocre traders
enjoy amazing runs in which everything they touch turns to gold. Those
winning periods are especially damaging to marginal players because they
build a false sense of entitlement. In turn, the delusion eventually generates higher amplitude down cycles that can trigger catastrophic losses.
And so it goes, cycle after cycle, until the mediocre trader washes out and
the good trader achieves consistent profitability.
Performance cycles coexist in multiple time frames, just like your
favorite charts. Using myself as an example, I know there will be one or
two days in every two-week period in which risk escalates through the
roof, turning marginally bad positions into high-cost nightmares. My only
defense is to recognize these days as early as possible and to cut my
exposure to the bone to avoid the buzz saw. This is a psychological as well
as tactical issue because the favored trades that usually fill my coffers are
the same ones drawing blood during those high-risk sessions. Given my
tendency to aggressively trade the setups I know and love, switching gears
and sitting on my hands can be a demanding task, to say the least.
Large-scale performance cycles usually track broad market direction.
For example, if you’re a long-biased trader, corrective periods generate all
sorts of losses while you play a buyer’s game that no longer works. Conversely, short sellers go through long stretches of fighting the tape and
paying the price but then take home windfall profits when the market
finally falls from its own weight. The intimate relationship between
personal bias and performance cycle needs to be addressed and deconstructed in order for the trader to survive and prosper in the long term.
Theoretically, the swing trader is just an opportunist, ready to pounce on
good patterns in either direction. However, in the real world, most of us

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

269

favor one side of the market over the other. So, breaking this lopsided
relationship requires (a) a recognition that you fall into the long or short
category, and (b) a strategy to deal with markets that are moving in the
opposite direction of your bias.
The long- or short-biased trader will recognize the onset of adverse
market conditions by unexpected losses on favored setups. Trade frequency should be reduced immediately when this happens, while a search
for sectors still favoring your bias gets under way. For example, the U.S.
indices selling off after a long rally can take the entire stock universe
with them or just a few overheated sectors. In addition, commodities and
foreign markets often move against the downward tide, offering longside trades through an entire index decline. Holding periods can also be
adjusted to sidestep a falling market. Zoom out to the weekly charts and
look for pullbacks within the larger-scale uptrend. Then stalk your candidates for weeks, if necessary, waiting for price to pull into substantial
support. Finally, buy in pieces, using the averaging techniques outlined in
Part Four, with the intention of aligning the bounce with a turnaround in
the broader indices.
A second holding period strategy for the long-biased market player
during a correction is to become a day trader, playing small uptrends that
develop within broader down cycles. In fact, day trading as a defensive
strategy is a highly effective methodology for dealing with a variety of
adverse markets.
The next step in managing the performance cycle is so boring that
most traders don’t want to hear it. Simply stated, sit on your hands and
wait for a more supportive market. Most of us can’t generate equal edges
in both directions, so any effort to reverse our strategies because the market
has shifted gears ends in failure. In many cases, the best plan is to stay out
of the action until it supports your particular game once again. Of course,
this is easier said than done, which brings us back to a major theme in this
final section. The sad truth is, if you don’t learn to sit on your hands when
required, you’re going to fail and wash out of the markets. Hopefully that
thought is scary enough to force you into a disciplined approach when
it’s needed.
The markets operate through an inefficiency engine that sets up
good trades at key intersections of price and time. In between these points
of light, trading is often volatile, choppy, and downright treacherous. By
focusing your efforts on points of genuine opportunity, you apply capital
and emotions where they will do the most good. Trading in the gray zone
usually won’t cost you a fortune, but it will undermine your discipline and
dull your senses. At a minimum, you might not be ready to act without

270

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

hesitation when the next real opportunity comes along. I can’t tell you how
many times in the last two decades I’ve chased around shadows and then
failed to pull the trigger when a great setup appeared out of nowhere. Of
course, it always turned up at exactly the same time I was burned out from
a bad trade and hating the market for ruining my week. At that point, it
was a tough chore to clear my head and take on risk, so I did nothing and
wound up kicking myself later.
Notice how your perception changes when you move back to the
sidelines after a bad trade. The fog lifts and you feel reenergized because
risk has been removed from the equation, which is the major benefit of
getting out of the market. Sometimes it’s even a good idea to dump a profitable trade, just to look at things without the bias induced by position risk.
It’s absolutely amazing how much easier it is to read the market when you
have no stake in its outcome. In fact, I know you’ve missed thousands of
signals over the years because your positions blinded you to what was
right in front of your nose.
Standing aside becomes even more valuable after a large drawdown.
Our first instinct when we lose money is to get back on the horse immediately and try to recover our losses. But that’s often the worst thing we
can do because the effort focuses on getting even, rather than on managing
opportunities. Logically speaking, big losses are telling us we took the
wrong risks at the wrong time. Stepping back to the sidelines lets us review
the situation in detail without doing any further damage. It also gives us
the opportunity to evaluate our losses from a more objective viewpoint.
Not surprisingly, this data mining often leads to a longer break from the
action while we recharge our batteries.
Want to enjoy the financial benefits of moving to the sidelines?
Here’s an exercise that will improve your bottom line results immediately.
Go over your trading results in the last year, and compute the number
of positions you entered each week. Then commit yourself to cutting the
average number in half for the next month. You’ll be amazed at how this
small decision affects your perception of opportunity because it forces you
to become selective in your choices, while it opens your eyes to the perfect
setups you’ve been missing while you were chasing your own tail.

Overtrading
It’s easy to get so addicted to the price action that we trade for the adrenaline instead of the profit. This obsessive behavior leads to overtrading,

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

271

which is a popular disease in our fast-fingered markets. It’s also one of
the hardest flaws to conquer, because it doesn’t vanish with experience. In
other words, both newbies and lifetime pros overtrade with equal vigor.
Most traders find themselves in the following scenario from time to time.
They get into a groove and respond by doubling or tripling their usual
number of positions, which almost mystically ends their winning streaks
dead in their tracks. We have just two logical choices when we find ourselves in this frustrating situation. First, recognize the danger, shift back to
smaller size, and get back into business. Second, ignore the feedback, lose
control, and blow up with even bigger losses.
It’s easy to talk about self-discipline, but the heat of the moment can
be overwhelming. The endless daily grind often wears on our concentration, making us forget the most basic trading lessons. Bad mornings
are an especially destructive force. In fact, a few losses on Monday
morning can trigger a domino effect that spirals into a week of overtrading, dwindling capital, and reduced confidence. It’s even possible to
lose so much money through overtrading that we get “numb” and stop
caring about our losses. This is very hazardous because it removes the fear
factor while doing nothing to wake up our discipline and get us back on
the right track. Sadly, many traders wash out of the markets when they
hit this turning point, because their senses become too dull to recognize
impending catastrophe.
How can you overcome the overtrading monster? Many times, it
takes a severe beating to wake up from this nightmare. When the new
dawn finally arrives, immediate changes to your trading style are required
in order to avoid a repeat performance. Start with a detailed diary in which
you write down every position you take and why it’s worth the risk. Then
keep one eye on your losses at all times, shutting down the computer and
walking away when you reach a predetermined daily or weekly limit.
Not surprisingly, choppy markets trigger more overtrading than trending
markets, so step back before the day begins and figure out exactly what
type of market you’re trading. This collaring process, discussed later in
this chapter, can lead to profound changes in your strategy, self-discipline,
and performance. To see why this works, open up your diary and compare
your worst days to the overriding trend during those sessions. Most likely,
you were fighting the tape with an inappropriate collar.
It’s easy to write down rules that tell you when to enter or exit the
market. The problem arises when they stop working, even for a little
while, because we live in an instant gratification culture and expect to be
rewarded every single day. So when we lose a little money, we assume our
rules are to blame and start overtrading in order to find new ones. It’s even

272

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

worse when we make money through overtrading. In this incarnation,
the mindless gamble pays off and reinforces an undisciplined approach,
but the diabolical market ultimately extracts its revenge and takes away
what was given in error. And it doesn’t stop there. It then attacks our seed
money because we’ve become reckless. In the end, our lucky trades wind
up costing a lot more than a simple string of bad trades.
Those who fail to learn from overtrading binges are doomed to
repeat them. Fortunately, you can end this destructive cycle with an honest
review, looking for common themes and a triggering event. You might
find it starts after a big bet blows up in your face, or a big profit turns into
a big loss. And don’t forget the ultimate frustration of missing out on a
series of good trades. That disappointment can set off a negative spiral in
which you try to get back at the market for your own failure to pull the
trigger. The bottom line is, the markets have no ego and are not out to get
you. They just go up and down and don’t care about your opinion. The
sooner you realize there’s no revenge factor in trading, the easier it will
be to reestablish the discipline required to avoid the overtrading monster.
That realization will finally let you watch the markets with an open mind
and trade only when the true signals appear.

Trading Mistakes
Neophytes think their trading mistakes will vanish after a few million
hours of experience, but that just isn’t true. Even professionals still make
costly mistakes that should have been avoided. Trading mistakes run the
gamut from mental errors to misguided opinions. The most common ones
also cause the most damage. For example, just consider how much money
your bullishness cost you in the last two bear markets.
Trading mistakes can’t be eliminated, but you can curb their considerable influence. Start by listening to the little voice in your head, and let
it question every decision you make. In no time, you’ll uncover a dozen
ways you’re losing money for no good reason.
Fortunately, we can control our own fates most of the time. To this
end, it’s vitally important to recognize the circumstances that place us
at the most risk of making bad decisions. Realistically, the following
scenarios will keep draining our accounts, but their impact can be
reduced substantially when we see them coming and initiate defensive
countermeasures:

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

273

1. Out of sync. There’s nothing worse than playing a trend in a
choppy market or a chop in a trending market. Make sure you
know the type of environment you’re trading before pulling the
trigger.
2. Pressing the bad. You don’t want to admit it when you’re wrong,
so rather than cut your losses, you press on with bad positions,
trying to turn lemons into lemonade.
3. Cutting the good. You’re in a great trade, but something inside
doesn’t want that wonderful experience, so you exit with a small
profit just before the position takes off like a rocket.
4. Being early. You get ahead of yourself by jumping into a position
