
If any of these needs are yours, then you've come to the right place.

What This Book Offers
Here's what you get.
An intelligent introduction to forex. Instead of time-consuming, high-risk methods unsuited for
most people, this book provides:
Focus on a variety of lower-risk, simpler, less time-consuming trading methods, styles,
instruments, and time frames to suit different personalities and needs.
Detailed coverage of the key aspects of trader psychology, risk, and money management that
are in fact the real foundation of trader success.
Unique, exclusive, in-depth coverage of new, alternative ways and instruments for forex
traders that are less risky and demanding—social trading and binary options.
Ways for longer-term passive investors to identify the most stable, reliable long-term forex
trends and the best assets for riding them for higher returns and lower risk via currency
diversification.
A practical introduction to forex. Going beyond simplifications and theory, it provides a
practical, well-illustrated, step-by-step guide to actually identifying, planning, and executing
lower-risk, higher-yield trades and investments for a variety of traders and investors.

Why Listen to You, Cliff?
The short answer is: As trader, writer, advisor, and chief analyst in one form or another for over 30
years, I've been both ringside seat spectator and combatant in the markets. You can find further details
through a simple online search from various online profiles.
Rabbi Noach Weinberg once told me that a fool learns from his own mistakes, but a wise man
learns from the mistakes of others.
Here's my offer to help you learn like a wise man, from my mistakes and experience. Credentials
aside, let the ideas speak for themselves.
What This Book Will Not Do
Pretend to teach you hidden secrets of trading.
Suggest that forex trading or investing is a likely road to fast riches requiring little effort.
Focus on the high-risk, overly complicated, or very short-term hyperactive trading styles
typically advocated in so many forex books. These strategies alone virtually guarantee failure for
all but the few with exceptional experience, powers of concentration, temperament, risk
tolerance, and capital. The only positive thing these strategies reliably produce is high trading
volume fees for the brokers. In one recent survey, most online forex brokers reported that only 20
to 25 percent of their traders were profitable.4
Burden you with interesting but unnecessary historical background information about forex.
Overload you with more kinds of fundamental and technical analysis tools than you can use, and
leave you without guidance about which tools to start with and when to add or use others. That,
in turn, risks causing traders to:
Abandon attempts to learn how to methodically combine different kinds of indicators into

simple systems and how to test them. Instead, they attempt random combinations of analytical
tools without any controlled method for evaluating which work and which don't.
Succumb to paralysis from analysis, unable to act under the weight of a vast flow of often
conflicting information.
Include long tracts of pages repeating information that's been said better elsewhere and is easily
available. Where possible I've tried to strike a balance between comprehensiveness and brevity,
referring you to quality, free, online resources when appropriate.
Focus exclusively on leveraged spot market trading. From other forex books, you'd think there's
no other way to play forex. Hardly. For both traders and longer-term investors, there are worthy
alternatives to consider in the right conditions, like forex binary options for simple shorter-term
trend trading, and forex exchange-traded funds (ETFs) for those seeking exposure by means of an
unleveraged instrument that behaves like a stock and can be accessed via a standard equities
account.
What This Book Will Do
The short version is pretty much the opposite: It will provide an alternative introduction to forex,
one aimed at the sensible, rational investor and trader, instead of the madcap gambler or get-richquick sucker.
Virtually every investor needs this kind of guidance, because today, the hard fact is that everyone
needs currency diversification.
We can't afford to ignore currency markets any longer, so we need to learn sensible ways to
benefit from them.
For traders or aspiring traders, that means it will:
Teach you how to find and execute only the lowest-risk, highest potential yield trades via
relatively simple tools and easily available information. In other words, you'll learn to be a
successful beginner with the right tools for your level, rather than a failed imitation of an
experienced, prepared professional.
Show how to use forex to profit in bear markets more easily than with other asset classes like
stocks.
Counteract the get-rich-quick day trader mentality that pervades so many other forex books and
leads most traders to failure. Instead, we'll set you up to succeed by showing you how to keep
losses low relative to your gains so you make money even when most of your trades don't. We'll
push you to make defensive trading your top priority.
In place of purported secrets, give you the best of what's been said distilled from over 30 years
of experience and a small library's worth of study.
You'll get enough details and tools so that you can identify, plan, and execute relatively simple,
low-risk, high-potential yield trades, while avoiding information overload. These include plenty
of step-by-step examples of each step of the trading process, including the critical risk and money
management so you avoid fatal damage to your capital or confidence. The idea is to give you
enough information to make smart but simple trades with relatively low risk and high reward so,
in the shortest time possible, you're trading and, if not making money, at least not losing much
while you are learning.
Give you more than enough of the core skills you need to get started, and then offer guidance on

how to continue your education—what to cover next and where to learn it.
Focus on trading styles, methods, and time frames that are best suited for less experienced
traders, the kind that increase the odds of keeping your capital and confidence intact while you
gain skills and suffer the normal setbacks.
Provide a full toolbox of technical and analytical tools and guidance on how to combine them
into a variety of simple trading systems that you can back test before risking your cash.
Show how to combine your analytical risk and money management (RAMM) tools into a
complete trading plan.
Demonstrate how to record and organize your trading plans so you can review every trade and
learn from your successes and failures.
Offer alternative ways to benefit from forex markets beyond the usual leveraged spot market
trading of most online forex brokers. Even those who ultimately don't have the inclination or time
for forex trading will find there are multiple ways a more passive, long-term investor can benefit
from nonleveraged forex exposure.
In what may be the most important section of the book, present the first widely published
objective look at the two newest ways to profit in forex:
1.Forex social networks and social trading: Use a community of fellow traders and ranked
experts with published performance data to improve your skills. Or even better, let the best
traders trade for you and earn better, more reliable returns with far less work. This is
probably the most reliable way for those new to forex to get started actually making money,
because you're using proven pros.
2.Binary options: We present the pros and cons of a new, little known, and potentially very
useful new forex trading instrument when used properly, binary options. In the right
circumstances, these simplify your trading, give you more control over risk, and can up your
odds of success.
For longer-term investors with little interest in trading, we show you how to use your knowledge of
currency markets to:
Enhance your capital gains and income.
Reduce the risks from lack of currency diversification.
Achieve all this without ever needing to directly trade currency pairs.
For both traders and investors, the book will:
Guide you to some of the best free online sources of information on a wide range of forex topics,
like trade advice, continuing trader training, broker reviews, and daily and weekly fundamental
and technical analysis of specific currency pairs and overall markets.
At the end of the book, leave you with specific ideas on what to do next to get started trading
forex.
Yes, I'm offering you a lot. If you're investing your valuable time to read this, I owe you no less.
In sum, this is the forex book for:
Profit-maximizing, risk-averse traders: Those seeking a sensible introduction to forex trading,
who are more focused on steady monthly profits rather than gambling, via safer, easier, more
profitable ways to trade than the short-term, high-leverage, high-risk methods most people
associate with forex trading.

Long-term investors with little or no interest in trading forex: Those seeking to lower currency
risk and increase returns by diversifying into assets denominated in the currencies most likely to
hold their value and appreciate over the long term.
Anyone seeking an asset class that works in any market condition: Unlike stocks or bonds, the
very nature of forex markets means there's always a bull market in some currency pair.
Whether you're a trader or a traditional, conservative, long-term investor seeking capital gains or
steady income, this is the one forex book written specifically for you, not the wild-eyed action junkie
day trader so beloved (and quickly fleeced) by many in the forex industry.

VISIT THESENSIBLEGUIDETOFOREX.COM FOR
ADDITIONAL ONLINE CONTENT

Additional
related
content
resides
on
the
book's
companion
website
at
www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com. This website provides:
Updates and additional content.
Much clearer versions of the charts, in color and with much better resolution.
Trade simulation exercises to practice what you've learned with the option for interactive
feedback.
More in-depth information on a variety of topics found in the book.
A continual stream of articles on ideas for trades or investments for currency diversified income.
Go to www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com. The breadth and depth of the site's content will expand
over time. We hope the site becomes a must-read for those seeking currency diversification, either as
traders or investors seeking capital gains and/or income denominated in a variety of currencies.

Notes
1. Peter Schiff, “Currency Is the Hidden Porfolio Risk,” Business Insider (October 2011),
www.businessinsider.com/currency-the-hidden-portfolio-risk-2011-10.
2. Andrew J. Johnson, “Small Businesses Try Hand at Forex,” Wall Street Journal (August 2011),
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111903639404576514560310571904.html.
3. Joshua M. Brown, “Inside the Currency Boiler Rooms” (August 2011),
www.thereformedbroker.com/2011/04/09/inside-the-currency-boiler-rooms/; also, Michael
Greenberg, “U.S. Forex Brokers Account Profitability Comparison” (October 2010),
http://forexmagnates.com/us-forex-brokers-account-profitability-comparison/.

Acknowledgments
Zack Miller, Managing Director of Lighthouse Capital Ltd, publisher of NewRulesofInvesting.com,
and author of the seminal work on social networks and social trading, TradeStream Your Way to
Profits. In addition to repeated and invaluable mentoring when I needed him most, he provided the
first contact with…
SeekingAlpha.com CEO David Jackson and his editorial team. Together they've provided me and
so many with the chance to prove ourselves with nothing more than our writing as a credential. That
led to connecting with…
John Nyaradi, publisher of WallStreetSectorSelector.com and author of Super Sectors: How to
Outsmart the Market Using Sector Rotation and ETFs, who in turn who introduced me to…
Senior Editor Laura Walsh of John Wiley & Sons, who paired me up with Senior Development
Editor Judy Howarth, both of whom merit special thanks for their expert guidance, insight, and
enormous patience in shepherding the manuscript into its finished form.
Anna Olswanger, my agent, guide, and interpreter throughout the journey through the world of
publishing.
Longtime friend and wise counsel Shelly Freedman, Esq., for support, advice, and a special assist
on the title.
Those whom I've met only through their writings:
In no particular order, Kathy Lien and Boris Schlossberg (Bkassetmanagement.com), John
Kicklighter and Joel Kruger (d=DailyFX.com), Brian Dolan (Forex.com), Kathleen Brooks
(Forex.com), John Mauldin (www.johnmauldin.com), Marc Chandler (Brown Brothers Harriman,
marctomarket.com), James Chen (FXDD.com), Dr. Alexander Elder ( Elder.com), Ed Ponsi, and the
others referred to as resources for further information in Appendix A.
Samantha McGarry (Inkhouse Media and Marketing), and Alon Levitan (eToro), for their help on
the forex social networks and trading chapter.
Shay Ben Asulin, CEO of Anyoption.com, for his cooperation in freeing up the time needed for this
project.
It's easier to stand tall on the shoulders of giants.
Finally, my deepest thanks in advance to you, dear reader, for spreading the message contained
herein. It's through you that we'll strike a blow against governments that want to steal our money
through inflation, and brokers who seek a quick buck at our expense.

CHAPTER 1
Three Must-Know Forex Facts
Forex's Top Three Lessons
The three most important lessons you'll ever learn about foreign exchange (forex) markets are:
1. Everyone needs forex diversification. Just as every competent investor needs to diversify by
asset classes and sectors, so too they need exposure to assets in multiple currencies and an
understanding of forex trends and what's driving them. Yet most have almost all their assets
denominated in one or two currencies. Today, that is an especially fatal error, because the
governments behind most major currencies intend to get out of debt by causing inflation, which
allows them to repay their bonds with depreciated money. That's good for those governments, and
disastrous for those holding their weakened currency and anything denominated in it. They won't
admit it, but historically low interest rates and a steady stream of economic stimulus programs
betray their real intentions. They want to reduce their real debt, and, in the process, your wealth,
through the subtle tax of inflation. To protect yourself, you need as much of your assets as
possible to be denominated in the currencies that are likely to hold their real value or appreciate
in the long run, and lift your portfolio along with them. Having some commodities exposure is
also a means of hedging this currency risk and playing forex trends, so both forex brokers and
traders typically also deal with commodities. Thus while they're different asset classes, in
practice forex tends to include commodity trading and investing.
2. Forex markets offer significant advantages over other asset markets. If trading with
leverage, there is more risk, but that can be controlled and managed if you invest the time to learn
and practice proper risk and money management (RAMM). You can benefit from forex without
dealing with the added complications of RAMM issues (covered in Chapters 0 through 12).
3. You can succeed using forex trading or investing if you learn and practice what follows.

FACT 1: EVERYONE NEEDS FOREX
DIVERSIFICATION EVEN IF YOU DON'T TRADE
ACTIVELY
All those responsible for managing assets need some forex exposure and awareness of what drives
forex markets.

You're Exposed: Cover Your Assets

Like it or not, you're exposed to currency risk. Every asset is denominated in some kind of currency.
For example, consider the case of the US investor. Even if your portfolio has done well in U.S. dollar
(USD) terms, over the past decades, the picture is less rosy against other major currencies and
commodities. Because we all use imported products, this means your purchasing power and wealth
are melting away if your assets are in a declining currency like the U.S. dollar.
For example, anyone whose assets are too concentrated in U.S. dollars has paid the penalty
countless times whether they realize it or not. Remember oil at $10 per barrel, or gas at $0.35 per
gallon? Remember the bestselling guide for frugal tourists in the late 1950s, Europe on $5 a Day?
The final version came out in 2007, Europe from $95 a Day .1 Remember how in the 1960s and early
1970s durable Japanese cars were considered inexpensive?
This decline in purchasing power isn't just due to inflation. For example, the U.S. dollar has been in
steady decline for decades against many other important currencies.
Since 2000, the USD is down 32 percent versus the Canadian Dollar (CAD).
Since 1990, the USD is down 52 percent versus the Japanese Yen (JPY).
Since 1970, the USD is down 75 percent versus the Swiss Franc (CHF).
Today, currency diversification is no longer optional. As governments maintain historically low
interest rates and assorted stimulus plans that risk devaluing their currencies and your savings,
currency diversification is as essential for your portfolio as sector and asset class diversification.
Failure to do so is foolhardy. You don't have to be an active trader to ride the strongest long-term
forex trends. We'll show you many ways that passive, longer-term investors can protect themselves.
While Americans may be waking up to the need for currency diversification, that's hardly news to
most of the world, which has dealt with this issue for years. In other areas of the world, like Japan or
Italy, with histories of weak currencies, participation in forex trading is a widespread middle-class
phenomenon. For example, Japanese housewives are such prominent participants in forex that they're
referred to collectively as “Mrs. Wantanabe.”2
As an American student in Israel in the 1980s, I watched families run to spend their monthly pay
check because its purchasing power would fall every day due to high inflation. In the mid-1980s,
friends with dollars could exchange them for local currency at higher black market rates and purchase
anything from cars to apartments in the local currency at a 40 percent discount.

Even Long-Term Buy-and-Hold Investors Need Forex Diversification
Therefore, just as wise investors diversify into different kinds of assets and sectors, they must also
diversify into the different kinds of currencies, particularly those likely to appreciate versus their
peers. As we'll discuss in Chapters 0 through 12, even long-term buy-and-hold passive investors who
don't actively trade currencies can protect and grow their wealth by allocating portions of their
portfolios to instruments denominated in the most promising currencies.
Although most forex market participants are short-term speculators, currencies can be excellent
long-term plays, because currency pairs tend to form stronger, more stable long-term trends compared
to stocks. Why? Because the fundamentals of the underlying economies that drive currency prices
change much more slowly than those of individual companies. It's a longer, more complex process to
change the relative growth rates of entire economies (or currency unions in the case of the Euro) than
it is for an individual company. Even better, unlike stocks, currencies don't all move together in the

same direction, nor do they all respond in the same way to other markets or global indexes. Indeed,
some currencies move in the opposite direction, providing a genuine bear market hedge without the
complications (or periodic bans) involved in shorting stocks.
In short, currency markets produce some of the most stable long-term price trends that are ideally
suited for long-term passive investors, and also can provide simple, effective ways to profit in bear
markets. As we'll discuss in Chapter 2, the right currency investments can provide long-term
appreciation as well as steady income yields.

FACT 2: POTENTIAL FOR BETTER RISK-ADJUSTED
RETURNS
There are more reasons to have forex exposure beyond currency diversification. Once you do some
homework, you'll realize that forex is arguably among the most rewarding asset classes for traders
and investors. Even though forex is dominated by short-term, high-risk speculators, there are
investing/trading styles suitable for both:
1. More conservative active traders who use longer-term holding periods and specific methods
and instruments to reduce risk.
2. Long-term investors who know how to:
Ride stable, proven, long-term forex trends for capital gains.
Earn steady income from “carry trades” or from investing in bonds, dividend stocks, and
other income vehicles denominated in the right currencies.

Forex Markets Often Provide Advanced Warnings of Changes in Other
Markets
Forex markets often react to changing conditions before other markets, providing valuable advanced
warning of possible trend changes. As we'll learn later, certain currencies tend to move same
direction as “risk assets” like stocks or industrial commodities, and others tend to act like “safe haven
assets” like bonds. When these correlations break down, that too can often be a warning of a change
in direction for other markets. We'll delve further into this kind of intermarket analysis in Chapter 9.

Forex Needn't Be Any Riskier Than Other Markets
Forex has a gotten a reputation for being excessively risky due to a combination of:
1. High failure rates due to beginner traders who failed to do their homework and understand the
risks associated with the high leverage (see borrowed funds in Chapter 2) commonly used in
most forex trading.
2. Brokers who failed to provide sufficient training to deal with the risks of using leverage.
However, you can reduce and manage the risks. There are:
Brokers, like etoro.com, that allow you to adjust your leverage down to what you can handle, and
they will provide guidance on the appropriate level.
Unlevered ways to play forex, which are no riskier than an exchange-traded fund (ETF) or a

stock.
A variety of techniques to reduce risk in forex trading, as well as new instruments for simpler,
safer forex trading (see Chapter 1).
As we'll see further on, making money trading forex can be easier than in stocks and other more
traditional asset markets, particularly in bear markets. However, you do need to do your homework,
especially if trading with leverage, which adds risk as well as reward. Part of that homework is to
learn more conservative, simpler techniques that make it easier to succeed at forex than those most
commonly used. Until recently, there was no single source for learning this more sensible,
conservative forex. No longer. This is the only book to gather these methods into one collection.
Part of forex's reputation for excessive risk comes from stories appearing in the mainstream media.
The typical plotline runs like this: Some gullible novices believed a broker's get-rich-quick pitch
about how they'd score fast money with little effort or background in forex. These geniuses were
shocked (shocked!) to find out otherwise. The conclusion: Forex should either be avoided altogether
or is unsuitable for most people.
If you're smart enough to be reading this book, you will see the absurdity of that reasoning. Just
because there are individuals who behave stupidly with cars or power tools doesn't mean that these
should be avoided altogether. The same goes for forex, including the typical leveraged trading. If
you've had the right preparation and have the discipline to practice proper trade planning risk and
money management (RAMM), you can keep the risk to acceptable levels, just as with any other kind
of investing or trading. As with driving, there are ways to simulate the experience until you're ready
for the real thing, and ways to then start slowly under less challenging conditions until you're ready
for more challenging conditions
