
c05.indd 90

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

91

annual Forbes list of the world’s highest-paid athletes, earning millions of
dollars from salaries, bonuses, and sponsorships. However, pointing young
athletes a certain way just because others have been successful in that ﬁeld
may not yield similar results.
In fact, it would be hard to even imagine soccer great Lionel Messi
having the same level of boxing success as Manny Pacquiao, should he
decide on a career switch one day.
Recently, global TV giant Entertainment and Sports Programming
Network (ESPN) came up with a list of ten skills that it determined make
up a successful sports person. These were:
1. Endurance
2. Strength
3. Power
4. Speed
5. Agility
6. Flexibility
7. Hand–eye coordination
8. Nerve (deﬁned as the ability to maintain composure in a fearful

environment)
9. Durability (deﬁned as the ability to withstand constant physical
punishment)
10. Analytic aptitude (deﬁned as the ability to evaluate and react to strategic
situations)
ESPN then analyzed 60 sports and asked a group of experts made up of
sports scientists, kinesiology academics, and sporting journalists to assign
a number from 1 to 10 to each of these skills.
The Results Among the 60 sports analyzed, baseball came out tops in
the hand–eye coordination category with a rating of 9.25. Soccer led the
pack in the agility category with a rating of 8.25. Motor racing was number
1 in the nerve category with a rating of 9.88. Track and ﬁeld sprinting was
placed ﬁrst in the speed category, also with a rating of 9.88. Finally, boxing
emerged victorious in the durability category with a rating of 8.5.
Hence, to ensure the highest chance of success in any given sport, a
sports coach would put an athlete through a series of tests to determine
his or her strengths and weaknesses. If the athlete scored the highest in
the hand–eye coordination category, the baseball route would be apt.
If the athlete came out tops in the agility category, soccer would be the top

c05.indd 91

03/12/12 9:55 AM

92

FOREX IS A GAME

choice. If the athlete had the best score in the nerve category, a career in
motor racing might beckon.
Track and ﬁeld sprinting would be the answer had the athlete aced the
speed category, and, ﬁnally, an illustrious boxing career wouldn’t be too far
off if the athlete led in the durability category. Your best chance of achieving greatness in the sporting world is choosing the sport that best resonates
with your dominant strengths.
Forex trading is like sports. There are many ﬁelds where success can
be achieved in the forex market. A certain strategy in the forex world corresponds to a certain discipline in the sporting world, whether it is soccer or
boxing. Similarly, the best chance of succeeding in forex trading is selecting a toolbox of strategies that complements your personality.

FIVE CATEGORIES OF FOREX TRADERS
Style is important. We hear about style on a daily basis from the mass
media. Not a day goes by without the newspapers, magazines, radio, or TV
promoting a perfume, apparel, a luxury car, a watch, or a mobile phone.
Advertisers know that style is an integral part of our personality.
This is why products are painstakingly created with different textures,
smells, or purposes. Everyone is different, and the best product is the
one that best suits your needs. The products that you buy tell a lot about
the kind of style that you like and reveal much about your personality.
They deﬁne who you are.
It is the same with forex trading: No two traders have exactly the same
style. That’s why it’s important for you to choose a style of trading that
resonates with your personality and deﬁnes who you are. Forex traders the
world over fall into one of ﬁve categories: scalpers, day traders, swing traders, position traders, and mechanical traders. The main difference between
the categories of traders is the time frame employed while trading.
Essentially, the length of time in which a trading position is held
increases from a scalper to a day trader, to a swing trader, and ﬁnally to
a position trader. Mechanical traders are oblivious to the passing of time.
Their trades are based on a ﬁxed routine, regardless of time frame and
regardless of market activity.

Scalpers
Scalpers are traders who like fast action. They enter and exit the forex market multiple times a day, taking a few pips each time. Typically, proﬁts can
range anywhere from a single pip to 10 pips. These trades can last anywhere

c05.indd 92

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

93

from several seconds to several minutes. In terms of time frames, scalpers
prefer looking at M1 and M5 charts (minute charts and 5-minute charts).
Their actions are mostly centered around the overlapping sessions of
the major regions, typically during the Asia close/Europe open, Europe
close/U.S. open. Scalpers trade during these hours mainly because these are
the busiest hours in the forex market on any given day. This business tends
to generate more volume, which in turn presents more trading opportunities.
As they need to react to market movements quickly, scalping is most
suitable for traders who can devote their undivided attention and focus on
the charts for a couple of hours at a time. In addition, scalpers need the
ability to think on their feet and switch the direction of their trades fast if
the situation calls for it.
Due to the numerous times in which scalpers enter and exit the
markets, there are three simple rules in their toolbox:
1. Spreads. The spread on currency pairs is a signiﬁcant factor in

the scalper’s strategy. Scalpers tend to stay away from currency
pairs with large spreads and focus only on the major pairs, such as
EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and USD/JPY. They do this because the spread
on the majors is normally the tightest, and the majors have the highest
liquidity.
2. News. Scalpers tend to avoid trading during major news announcements. This is because major news can evoke different emotions in
the markets and cause wild swings in currency pairs. The unwelcome
volatility during such news announcements can be the difference
between a winning trade and a losing one.
3. Leverage. Scalpers tend to use high leverage because they are in and
out of the market repeatedly with only a small proﬁt. The high leverage
ampliﬁes their returns signiﬁcantly.
Due to the fast-paced nature of scalping, it is not uncommon for
traders to employ automated trading systems to execute trades on their
behalf.
Scalping offers these top three advantages:
1. Risk exposure. Due to the nature of scalping, traders stay in the

market for brief periods each time. This reduces their risk of getting
stopped out by any unforeseen adverse events.
2. Easier bites. Markets can’t make big moves without ﬁrst making
small ones. As commonsensical as that sounds, it is also why scalpers
love small moves—they happen more frequently, so scalpers’ chances
of winning are bumped up.

c05.indd 93

03/12/12 9:55 AM

94

FOREX IS A GAME

3. Frequency. For markets to achieve signiﬁcant up or down moves, a

major change in expectations is required. Such changes normally are
caused by primers, such as a major news release. The good news for
scalpers is that even in the absence of news, proﬁts can still be made.

Day Traders
The main distinguishing characteristic of day traders is that they don’t
like to hold a trading position overnight. Day traders typically put on a
trade at the start of the trading day and tend to close it out before the day
is over. To day traders, ﬁnishing the day without an open position is more
important than the actual result of the trade itself. This means that the
trade could either be a proﬁt or a loss.
Depending on the currency pair, the proﬁt potential per trade for day
traders can range from 20 pips to 40 pips or more. In terms of time frames,
day traders prefer looking at the M15 and the M30 charts (the 15-minute
and the 30-minute chart respectively).
Unlike scalpers who avoid the news, day traders love trading the news.
Keeping abreast of the daily news releases actually help them to plan their
trades more effectively. Additionally, many day traders depend on news
announcements as triggers for their trades.
Day traders are big momentum traders. This means that they look for
a certain directional bias and go long or short based on the current movement, or wave, at that time. Part of the strategy entails looking for possible
breakouts from tight ranges, especially when certain news announcements
fare better or worse than forecasted numbers.
Day trading offers these top three advantages:
1. Peace of mind. Day traders sleep soundly at night knowing that they

do not have any open market positions. As long as a position remains
open in the forex market, it is exposed to risk. Examples of risk include
market gapping, which happens when prices are non-existent during
brief periods because of market volatility.
If a trader’s stop loss is located in the gap, the trade might not
close out. If this happens, the trader has a higher risk exposure. Since
day traders close out their positions by the end of the trading day,
market gapping risk is hardly present.
2. Easy analysis. Day traders love the news, because news often injects
momentum and causes currencies to move up or down. As positions
are closed out every day, day traders do not subject themselves to
analysis paralysis. This trading disease happens to many news traders

c05.indd 94

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

95

who grapple with the concept of how much markets tend to price in
upcoming news or released news.
Since day traders are momentum traders who take advantage of
the ﬁrst moves, analysis is easy and straightforward.
3. Structured calculations. This is also one of the beneﬁts of starting

with a clean slate every day. When trades are left hanging in the market,
equity and margin levels constantly ﬂuctuate to reﬂect the current size
of the open position. This ﬂuctuation can confuse traders who need to
make adjustments when they calculate their lot size for the next trade.
Day traders do not have this problem because trades are closed
out at the end of the day, and lot sizes are calculated on a clean slate
the next day.

Swing Traders
Swing traders normally hold trades beyond a day but never beyond a week.
This trading style is most suited to part-time traders who have full-time
jobs because not much time is needed to analyze the markets and set up
the trade.
Depending on the currency pair, the proﬁt potential per trade for swing
traders can range from 50 pips to 150 pips or more. In terms of time frames,
swing traders prefer looking at the H1 and the H4 charts (the hourly and the
4-hourly charts respectively).
Swing traders tend to be a bit more conservative than scalpers or
day traders; they typically wait for several conﬁrmation signals before
triggering a trade.
At the same time, swing traders are not bothered by intraday volatility and price swings because they are more concerned with catching the
medium-term trends. Proﬁt targets and stop-loss levels are naturally larger
for swing traders because they have a slightly longer-term view than day
traders.
Since trades usually have larger targets, spreads won’t have as much of
an impact to overall proﬁts for swing traders. As a result, trading pairs with
larger spreads and lower liquidity is acceptable.
Swing trading offers these top three advantages:
1. Favorable risk to reward. Swing traders normally are not concerned

with intraday movements of the market because they have a slightly
longer time horizon in watching the markets.
As their time horizon is longer than that of day traders, swing traders normally set favorable risk to reward ratios of 1:2, 1:3, or more.

c05.indd 95

03/12/12 9:55 AM

96

FOREX IS A GAME

If the stop loss is set at 50 pips, the proﬁt target is normally 100 pips,
150 pips, or more.
2. Save time. Swing traders are mostly technical traders, which means
they do not have to spend time every day to keep abreast of ﬁnancial
news.
This is not to say that news is not important, but due to the swing
trader’s trading style of exiting positions in two to ﬁve days, daily news
events don’t matter much. This is one of the biggest draws of swing
trading and makes the method perfect for new traders or part-time
traders who have full-time jobs.
3. Hassle-free. Many traders feel the need to meddle with ongoing

trades or to trigger unnecessary ones. This normally happens when
traders trade several times a day.
As swing traders depend on a trading plan to trigger long and short
positions, they do not fall into this trap. In fact, swing traders thrive on
following a structured plan. Following a plan keeps human error to a
minimum and enables swing traders to avoid emotional trading.

Position Traders
Position traders have the longest time horizon of the different categories. The total opposite of scalpers, position traders can sit on a trade for
several weeks to several months. They have a very strong grasp of market fundamentals and are able to spot changes that could lead to highly
proﬁtable long-term gains once trades are locked in. Depending on the
currency pair, the proﬁt potential per trade for position traders can range
from 500 pips to several thousand pips or more.
In terms of time frames, position traders prefer looking at the D1, W1,
and even the MN charts (daily, weekly, and monthly charts respectively).
Position traders are usually sophisticated investors with two distinct
characteristics: Their astute reading of the ﬁnancial markets makes them
totally unconcerned with the short-term or even the medium-term movements of the currency market, and they own a large trading account. This
size is necessary because capital is needed to withstand large ﬂoating
losses should trades go against the trader for an extended period of time.
Position trading offers these top three advantages:
1. Lower transaction costs. Brokers charge a spread for every position

executed in the forex market. Thus, scalpers incur the highest costs by
virtue of their trading frequency. Position traders are on the opposite

c05.indd 96

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

97

end of the pole. Instead of executing many trades, position traders
execute very few trades and prefer to manage those trades effectively.
They do this by tightening the stop loss for open positions, which is a
technique of dynamically shifting the stop loss level to chase the price.
As an example, for long positions, the stop loss is continuously shifted upwards. For short positions, the stop loss is continuously
shifted downwards. This technique helps position traders to lock in
proﬁts along the way.
2. Earn swap. In every forex transaction, the trade involves borrowing

one currency to buy another. Interest or swap is paid on the currency
that is borrowed and earned on the one that is bought.
As an example, if you are buying a currency with a higher interest
rate than the one you are borrowing, the net interest rate differential will be positive, and you earn interest for every day that the trade
remains open. This is sometimes called the carry trade. Position traders stand to gain a huge amount of swap when they hold trades for an
extended period of time.
3. Character building. Emotions sometimes set in when trades are held
for a long time. Both greed and fear can take over during the course
of the trade. Position traders have to learn to manage greed when a
sizable proﬁt builds up. They have to weigh the decision of exiting the
trade early to bank the proﬁts against holding the trade longer for even
bigger returns.
The opposite is also true. When trades go against position traders,
fear is bound to set in. They then have to weigh the decision of exiting
the trade early to realize the loss against holding on to the position
in the event markets reverse. Over their trading journeys, position traders must cultivate patience.

Mechanical Traders
Mechanical traders are usually beginners in the forex market. Their main
focus in trading the markets is not time driven but system driven.
After mechanical traders go through a period of back-testing with
historical data, they deem a particular strategy sound. Thereafter, these
traders focus only on the execution of that strategy based on its rules. This
method allows them to enter and exit trades without emotions or stress.
Due to the robotic application of mechanical trading, it is not uncommon to ﬁnd mechanical traders coding their strategies into automated
trading systems that can be ﬁred off on cue. Once these systems are

c05.indd 97

03/12/12 9:55 AM

98

FOREX IS A GAME

trading automatically, traders have the added advantage of further backtesting the automated systems with more historical data to ensure that
it remains robust.
However, the very nature of robotic application is a double-edged
sword. Since no discretionary trading takes place, an automated system
can lull mechanical traders into a false sense of security.
This false security becomes a problem when market conditions change,
as when interest rates are raised or lowered or when central banks intervene to pump liquidity into the ﬁnancial system. Such acts undoubtedly
affect the currency volatility and trading ranges.
If automated systems are not tweaked periodically to reﬂect changing market conditions, mechanical traders can be in for a rough time with
prolonged losses on their trading account.
Mechanical trading offers these top three advantages:
1. No monitoring needed. Once mechanical traders are confident

that the system works, absolutely no monitoring of the market
is needed, because mechanical traders are mostly system driven.
Trades are executed faithfully (sometimes several times a day)
regardless of how the market moves.
2. Flexible trading. Since mechanical traders are not dependent on
any speciﬁc time frame, they are able to formulate trading systems to
exploit the movements of any currency pair. This gives them the ﬂexibility to trawl all available currency pairs on the broker’s platform and
build a mechanical system around it.
3. Free time. A fair amount of mechanical traders utilize expert advisors
(EAs) on their trading platform to assist in trade execution. EAs are
essentially automated trading systems. Because the model is handsfree, these mechanical traders have the time to pursue other work
interests and hobbies.

YOUR PERFECT STRATEGY
We are how we trade and we trade how we are. No two traders are exactly
alike. Your unique personality will cause you to trade differently from
someone else. If you enjoy a fast-paced life ﬁlled with action from the word
Go!, you most likely fall into the scalper category.
If you are holding down a job and don’t have too much time to monitor
the markets, you most likely fall into the swing trader category. It is important to note that no one category is better or worse than the other. They are
all the same in terms of making you a consistently proﬁtable trader.

c05.indd 98

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

99

The key here is to discover which category you are in, based on your
lifestyle and personality, so that you can ﬂow with your dominant strength
when trading the forex market. Failure to do this right will result in the
single biggest stumbling block to achieving consistent proﬁts when trading
the forex market from the very start.
Would you like to ﬁnd out your predominant trading style? Then take
this short quiz to ﬁnd out what kind of trader you are. Once you ﬁnd out
which category you belong to, the next step is to select the right trading
strategy that ﬂows with your personality and current lifestyle.
Are you ready? Then let’s go!

WHAT KIND OF TRADER ARE YOU?
Answer these 25 questions as accurately as possible to find out.
1. At a social event, do you:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Find your best friend as soon as possible.
Move around and interact with as many people as possible.
Look out for interesting and popular people/groups.
Sit in one corner and wait for people to talk to you.
Find a group of friends and join in the conversation.

2. How often would you like to trade?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

A few times a week
A few times a day
A few times a month
More than 10 times a day
A fixed time every day

3. If you could have it your way, what would you be?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Formula 1 racing driver
Accountant
Research analyst
Doctor
Professional chess player

4. Your favorite band releases a new album. How would you get a copy?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

c05.indd 99

Plan a day to visit your favorite CD shop and get a copy.
Order it online.
Check around for any special promotion.
Download it immediately via the Internet.
Wait for a friend to buy it and borrow theirs.

03/12/12 9:55 AM

100

FOREX IS A GAME

5. You are in a long GBP/USD trade. You watch the news and discover that a
famous fund manager is in a short GBP/USD trade. You:
a. Shift your stop loss to entry price and proceed to short GBP/USD.
b. Stick to your trading plan.
c. Start to research on CNBC and Bloomberg for any news concerning GBP
and USD currencies.
d. Close your existing order immediately and short GBP/USD.
e. Change the channel to watch a movie.
6. You ride past a motorcycle showroom. You:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Ask the salesperson which models are on sale.
Decide to test ride a model you like.
Stop and take a quick glance.
Study the brochure for specifications.
Continue riding on.

7. Which sport helps you to unwind?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Bungee jumping
Basketball
Golf
You prefer watching sports to unwind
Tennis

8. How do you keep up with your social circle?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Write on their Facebook wall
Hang out with the same group once a week
Maintaining your social circle is not your priority
Meet up several times a year
Call them up regularly for a chat

9. You love a lifestyle that:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Offers a change only once in a while.
Doesn’t disrupt your daily schedule of doing nothing.
Follows a fixed routine.
Packs your time with action and activities.
Throws regular challenges at you.

10. Someone cuts you off while driving. How do you typically respond?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

c05.indd 100

You continue driving as per normal.
You step on the accelerator with your blood boiling and cut the driver off.
You steam quietly in your seat.
You flash your lights and toot the horn.
You take a deep breath and brush it off.

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

101

11. You are waiting for a special date in a restaurant. You:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Order a glass of water and update your Facebook status.
Glance at your watch every three seconds.
Sit quietly and prepare for an enchanted evening.
Take out your seven-point checklist and tick off point 1.
Check that the table is set perfectly.
