
Fixing the indicator
The two moving average crossover backtest results in Table 4-3 highlight
some of the common problems you encounter when you begin backtesting
indicators. I go into more detail about these issues in the following sections.

www.pdfdummies.com

71

72

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
Overtrading
Some indicator parameters call for more-frequent trading than you can spare
time for. You therefore need to find adjustments to the indicator to reduce
the number of trades without damaging the returns from the winning trades.
One solution is to filter the buy/sell signals by specifying that you want the
software to generate a buy/sell signal only if the price is x percent above or
below the moving average or has been above or below the moving average by
y amount of time. Most indicators can be filtered in this way.

Losing trades
The single best way to reduce your losing trades is to add a confirmation
requirement, such as one of the momentum indicators. In fact, in my own
experience, adding 12-day momentum as an additional requirement can
reduce the number of trades by 30 to 50 percent without sacrificing much
profit. And because the trades being eliminated by momentum confirmation
are generally losing trades, the gain-loss ratio improves, too.

Applying the indicator again
After choosing your indicator parameter, your job isn’t finished. Backtests are
hypothetical. You didn’t actually make those trades. To get a more-realistic
idea of how an indicator-based trading rule works, backtest the rule on historical price data and then apply it to out-of-sample data. In the XYZ case in
Table 4-1 and 4-2, for example, I backtested on 1,000 days of data. Now I should
backtest it on the next 500 days of data. If the results are about the same on the
fresh data, you consider your rule to be robust, meaning it works across a wide
range of conditions.

Evaluating the risks of backtesting
The flaw in optimization is that the ideal parameter for an indicator is ideal
only for the past. Critics of backtesting point out that even if your indicator is
robust on the next 500 days of out-of-sample data, after you actually add that
500 days to the backtest, the perfect parameter is now some other number.
You can go mad backtesting until you are blue in the face, and you will never
find the optimum parameter that stays the same over time.
The unreliability factor gets worse if you fiddle with the indicator with filters.
This is named curve-fitting, or making the indicator perfect for the past. The
probability of that indicator being perfect for the future is low, because the
market is dynamic and changes.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically
Don’t count on finding a magic number to put into your indicators. In fact, you
can use the default parameters that you find in books and software without
harm to your performance — if you have good indicators for the security and
apply your trading rules with care and consistency.

www.pdfdummies.com

73

74

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5

Managing the Trade
In This Chapter
▶ Creating trading rules: The five-step plan
▶ Knowing when to take the money and run
▶ Keeping losses under control
▶ Finding out how to adjust positions

I

n technical trading, you use indicators that help you identify what the
price is doing — trending, going sideways, making a peak or a bottom,
and so on. Indicators give you useful information about price dynamics, but
it’s up to you to build trading rules around them. Indicators are about price
changes. Trading rules are about you and your money.
In this chapter, I talk about developing trading rules that match up with your
indicator skills, your appetite for risk, and your choice of time frame. Special
emphasis is on stop-loss rules — don’t leave home without one.

Talking about managing the trade before I talk about indicators may seem
a little strange, but I have a very good reason for it. You may see ads or get
e-mails touting “the one indicator that will make you 89 percent in the next
three weeks” or “the dirty little secret that guarantees 92 percent profits in
a year.” Of course you know better than to believe these silly promotions
(don’t you?). Well, all through this book, I show you every single one of these
“hidden secrets” and magic flash point indicators. Some of them actually perform as well as advertised, at least sometimes. But they don’t do you a lick
of good unless you prepare your mind ahead of time to take a new kind of
responsibility — the responsibility of planning each trade.

Building Trading Rules
To plan and manage your trades, you need trading rules. A trading rule is the
specific action you take when certain conditions are met. At the most basic,
a trading rule instructs you to buy or sell when an indicator meets a preset
criterion (like the moving average crossover in the case in Chapter 4). Most

www.pdfdummies.com

76

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
indicators have a buy/sell trading rule already embedded in them, as I describe
in each of the chapters about indicators (see Chapters 6 through 17).
But technical trading is a mindset that goes beyond using indicators. Trading
rules improve your trading performance by refining the buy/sell signals you
get from indicators. Trading rules tend to be more complex and contain more
conditions than raw indicators, such as “buy after the first 45 minutes if x and
y also occur” or “sell half the position when z occurs.”
Your overall goal should be to get the highest return for the lowest risk. How
can you accomplish this? You start with a plan.

Your trading plan outline
You may think that you can do it the easy way, by having a technical expert
send you a newsletter or a password to a technical Web site that gives you
the magic trade of the day. The expert may even explain and illustrate the
technique. But when it fails — and they always fail at some point — you end
up poorer and probably pretty mad at the charlatan who sold you a trading
program based on MACD, the stochastic oscillator, or something else you
could have done yourself without paying a big subscription fee. You may
even walk away saying technical analysis is hokum.
The fault lies not in the “magic” indicator but in the trader, or rather the trader’s lack of a trading plan. Good trading isn’t about the securities you trade
or about indicators. It’s about planning the trade in full ahead of time and following the plan. Strictly speaking, managing the trade isn’t exclusive to technical analysis. But all successful technical traders manage their trades.
At each step you have to decide which indicators or combinations of indicators to follow, and your exact specifications for them. Here’s what your indicators and rules need to do:
1. Determine the current trend.
2. Establish the rules for opening a position.
3. Manage the money at risk by scaling up or down.
4. Establish the rules for closing a position — set stops and targets.
5. Establish a reentry rule after being stopped or after the target is hit.
The technical trader plans the trade from entry to exit. This is the opposite
of traditional investing, where you buy a security for an indefinite period of
time and seldom establish in advance the level at which you will sell. But if
you want to increase your stake or preserve capital, it’s when you sell that
counts. You sell for one of three reasons — you met a profit target, you met a
loss limit, or you chose to increase or decrease the risk of the trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade
Step 4 is the most important step. If you do the other steps but neglect Step 4,
you will not succeed in trading. The paramount rule in technical trading is to
control losses. You can pick so-so securities and apply so-so indicators to
them, and if you’re trading systematically, you can still make a decent net gain
if you only control losses.

Common questions and concerns
The overall subject of money management is a big one, and I can’t hope to
cover more than some basics here. However, I address some of the most frequent queries about technical trading in this section:
✓ How much should I put into technical trading? Ten percent of my capital? Fifty percent? No single correct answer exists. You have to decide
this one on your own. You might start out with 10 percent and move
it up to a higher proportion as you gain expertise and confidence. One
thing is for sure: You should never start technical trading with a stop
that costs more than you can bear. Van Tharp, the author of the book
Definitive Guide to Position Sizing, offers a sensible methodology that
keeps us away, mostly, from the horrors of fancy mathematics.
✓ How much risk should I take? Before you enter a new position, you
should define your initial risk, which is the dollar amount you are willing
to lose if the trade goes bad. If your security is priced at $8, you could
set your initial risk at $2. Tharp calls this number R and notes that if differs from the usual definition of financial risk that involves variance as
measured by the standard deviation. (See Chapter 14 for some digestible
information about the standard deviation.)
The amount of loss you embed in your stop-loss should be limited to R
or a fraction of R. In this example, that means your stop-loss would entail
losing less than $2, say $1.50. Your expected gain should be a multiple
of R, meaning you would risk a loss of $1.50 only to make more than $2.
Okay, how much more? Let’s say you are willing to risk losing $1.50 only
if you can make twice R, or $4. This level of risk ensures that on average,
your gains are bigger than your losses.
Now you examine your security in the context of a possible $5.50 price
swing over your expected holding period. If the maximum high-low
range of your security is $3, you have no chance of making $4 (unless
volatility changes), but you still have a chance of seeing your $1.50 stop
get hit. You need to modify your expected gain to no more than $3. Now
your risk-reward ratio is 2:1, meaning that you should make $2 for every
$1 you lose over the course of many trades in this one security.
✓ How many securities should I trade? As a general rule, you want more
than one security as a form of diversification (which reduces the risk of
losing it all in a single event), but less than 20 securities (which would
require too much analysis even for a full-time trader). Three to five securities are about right, especially for a newcomer.

www.pdfdummies.com

77

78

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
✓ Which securities? This question is trickier. Again according to Tharp,
you can add up the R values for each of your securities and average
them, giving you the expected return. If you are not happy with this
number, you can alter the portfolio to include securities with a higher
or lower R to shift the average. Similarly, you can take the square root
of the mean R of the portfolio to measure its variance, and if that is a
number that is too high or low for you, you can alter the composition of
the portfolio.
✓ How do you allocate your capital among the securities you’re trading?
You can divide it up equally, or you can allocate a higher percentage
to the security getting the most winning trades over the past 30, 60, or
90 days. You can also allocate according to the volatility of the security
(check out Chapter 14 for more on volatility).
Finally, you can apply fixed fractional position sizing, popularized by
Ralph Vince, which calls for allocation as a function of total possible loss
as a fixed percentage of total capital. Say you have $10,000 in capital and
you want to buy Blue Widget stock at $40 per share. You set your stop at
$2, meaning you will sell if it reaches $38. At the same time, you want to
limit the possible loss on Blue Widget to 2.5 percent of your total portfolio, or $250. Therefore, you can buy no more than 6.3 shares of Blue
Widget.
Buying only 6 shares (an odd-lot, where a standard lot is 100 shares)
can be done but at a high commission cost. You need to pick a lowerpriced stock, reduce your stop, or raise the percentage of your portfolio
dedicated to a single security. Even if you plan not to use fixed fractional
position sizing, remember that this example embodies the spirit of managing the trade.

Taking Money off the Table: Establishing
the Profit Target
When you have a gain in a trade, how much is enough? How do you know
when to take profits? Unfortunately, few gurus offer guidance on how to
design a take-profit rule. You never know at the beginning of a trend how long
it will last, or how far it will go. The central issue in managing the trade is that
you can have control over the size of your losses (via stop-losses), but very
little control over the size of the gains. You can buy a stock at $5 and make
sure that you only lose $2, but you cannot force the stock to go to $9.
In practice, each individual trader develops his own technique that is a combination of risk analysis and indicator readings. The optimum way to take
profit is, in fact, one of the great, unexplored frontiers of technical trading.
Here are some choices for selecting a profit target:

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade
✓ Name a dollar amount. Logically, you are compensated by an amount
that is a multiple of the risk you are taking. This is the Tharp approach I
mention in the section, “Common questions and concerns.” You set your
initial risk at $2 and are willing to accept a loss of a fraction of that, or
$1.50. Your profit target is double initial risk, or $4. Because the security
initially costs $8, you seek a 50 percent return. This expected gain may
or may not be realistic depending on your holding period, changes in
volatility, and other factors. After you have made the 50 percent, however, you obey the target and exit the trade when it reaches $12. The
problem with this approach, of course, is that the price may keep on
rising and then you have an opportunity loss if it reaches (say) $20.
✓ Set a true-range amount. Your security, historically, has an average
high-low range of $10 over 20 periods, your expected holding period.
You want to capture 75 percent of the range, or $7.50. Because you use
indicators to time your entry, you assume that you are entering at the
low end of the range; therefore, 75 percent is realistic. When the price
reaches your target, you take profit.
The problem with this approach is twofold: The range can widen or
narrow. If it widens, you aimed too low and if it narrows, your original
target is too ambitious. Second, how do you sit through a pullback?
You may have met the goal of entering at a low only to have an aberrant
pullback take the price down 30 percent rather than up 75 percent. This
movement was not enough to hit your stop but now your profit target
is $10.50 away from the current price. Because you know the average
range is $10, the probability of meeting your $7.50 target within your
holding period just went out the window.
✓ Rely on indicators. Instead of formulating take-profit rules, most technical traders rely on indicators to signal when a move has ended — the
signal is the de facto take-profit rule. Relying on indicators is “winging
it” and actually requires more market monitoring than the fixed dollar
amount or average true-range methods, which deliver a number you can
convert into a standing order with your broker.

Controlling Losses
Your level of risk seeking or risk aversion is personal. Therefore, nobody can
design rules for you. You must do it for yourself. Ask yourself whether you’d
faithfully follow every buy/sell signal generated by a given indicator when the
backtest of the indicator predicts that you will have some individual trades
that entail a loss of 50 percent of your trading capital. No?
Well, how much of your trading capital are you prepared to lose? This is not an
idle question. Your answer is critical to whether you succeed in technical trading. If you say you can accept no losses at all, forget technical trading. You will
take losses in technical trading. If you say that you’re willing to lose 50 percent

www.pdfdummies.com

79

80

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
in a single trade — whoa, Nellie! That’s too much. Three or four losing trades in
a row and you would not have enough capital left to do any trades. I offer some
help in deducing your personal number in the following sections.
Experienced traders ask themselves, “How much will I lose today?” when they
wake up every morning. They expect loss on some level. In contrast, beginners
find losses almost impossible to contemplate. Yet if you don’t control losses,
the question is not whether you go broke, but when you go broke (as a famous
trader named W.D. Gann wrote on the very first page of one of his books).
Exiting a losing trade is the single hardest thing to do in trading. For one
thing, exiting means that your indicator let you down. Accept that your indicators have shortcomings and that your job is to overcome those shortcomings by using money-management rules.
A bigger problem may be your bruised ego. To sell a losing position means
that you failed, and the standard response to a loss is denial. “It will come
back!” you cry. In the long run, maybe it will come back. But by then, you may
be broke and unable to take advantage of it. Flip back a few pages and look at
Table 1-1 in Chapter 1 that shows the percentage gain that you need to recover
a loss. To recover a 50 percent loss, you need to make a 100 percent gain.
Every top trader admits to taking bigger losses than they planned. Many go
out of business for a period of time, only to come back later with essentially
the same indicators — and better ways to manage the trade. In fact, some
investors say that the best time to place money with a professional trader is
right after he has taken a fat loss — because then he’s a better trader. Note
that such investors aren’t predicting he will be a better indicator analyst, but
a better trader.

Using the First Line of Defense:
Stop-Loss Orders
You use a stop-loss order to overcome the unreliability of indicators as well as
your own emotional response to losses. A stop-loss order is an order you give
your broker to exit a trade if it goes against you by some amount. For a buyer,
the stop-loss order is a sell order. For a seller, it’s a buy order.
If market conditions are choppy (high volatility), you may want to widen your
stop even though your own particular security is behaving nicely. In this
instance, you fear an overflow effect from the general market to your particular security. You may switch from a money-based trailing stop like the 2 percent rule to a volatility or pattern type of stop.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade
To know when to put on the brakes with a stop-loss order, keep reading. You
absolutely need to understand stops to trade successfully.

Mental stops are hogwash
You should enter your stop-loss order at the same time you enter the position. In fact, you need to know the stop in order to calculate how big a position to take in the first place, if you’re using any risk-management rule. Why
some traders don’t do this is a mystery. Many traders say they keep a mental
stop in their heads, but this “method” is a delusion. The trader is conning
himself into thinking that he’ll be watching the price every minute the market
is open and will have the gumption to sell at a loss if the limit is reached.
But no one can watch the market every minute, and in practice, most traders with mental stops sit hopelessly by as the trade goes further and further
against them.
Other traders say that their security isn’t suitable for stops because it’s too
volatile. Or the trader is so big that the market would find out where his
stops are and maliciously target them. Another rationalization is that the
trader’s stops get hit, and often, only for the price to move back in the original direction right afterwards. This excuse isn’t a reason to avoid using stoplosses. It’s a reason to reset the stop to a better level.
To pretend that you have a mental stop or to refuse to place stops is to avoid
accepting the reality of trading — it’s a business, and setbacks happen in business. Setting a stop-loss order is like buying insurance in case the store burns
down. Not to take out insurance is to treat trading as a hobby and view the
amount at stake as play money rather than as risk capital.

Sorting out the types of stops
Technical traders have developed many stop-loss principles. Each concept
is either a fixed trading rule or a self-adjusting one. Stops relate to indicators,
money, or to time, and often these three don’t line up neatly to give you an
easy decision. You have to choose the type of stop that works best for you.

The 2 percent stop rule
Probably the most famous stop-loss rule is the fixed 2 percent rule that was
employed by a trading group named the Turtles. The 2 percent rule states that
you should stop a loss when it reaches 2 percent of starting equity. If you’re
trading risk capital of $10,000, you can afford to lose no more than $200 on any
single trade if you expect to stay in business for a long period of time. The 2
percent rule is an example of a money stop, which names the amount of money
you’re willing to lose in a single trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

81

82

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
Two hundred dollars may sound like a tiny number to you, but in the context
of active trading, this figure is quite large. You need only 50 losing trades in
a row to go broke. And 50 trades may sound like a lot of trades, but you find
that many valid indicators have you trading that often, depending on your
time frame. If you’re trading 15-minute or 60-minute bars, you could easily
have more than 100 trades in a month.
Although your indicators should be better than to have 50 consecutive losses
in a single security, if you’re trading several securities, 50 is no longer a large
number. If you’re trading five securities, for example, you go broke after ten
consecutive losses per security.

Risk-reward money stops
The risk-reward ratio puts the amount of expected gain in direct relationship
to the amount of expected loss, as in the Tharp approach I mention in the
“Common questions and concerns” section in this chapter. The higher the
risk-reward ratio, the more desirable the trade. Say, for example, that you’re
buying Blue Widget stock at $5 and your indicators tell you that the potential
gain is $10, which means that the stock could go to $15. You could set your
initial stop at $2.50, or 50 percent of your capital stake, for the chance to
make $10. That gives you a risk-reward ratio of 10:2.5, or 4:1. (Strangely, the
amount of the gain, the reward, is always placed first in the ratio, even though
it comes second in the name.)
But consider the premise from this example — your ending capital triples
your initial stake. But gee, expecting a 300 percent return is going a bit far,
isn’t it? Well, it depends on your skills. If you consistently forecast and get
300 percent gains, good for you. You may be able to accept a higher initial
