
CHAPTER 14

CANDLES WITH
OSCILLATORS

Let every bird sing its own note.

u

nlike pattern recognition techniques that are subjective
(this includes candlestick techniques), oscillators are
mathematically derived techniques that offer a more objective
means of analyzing the market. They are widely used and are
the basis of many computerized trading systems.
Oscillators include such technical tools as the relative
strength index, stochastics, and MACD. The three major uses of
oscillators are:

1. As a divergence indicator. There are two kinds of divergence. A
negative, or bearish, divergence occurs when prices are at a
new high, but the oscillator is not. This implies the market is
internally weak. A positive, or bullish, divergence is when

225

226

Part 2 • Convergence

prices are at a new low, but the oscillator does not hit a new
low. The implication is that the selling pressure is losing
steam.
2. As overbought /oversold indicators. This means oscillators can
notify the trader if the market has become overextended and,
thus, vulnerable to a correction.
3. As confirmation of the force behind a trend' s move. Oscillators can
confirm the market's momentum, measuring the velocity of
a price move by comparing price changes. In theory, the
velocity should increase as the trend is under way. A flattening of momentum could be an early warning that a price
move may be decelerating.
There is a Japanese saying: "All clouds do not rain." I view
the oscillator as a rain cloud that has the potential for rain but
the only way to tell it's raining is either seeing or feeling the
raindrops. So it is with oscillators. An oscillator is like a storm
cloud, but we need a final confirmation with candle signals.
Thus, I view an overbought or oversold oscillator as only a
warning, a clue, with final confirmation coming with a candlestick pattern.

—

THE RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX
The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is one of the most popular
oscillators. The RSI oscillator is different from the concept of the
relative strength. The relative strength compares the relative
strength performance of a stock, or a small group of stocks, with
the performance of a sector or a broader market index such as
the Dow Jones or the S&P 500.

Computing the RSI
The RSI compares the relative strength of price advances to
price declines over a specified period. Nine and 14 days are
two of the most popular periods used. The RSI is figured by
comparing the gains of up sessions with the losses of the down
sessions over a given time frame. The calculations used are
dependent only on closing prices. The formula is:
RSI = 100 - (100 / (1 + RS))

where RS =

average up points for period
average down points for period

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

Thus, computing a 14-day RSI entails adding the total gains
made on the up days over the last 14 days (on a close-to-close
basis) and dividing by 14. The same would be done for the
down days. These figures provide the relative strength (RS).
This RS is then put into the RSI formula. This RSI formula converts the RS data so that it becomes an index with a range
between 0 and 100.

Using the RSI
The two main uses of RSI are as an overbought / oversold indicator and as a tool to monitor divergence.

• As an overbought / oversold indicator, the RSI implies that
the market is overbought if it approaches the upper end of
this band (that is, above 70%). At that point, the market may
be vulnerable to a pullback or could move into a period of
consolidation. Conversely, at the lower end of the RSI range
(usually below 30%), it is said to reflect an oversold condition. In such an environment, there is a potential of a short
covering move.
• As a divergence tool, RSI calculations can be helpful when
prices make a new high for the move and the RSI fails to
make a concurrent high. This is called negative divergence
and is potentially bearish. Positive divergence occurs when
prices make a new low, but the RSI does not. Divergence is
more meaningful when RSI oscillator readings are in overbought or oversold regions.
In Exhibit 14.1, through the later part of November there was
resistance near $58. Once Albertson's pushed over that level
with a tall white candle on December 1, we can then use the
change of polarity that converts the prior resistance into new
support. There was vacillation the week of December 14, but a
series of bullish long lower shadows showed that this stock had
a good foundation near $62. The rally resumed on December
21, stalling with a dark-cloud cover. As the stock formed this
dark-cloud cover at new highs, the RSI was overbought and
also formed a negative divergence signal. That is, the stock's
price was higher at 2 than 1, but the RSI was lower at 2 than 1.
The aforementioned dark-cloud cover became resistance as
confirmed by another dark-cloud cover made on January 10
and 11. A piercing pattern in mid January at P occurred in an
oversold environment (as gauged by the RSI).

227

228

Part 2 • Convergence

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 14.1. Albertson's Daily (RSI)

This convergence of bearish divergence and the dark-cloud
cover reinforced the potential bearish implications of the darkcloud cover. Trend lines can also be used on the relative
strength index. This is shown by the dashed line on the oscillator. Note that, once this rising support line was penetrated, it
became another negative signal.
A key concept with candle charts is that the overall technical
picture is more important than a single candle line. One should
always view the candle line or candle pattern in the context of
its market surroundings.
In Exhibit 14.2 there are two bullish engulfing patterns
shown as 1 and 2. (Although the open of the white candle of
this pattern was the same as the close of the black candle, this
is acceptable as a bullish engulfing pattern since foreign
exchange markets' open and close are the same.) Bullish
engulfing pattern 2 was more important than bullish engulfing
pattern 1 because the second bullish engulfing pattern was confirmed by bullish divergence. In the first bullish engulfing pattern, the RSI was continuing its descent as the stock made new
lows. This kept the bearish momentum intact.

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 14.2. British Pound—Daily (RSI)

MOVING AVERAGE OSCILLATOR
Computing the Moving Average Oscillator
This indicator is obtained by subtracting the shorter-term moving average from the longer-term moving average. It has plus
or minus values. Thus, a value above 0 means the shorter-term
moving average is above the longer-term moving average. A
reading under 0 means the shorter-term moving average is less
than the longer-term moving average.

Using the Moving Average Oscillator
Since this oscillator uses a short- and long-term moving average, we are comparing the short-term momentum to a longerterm momentum. This is because the short-term moving average is more responsive to recent price activity. If the short-term
moving average is relatively far above (or below) the longerterm moving average, the market is said to be overbought (or
oversold ). As with the other oscillators, the moving average
oscillator is also used as a divergence vehicle.

229

230

Part 2 • Convergence

As prices increase, the technician wants to see the short-term
moving average increase relative to the longer-term moving
average. This would mean increasing positive values for the
moving average difference line. If prices advance and the dif ference between the short- and long-term moving averages narrows, the market is indicating that the shorter-term momentum
is running out of steam.
During the first week of May in Exhibit 14.3 the Eurodollar
built a bullish engulfing pattern at B. After a small rally from
this pattern, the market retreated and found support, as expected, at the lows of the bullish engulfing pattern. Not only was
the support area defended with a May 19 hammer, but there
was also the bullish divergence as the Eurodollar marginally
made a new low while the moving average oscillator made a
higher low with the hammer. Once the market pushed above
.9200 from the hammer, it confirmed a double bottom made
with the dual lows at the bullish engulfing pattern and hammer. As will be discussed in Chapter 16, we can use a breakout
from the .350 trading range (i.e., from .8850 to .9200) to give us
a target toward .9550 (obtained by adding the .350 trading
range onto the breakout point of .9200).

0.9900
- 0.9850
• 0.9800
- 0.9750
• 0.9700
• 0.9650
• 0.9600
•

Q

0.9550

i

•

1

W

m

,
t
V'

•
•

0.9500
0.9450
0.9400

0.9350
0.9300
• 0.9250
• 0.9200
• 0.9150
•

- 0.9100
•

0.9050

•

0.9000

•

0.8950

0.8900
• 0.8850
•

- 0.9 BOO
•

B :

hammer

•

0.8750
0.8700

Osciljator j

Moving
;

:

.

i

i

i

I

'

:

V:

0.02

\

:

0.015

0.01

X

1

0.005

0
•

:•
;

^

T TTcT

TTHT

14/24

M

5 /8

BHT

•

1tif 2

8 /i

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 14.3. Eurodollar / US—Daily (Moving Average Oscillator )

m B /7

-0.005
0.01
-0.015

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

In Exhibit 14.4 Catalina was ascending along a rising resistance line. During the week of July 13, although the stock was
hovering near its current highs, a series of small real bodies
showed that the bulls' advance was being constrained by the
bears. This hesitation near $56 is not surprising considering
that level was resistance in late April.
We now turn our attention to the moving average oscillator.
At the time of the aforementioned small real bodies in mid July,
there was also bearish convergence. Consequently, we have a
classic example of convergence at $56. Specifically: (1) The
stock was at a resistance area based on the rising resistance line
and the prior April price peak; (2) a series of small real bodies
showing a market separating from its bull trend; and (3) the
bearish divergence. If we need more proof of a market in trouble, then we would have received this signal with a falling window (at the arrow) that became resistance.
Exhibit 14.5 displays a key use of candles and oscillators.
Most equity traders are buyers; relatively few are short sellers.
A challenge longs may have is knowing when to exit a position.
This is where an oscillator, especially when confirmed with a
candles line or pattern, can become useful. As we saw in

Ml

4/13

14 /20

|4 /27 |5/1

15 /11 |5/18
© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 14.4. Catalina Marketing—Daily (Moving Average Oscillator)

231

232

Part 2 • Convergence

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—Daily (Moving Average Oscillator)

EXHIBIT 14.5. Wal-Mart Stores

Exhibit 14.4, when a stock becomes overextended and there is
also a candlestick confirming a turn, it could be a good place to
either exit longs or lighten up on long positions. With this in
mind, let's look at each overbought occurrence:
1. There were two hanging man lines at H in the first week of
March. These appeared during an overbought market (based
on the oscillator), but they were not confirmed by a close

under their real bodies. Remember, for bearish confirmation
of a hanging man, we need a close under the hanging man's
real body to confirm a hanging man's potentially bearish
implications. Additionally, the market formed a rising window on the first hanging man session. As such, the window
became support. So, while the market was overextended,
there was no bearish confirmation of a market rate turn at 1
based on the candle lines. The bearish engulfing pattern at B
on March 18 and 19 was a turning signal not only because of
the bearish engulfing pattern itself , but also because at the
time of that pattern the stock had made a new high and the
moving average oscillator had made a lower high. This
formed bearish or negative divergence.

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

2. An overbought reading with the oscillator, but no turning
signals with the candles since the candle line during the
overbought reading was a tall white real body. A few days
after this white real body we can see a bearish engulfing pattern (at C) which became resistance for a few sessions.
3. On April 7 Wal-Mart moved above the bearish engulfing pattern discussed above. As such, it could be viewed as a bullish
breakout. At area 3 the oscillator was overbought, but there
were no turning signals with the candles and we would not

look to sell. A cautionary signal would come a few days later
with a long-legged doji after a tall white candle.
4. An overbought oscillator with a doji confirming a potential
turn. While the stock hesitated at this doji, a small rising window opened between April 22 and 23 as support. Thus, we
would need further bearish confirmation by a close under
the window. The break of the window's support occurred on
April 28.
5. A hanging man at the arrow on May 11 and an overextended
oscillator gave us a turning signal. The bearish implications
of the hanging man were confirmed by a lower close the next
day.
6. A doji confirming hesitation. Similar to 4, there was a rising
window that needed to be closed before the trend could be
viewed as damaged. The close under the window's support
took place on June 8.

STOCHASTICS
The stochastic oscillator is another popular tool. It, like all the
other oscillators, provides overbought and oversold readings
and signals divergences. It also affords a mechanism to relate a
shorter-term trend to a longer-term trend. The stochastic indicator compares the latest closing price with the total range of
price action for a specified period. Stochastic values are
between 0 and 100. A high stochastic reading would mean the
close is near the upper end of the entire range for the period. A
low reading means that the close is near the low end of the
period's range. The idea behind stochastics is that as the market moves higher, closes tend to be near the highs of the range;
as the market moves lower, prices tend to cluster near the lows
of the range.

233

234

Part 2 • Convergence

Computing Stochastics
The stochastic indicator is comprised of two lines: the %K and
the %D. The %K line, called the raw stochastic or the fast %K,
is more sensitive. The formula for the %K line is:
(Close) - (Low of N)
X 100 = %K
(High of N) - (Low of N)

where Close = current close
Low of N = low of the range during the period used
High of N = high of the range during the period used

The "100" in the equation converts the value into a percentage. Thus, if the close today is the same as the high for the
period under observation, the fast %K would be 100%. A period
can be in days, weeks, or even intraday (such as hourly).
Fourteen, nineteen, and twenty-one periods are some of the
more common periods.
Because the fast %K line can be so volatile, this line is usually
smoothed by taking a 3-period moving average of the last three
%K values. This 3-period moving average of %K is called the
slow %K. Most technicians use the slow %K line instead of the
choppy fast %K line. This slow %K is then smoothed again using
a 3-day moving average of the slow %K to get what is called the
%D line. This %D is essentially a moving average of a moving
average. One way to think of the difference between the %K and
%D lines is too view them as you would two moving averages
with the %K line comparable to a short-term moving average,
and the %D line comparable to a longer-term moving average.

Using Stochastics
As mentioned previously, stochastics can be used in several
ways. The most popular method is as a tool for showing divergence. Most technicians who monitor stochastics use this
aspect of divergence in conjunction with overbought / oversold
readings.
Some technicians require another rule: to have the slow %K
line cross under the %D line for a sell signal, or for the slow
%K to move above the %D for a buy signal. This is comparable to the bullish (bearish ) signal of a faster moving average
crossing over (under ) the slower moving average.
Another use is as a gauge for overbought / oversold. Most
traders will view an 80% or higher reading as overbought, and

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

20% or lower as oversold. For instance, to get a buy signal, the
market must be oversold (20% or less for %D), there is positive
divergence, and the %K line is crossing above the %D line.
Exhibit 14.6 displays a small bearish engulfing pattern at B in
the early morning of October 23. Normally such a small bearish
engulfing pattern is not significant, but, when combined with
stochastics, we see that the stochastic is overextended and there
is a bearish crossover (where the faster %K line crosses under
the slower %D line). This put more significance on the bearish
engulfing pattern. We look for the high of this pattern at $105 to
be resistance. This resistance held as a stock got to $104 the following morning from where it then failed.
A large falling window opened October 25. A nicely defined
hammer appeared early the next morning (October 26). A few
periods before this hammer, we got a tentative clue of bottom
with the stochastics. Specifically, early on October 26 the
stochastic was in oversold territory (that is, below 20%). We
also see a bullish crossover where the faster %K line crossed
above the slower %D line. Soon after the stochastic turning signal, we got a bullish candle signal with the aforementioned

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 14.6. JDS Uniphase 60 Minutes (Stochastics)

235

236

Part 2 • Convergence

hammer. This hammer held as support. If the stock had pulled
under the hammer 's low then, in spite of the positive stochastic reading, one should consider vacating longs.
Exhibit 14.7 shows a series of long lower shadows emerged in
early October. During the week of October 12 we see the
stochastic oscillator in oversold readings near 20% with a
bullish crossover. This reinforced what the bullish shadows had
hinted at, that the stock was stabilizing.
A doji-like line emerged on October 19 following a tall white
candle. This converted the trend from up to more neutral since
the doji hinted that the market was "tired." The market treaded water after this doji and then pushed higher with the
November 2 rising window. This window became support during the week of November 2. A bearish engulfing pattern on
November 6 and 9 at B turned the trend less positive. This bearish engulfing pattern had about equally sized real bodies; normally we like to see a black real body of the bearish engulfing
pattern much larger than the white real body. This shows the
bears have wrested control from the bulls. In this case, however, at the time of the bearish engulfing pattern, there was also a
bearish crossover in the stochastic reading. As such, when

¥—
^

B

57
56

55
54
53

|fifU+

D

52

a

!+

1 ’Htj

I*

51

50
49

48
47
46

45

44
43

80

70
60
50
40
30

20
10

K /21

I9/2I

10/1 10/5

fio /n

ITofii

TToTJs

1TT72

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 14.7. Schlumberger—Daily (Stochastics)

MW9

11/16 11/18

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

combined with the stochastic reading, this bearish engulfing
pattern took on extra significance.

MOVING AVERAGE CONVERG ENCEDIVERGE NCE
Constructing the MACD
While the Moving Average Convergence-Divergence (MACD)
is composed of two lines, it is really a combination of three
exponentially smoothed moving averages. The first line is the
difference between two exponential moving averages (usually
the 26- and 12-period exponential moving averages). The sec
ond line of the MACD is made by taking an exponential moving average (usually 9-period ) of the difference between the
two exponential moving averages used to make the first line.
This second line is called the signal line.

-

Using the MACD
When the faster line crosses above the slower ( the signal line),
it is viewed as a positive. A bearish crossover is when the faster
line moves under the slower line. The MACD can also be used
to find areas in which the market is overbought or oversold.
Because of the slower nature of MACD, it is not generally used
as a short-term trading tool.
In Exhibit 14.8 the tall white candle on March 16 opened a rising window. The next day the small real body inside this white
candle formed a harami pattern. The correction from this
harami pattern found stabilization at the aforementioned win
dow. A dark-cloud cover on March 30 and April 1 at D gave
early evidence that the market, as the Japanese would say, "had
a poor chance of rising." This dark-cloud cover became resistance shown by the action the following two days. While the
stock pushed over the dark-cloud's resistance intraday, it had
failed to close above it, thus keeping the resistance intact.
The week after the emergence of the dark-cloud cover, we get
the bearish confirmation via the MACD as the faster line crosses under the slower signal line.
Note how the decline from the dark-cloud cover continued
until the market formed a bullish engulfing pattern in mid
April. This bullish engulfing pattern confirmed the potential
support area at the rising window from March 15 and 16.

-

237

238

Part 2 • Convergence

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 14.8. Target Daily (MACD)

B:

1435.00

Oh

1430.00
1425.00
1420.00
1415.00

1410.00

i

1

p*

windows

LI

* .

1320.00
1315.00

i

m

..M

.

:

M

MI

1345.00

1330.00
1325.00

^

M

1365.00
1360.00
1355.00
1350.00

1335.00

f

m

1370.00

1340.00

I

IL

1405.00
1400.00
1395.00
1390.00
1395.00
1380.00
1375.00

MI

le/28

! i
(

1711

7 /5

crossover

20
15
10
5

o

:

i

Ml

I? /26 j?/28

-5
10

•

-15

17 /12

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 14.9. S&P 500—Daily (MACD)

bearish

Day

Chapter 14 • Candles with Oscillators

This chart is a good example of the value added of candle
charts. Very often candles will give a turning signal ahead of
traditional Western technicals. In this scenario we saw the darkcloud cover presaging a top almost a week before the MACD
gave its reversal signal.
In Exhibit 14.9 the S&P made a new high in mid July. But
indications of trouble came with the bearish engulfing pattern
at B. Further dampening the bullish outlook was a bearish clue
sent via the MACD as the faster line crossed under the slower
line. The session after the bearish engulfing pattern, the market
opened a falling window. Because the market had a rising window the prior week, this falling window built an island top.
This further reinforced the potentially bearish outlook.
In Exhibit 14.10 a large bullish engulfing pattern was completed on August 3. A few sessions after this, there was a bullish
crossover in the MACD (another example of candles giving an
earlier clue of a reversal than Western techniques). The ascent
from this bullish engulfing pattern continued until the evening
star. (The middle part of the pattern was also a high-wave candle.) A day after this evening star pattern, the nail in the coffin
was placed with the bearish crossover in the MACD.
