
Forex for Beginners
Fed’s policy to ignore money supply. In 2006, it caused quite a stir when the
Fed ceased collecting data on M3 (M2 plus large and long-term deposits)
which is perhaps the broadest measure of US money supply. Fundamental
analysts that disagree with the Fed’s interpretation can still access M1
(physical money such as coins and currency plus demand deposits) and M2
(M1 plus time-related deposits and savings deposits). Other central banks
publish comparable data. Given the link between a continuously growing
money supply and a declining US dollar (Figure 5-7), these data series might
be worth paying attention to!

Figure 5-7. Correlation between rising M2 and declining (trade-weighted) US dollar

For guidance on where the markets think US inflation is headed, analysts
should look at US Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS). TIPS are
similar to US Treasury bonds, except that principal and interest payments are
tied to the CPI. By calculating the breakeven point between TIPS and normal
Treasury securities, it’s possible to determine inflation expectations for the
next 5, 10, 20, and 30 years. For example, if the current 10-year US Treasury
yield is 4.5%, and the yield on an equivalent TIPS bond is 7.5%, then the
“breakeven” inflation rate is 3% per year. (This calculation ignores the
liquidity/uncertainty premium built into TIPS, which is generally
insubstantial.) If inflation expectations rise, this premium will also rise, even
controlling for changing perceptions of US creditworthiness. Ignoring the
2008 volatility—which was an anomaly caused by the credit crisis—the
expected inflation rate for the next 5 years has hovered around 2.5%–3%.
3 Ben S. Bernanke, “What the Fed Did and Why: Supporting the Recovery and Sustaining

Price Stability,” Washington Post, November 4, 2010, www.washingtonpost
.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/11/03/AR2010110307372.html.

107

108

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
(See Figure 5-8.) If you perform this calculation on the equivalent Japanese
securities, in contrast, you will see that expectations there are for negative
price inflation (also known as deflation).

Figure 5-8. Market expectations for 5-Year CPI inflation based on “breakeven” rates (Source:
Bloomberg L.P.)

Economic Indicators
After inflation, gross domestic product (GDP) is the most important
economic indicator, at least as far as the forex markets are concerned. The
GDP growth rate—or rather, the real GDP growth rate, which controls for
inflation—is a comprehensive barometer of the health of an economy. If the
number is positive, it means that economic output is expanding, while a
negative number implies a contraction. Real GDP is especially useful for
comparative purposes. In a nutshell, the currencies of high-growth emerging
economies should outperform major currencies, whose economies tend to
exhibit slower growth.
Unfortunately, that’s probably the most profound generality that can be
made. For example, there is only a slight connection between real GDP
growth differentials and long-term exchange rate movements between
Canada and the United States, as seen in Figure 5-9. Generally speaking, the
US dollar has risen against the Loonie when the US/Canada differential was
positive, and fared less well when the differential turned negative. At the

Forex for Beginners
same time, the Loonie has appreciated by more than 40% since 2002, even
though the economies of the US and Canada have grown at roughly the same
rate (the real GDP growth differential has hovered around 0) for the same
period. In short, it might be difficult to establish an actionable trading
strategy based on GDP alone.

Figure 5-9. USD / CAD exchange rate and real GDP growth differential

That’s not to say that the currency markets don’t take GDP seriously. On the
contrary, GDP figures are probably secondary only to inflation indicators in
their ability to create a stir and drive instantaneous reactions. This can be
seen especially in the frantic trading that takes place in the minutes leading
up to and immediately following their official release.
The same can be said about most of the various other economic indicators,
which are absorbed into the currency markets either right away, not at all, or
indirectly through other indicators. As for which indicators are important
(those that have the power to move the market), that depends on the market
narrative at any given time. In the wake of the 2008 housing market collapse,
for example, housing indicators suddenly acquired tremendous influence as
the financial markets looked to the housing sector to lead the economic
recovery. There are indicators that measure supply, by way of housing starts
and construction permits and inventory, as well as those that measure
demand, by way of mortgage applications, residential sales, and vacancy
rates. And of course, there are dozens of indexes that measure nothing but
price, segmented by type of dwelling, price-range, region, and so forth. The

109

110

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
most famous index is probably the Case-Shiller Home Price Index, though it
is not necessarily the most comprehensive.
There are some commentators who would insist that there are certain
indicators that are always important, but my experience suggests that this is
not actually the case. That’s probably due to the fact that there are thousands
of indicators covering every facet of every economy. To try to monitor more
than a handful with any level of dedication would be futile at best and
counterproductive at worst. That’s not just because most indicators are
irrelevant, but also because many are contradictory. For trading purposes, it’s
best to stick to a few of the most prominent leading indicators. These
indicators precede changes in the economy and must be distinguished from
lagging indicators, which follow changes in the economy.
Most forex news websites (and most financial news websites, for that matter)
compile a calendar of all economic indicators, along with a description of
each, scheduled release/date time, previous value, and consensus forecast
(like the one in Figure 5-10). Some editors will go one step further and
attempt to gauge the relative importance of each indicator. From monitoring
these lists, forex forums, and media coverage, it’s usually fairly easy to
determine which indicators are worth paying attention to at any given time.

Figure 5-10. Sample Economic Calendar (Source: ForexPros.com)

A good rule of thumb is that if CNBC and Bloomberg News are not featuring
live coverage of the indicator’s release, it probably won’t sway the markets
much. As with inflation, interest rates, and GDP figures, the number that is
reported is not significant in and of itself, but only relative to market
expectations. It’s not uncommon for a speculative buildup in advance of the
release to drive a 50 PIP move in one direction, only to reverse completely
when the indicator fails to conform to expectations. It should also be noted

Forex for Beginners
that all initial data releases are preliminary and are always accompanied by
modified final numbers for the previous period.
As for why indicators’ relative significance varies over time, the answer is
that the markets are capricious and that significance is self-fulfilling.
Sometimes the rationale is indirect. Employment indicators, for example,
would seem to have very little direct bearing on currencies. Because they can
influence monetary policy (such as when a high unemployment rate
prevented the Fed from hiking interest rates despite the onset of economic
recovery in 2010) one must still pay attention to them.
Practitioners of technical analysis should also be aware of economic
indicators’ scheduled release times. The spikes in volatility that they tend to
produce can confound technical strategies and trigger massive losses among
those caught unaware.

Balance of Payments Analysis
As I explained in Chapter 3, the impact of payments imbalances on exchange
rates is anything but straightforward. In theory, a perennial trade deficit
(when imports exceed exports) should cause currency depreciation so that
long-term equilibrium can be restored. You can see from Figure 5-11, for
example, that the release of UK trade figures in November 2011 touched off
an immediate 150 PIP decline in the pound and seemed to catalyze an even
bigger correction in the weeks that followed.

111

112

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Figure 5-11. Impact of trade deficit on British pound

That’s because the figures showed a growing trade deficit and a goods deficit
that was at the highest level since 1998. In other words, the markets
concluded that at its current level, the pound was hindering both the recovery
of the export sector (still languishing after the 2008 economic downturn) and
the broader economy. To add fuel to the fire, the trade figures were even
worse than the most pessimistic forecasts.
Naturally, the opposite should be true for any currency that boasts a trade
surplus. South Korea and the rest of the so-called Asian Tigers, for example,
have long experienced currency appreciation as a (undesirable) byproduct of
their perennial trade surpluses.
Most countries release trade data broken down into goods and services,
imports and exports, and on a monthly basis. Current account data,
meanwhile, is typically released on a quarterly basis. In addition, there are an

Forex for Beginners
inexhaustible number of data streams for cross-border capital flows
(classified by region, financial security, type of transaction, and so forth)
which make excellent fodder for fundamental analysis!
In practice, it is tremendously difficult to derive the equilibrium exchange
rate from a trade imbalance alone because the exchange rate is necessarily
already at equilibrium. Recall that the difference between exports and
imports should approximate the difference between savings and investment
as well as the net change in ownership of domestic assets. This is basically
another way of saying that trade deficits must be offset by net investment
inflows, and vice versa. From this perspective, the relevant question is not
whether net exporters are willing to subsidize net importers, but whether
investors from net exporting countries are able and willing to deploy this
difference into investment opportunities in the net importing economy at
current exchange rates. In the words of one economic columnist, “When it
comes to the U.S. trade gap, how many refrigerators the U.S. sells overseas is
far less important than how many dollars the rest of the world wants.”4
Figure 5-12, for example, shows that foreign entities purchase trillions of
dollars of US securities (on a gross basis) every quarter, which provides a
strong counterbalance to the trade deficit.

Figure 5-12. Gross quarterly purchases of US financial securities by foreign residents
(Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis)

6 Frank Ahrens, “U.S. Trade Imbalance Widens Slightly: So What?” Washington Post,

May 13, 2009, http://voices.washingtonpost.com/economy-watch/2009/05/us_trade
_imbalance_widens_slig.html.

113

114

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
As an aside, current account deficits sometimes lead to bubbles in net
importing countries, while other times it leads to currency depreciation. In
the case of the US dollar, the perennial US current account deficit has caused
both outcomes.
Another problem with analyzing the impact of trade data on exchange rates is
that, by definition, they describe the past. As trade and investment flows
reflect fundamental (non-speculative) shifts in demand for particular
currencies, these shifts must necessarily have already happened prior to the
release of the data. In other words, the fact that the United Kingdom
experienced a large trade deficit last month doesn’t necessarily offer any
clues into what will happen in the future.
Fortunately, this is almost irrelevant as far as you and I are concerned. Since
forex trading is dominated by speculators, the fact that the markets adjust to
trade and investment flows only after they have taken place (when they are
reported) is not really a problem. In this way, these movements of money can
be said to affect exchange rates twice: first, when they actually take place
and, secondly, when the markets become aware of them. The first adjustment
takes place gradually and often imperceptibly, while the second happens in
large thuds.
Moreover, trade and investment flows typically follow easily identifiable
trends. While deficits may spike from time to time, they typically move up,
down, or sideways, and they do so for sustained periods of time. A structural
shift from surplus to deficit (or vice versa) might signify that a currency is
undervalued (overvalued), especially if it isn’t offset by a comparable shift in
investment flows. In 2011, the Japanese yen rose to a record high against the
US dollar, and its trade surplus steadily narrowed. The budding fundamental
analysts out there might want to look for further clues that the yen might
soon
follow
the
dollar
downward.
(See
Figure 5-13.)

Forex for Beginners

Figure 5-13. (Potential) impact of changing trade patterns on USD/JPY (Source: Japan
Ministry of Finance, Bank of Japan)

Sentiment Analysis
The theme of risk aversion was thrust to the forefront of investor
consciousness in 2008 with the collapse of Bear Stearns and Lehman
Brothers. As the banking crisis morphed first into a credit crisis and then into
a full-blown financial crisis, the markets became transfixed by credit risk and
moved to shed any assets for which there was even a slight possibility of
default. This phenomenon manifested itself with especial intensity in the
forex markets, where investors fled all emerging and peripheral currencies
and migrated en masse into the US dollar. (Note Figure 5-14.) That’s because
the United States is perceived as one of the safest places in the world to
invest, due to the size of the US economy and depth of US capital markets.
With this, the notion of the safe haven currency—one that is seen as
preferable during times of crisis—was born.

115

116

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Figure 5-14. USD, CHF, JPY: 2008 financial crisis and aftermath

Even after the markets recovered in 2009 and 2010, risk aversion was never
far away. The sudden ignition of the European sovereign debt crisis, the
earthquake in Japan, the downgrading of the US sovereign credit rating, and
more all fueled investors’ fears. With each negative development, the
markets responded in kind. The Japanese yen and the Swiss franc, which had
also developed reputations as safe haven currencies, both rose to record
highs. Simply, their capital markets are not deep enough to absorb sudden
influxes of money without putting strong downward pressure on their
exchange rates. The US dollar held up well, too. Throughout this period,
there were plenty of developments that generated optimism. Each caused the
flight of capital into safe havens to reverse. This manifestation of bipolar
disorder was dubbed by one commentator as “risk-on, risk-off.”5
In fact, risk aversion has long been a driver of currency markets, though
previously it was risk appetite that hogged the spotlight. During most of the
2000s, record-high risk tolerance (some would call it complacency) led
droves of investors into growth currencies. They came in search of higher
yields, and the potential for currency appreciation was merely an added
9 Matthew Brown, “‘Risk On-Risk Off’ to Remain Key to Currency Markets for Months,

HSBC Says,” Bloomberg News, August 17, 2010, www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-0817/-risk-on-risk-off-to-remain-key-to-currency-markets-for-months-hsbc-says.html.

Forex for Beginners
bonus. In 2011, the carry trade began to make a comeback, as investors were
lulled back into a sense of security by rising interest rate differentials and
economic recovery.
From the standpoint of fundamental analysis, there are a few good
quantitative indicators that are useful for forecasting risk. The first is simply
forex volatility, which measures the extent of fluctuations in exchange rates
and is used interchangeably with risk. Most forex portals offer volatility data
on specific forex pairs, in absolute and percentage terms. In Figure 5-15, you
can see how volatility in the EUR/USD has ebbed and flowed over time.

Figure 5-15. Average daily fluctuation in EUR/USD, number of PIPs (Source:
Forexticket.co.uk)

The JP Morgan G7 Currency Volatility Index (shown in Figure 5-16)
meanwhile offers the most comprehensive snapshot of overall forex
volatility. A spike in volatility will typically precede a spike in risk aversion.
That’s because an increase in volatility implies more variable (and therefore
less dependable) returns.

117

118

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Figure 5-16. JP Morgan G7 Currency Volatility Index, 2007–2011 (Source: Bloomberg L.P.)

Implied volatility in options contracts represents market expectations of
volatility going forward. One can look at specific contracts in order to
determine how volatility expectations differ across different currency pairs,
time periods, and so on. With the Black-Scholes options pricing model, it’s
possible to plug in all of the known variables and deduce the volatility that is
implied by the price of the option. Most integrated quote/trading platforms
(or a subscription to OptionVue) can perform this calculation automatically
based on the other known parameters and display the implied volatility for
any security/currency that has a corresponding option. Additionally, the New
York Federal Reserve Bank regularly publishes data on implied volatility for
major currencies, as shown in Figure 5-17. For example, the implied
volatility of the JPY/USD in February 2012 was 10.1% (annualized) on a
weekly basis and 13.5% on an annualized basis. When statistical theory is
applied to these numbers, they imply a 68% chance that one year from now,
the USD/JPY will be within 13.5% of the current exchange rate, and there is
a 95% chance that it will fall within 27% (2 times implied volatility).

Forex for Beginners

Figure 5-17. Implied volatility (%) for major currencies in February 2012 (Source: The New
York Fed)

As for measuring the markets’ appetite for risk, the best proxy is probably
the S&P 500 Index. When risk appetite is high, equities tend to outperform
bonds, and growth currencies tend to outperform the majors. Similarly, the
shift of capital from bonds into stocks (which is measured and released
periodically by the mutual fund industry) also reflects an increased risk
appetite. In fact, 2010–2011 witnessed a strong inverse correlation between
the EUR/USD and the S&P 500. Each new revelation that the European debt
crisis was deepening led investors to sell both US stocks and the euro. (See
Figure 5-18.) As this correlation tightened, investors actually began to see the
S&P 500 as a proxy for risk. As a result, big moves in the S&P 500 often
preceded—not mirrored—changes in the EUR/USD.

Figure 5-18. Correlation between the EUR/USD and S&P 500

119

120

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Market Correlations
Speaking of correlations, the currency markets are full of them. There are
correlations between currencies and commodities, between currencies and
financial securities, and between multiple currencies. Correlation can be
discerned both through visual comparison and quantitative analysis.
Sometimes, it’s enough to look at a chart of two different indicators (as with
Figure 5-18) and immediately determine whether there is a relationship.
Other times, it’s helpful to know the exact correlation coefficient, which, for
statistics junkies, is the covariance of two data streams divided by the
product of their standard deviations. A coefficient of 1 (or 100%) implies a
perfect direct correlation, and a coefficient of -1 (-100%) implies a perfect
inverse correlation. If the coefficient measures 0, then there isn’t any
relationship between the two variables. While there is certainly disagreement
over what the threshold is for significance, most would agree that a figure
over 80% demonstrates a reasonably strong correlation and over 90%
demonstrates a very strong correlation.
Of course, correlation does not imply causation. Just because two variables
track each other very closely doesn’t mean that one necessarily causes the
other. As with the observable relationship between the S&P 500 and
EUR/USD, it could merely be that an external factor (risk appetite, in this
case) is driving both to behave identically rather than implying that
fluctuations in one are actually causing fluctuations in the other. This is a
very important distinction because only instances of causation are actionable.
Correlations can help us to understand the markets but are not entirely useful
for plotting strategy. On the other hand, if I can determine that a rising S&P
500 Index is directly causing a rising EUR/USD, then I can buy the
EUR/USD when the S&P rises and sell when it falls.

With that in mind, let’s look at some specific examples of correlation.
Commodity prices tend to manifest themselves in currency markets in
several different respects. Commodity currencies may take their cues
directly from commodity prices, especially during periods of economic
expansion. Canada, for example, is dependent on the United States for
energy exports while China’s demand for coal and iron ore drives the
Australian economy. As a result, the Canadian Loonie and the
Australian Aussie are buttressed during commodity price booms. In
the past, the South African rand has exhibited a correlation with gold

Forex for Beginners

prices, and the New Zealand dollar has always benefited from rising
agricultural prices.
The role of oil prices in forex is slightly more complex. While there are a
handful of economies around the world (namely, members of OPEC) that are
completely dependent on oil, most are plagued by political instability and
their currencies are not actively traded in the forex markets. The main
exceptions are Norway and Mexico, whose respective krone and peso are
both tied closely to the price of oil.
Much has been written about the relationship between oil prices and the US
dollar. For most of the modern financial era, there was very little correlation
between the two, probably because the price of oil didn’t fluctuate much.
That changed around 2003 when oil prices began a 5-year, 400% climb, and
the downtrend of the US dollar simultaneously accelerated (Figure 5-19). It
was originally hypothesized that the latter caused the former. Since oil was
priced in USD and the dollar was depreciating, oil producers had to raise
their prices in order to offset the foreign exchange losses. Economists later
determined that it was actually the other way around.
