
P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

10

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

the interest rate move will do. Indicators that have the biggest impact on
interest rates are the producer price index (PPI), consumer price index
(CPI), and GDP. Generally the timing of interest rate moves is known in
advance. They take place after regularly scheduled meetings by the Bank
of England (BOE), the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed), the European Central
Bank (ECB), the Bank of Japan (BOJ), and other central banks.
The trade balance shows the net difference over a period of time between a nation’s exports and imports. When a country imports more than
it exports the trade balance will show a deficit, which is generally considered unfavorable. For example, if U.S. dollars are sold for other domestic
national currencies (to pay for imports), the flow of dollars outside the
country will depreciate the value of the dollar. Similarly, if trade figures
show an increase in exports, dollars will flow into the United States and
appreciate the value of the dollar. From the standpoint of a national economy, a deficit in and of itself is not necessarily a bad thing. If the deficit is
greater than market expectations, however, then it will trigger a negative
price movement.

FX versus Futures
The FX market holds advantages over not only the equity market, but also
the futures market. Many futures traders have added currency spot trading to their portfolios. After recapping the key spot foreign exchange attributes, we compare the futures attributes.
FX Market Key Attributes

r It is the largest market in the world and has growing liquidity.
r There is 24-hour around-the-clock trading.
r Traders can profit in both bull and bear markets.
r Short selling is permitted without an uptick, and there are no trading
curbs.

r Instant executable trading platform minimizes slippage and errors.
r Even though higher leverage increases risk, many traders see trading
the FX market as getting more bang for the buck.
Futures Attributes

r Market liquidity is limited, depending on the month of the contract
traded.

r The presence of exchange fees results in more costs and commissions.
r Market hours for futures trading are much shorter than for spot FX
and are dependent on the product traded; each product may have

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

11

different opening and closing hours, and there is limited after-hours
trading.
r Futures leverage is higher than leverage for equities, but still only a
fraction of the leverage offered in FX.
r There tend to be prolonged bear markets.
r Pit trading structure increases error and slippage.
Like they can in the equities market, traders can implement in the FX
market the same strategies that they use in analyzing the futures markets.
Most futures traders are technical traders, and as mentioned in the equities section, the FX market is perfect for technical analysis. In fact, it is
the most commonly used analysis tool by professional traders. Let’s take a
closer look at how the futures market stacks up against the FX market.
Comparing Market Hours and Liquidity The volume traded in the
FX market is estimated to be more than five times that of the futures market. The FX market is open for trading 24 hours a day, but the futures market has confusing market hours that vary based on the product traded. For
example, trading gold futures is open only between 7:20 a.m. and 1:30 p.m.
on the New York Commodities Exchange (COMEX), whereas if you trade
crude oil futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange, trading is open
only between 8:30 a.m. and 2:10 p.m. These varying hours not only create
confusion, but also make it difficult to act on breakthrough announcements
throughout the remainder of the day.
In addition, if you have a full-time job during the day and can trade
only after hours, futures would be a very inconvenient market product for
you to trade. You would basically be placing orders based on past prices
and not current market prices. This lack of transparency makes trading
very cumbersome. With the FX market, if you choose to trade after hours
through the right market makers, you can be assured that you would receive the same liquidity and spread as at any other time of day. In addition,
each time zone has its own unique news and developments that could move
specific currency pairs.
Low to Zero Transaction Costs In the futures market, traders must
pay a spread and/or a commission. With futures brokers, average commissions can run close to $160 per trade on positions of $100,000 or greater.
The over-the-counter structure of the FX market eliminates exchange and
clearing fees, which in turn lowers transaction costs. Costs are further
reduced by the efficiencies created by a purely electronic marketplace
that allows clients to deal directly with the market maker, eliminating
both ticket costs and middlemen. Because the currency market offers
around-the-clock liquidity, traders receive tight, competitive spreads both

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

12

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

intraday and at night. Futures traders are more vulnerable to liquidity risk
and typically receive wider dealing spreads, especially during after-hours
trading.
Low to zero transaction costs make online FX trading the best market
to trade for short-term traders. If you are an active futures trader who typically places 20 trades a day, at $100 commission per trade, you would have
to pay $2,000 in daily transaction costs. A typical futures trade involves a
broker, a Futures Commission Merchant (FCM) order desk, a clerk on the
exchange floor, a runner, and a pit trader. All of these parties need to be
paid, and their payment comes in the form of commission and clearing fees,
whereas the electronic nature of the FX market minimizes these costs.
No Limit Up or Down Rules/Profit in Both Bull and Bear
Markets There is no limit down or limit up rule in the FX market, unlike the tight restriction on the futures market. For example, on the S&P
500 index futures, if the contract value falls more than 5 percent from the
previous day’s close, limit down rules will come in effect whereby on a
5 percent move the index is allowed to trade only at or above this level
for the next 10 minutes. For a 20 percent decline, trading would be completely halted. Due to the decentralized nature of the FX market, there are
no exchange-enforced restrictions on daily activity. In effect, this eliminates missed profits due to archaic exchange regulations.
Execution Quality and Speed/Low Error Rates The futures market is also known for inconsistent execution in terms of both pricing and
execution time. Every futures trader has at some point in time experienced
a half hour or so wait for a market order to be filled, only to then be executed at a price that may be far away from where the market was trading
when the initial order was placed. Even with electronic trading and limited
guarantees of execution speed, the prices for fills on market orders are far
from certain. The reason for this inefficiency is the number of steps that are
involved in placing a futures trade. A futures trade is typically a seven-step
process:
1. The client calls his or her broker and places a trade (or places it

online).
2. The trading desk receives the order, processes it, and routes it to the
FCM order desk on the exchange floor.
3. The FCM order desk passes the order to the order clerk.
4. The order clerk hands the order to a runner or signals it to the pit.
5. The trading clerk goes to the pit to execute the trade.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

13

6. The trade confirmation goes to the runner or is signaled to the order

clerk and processed by the FCM order desk.
7. The broker receives the trade confirmation and passes it on to the

client.
An FX trade, in comparison, is typically only a three-step process. A
trader would place an order on the platform, the FX dealing desk would
automatically execute it electronically, and the order confirmation would
be posted or logged on the trader’s trading station. The elimination of the
additional parties involved in a futures trade increases the speed of the FX
trade execution and decreases errors.
In addition, the futures market typically operates under a “next best
order” system, under which traders frequently do not get executed at the
initial market order price, but rather at the next best price available. For
example, let’s say a client is long five March Dow Jones futures contracts
at 8800 with a stop order at 8700; if the price falls to this level, the order
will most likely be executed at 8690. This 10-point difference would be attributed to slippage, which is very common in the futures market.
On most FX trading stations, traders execute directly off of real-time
streaming prices. Barring any unforeseen circumstances, there is generally
no discrepancy between the displayed price and the execution price. This
holds true even during volatile times and fast-moving markets. In the
futures market, in contrast, execution is uncertain because all orders must
be done on the exchange, creating a situation where liquidity is limited
by the number of participants, which in turn limits quantities that can be
traded at a given price. Real-time streaming prices ensure that FX market
orders, stops, and limits are executed with minimal slippage and no
partial fills.

DIFFERENT WAYS TO TRADE FX
Over the past few years, the FX market has evolved significantly. Many
products have been introduced as alternative ways to invest in or trade
currencies. Foreign exchange spot is the oldest of these markets and
represents the underlying for many of the new derivative products. Options, futures, and forwards are the next oldest, but forwards are generally
limited to a nonretail audience. An entire book can be dedicated to the differences between all of the new derivative products, but for the purpose of
this book, here are some basic descriptions as well as general advantages
and disadvantages (there may be many others that are not included in
this list).

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

14

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Spot
The FX spot market is the largest market in the world with a daily turnover
of over $3 trillion.
Quoting Convention Spot forex is quoted in pairs. If the EUR/USD exchange rate is 1.50, for example, it means that every euro buys 1.5 U.S.
dollars. A one-pip move represents a change in the last decimal place, and
for the EUR/USD it is worth $10 on a 100K lot.
Advantage The biggest advantages of trading the spot market are its
simplicity, liquidity, tight spreads, and around-the-clock trading. There is
no expiration or time decay, and accounts can also be opened with very
small initial balances. Real-time charts, news, and research are provided
free by many brokers.
Disadvantage The biggest disadvantage of the spot market is the fact
that it is an over-the-counter market, meaning that spot is not exchange
traded. Usually customers deal directly with their FX broker, who sources
their price feed from the interbank market. Unfortunately, not all brokers
are regulated, though this is expected to change in the coming years.
Additional Comment A characteristic of the spot market that can be
looked at as both an advantage and a disadvantage is leverage, because
in the spot market leverage is very high. Some brokers offer as much as
400-to-1 leverage. Many people view the generous leverage in the FX spot
market as a benefit, but leverage is a double-edged sword, meaning that it
exacerbates losses as well as gains. Too much leverage is also the primary
reason why many traders have difficulties turning a profit. Traders have the
option to change their leverage, but they usually don’t.

Futures
FX futures were created by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) in
1972 and were the first financial futures contracts ever created. The daily
notional volume is approximately $60 billion.
Quoting Convention Futures contracts are standardized and are subject to physical delivery. The prices of futures contracts are all quoted in
terms of U.S. dollars per unit of other currency being traded. For example,
the quotes would be given in U.S. dollars per euro or per Japanese yen.
Each tick or point equals 0.0001. Each contract for the euro, for example,
involves trading the value of 125,000 euros.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

15

Advantage The biggest advantage of trading futures is the fact that the
transactions are conducted over an exchange. The market is very liquid
and is well regulated. As the counterparty to every trade, CME Clearing
eliminates the risk of credit default by any single counterparty. Price and
transaction information is readily available, and the top five bids and offers
can be seen by electronic traders.
Disadvantage The contracts are standardized, which means that the
options are limited. Unless traders keep up with expiring contracts, they
are subject to physical delivery. Futures margins can be higher, which is
seen as a disadvantage by some traders, and account minimums are generally higher. Commissions and brokerage fees may also be higher.
Leverage is usually 5 to 1.

Options
There are many different ways to trade currency options. The Philadelphia
Stock Exchange, the International Securities Exchange (ISE), and the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange all offer options trading on currencies.
Quoting Convention With currency options, quoting conventions vary
depending on where the option is traded. At the Philadelphia Stock
Exchange, for example, euro currency options are quoted in terms of
U.S. dollars per unit of underlying currency, and each contract is worth
10,000 euros. The point value is $100 (i.e., one full Eurocent = currency
value × 100). At the International Securities Exchange, FX options have
underlying values expressed in foreign currency units per U.S. dollar that
are modified to create an indexlike underlying. For example, if the current exchange rate for USD/EUR is 0.7829, the underlying value for the
USD/EUR ISE FX option would be 78.29 (0.7829 × 100). This format is designed to help investors easily adapt the trading strategies they currently
use for equity and index options. One point is equal $100. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange, by contrast, offers options trading on futures contracts.
The trading unit is one CME futures contract (in euros, one contract =
125,000 euros), and the minimum tick size is 0.0001 per euro, which is the
equivalent point value of $12.50.
Advantage Like futures contracts, options are exchange traded. They
allow for limited risk because the premium is the predetermined maximum
loss. They also are inherently leveraged products, which may be attractive
to some traders.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

16

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Disadvantage The biggest disadvantage of trading FX options is the
time decay. Also, there are limited trading hours for some of the different
currency option products.

Exchange-Traded Funds
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are the newest entries into the FX world,
with Rydex Investments launching its first CurrencyShares in 2005. PowerShares have also entered the market, but only with DB U.S. Dollar Index
Bullish and Bearish funds. CurrencyShares are traded on the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) like any other exchange-listed security.
Quoting Convention CurrencyShares are traded like any stock or traditional exchange traded fund on the NYSE Arca. Shares are traded in
one or more blocks of 50,000 shares. A share in the CurrencyShares Euro
ETF for example is the equivalent of 100 Euros. PowerShares on the other
hand usually represent a basket of currencies. The shares are traded on the
American Stock Exchange (AMEX).
Advantage For many equity market traders, the biggest advantage of
trading Rydex’s CurrencyShares is their simplicity, because currencies are
traded in the same way as U.S. stocks and on the same exchange.
Disadvantage The biggest disadvantage is that the CurrencyShares are
available for trading only until 4:15 p.m., and trading does not restart until
the NYSE opens the next day. Because the market closes, exchange-traded
currency funds cater primarily to long-term traders. Also, since they are
traded on the NYSE, they are subject to standard stock commissions and
they have expense ratios.

WHO ARE THE PLAYERS
IN THE FX MARKET?
Since the foreign exchange market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market
without a centralized exchange, competition between market makers prohibits monopolistic pricing strategies. If one market maker attempts to
drastically skew the price, then traders simply have the option to find another market maker. Moreover, spreads are closely watched to ensure market makers are not whimsically altering the cost of the trade. Many equity
markets, in contrast, operate in a completely different fashion; the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE), for instance, is the sole place where companies listed on the NYSE can have their stocks traded. Centralized markets
are operated by what are referred to as specialists, while market makers is

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

17

the term used in reference to decentralized marketplaces. (See Figures 1.2
and 1.3.) Since the NYSE is a centralized market, a stock traded on the
NYSE can have only 1 bid/ask quote at all times. Decentralized markets,
such as foreign exchange, can have multiple market makers—all of whom
have the right to quote different prices. Let’s look at how both centralized
and decentralized markets operate.

Centralized Markets
By their very nature, centralized markets tend to be monopolistic: with
a single specialist controlling the market, prices can easily be skewed to

FIGURE 1.2 Centralized Market Structure

FIGURE 1.3 Decentralized Market Structure

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

18

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

accommodate the interests of the specialist, not those of the traders. If,
for example, the market is filled with sellers from whom the specialists
must buy but no prospective buyers on the other side, the specialists will
be forced to buy from the sellers and be unable to sell a commodity that is
being sold off and hence falling in value. In such a situation, the specialist
may simply widen the spread, thereby increasing the cost of the trade and
preventing additional participants from entering the market. Or specialists
can simply drastically alter the quotes they are offering, thus manipulating
the price to accommodate their own needs.

Hierarchy of Participants in
Decentralized Market
While the foreign exchange market is decentralized and hence employs
multiple market makers rather than a single specialist, participants in the
FX market are organized into a hierarchy; those with superior credit access, volume transacted, and sophistication receive priority in the market.
At the top of the food chain is the interbank market, which trades
the highest volume per day in relatively few (mostly G-7) currencies. In
the interbank market, the largest banks can deal with each other directly,
via interbank brokers or through electronic brokering systems like Electronic Brokering Services (EBS) or Reuters. The interbank market is a
credit-approved system where banks trade based solely on the credit relationships they have established with one another. All the banks can see
the rates everyone is dealing at; however, each bank must have a specific
credit relationship with another bank in order to trade at the rates being
offered. Other institutions such as online FX market makers, hedge funds,
and corporations must trade FX through commercial banks.
Many banks (small community banks, banks in emerging markets),
corporations, and institutional investors do not have access to these rates
because they have no established credit lines with big banks. This forces
small participants to deal through just one bank for their foreign exchange
needs, and often this means much less competitive rates for the participants further down the participant hierarchy. Those receiving the least
competitive rates are customers of banks and exchange agencies.
Recently technology has broken down the barriers that used to stand
between the end users of foreign exchange services and the interbank market. The online trading revolution opened its doors to retail clientele by
connecting market makers and market participants in an efficient, lowcost manner. In essence, the online trading platform serves as a gateway to
the liquid FX market. Average traders can now trade alongside the biggest
banks in the world, with similar pricing and execution. What used to be a
game dominated and controlled by the big boys is slowly becoming a level

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

19

playing field where individuals can profit and take advantage of the same
opportunities as big banks. FX is no longer an old boys club, which means
opportunity abounds for aspiring online currency traders.
Dealing Stations—Interbank Market The majority of FX volume
is transacted primarily through the interbank market. The leading banks
of the world trade with each other electronically over two platforms—the
EBS and Reuters Dealing 3000-Spot Matching. Both platforms offer trading
in the major currency pairs; however, certain currency pairs are more liquid and generally more frequently traded over either EBS or Reuters D3000.
These two companies are continually trying to capture each other’s market
shares, but as a guide, here is the breakdown of which currencies are most
liquid over the individual platforms:
EBS

Reuters

EUR/USD
USD/JPY
EUR/JPY
EUR/CHF
USD/CHF

GBP/USD
EUR/GBP
USD/CAD
AUD/USD
NZD/USD

Cross-currency pairs are generally not traded over either platform, but
instead are calculated based on the rates of the major currency pairs and
then offset using the “legs.” For example, if an interbank trader had a
client who wanted to go long AUD/JPY, the trader would most likely buy
AUD/USD over the Reuters D3000 system and buy USD/JPY over EBS. The
trader would then multiply these rates and provide the client with the respective AUD/JPY rate. These currency pairs are also known as synthetic
currencies, and this helps to explain why spreads for cross currencies are
generally wider than spreads for the major currency pairs.
