
8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 47

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 47 •

positions at $85 on steel and covered at $110, a loss of $25,000.
He lost a second $25,000 on Santa Fe. He had been right, the
market had done as he predicted, but he was now broke. He had
traded off the ticker instead of off the real quotes, which were
coming too fast on the floor to be accurately caught by the lagging ticker. In this fast market, the ticker had fallen behind by as
much as two hours.
This day provided Livermore with his greatest lesson to that
point. He was trading in real time, for the short term, as he had
done when he was trading in the bucket shops. But the stock market ticker was not reporting in real time—it was stuck in delayed
time, falling further behind as the day progressed. The tape spit out
a long-expired price, not the present price. It was now finally clear
to Livermore: Short-term trades were too hard to catch on Wall
Street.
Yet he had been right in his basic judgment. The market did
exactly what he had predicted; the only flaw had been in his execution. His timing had been off because his orders could not be
executed as quickly as he wanted. As a result, he was late in selling
and late in buying.
Livermore was busted, once again, in the blink of an eye. The
event disillusioned him, left him despondent, depressed, and
entirely worn out. Yesterday he had $50,000 and was full of selfconfidence. Today he was shaken to the core. His only consolation
came from figuring out why he had failed.
He left New York and headed back for Boston and the bucket
shops to start over and rebuild his stake. He also had to rethink his
lifestyle. He had become used to the high life. It was a lifestyle that
took money to fuel, and now he was out of money.
This, of course, had an impact on his married life. Things on
the home front had been going well between the newlyweds until
Livermore went broke again in May 1901. He asked Nettie to

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 48

• 48 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

pawn her jewelry—the $12,000 worth he had bought for her in
Europe—as a stake so he could go back to playing the bucket
shops.
She refused. This caused a permanent rift between him and
Nettie, but she did not like the idea of pawning her jewelry. Ultimately, the couple separated. He was now both broke and separated from his young wife.
The market was all he knew. So he took a deep mental breath
and decided he had to get a stake and return to Wall Street. He
devoted all his energies to this objective: Get some cash.
Once again he returned to the bucket shops—but, unfortunately, they still remembered him in Boston. No one would take
his orders. He sent people in to do his bidding and place his trades,
but they were quickly uncovered. Soon Livermore had no place to
trade.
Fortunately for Livermore, a new hybrid bucket shop had been
born. This new bucket shop looked even more like a respectable
brokerage and advertised its affiliations with a real brokerage firm
with a seat on the exchange. And, in fact, on rare occasions, these
bucket shops actually did put the customer’s orders through to the
floor of the exchange, but they were far more likely to bucket the
order. That is, they kept the order in the house, unfilled, and bet
against the customer, just canceling out the transaction with inhouse bookkeeping when the customer wanted to close out the
trade or, more likely, went broke on the margin swings.
Livermore was not recognized in these establishments, and he
quickly hooked up with five of them. They promised him they
would stay within one point of the prices that came across the ticker
tape. In other words, they would give him basically an instant fill.
So Livermore went back to his old method of trading off the
tape, taking small gains on many daily trades. He had to build up
a stake before he could make his way back to Wall Street. He set

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 49

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 49 •

up a small office with five direct wires to these new quasi–bucket
shops. He traded under an alias as he was still afraid of being recognized. He also had one other wire installed, direct to a legitimate broker in New York, as well as his own stock ticker, once
he had made enough profits. He traded for the better part of a
year this way and did well enough to buy a car. He started to
renew his trading stake. But as his trading and his winnings
increased, it became harder and harder to convince these establishments to allow him to trade, particularly since the money was
primarily going one way—from their treasuries into Livermore’s
coffers.
The firms started to play games with Livermore as his trading
position size increased. If Livermore went long a stock with a big
position on heavy margin, the brokerage firm would go short,
catching him for several points when he had to cover. When they
were able to play these games successfully, he would lose money.
But normally, he was winning. Finally, when his trading stake
was big enough, he reversed the game on them. He found a stock
that had been very active at one time but had fallen into disinterest and was trading on hardly any volume, a sleepy stock.
He wired each of the five bucket shops and said, “Buy me one
hundred shares of Acme at $81, which was the last recorded trade.”
When the five brokers confirmed his purchase price to him at $81,
he would then wire his real broker in New York, E. F. Hutton.
He now knew what his buy price was: $81. “Buy me 100 shares
of Acme at the asking price of $85,” he’d tell Hutton. He waited
for that sale to cross over the tape and immediately sold his position at the bucket shops against the price of $85, netting 4 points,
or $2,000. He would then close out the $85, 100-share position in
New York.
Livermore hit the five houses with this several times. Then,
unexpectedly, he had a windfall: A stock he played was actually

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 50

• 50 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

driven up 10 points by his buying. He had 600 shares out, for a
profit of $6,000. After this trade, however, the quasi–bucket shops
finally figured out Livermore’s trick. At one of the firms, he ran
into trouble when he went to collect his money.
“Livermore, we’re not paying you. You rigged the market! And
you been tradin’ under an alias.”
“Don’t accuse me of the things you do,” was his reply.
“You pumped up the price by buying in New York. You drove
up the price just after we took your position. You drove up the
price yourself.”
“You give me too much credit. Your crooked mind lays things
on me that you are capable of, not me.”
“Get outta here. I heard of you—the Boy Plunger, ain’t it? Well,
that don’t work here, and you’re headin’ for trouble, big trouble.
You rigged this market with some of your friends.”
“I never trade with partners. I trade only for my own account
and you know it! There is no way you can prove your false allegations!” Livermore said.
“It’s proven in my mind, that’s enough. You cheated us here.”
“You have a big firm with many offices. I trade alone. How
could I cheat you?”
“I don’t know exactly how you did it, but you did it.”
“You just said you don’t know. You have no proof. You just
don’t want to give me what I have coming to me.” Livermore’s
voice rose again.
“You bastard!”
“You’re not going to scare me away with name-calling. I have a
slip in my hand confirming my orders to you to buy and sell for
my account. The trade is completed. You owe me the money, two
thousand dollars. Are you welching?”
Livermore was yelling now and a crowd had gathered. The one

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 51

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 51 •

thing these shops could never allow was to fail to pay off on a completed trade. Because these were shady operations, rumors would
fly, and there would be a rush by the customers to redeem their
accounts for cash—then chaos, like a run on a bank.
There was silence. The manager finally reached into his cash
drawer and yanked out the money. He peeled it out as the customers watched. He whispered to Livermore as he peeled off the
last hundred, “Don’t come back here. Don’t ever come back here,
‘Boy Genius.’ ” Livermore pocketed the money and left.
He had played the exact same trick on them that they had used
to wipe out hundreds of customers who traded on skinny margins
and were wiped out automatically when the market moved against
them.
He got in his car that night and, with a trading friend, headed
for New York. On the way, he was up to his usual tricks—which
led to a favorite story of his about how close he once came to Yale
University.
Livermore and his friend stopped in New Haven and stayed in a
hotel. While they were at the hotel, they learned of a bucket-shop
operation in town. The temptation was too great, and the next
morning they paid it a visit. They received an effusive welcome
from the manger of the shop. Livermore was wearing a light tan
suit. His friend was wearing a blue blazer and khaki pants. New
Haven being a college town, the manager immediately mistook
them for Yale students. And the manager was used to fleecing the
Joe College types.
The first day Livermore played conservatively, and his trading
friend followed his lead. They stayed over a second night and
showed up the next morning, just as the New York market
opened. They played all day, and Livermore’s profits were close to
$1,500. On the third day, dressed in their best collegiate outfits,

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 52

• 52 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

they returned again. Livermore opened the day by selling short
500 shares. The stock collapsed, and Livermore covered the short
immediately. The manger slowly paid off the money—$500 margin and $500 profit.
When he was done, the manager glanced over Livermore’s blue
eyes, his young smiling face, his blond hair. He observed Livermore’s polite manner, his quiet demeanor. The manager was no
longer the same effusive person, waiting to get wealthy from rich,
careless college boys.
Livermore returned with cash in hand and said, “I’d like to sell
two hundred Steel short.”
The manger looked at the cash in Livermore’s fist and did
nothing. He just stared before he finally spoke. “You boys aren’t
college students, are you?”
“We never said we were. You assumed we were,” Livermore
answered.
“You’re ringers, hustlers.”
“How can we be ringers and hustlers? If we were, then we
would have to rig the market to move in our favor. You’ve seen
that we have been just sitting here, no phone calls, no mysterious
behavior, no tricks.”
“You got some kind of system for winning, that’s what you
got.”
“You’ve got a system for your customers to lose. They get
wiped out every time they lose their margin. We’re playing by
those rules. Take this order for two hundred Steel.”
“Not on your life, never—you hustled me. You two little bastards hustled me.”
“Look . . .” Livermore continued.
“No, I won’t look. Just get outta here now, before I lose my
temper.”
“Looks like you already lost your temper,” Livermore said, as he

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 53

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 53 •

watched the man’s face turn from red to purple. “All right, we’ll
leave.”
“And don’t ever come back!” Livermore heard the manager yell
as the door slammed shut behind him. The manager was not completely wrong in his assessment. Livermore could have been in college, maybe even at Yale. But Livermore was interested in only
one college—Wall Street.
He had lost everything twice now, but he knew that was the
only way a person learned in the trading profession. You had to
lose, because it taught you what not to do, and if you did it again,
well, then you were a slow learner and you would lose again. He
had been away for the better part of a year now, a lot of time for
him to think about the mistakes he had made.
He believed he was now ready to go back to New York, back to
Wall Street.
Over his 10 years of trading, Livermore had observed the methods of the technicians, the chartists, and the mathematicians, all
the theories and techniques of trading developed by graduates of
the superb engineering and technical schools of America. He
believed that they all had merit, but his conclusions were developed from actual trading, from hands-on participation in the market and constant analysis. His ultimate method was beginning to
form in his mind.
He already believed in some basic guides:
• Always evaluate and appraise general conditions first, and
determine the line of least resistance. Is it an upward-trending
market or a downward-trending market? Or is it consolidating—moving sideways, trying to make up its mind?
• If the overall trend of the market is not in your favor, you are
playing at an extreme disadvantage. Go with the flow, bend
with the trend, do not sail into a gale.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 54

• 54 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore was looking for the difference between stock gambling and stock speculation. And he never used the words bull market
or bear market because these terms tended to make too permanent
a psychological mind-set.
He was now playing in a different arena from the bucket shops,
and he knew it—that was why he had been wiped out twice. The
game was much bigger and therefore it had more risks. Before Livermore could solve a problem, he had to state the problem and
define the problem to himself in an honest way.
The first thing he analyzed now—something he would analyze
for the rest of his life—was the dimension of time. He concluded
that in his old life in the bucket shops, time for him had been
instant; that is, he lived in the moment. He could bet on the swings
as they happened, reacting to the moment, the second.
If he was to win on Wall Street, he would have to change his
strategy to accommodate a longer outlook, to react to future time.
He would have to be patient and anticipate the inevitable advances
and declines—make a move and then be patient and wait.
Livermore’s final conclusion was clear: To anticipate the market is
to gamble; to be patient and react only when the market gives the signal is
to speculate.
And he believed the only way to test this solution, to prove this
strategy on Wall Street, was with money. Livermore had been right
on the moves, but wrong on the timing. Now he went into the
market with a new attitude and methodology.
He did all right—but not as well as he had expected, for two
reasons: His trading system was still not what he wanted, and he
was listening to the other traders around him. Instead of holding
onto a winning position, he sold after a few points profit. He
adopted the maxim “you can’t go broke taking a profit” as his philosophy. He was also still affected by his old trading methods from
the days when he had hit and run, taking his profits before the

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 55

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 55 •

market turned against him. But primarily it was the barrage of
information from other traders that affected his judgment; the
never-ending tips, especially from those he thought were savvy,
experienced traders.
There was one trader, a major player, whom he particularly
admired. This trader gave no tips and offered only one piece of
advice to anyone who asked: “It’s a bull market,” or “It’s a bear market,” or “It’s a sideways market, hasn’t made up its mind which way
it’s going yet.” It was this advice that Livermore was later to cherish.
He was now learning that before a play could be made, he first
had to decide on the overall direction of the market. Also, once
the play was made, it had to be seen through to its conclusion. It
was imperative not to sell until he had a good reason to sell—and
if the general trend of the market was with him and there were no
other extenuating circumstances, well, then he had to play it out.
He also studied losers. He divided these suckers into three
classes:
1. Ignorant novices who know nothing, and know that they
know nothing, but still want to play the market. Life span 3
to 30 months.
2. Second-grade suckers or, as Livermore called them, semisuckers, who get their information from suckers of an even
higher grade. They have gone through the first phase of
being suckers and have now moved into the second phase.
They quote market aphorisms and the words of market
sages. They are intelligent enough to play the game for a
longer time than the basic suckers. Life span up to 42
months.
3. Suckers of the third kind, who look for bargains, buy at the
bottom, and wait for the rally. They do okay until they hit
a stock that never rallies, or keeps declining.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 56

• 56 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The one rule that suckers never learn—nor do most market
players—is don’t be a sucker!
Livermore felt that at this point in his career he was still a
sucker—but he was also a special class of sucker. He was what he
called a Careful Mike sucker. Careful suckers listen to others and
cuts their profits short. In their rush to avoid risk, they see the
biggest part of a stock’s move proceed without them. They wait
for the dips that never come, or the dips come too fast for them to
move, or the stock just simply becomes too expensive, in their
minds, to buy again.
Livermore had decided it was the big swings that made the really
big money. And if he was correct and patient, and waited through
the adversity of negative fluctuations and corrections, he would prevail. This, of course, did not mean he would be stubborn and sit
through severe drops in the market. His 10 percent bucket-shop rule
stayed with him for the rest of his life: If he lost more than 10 percent against his original purchase price, then he covered his position.
Slowly, through long and deep analysis, constant revision, and
actually buying and selling stock, Livermore was evolving, developing, rules—his basic theories on speculating in the stock and
commodities markets.
Then he broke all his rules and made a fortune.
He called it his spooky story. He loved to tell it to his sons and
close friends.
It was the spring of 1906 and Livermore was 29 years old, vacationing in Atlantic City. He had cleared all his stock market positions and was relaxing on the Jersey shore with a friend, another
trader. Of course, he still had his account with E. F. Hutton.
There, he had a buying power of between 3,000 and 4,000 shares
on margin, at an average price of $100. This meant he had the
capacity for a $400,000 position. It was a medium up-trending
market climate with stocks steadily advancing.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 57

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 57 •

One morning Livermore and his friend, slightly bored, wandered into the Atlantic City branch of E. F. Hutton to idly check
out the market. The market was strong, and Livermore’s friend
had a good position on the bull side of the market.
“See, strong market, just like I said it would be. Buy something,
J.L.,” his friend said.
Livermore stood watching the tape in silence as it slid through
his fingers.
“You with us, J.L.? Did you hear what I said?”
Livermore was oblivious to his friend. He kept watching the
tape in silence. All his trading life Livermore had been struck, on
rare occasions, by impulses, premonitions, intuitive urges that he
did not understand. In most cases he did not follow them, but he
kept track of them, and mostly they worked out. He did not know
if it was the unconscious mind making choices based on the accumulated experience of having traded millions of shares or whether
it was some kind of a psychic urge. Maybe it was simply the gambler’s instinct. He knew it defied all his carefully studied and
applied rules. These feelings defied logic or explanation, but they
had always made him money. In fact, he did not know what the
hell it was, but it was a clear impulse to make a move. So, this
spring day in 1906, he moved.
He walked up to the clerk. “Sell a thousand Union Pacific
short.”
His friend went with him. “J.L., why are you putting out a short
line? The market’s going up.”
Livermore took his order slip and studied his friend before
replying. “I don’t know why, exactly. I just think it’s the right
thing to do.”
“You know something, don’t you?” his friend asked. The clerk
was watching now.
Livermore knew if he told his friend he had a tip his friend

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 58

• 58 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

would rush over and do what he did. “Please, I told you, I don’t
have a clear reason for doing this.”
“I know you never do anything without a reason. In fact, you
told me that anyone who trades without a plan, a consistent plan,
is a fool. Now you tell me that you have no reason to sell U.P.
short,” his friend said. “You’re breaking your own rules, for crying out loud!”
Livermore said nothing. He turned and walked back to the
clerk, “Sell short another thousand Union Pacific.”
“You’ve gone crazy, Livermore. Three days of lying in the sun,
taking in the ocean air, and you’re having a mental breakdown.”
Livermore slipped the order into his pocket.
“We’re leaving before you do anything else stupid.” His friend
took him by the arm.
“Just a second,” Livermore said. He went back and sold a third
thousand shares short. He pocketed the order form and then followed his friend outside into the sunshine.
Later that afternoon, near the market close, he went back to the
brokerage office to check the price of the Union Pacific stock.
The stock had risen almost two points above where he had sold
short.
“See, J.L., I told you—the market’s up, and you lost $6,000 for
your foolishness.”
Livermore said nothing. He simply smiled and walked back out
onto the boardwalk to watch the descending sun.
The next day he went back in the early afternoon. The stock
was up slightly along with the market, but near the close the stock
started to sell off. Livermore sold 2,000 more shares.
“You are totally crazy, J.L.,” his friend said.
“I think you’re right, because now I have to go back to New
York. I’ve exceeded my margin and I need to oversee my investment. My vacation is over.”
