unchanged in the future. (This includes the assumption that its relative growth rate, as shown in the last seven years, will also continue unchanged over the next seven years.) This process could be
carried out mechanically by applying a formula that gives individual weights to past figures for profitability, stability, and growth,
and also for current financial condition. The second part of the
analysis should consider to what extent the value based solely on
past performance should be modified because of new conditions
expected in the future.
Such a procedure would divide the work between senior and
junior analysts as follows: (1) The senior analyst would set up the
formula to apply to all companies generally for determining pastperformance value. (2) The junior analysts would work up such
factors for the designated companies—pretty much in mechanical
fashion. (3) The senior analyst would then determine to what
extent a company’s performance—absolute or relative—is likely to
differ from its past record, and what change should be made in
the value to reflect such anticipated changes. It would be best if the
senior analyst’s report showed both the original valuation and the
modified one, with his reasons for the change.
Is a job of this kind worth doing? Our answer is in the affirmative, but our reasons may appear somewhat cynical to the reader.
We doubt whether the valuations so reached will prove sufficiently
dependable in the case of the typical industrial company, great or
small. We shall illustrate the difficulties of this job in our discussion of Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA) in the next
chapter. Nonetheless it should be done for such common stocks.
Why? First, many security analysts are bound to make current or
projected valuations, as part of their daily work. The method we
propose should be an improvement on those generally followed
today. Secondly, because it should give useful experience and
insight to the analysts who practice this method. Thirdly, because
work of this kind could produce an invaluable body of recorded
experience—as has long been the case in medicine—that may lead
to better methods of procedure and a useful knowledge of its possibilities and limitations. The public-utility stocks might well
prove an important area in which this approach will show real
pragmatic value. Eventually the intelligent analyst will confine
himself to those groups in which the future appears reasonably

Security Analysis for the Lay Investor

301

predictable,* or where the margin of safety of past-performance
value over current price is so large that he can take his chances on
future variations—as he does in selecting well-secured senior securities.
In subsequent chapters we shall supply concrete examples of
the application of analytical techniques. But they will only be illustrations. If the reader finds the subject interesting he should pursue
it systematically and thoroughly before he considers himself qualified to pass a final buy-or-sell judgment of his own on a security
issue.

* These industry groups, ideally, would not be overly dependent on such
unforeseeable factors as fluctuating interest rates or the future direction of
prices for raw materials like oil or metals. Possibilities might be industries
like gaming, cosmetics, alcoholic beverages, nursing homes, or waste management.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 11

“Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from
here?”
“That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said
the Cat.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

Putting a Price on the Future
Which factors determine how much you should be willing to pay for a
stock? What makes one company worth 10 times earnings and
another worth 20 times? How can you be reasonably sure that you are
not overpaying for an apparently rosy future that turns out to be a
murky nightmare?
Graham feels that five elements are decisive.1 He summarizes them as:
•
•
•
•
•

the company’s “general long-term prospects”
the quality of its management
its financial strength and capital structure
its dividend record
and its current dividend rate.

Let’s look at these factors in the light of today’s market.
The long-term prospects. Nowadays, the intelligent investor
should begin by downloading at least five years’ worth of annual
reports (Form 10-K) from the company’s website or from the EDGAR

1

Because so few of today’s individual investors buy—or should buy—individual bonds, we will limit this discussion to stock analysis. For more on bond
funds, see the commentary on Chapter 4.
302

Commentary on Chapter 11

303

database at www.sec.gov.2 Then comb through the financial statements, gathering evidence to help you answer two overriding questions. What makes this company grow? Where do (and where will) its
profits come from? Among the problems to watch for:
•

•

2

The company is a “serial acquirer.” An average of more than two
or three acquisitions a year is a sign of potential trouble. After all,
if the company itself would rather buy the stock of other businesses than invest in its own, shouldn’t you take the hint and look
elsewhere too? And check the company’s track record as an
acquirer. Watch out for corporate bulimics—firms that wolf down
big acquisitions, only to end up vomiting them back out. Lucent,
Mattel, Quaker Oats, and Tyco International are among the companies that have had to disgorge acquisitions at sickening losses.
Other firms take chronic write-offs, or accounting charges proving
that they overpaid for their past acquisitions. That’s a bad omen
for future deal making.3
The company is an OPM addict, borrowing debt or selling stock
to raise boatloads of Other People’s Money. These fat infusions of
OPM are labeled “cash from financing activities” on the statement
of cash flows in the annual report. They can make a sick company
appear to be growing even if its underlying businesses are not
generating enough cash—as Global Crossing and WorldCom
showed not long ago.4

You should also get at least one year’s worth of quarterly reports (on Form
10-Q). By definition, we are assuming that you are an “enterprising” investor
willing to devote a considerable amount of effort to your portfolio. If the
steps in this chapter sound like too much work to you, then you are not temperamentally well suited to picking your own stocks. You cannot reliably
obtain the results you imagine unless you put in the kind of effort we
describe.
3
You can usually find details on acquisitions in the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” section of Form 10-K; cross-check it against the footnotes to the financial statements. For more on “serial acquirers,” see the
commentary on Chapter 12.
4
To determine whether a company is an OPM addict, read the “Statement
of Cash Flows” in the financial statements. This page breaks down the

304

•

Commentary on Chapter 11

The company is a Johnny-One-Note, relying on one customer (or
a handful) for most of its revenues. In October 1999, fiber-optics
maker Sycamore Networks, Inc. sold stock to the public for the
first time. The prospectus revealed that one customer, Williams
Communications, accounted for 100% of Sycamore’s $11 million
in total revenues. Traders blithely valued Sycamore’s shares at
$15 billion. Unfortunately, Williams went bankrupt just over two
years later. Although Sycamore picked up other customers, its
stock lost 97% between 2000 and 2002.

As you study the sources of growth and profit, stay on the lookout
for positives as well as negatives. Among the good signs:
•

The company has a wide “moat,” or competitive advantage. Like
castles, some companies can easily be stormed by marauding
competitors, while others are almost impregnable. Several forces
can widen a company’s moat: a strong brand identity (think of
Harley Davidson, whose buyers tattoo the company’s logo onto
their bodies); a monopoly or near-monopoly on the market;
economies of scale, or the ability to supply huge amounts of goods
or services cheaply (consider Gillette, which churns out razor
blades by the billion); a unique intangible asset (think of CocaCola, whose secret formula for flavored syrup has no real physical
value but maintains a priceless hold on consumers); a resistance
to substitution (most businesses have no alternative to electricity,
so utility companies are unlikely to be supplanted any time soon).5

company’s cash inflows and outflows into “operating activities,” “investing activities,” and “financing activities.” If cash from operating activities is
consistently negative, while cash from financing activities is consistently
positive, the company has a habit of craving more cash than its own
businesses can produce—and you should not join the “enablers” of that
habitual abuse. For more on Global Crossing, see the commentary on
Chapter 12. For more on WorldCom, see the sidebar in the commentary on
Chapter 6.
5
For more insight into “moats,” see the classic book Competitive Strategy
by Harvard Business School professor Michael E. Porter (Free Press, New
York, 1998).

Commentary on Chapter 11

•

•

305

The company is a marathoner, not a sprinter. By looking back at
the income statements, you can see whether revenues and net
earnings have grown smoothly and steadily over the previous 10
years. A recent article in the Financial Analysts Journal confirmed
what other studies (and the sad experience of many investors)
have shown: that the fastest-growing companies tend to overheat
and flame out.6 If earnings are growing at a long-term rate of 10%
pretax (or 6% to 7% after-tax), that may be sustainable. But the
15% growth hurdle that many companies set for themselves is
delusional. And an even higher rate—or a sudden burst of growth
in one or two years—is all but certain to fade, just like an inexperienced marathoner who tries to run the whole race as if it were a
100-meter dash.
The company sows and reaps. No matter how good its products
or how powerful its brands, a company must spend some money
to develop new business. While research and development
spending is not a source of growth today, it may well be tomorrow—particularly if a firm has a proven record of rejuvenating its
businesses with new ideas and equipment. The average budget
for research and development varies across industries and companies. In 2002, Procter & Gamble spent about 4% of its net
sales on R & D, while 3M spent 6.5% and Johnson & Johnson
10.9%. In the long run, a company that spends nothing on R & D
is at least as vulnerable as one that spends too much.

The quality and conduct of management. A company’s executives should say what they will do, then do what they said. Read the
past annual reports to see what forecasts the managers made and
if they fulfilled them or fell short. Managers should forthrightly admit
their failures and take responsibility for them, rather than blaming
all-purpose scapegoats like “the economy,” “uncertainty,” or “weak
demand.” Check whether the tone and substance of the chairman’s
letter stay constant, or fluctuate with the latest fads on Wall Street.
(Pay special attention to boom years like 1999: Did the executives of

6

See Cyrus A. Ramezani, Luc Soenen, and Alan Jung, “Growth, Corporate
Profitability, and Value Creation,” Financial Analysts Journal, November/
December, 2002, pp. 56–67; also available at http://cyrus.cob.calpoly.edu/.

306

Commentary on Chapter 11

a cement or underwear company suddenly declare that they were “on
the leading edge of the transformative software revolution”?)
These questions can also help you determine whether the people
who run the company will act in the interests of the people who own
the company:
•

7

Are they looking out for No. 1?
A firm that pays its CEO $100 million in a year had better have a
very good reason. (Perhaps he discovered—and patented—the Fountain of Youth? Or found El Dorado and bought it for $1 an acre? Or
contacted life on another planet and negotiated a contract obligating the aliens to buy all their supplies from only one company on
Earth?) Otherwise, this kind of obscenely obese payday suggests
that the firm is run by the managers, for the managers.
If a company reprices (or “reissues” or “exchanges”) its stock
options for insiders, stay away. In this switcheroo, a company cancels existing (and typically worthless) stock options for employees
and executives, then replaces them with new ones at advantageous prices. If their value is never allowed to go to zero, while
their potential profit is always infinite, how can options encourage
good stewardship of corporate assets? Any established company
that reprices options—as dozens of high-tech firms have—is a disgrace. And any investor who buys stock in such a company is a
sheep begging to be sheared.
By looking in the annual report for the mandatory footnote
about stock options, you can see how large the “option overhang”
is. AOL Time Warner, for example, reported in the front of its
annual report that it had 4.5 billion shares of common stock outstanding as of December 31, 2002—but a footnote in the bowels
of the report reveals that the company had issued options on 657
million more shares. So AOL’s future earnings will have to be
divided among 15% more shares. You should factor in the potential flood of new shares from stock options whenever you estimate
a company’s future value.7
“Form 4,” available through the EDGAR database at www.sec.

Jason Zweig is an employee of AOL Time Warner and holds options in the
company. For more about how stock options work, see the commentary on
Chapter 19, p. 507.

Commentary on Chapter 11

•

8

307

gov, shows whether a firm’s senior executives and directors have
been buying or selling shares. There can be legitimate reasons for
an insider to sell—diversification, a bigger house, a divorce settlement—but repeated big sales are a bright red flag. A manager
can’t legitimately be your partner if he keeps selling while you’re
buying.
Are they managers or promoters?
Executives should spend most of their time managing their
company in private, not promoting it to the investing public. All too
often, CEOs complain that their stock is undervalued no matter
how high it goes—forgetting Graham’s insistence that managers
should try to keep the stock price from going either too low or too
high.8 Meanwhile, all too many chief financial officers give “earnings guidance,” or guesstimates of the company’s quarterly profits. And some firms are hype-o-chondriacs, constantly spewing
forth press releases boasting of temporary, trivial, or hypothetical
“opportunities.”
A handful of companies—including Coca-Cola, Gillette, and
USA Interactive—have begun to “just say no” to Wall Street’s
short-term thinking. These few brave outfits are providing more
detail about their current budgets and long-term plans, while
refusing to speculate about what the next 90 days might hold.
(For a model of how a company can communicate candidly and
fairly with its shareholders, go to the EDGAR database at
www.sec.gov and view the 8-K filings made by Expeditors International of Washington, which periodically posts its superb
question-and-answer dialogues with shareholders there.)
Finally, ask whether the company’s accounting practices are
designed to make its financial results transparent—or opaque. If
“nonrecurring” charges keep recurring, “extraordinary” items crop
up so often that they seem ordinary, acronyms like EBITDA take
priority over net income, or “pro forma” earnings are used to cloak
actual losses, you may be looking at a firm that has not yet learned
how to put its shareholders’ long-term interests first.9

See note 19 in the commentary on Chapter 19, p. 508.
For more on these issues, see the commentary on Chapter 12 and the
superb essay by Joseph Fuller and Michael C. Jensen, “Just Say No to Wall
Street,” at http://papers.ssrn.com.

9

308

Commentary on Chapter 11

Financial strength and capital structure. The most basic possible
definition of a good business is this: It generates more cash than it
consumes. Good managers keep finding ways of putting that cash to
productive use. In the long run, companies that meet this definition are
virtually certain to grow in value, no matter what the stock market
does.
Start by reading the statement of cash flows in the company’s
annual report. See whether cash from operations has grown steadily
throughout the past 10 years. Then you can go further. Warren Buffett
has popularized the concept of owner earnings, or net income plus
amortization and depreciation, minus normal capital expenditures. As
portfolio manager Christopher Davis of Davis Selected Advisors puts
it, “If you owned 100% of this business, how much cash would you
have in your pocket at the end of the year?” Because it adjusts for
accounting entries like amortization and depreciation that do not
affect the company’s cash balances, owner earnings can be a better
measure than reported net income. To fine-tune the definition of owner
earnings, you should also subtract from reported net income:
•
•
•

any costs of granting stock options, which divert earnings away
from existing shareholders into the hands of new inside owners
any “unusual,” “nonrecurring,” or “extraordinary” charges
any “income” from the company’s pension fund.

If owner earnings per share have grown at a steady average of at
least 6% or 7% over the past 10 years, the company is a stable generator of cash, and its prospects for growth are good.
Next, look at the company’s capital structure. Turn to the balance
sheet to see how much debt (including preferred stock) the company
has; in general, long-term debt should be under 50% of total capital.
In the footnotes to the financial statements, determine whether the
long-term debt is fixed-rate (with constant interest payments) or variable (with payments that fluctuate, which could become costly if interest rates rise).
Look in the annual report for the exhibit or statement showing the
“ratio of earnings to fixed charges.” That exhibit to Amazon.com’s
2002 annual report shows that Amazon’s earnings fell $145 million
short of covering its interest costs. In the future, Amazon will either
have to earn much more from its operations or find a way to borrow
money at lower rates. Otherwise, the company could end up being

Commentary on Chapter 11

309

owned not by its shareholders but by its bondholders, who can lay
claim to Amazon’s assets if they have no other way of securing the
interest payments they are owed. (To be fair, Amazon’s ratio of earnings to fixed charges was far healthier in 2002 than two years earlier,
when earnings fell $1.1 billion short of covering debt payments.)
A few words on dividends and stock policy (for more, please see
Chapter 19):
•

•

•

The burden of proof is on the company to show that you are better
off if it does not pay a dividend. If the firm has consistently outperformed the competition in good markets and bad, the managers are
clearly putting the cash to optimal use. If, however, business is faltering or the stock is underperforming its rivals, then the managers
and directors are misusing the cash by refusing to pay a dividend.
Companies that repeatedly split their shares—and hype those
splits in breathless press releases—treat their investors like dolts.
Like Yogi Berra, who wanted his pizza cut into four slices because
“I don’t think I can eat eight,” the shareholders who love stock
splits miss the point. Two shares of a stock at $50 are not worth
more than one share at $100. Managers who use splits to promote their stock are aiding and abetting the worst instincts of the
investing public, and the intelligent investor will think twice before
turning any money over to such condescending manipulators.10
Companies should buy back their shares when they are cheap—
not when they are at or near record highs. Unfortunately, it
recently has become all too common for companies to repurchase their stock when it is overpriced. There is no more cynical
waste of a company’s cash—since the real purpose of that maneuver is to enable top executives to reap multimillion-dollar paydays
by selling their own stock options in the name of “enhancing
shareholder value.”

A substantial amount of anecdotal evidence, in fact, suggests that
managers who talk about “enhancing shareholder value” seldom do.
In investing, as with life in general, ultimate victory usually goes to the
doers, not to the talkers.

10

Stock splits are discussed further in the commentary on Chapter 13.

CHAPTER 12

Things to Consider About
Per-Share Earnings

This chapter will begin with two pieces of advice to the investor

that cannot avoid being contradictory in their implications. The
first is: Don’t take a single year’s earnings seriously. The second is:
If you do pay attention to short-term earnings, look out for booby
traps in the per-share figures. If our first warning were followed
strictly the second would be unnecessary. But it is too much to
expect that most shareholders can relate all their common-stock
decisions to the long-term record and the long-term prospects. The
quarterly figures, and especially the annual figures, receive major
attention in financial circles, and this emphasis can hardly fail to
have its impact on the investor’s thinking. He may well need some
education in this area, for it abounds in misleading possibilities.
As this chapter is being written the earnings report of Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA) for 1970 appears in the
Wall Street Journal. The first figures shown are

Share earnings a

1970
$5.20

1969
$5.58

The little a at the outset is explained in a footnote to refer to “primary earnings,” before special charges. There is much more footnote material; in fact it occupies twice as much space as do the
basic figures themselves.
For the December quarter alone, the “earnings per share” are
given as $1.58 in 1970 against $1.56 in 1969.
The investor or speculator interested in ALCOA shares, reading
310

Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings

311

those figures, might say to himself: “Not so bad. I knew that 1970
was a recession year in aluminum. But the fourth quarter shows a
gain over 1969, with earnings at the rate of $6.32 per year. Let me
see. The stock is selling at 62. Why, that’s less than ten times earnings. That makes it look pretty cheap, compared with 16 times for
International Nickel, etc., etc.”
But if our investor-speculator friend had bothered to read all the
material in the footnote, he would have found that instead of one
figure of earnings per share for the year 1970 there were actually
four, viz.:
