How to

Make
Money in
Stocks

This page intentionally left blank

How to

Make
Money in
Stocks
FOURTH
EDITION

A WINNING SYSTEM IN
GOOD TIMES OR BAD

WILLIAM J. O’NEIL

New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi San Juan
Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

Copyright © 2009, 2002 by William J. O'Neil. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means,
or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-161414-6
MHID: 0-07-161414-1
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-161413-9, MHID:
0-07-161413-3.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner,
with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been
printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use
in corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter
covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional person should be sought.
—From a Declaration of Principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and a
Committee of Publishers
This text contains the following, which are trademarks, service marks, or registered trademarks of Investor’s
Business Daily, Inc., William O’Neil + Co. Incorporated, or their affiliated entities in the United States and/or other
countries: Investor’s Business Daily®, IBD®, CAN SLIM®, SmartSelect®, ACC/DIS RTG®, SMR®, Stock
Checkup®, Stocks on the Move™, Daily Graphs®, Daily Graphs Online®, O’Neil Database®, and The William
O’Neil + Co. 197 Industry Groups®.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all
rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of
1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or
sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE
OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED
THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant
or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be
uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has
no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar
damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the
possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such
claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

• CO NTE NTS •

Part I:
A Winning System: CAN SLIM®
Introduction You Can Learn and Benefit from America’s
100 Years of Super Winners

3

CHAPTER 1

The Greatest Stock-Picking Secrets

9

CHAPTER 2

How to Read Charts Like a Pro and Improve
Your Selection and Timing

110

CHAPTER 3

C = Current Big or Accelerating Quarterly Earnings and Sales 152

CHAPTER 4

A = Annual Earnings Increases: Look for Big Growth

161

CHAPTER 5

N = Newer Companies, New Products, New Management,
New Highs Off Properly Formed Bases

171

CHAPTER 6

S = Supply and Demand: Big Volume Demand at Key Points

180

CHAPTER 7

L = Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock?

186

CHAPTER 8

I = Institutional Sponsorship

193

CHAPTER 9

M = Market Direction: How You Determine It

199

Part II:
Be Smart from the Start
CHAPTER 10

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . without Exception 239

CHAPTER 11

When to Sell and Take Your Worthwhile Profits

v

254

vi CONTENTS
CHAPTER 12

Money Management: Should You Diversify, Invest for the Long
Haul, Use Margin, Sell Short, Buy Options, IPOs, Tax Shelters,
Nasdaq or Foreign Stocks, Bonds, Etc.?
273

CHAPTER 13

Twenty-One Costly Common Mistakes Most Investors Make

302

Part III:
Investing Like a Professional
CHAPTER 14

More Models of Great Stock Market Winners

311

CHAPTER 15

Picking the Best Market Themes, Sectors and Industry Groups 323

CHAPTER 16

How to Use IBD® to Find Potential Winning Stocks

340

CHAPTER 17

Watching the Market and Reacting to News

382

CHAPTER 18

How You Could Make Your Million Owning Mutual Funds

393

CHAPTER 19

Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios 403

CHAPTER 20

Important Rules to Never Forget

424

Real Success Stories

429

Index

443

I

• PAR T •

A Winning
System:
®
CAN SLIM

This page intentionally left blank

• I NTRODUCTION •

You Can Learn and Benefit
from America’s 100 Years
of Super Winners

After the market debacles of 2000 and 2008, most investors now know that they

need to take charge and learn much more about what they’re doing when
they save and invest their hard-earned money. However, many investors
don’t know where to turn, whom to trust, or what they must stop doing if
they are to achieve dramatically superior investment performance.
You don’t have to give your money to a Bernie Madoff, who’ll take it but
won’t tell you exactly what he’s doing with it. Instead, you can and should
read a few good investment books, attend some investment classes, or participate in an investment meet-up group so that you can learn how to
invest with real confidence. At the very least, you should learn and understand well the sound principles and proven rules and methods that will
protect and build your investment portfolio over time. Half of all Americans save and invest; now it’s time to learn to do it intelligently with critical knowledge.
When I started investing, I made most of the same mistakes you’ve probably made. But here’s what I’ve learned:

• You should buy stocks when they’re on the way up in price, not on the
way down. And when you buy more, you do it only after the stock has
risen from your purchase price, not after it has fallen below it.

• You buy stocks when they’re nearer to their highs for the year, not when
they’ve sunk so low that they look cheap. You buy higher-priced stocks
rather than the lowest-priced stocks.

3

4 A WINNING SYSTEM
• You learn to always sell stocks quickly when you have a small loss rather
than waiting and hoping they’ll come back.
• You pay far less attention to a company’s book value, dividends, or PE
ratio—which for the last 100 years have had little predictive value in spotting America’s most successful companies—and focus instead on more
important proven factors such as profit growth, price and volume action,
and whether the company is the number one profit leader in its field with
a superior product.
• You don’t subscribe to a bunch of market newsletters or advisory services,
and you don’t let yourself be influenced by recommendations from analysts, who, after all, are just expressing personal opinions that can frequently be wrong.
• You also have to acquaint yourself with charts—an invaluable tool most
professionals wouldn’t do without but amateurs tend to dismiss as complicated or irrelevant.

All these vital actions are completely contrary to human nature. In reality,
the stock market is human nature and crowd psychology on daily display,
plus the age-old law of supply and demand at work. Because these factors
have remained the same over time, it is remarkable but true that chart patterns are just the same today as they were 50 years ago or 100 years ago. Few
investors know or understand this. It can be to your inspiring advantage.
In this fourth edition of How to Make Money in Stocks, I’m showing you
right up front, in Chapter 1, 100 annotated color charts of 100 of America’s
greatest winning stocks, covering each decade from the 1880s to the end of
2008—from the Richmond and Danville Railroad in 1885 and Northern
Pacific during the famous corner of the stock in 1901, when it raced from
$115 to $700 in one week, to Apple and Google in our twenty-first century.
There is a lot you can learn from studying these great examples. You’ll see
that there are such things as chart bases that have been repeated year after
year with enormous success. There are 105 examples (among the 100 stocks)
of classic bases that look like cups with handles when viewed from the side.
Some are small, others large, and still others in between.
In addition to cups with handles, we’ve identified eight other distinctively
different, highly successful base patterns that have occurred in cycle after
cycle. Bethlehem Steel in 1915 is our first powerful high, tight flag example
and served as a perfect historical precedent for later high, tight flags such as
Syntex, Rollins, Simmonds Precision, Yahoo!, and Taser. All of these stocks
had huge price moves.
Charts will help you tell the better stocks and general markets from the
weaker, riskier stocks and markets that you must sidestep and avoid alto-

Introduction

gether. That’s why I put all these examples in Chapter 1, with notes marked
on the charts to help you learn a skill that could just change your whole life
and let you live better and smarter.
A good clear picture is worth a thousand words. These 100 examples are
just a sample of what you’ve been missing. We have models of more than
1,000 great stock market winners over the last 100 years. It takes only one or
two to make your year or your future. But you have to get serious and work
at really learning and knowing what you’re doing when you invest. You can
do it if you really want to.
You’ll probably find this a whole new way of looking at America and its
stock market. From the railroad to the auto and the airplane, from the radio
and TV to computers, from jet airliners to space exploration, from massive
discount stores to semiconductors and the Internet, this country has shown
rapid, unceasing growth. Living standards for the great majority of Americans
have improved materially from what they were 100, 50, or even 30 years ago.
Yes, there will always be problems, and everyone likes to criticize. But
America’s innovators, entrepreneurs, and inventors have been a major driving force behind its unparalleled growth. They have created the new industries, new technologies, new products, new services, and most of the jobs
from which we all have benefited.
Now it’s up to you to learn how to intelligently take advantage of the
relentless growth opportunities America’s freedom makes possible and that
entrepreneurs keep presenting for everyone during every business cycle.
In the following chapters, you will learn exactly how to pick big winners
in the stock market and nail down the gains they produce. You will also learn
how to substantially reduce your mistakes and losses.
Many people who dabble in stocks either have mediocre results or lose
money because of their lack of knowledge. But no one has to continue to
lose money. You can definitely learn to invest wisely. This book will provide
you with the investment understanding, skills, and methods you need if you
are to become a more successful investor.
I believe that most people in this country and throughout the free world,
whether they are young or old and regardless of their profession, education,
background, or economic position, should learn to save and invest in common stocks. This book isn’t written for the elite, but for the millions of ordinary guys and gals everywhere who want a chance to be better off
financially. You are never too old or too young to start investing intelligently.

•

YOU CAN START SMALL—If you’re a typical working person or a beginning
investor, you should know that it doesn’t take a lot of money to start. You can
begin with as little as $500 to $1,000 and add to it as you earn and save more

5

6 A WINNING SYSTEM
money. I began with the purchase of just five shares of Procter & Gamble
when I was only 21 and fresh out of school.

Mike Webster is one of our in-house managers who also started small. In
fact, Mike sold personal belongings, including his music CD collection, to
raise cash for investing. Prior to managing money for the firm, he had a gain
of over 1,000% in his personal account in 1999, a very unusual year.
Steve Birch, another of our in-house money managers, started managing
money earlier. He took advantage of the roaring bull market of the late 1990s
and protected most of his gains by going mainly to cash in the bear market.
Between 1998 and 2003, he had gained over 1,300%. Both Mike and Steve
have had their rough years, but they’ve learned from their many mistakes,
which we all make, and gone on to achieve significant performance.
You live in a fantastic time of unlimited opportunity, an era of outstanding new ideas, emerging industries, and new frontiers. However, you have to
read the rest of this book to learn how to recognize and take advantage of
these amazing new situations.
The opportunities are out there for everyone. You are now in a continually changing and, hopefully, improving New America. We lead the world in
high technology, the Internet, medical advancements, computer software,
military capability, and innovative new entrepreneurial companies. The
communist/socialist system and the concept of a centralized “command
economy” are now relegated to the ash heap of history. They did not work.
Our system of freedom and opportunity serves as a model of success for
most countries in the world.
Today it’s not enough for you to just work and earn a salary. To do the
things you want to do, go the places you want to go, and have the things you
want to have in your life, you absolutely must save and invest intelligently.
The income from your investments and the net gains you can make will let
you reach your goals and provide real security. This book can just change
your whole life. No one can hold you back but yourself.

•

SECRET TIP—The first step in learning how to pick big stock market winners
is to examine leaders of the past, like those you’re about to see, to learn the
characteristics of the most successful stocks. From these observations, you
will be able to recognize the types of price patterns these stocks developed
just before their spectacular price advances.

Other key factors you’ll discover include what the quarterly earnings of
these companies were at the time, what the annual earnings histories of
these organizations had been in the prior three years, what amount of trad-

Introduction

ing volume was present, what degree of relative strength there was in the
prices of the stocks before their enormous success, and how many shares of
common stock were outstanding in the capitalization of each company.
You’ll also learn many of the greatest winners had significant new products or new management, and many were tied to strong industry group
moves caused by important changes occurring in an entire industry.
It’s easy to conduct this type of practical, commonsense analysis of all past
successful leaders. I have already completed such a comprehensive study. In
our historical analysis, we selected the greatest winning stocks in the stock
market each year (in terms of percentage increase for the year), spanning
the past 125 years.
We call the study “The Model Book of Greatest Stock Market Winners.”
It’s been expanded recently to cover stocks dating back to the 1880s. It now
analyzes more than 1,000 of the biggest winning companies in recent market history in detail, super stocks such as
Texas Instruments, whose price soared from $25 to $250 from January 1958
through May 1960
Xerox, which escalated from $160 to the equivalent of $1,340 between
March 1963 and June 1966
Syntex, which leaped from $100 to $570 in only six months during the last
half of 1963
Dome Petroleum and Prime Computer, which advanced 1,000% and
1,595%, respectively, in the 1978–1980 stock market
Limited Stores, which wildly excited lucky shareowners with a 3,500%
increase between 1982 and 1987
Cisco Systems, which between October 1990 and March 2000 advanced
from a split-adjusted $0.10 to $82
Home Depot and Microsoft both increased more than 20 times during
the 1980s and early 1990s. Home Depot was one of the all-time great performers, jumping 20-fold in less than two years from its initial public offering in September 1981 and then climbing another 10 times from 1988 to
1992. All of these companies offered exciting new entrepreneurial products
and concepts. In total, we actually have 10 different model books that cover
America’s innovative and highly successful companies.
Would you like to know the common characteristics and rules of success
we discovered from this intensive study of all past stock market leaders?
They’re all covered in the next few chapters and in a simple, easy-toremember formula we have named CAN SLIM. Each letter in the words

7

8 A WINNING SYSTEM
CAN SLIM stands for one of the seven chief characteristics of these greatest winning stocks at their early developing stages, just before they made
huge profits for their shareholders and our country (companies and employees all pay taxes as well as helping to improve our standard of living). Write
this formula down, and repeat it several times so you won’t forget it.
The reason CAN SLIM continues to work cycle after cycle is that it’s
based solely on the reality of how the stock market actually works rather
than on our personal opinion or anyone else’s, including Wall Street’s. Furthermore, human nature at work in the market simply doesn’t change. So
CAN SLIM does not get outmoded as fads, fashions, and economic cycles
come and go. It will beat big egos and personal opinions every time.
You can definitely learn how to pick winners in the stock market, and you
can become part owner of the best companies in the world. So, let’s get
started right now. Here’s a sneak preview of CAN SLIM:
C

Current Quarterly Earnings per Share: The Higher, the Better

A

Annual Earnings Increases: Look for Significant Growth

N

New Products, New Management, New Highs: Buying at the Right Time

S

Supply and Demand: Shares Outstanding Plus Big Volume Demand

L

Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock?

I

Institutional Sponsorship: Follow the Leaders

M Market Direction: How to Determine It

Please begin immediately with Chapter 1. Go for it. You can do it.

1

• CHAPTE R •

The Greatest Stock-Picking
Secrets

Right up front in this latest revised edition, you’ll see 100 charts of the greatest

winners from 1880 through 2008. Study them carefully. You’ll discover
secret insights into how these companies set the stage for their spectacular
price increases.
Don’t worry if you’re a new investor and don’t understand these charts at
first. After all, every successful investor was a beginner at some point—and
this book will show you how to spot key buying opportunities on the charts,
as well as critical signals that a stock should be sold. To succeed you need to
learn sound, historically proven buy rules plus sell rules.
As you study these charts you’ll see there are specific chart patterns that
are repeated over and over again whether in 1900 or 2000. This will give you
a huge advantage once you learn to recognize these patterns that in effect
tell you when a stock is under professional accumulation.
It is the unique combination of your finding stocks with big increases in
sales, earnings and return on equity plus strong chart patterns revealing
institutional buying that together will materially improve your stock selection and timing. The best professionals use charts.
You too can learn this valuable skill.
This book is about how America grows and you can too. The American
dream can be yours if you have the drive and desire and make up your mind
to never give up on yourself or America.

9

Price

Completed railroad route from Richmond to
Danville, Virginia in 1856. By 1890 it covered
3,300 miles throughout the southern states.

Weekly Chart

10 A WINNING SYSTEM

Richmond & Danville–1885

400
340
300
260
220
190
160

Price up
weeks in black

140
120
100

Price down
weeks in red

80

A

70

Buy

60

High, low and
close plotted
for each week

45
38
32

America’s first cup-with-handle chart base…a
long one…74 weeks of price and volume action.
To count the weeks in a base, begin with the first
week that closes down in price at point A. Pattern
looks like a cup-with-handle if viewed from the side.

28
24
20
17

5,400
2,400
1,000
40 0
Jun 1882

Sep 1882

Dec 1882

Mar 1883

Jun 1883

Sep 1883

Dec 1883

Mar 1884

Jun 1884

Sep 1884

Dec 1884

Mar 1885

Jun 1885

Sep 1885

Richmond & Danville increased 257% in 70 weeks.
