
Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt 

 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 AN ARMY OF ONE 
 O n the morning of September 11, 2001, Zoran Perkov took the subway from his home in Queens to Wall Street, as he did every day. As usual, he wore headphones and listened to music, and pretended that the other people on the train didn’t exist. The difference between that morning and all the others was that he was running late, and the people on the train were harder than usual to ignore. They were talking to each other. “Nobody talks to each other,” said Zoran. “It was a weird feeling, when you feel something is off.” He was twenty-six years old, tall and broad, with hooded eyes that saw everything in one shade of gray or another. Born in Croatia, into long lines of fishermen and stonemasons, he’d moved with his parents to the United States when he was a small child. He’d grown up in Queens, and he worked on a tech help desk for the cryptically named Wall Street Systems, at 30 Broad Street, immediately next door to the New York Stock Exchange. His job bored him. What precisely he did on Wall Street Systems’ tech help desk didn’t matter. He wouldn’t be doing it much longer. In the next few hours, he’d discover a reason for doing something else. This discovery—and the clear sense of purpose that came with it—would put him on a course to be of serious use to Brad Katsuyama. 
 The subway car was a silent movie. Zoran watched the people in it talking to each other all the way to Wall Street. Ascending from the hole in the ground in front of Trinity Church and into the morning light, he noticed the necks tilted back and the eyes gazing upward. He, too, looked up, just as the second plane hit the South Tower. “You couldn’t see the plane,” he said. “You just saw this explosion.” 
 He took off his headphones and heard the sounds. “All around people crying, people screaming, people puking.” He saw people running up Broadway. He crossed the street and went to work. “Work isn’t work for me,” he said. “I got friends there. I went to find out what is going on.” Outside the front door, he spotted the same pretty woman with a cigarette he always saw on his way in. (“You know, the one hot chick in the building.”) She was smoking but also crying. He went upstairs, checked in with his friends, and called some guys he’d grown up with who worked on or around Wall Street. One of them worked in the Twin Towers—which tower Zoran couldn’t recall. A couple more worked in the buildings around the towers. He reached them and they agreed to use his office as their meeting point. When his friend from the Twin Tower arrived, he said that on his way out he’d heard the bodies hitting the ground. 
 The small group of five friends set out to escape. They discussed strategy. Zoran argued for walking out, up Broadway; the others voted to leave on the subway. “Democracy won,” said Zoran, and back down into the Wall Street station they went. It turned out that this was not an original idea. The crowds forced them apart; three of them squeezed into one car, while Zoran and another pushed into the next car. “It was such a mixed crowd,” said Zoran, “not your usual subway crowd.” There were all these Wall Street people: guys from the stock exchange in their colored jackets; people you just never saw there. The car lurched out of the station and into the dark tunnel, then stopped. “That’s when my ears popped,” said Zoran. “Like when you go swimming under water.” 
 The tunnel filled with smoke. Zoran had no idea what had happened—why his ears had popped, why the tunnel was full of smoke—but he noticed a guy trying to open a window, and he hollered at him to stop. Who gave you the authority? the guy screamed back at Zoran. “It’s smoke ,” Zoran shouted. “Breathe it. Die. It’s that fucking simple.” The window stayed shut, but the car remained fractious and unsettled. The car holding his other friends was tranquil. People bent over, praying. 
 The conductor came on and announced that the train needed to return to the Wall Street station. To general concern, the guy who drove the train walked from the front car to the back car, did whatever needed to be done to allow the train to go the wrong way inside a tunnel, and jolted it back from whence it had come. But not completely: Only the front two cars gained access to the platform. The people in what was now the rear of the train needed to file out through the cars to reach the exit. 
 That’s when Zoran noticed the old man—his neighbor, in a crowd trying to form a line to exit the train. “He’s got a cane,” said Zoran. “He’s in an old suit—he’s gotten thinner and smaller, so it doesn’t fit him very well. I remember thinking: I should probably make sure this guy doesn’t get crushed . So I just kind of kept him in front of me. I felt responsible for him.” Half-guiding the old man, he nudged his way back up the steps of the subway station and onto Wall Street. Then everything went totally black. “We get to street level, and I had to realize it was street level,” said Zoran. “And I lost the old guy. From that moment I was just paying attention to everything around me.” 
 He now couldn’t see, but he could hear people shouting. “Over here! Over here!” he heard someone scream. He and the friend who’d been in the subway car with him followed the sound of the voices, walking into what turned out to be the American Express building—though Zoran didn’t realize it until they’d been inside for a minute. What he noticed was the pregnant woman, sitting on the floor with her back against a wall. He went to her, made sure she wasn’t about to give birth, then gave her his phone, which still worked. The black air outside began to acquire a color. “For some reason everything had this beige-like tone,” he recalled. He could now see more or less where they were, and which direction was which. A cop inside the building said, “You need to stay in here.” Zoran grabbed his friend and left. They walked east and north until they arrived at some faceless apartment buildings on the Lower East Side. “It’s the projects,” said Zoran, “and people are coming out with cups of water and all of their cordless phones. To help. That’s when I started to cry.” 
 Eventually they reached the FDR Drive and continued due north. That might have been the oddest feeling of the entire morning: that walk along a stretch of the FDR. They were alone. It was quiet. For an amazingly long time, the only human being they encountered was a half-dressed cop who roared past them on a motorbike toward the catastrophe. Then the papers began to flutter down from above. On them Zoran could read the address of the World Trade Center. 
 To say that Zoran found the whole experience exhilarating—well, that wouldn’t be quite right, though, as he told his story, he said that “somehow I feel guilty about telling it.” It was more that there hadn’t been even a moment when he had felt he didn’t know what he should do next. He’d been jarred into a new kind of awareness, and interest in the people around him, and he liked the feeling. His reactions had surprised him into an observation about himself. “I was impressed that I did not fall apart,” he said. “I didn’t use it as an excuse for anything. What it tells me is that I wasn’t afraid of those situations. I like being front and center. I like being in a drama.” He could even pinpoint the moment he realized he was better suited to a crisis than he expected himself to be. “It was when I realized I’ve started to give a shit about other people,” he said. 
 Two days later he returned to work, but he’d been biffed from an ill-defined career path onto another, clearer one. He wanted to be in a job that required him to perform in a crisis. If you worked on the technology end of Wall Street and were looking for pressure, you ran an electronic stock market. By early 2006, that’s what Zoran was doing—at Nasdaq. “They just sat me in front of four machines with buttons that could, like, destroy everything,” he said. “It was the best thing in the world. Every day was the Super Bowl. The value of what you were doing felt so high.” The feeling of the job was hard to get across to anyone who wasn’t a technologist, but there was definitely a feeling to it. “Put it this way,” said Zoran. “If I fuck up, I’m going to be in the news. I’m the only one who can break it, and if it breaks I’m the only one who can fix it.” 
 He’d learned this the hard way, of course. Not long after he started at Nasdaq, he’d broken one of the markets. (Nasdaq has owned several markets—Nasdaq OMX, Nasdaq BX, INET, PSX.) It happened when he was making changes to the system during trading hours. He entered a command, then heard the people around him panicking; but he failed to immediately connect one event to the other. A former Nasdaq colleague recalled the ensuing bedlam. “I remember seeing people running around and screaming while it was happening,” he said. Zoran looked up at the stock market on his computer screen: It was frozen. It took him a few seconds to realize that, even though the thing he’d been working on should have had no connection to the market in real time, he had somehow shut his entire market down. It took him another few seconds to see exactly how he had done it. Then he fixed it, and the market resumed trading. From start to finish the crisis had lasted twenty-two seconds. Twenty-two seconds, during which all trading had simply ceased. “I remember sitting there and thinking: I’m done ,” said Zoran. “The CTO [chief technology officer] saved me. He said, ‘How can you get rid of a guy who makes a mistake, stops it, and fixes it?’ ” 
 Still, the event shaped him. “I said, ‘How do I never do that again?’ ” said Zoran. “I started really jumping into how to control large-scale complex systems. I became a student of complexity—defined as something you cannot predict. How do you have stability in a system that is by its nature unpredictable?” He read everything he could find on the subject. One of his favorite books was actually called Complexity, by M. Mitchell Waldrop. His favorite paper to pass out was “How Complex Systems Fail,” an eighteen-bullet-point summary by Richard I. Cook, now a professor of health care systems safety in Sweden. (Bullet Point #6: Catastrophe is always just around the corner. ) “People think that complex is an advanced state of complicated,” said Zoran. “It’s not. A car key is simple. A car is complicated. A car in traffic is complex.” 
 A stock market was a complex system. One definition of a complex system was a place where, as Zoran put it, “Shit will break and there is nothing you can do about it.” The person whose job it was to make sure shit didn’t break ran two kinds of career risks: the risk of shit breaking that was within his control, and the risk of shit breaking over which he had no control. Zoran continued to run one of the Nasdaq markets. Eventually, the company handed him bigger markets to run; and the risk of running them grew. By the end of 2011, he was overseeing all of Nasdaq’s market running. (Head of Global Operations, he was called.) He had spent the better part of six years adding complexity to those markets, for reasons he did not always understand. The business people would just decide to make some change, which it was his job to implement. “The Post-Only order type was the first thing that got me,” said Zoran, of the order designed to be executed only if the trader received a kickback from the exchange. “What the fuck is the point of a Post-Only order?” He was somehow expected to cope with the demands made on Nasdaq’s markets by Nasdaq’s biggest customers (high-frequency traders) and, at the same time, keep those markets safe and stable. It was as if a pit crew had been asked to strip down the race car, rip out the seat harnesses, and do whatever else they might to make the car go faster than it ever had before—and at the same time reduce the likelihood that the driver would die. Only in this case, if the driver was killed, blame for his death would be assigned, arbitrarily, to one member of the pit crew. Him. 
 This state of affairs led to a certain skittishness in the pit crew. It wasn’t just that the high-frequency traders were demanding changes to the market that would benefit only them: The mere act of changing the system increased the risks to everyone who depended on it. Adding code and features to a trading system was like adding traffic to a highway: You couldn’t predict the consequences of what you had done; all you knew was that you had made the situation more difficult to understand. “No one is trying to control what they don’t know,” said Zoran. “And what they don’t know is growing.” He thought of himself as good in a crisis, but he didn’t see the point of manufacturing crises so that he might demonstrate his virtuosity. He was also far less suited to managing a bunch of market runners than he was to running a market himself. He had no gift for corporate politics. Every day, he liked his job less and less—until, in March 2012, he was fired, whereupon he got a phone call from Don Bollerman. Don wanted Zoran to run the market for IEX. “I’m not going to pitch you just now, mainly because we have no money and we don’t even know what we’re going to do,” said Don. “But I may pitch you later.” Don knew that Zoran had been a casualty of an office political battle, and, more to the point, that he was maybe the best exchange runner he’d ever seen. “He has all the qualities,” said Don. “Poise under pressure. The ability to understand a complex and vast system. And be able to think into it—imagine into it—accurately. To diagnose and foresee problems.” 
 It was a little unsettling that the geeks who now ran the financial markets were also expected to have the nerves of a test pilot. But by the time Don approached Zoran, it had grown clear that the investing public had lost faith in the U.S. stock market. Since the flash crash back in May 2010, the S&P index had risen by 65 percent, and yet trading volume was down 50 percent: For the first time in history, investors’ desire to trade had not risen with market prices. Before the flash crash, 67 percent of U.S. households owned stocks; by the end of 2013, only 52 percent did: The fantastic post-crisis bull market was noteworthy for how many Americans elected not to participate in it. It wasn’t hard to see why their confidence in financial markets had collapsed. As the U.S. stock market had grown less comprehensible, it had also become more sensationally erratic. It wasn’t just market prices that were unpredictable but the market itself—and the uncertainty it created was bound to extend, sooner or later, to the many foreign stock markets, bond markets, options markets, and currency markets that had aped the U.S stock market’s structure. 
 In March 2012 the BATS exchange had to pull its own initial public offering because of “technical errors.” The next month, the New York Stock Exchange canceled a bunch of trades by mistake because of a “technical glitch.” In May, Nasdaq bungled the initial public offering of shares in Facebook Inc. because, in essence, some investors who submitted orders to buy those shares changed their minds before the price was agreed upon—and certain Nasdaq computers couldn’t deal with the faster speeds at which other Nasdaq computers allowed the investors to change their minds. In August 2012, the computers of the big HFT firm Knight Capital went berserk and made stock market trades that cost Knight $440 million and triggered the company’s fire sale. In November, the NYSE suffered what was termed a “matching engine outage” and was forced to halt trading in 216 stocks. Three weeks later, a Nasdaq employee clicked the wrong icon on his computer screen and stopped the public offering of shares in a company called WhiteHorse Finance. In early January 2013, BATS announced that, because of some unspecified computer error, it had, since 2008, inadvertently allowed trades to occur, illegally, at prices worse (for the investor) than the National Best Bid and Offer. 
 That was just a sampling from a single year of what were usually described as “technical glitches” in the new, automated U.S. stock markets: Collectively, they had experienced twice as many outages in the two years after the flash crash as in the previous ten. The technical glitches were accompanied by equally bewildering irregularities in stock prices. In April 2013, the price of Google’s shares fell from $796 to $775 in three-quarters of a second, for instance, and then rebounded to $793 in the next second. In May the U.S. utilities sector experienced a mini–flash crash, with stocks falling by 50 percent or more for a few seconds before bouncing back to their previous prices. These mini–flash crashes in individual stocks that now occurred routinely went largely unnoticed and unremarked upon. * 
 Zoran liked to argue that there were actually fewer, not more, “technical glitches” in 2012 than there had been in 2006—it was only the financial consequences of system breakdowns that had grown. He also took issue with the word “glitch.” (“It’s the worst word in the world.”) When some machine malfunctioned and a stock market came under scrutiny, the head of that market usually had no clue either what had happened or how to fix it: He was at the mercy of his technologists. But he had to say something, and so he said that there had been a “technical glitch.” It was as if there was no way to explain how the financial market actually worked—or didn’t—without resorting to fuzzy metaphors and meaningless words. † If stock market computer–related problems were to be reduced to a single phrase, Zoran preferred it to be “normal accidents.” ‡ 
 When Bollerman called him again, late in the summer of 2012, IEX had an idea, and the first glimmer of hope that they would find money. That the idea was also idealistic made Zoran skeptical; he wasn’t sure it was possible ever to make a financial market fair. But he absolutely loved the idea of running a market he helped to design—to limit the number of things in it he could not control. He came in to IEX to meet Brad and Rob and John Schwall and Ronan. Brad and Schwall and Rob liked him, Ronan not so much. “What put me off is that he wouldn’t shut the fuck up,” said Ronan. 
 His first few months on the job, Zoran drove everyone nuts. Lacking a market crisis, he proceeded to create a social one. They’d tell him about some new feature they had thought to introduce into the system and ask, “Will this make the system harder to manage?” To which Zoran would reply, “It depends on your definition of ‘harder.’ ” Or they would ask him if some small change in the system would cause the system to become less stable—to which Zoran would reply, “It depends on your definition of ‘stable.’ ” Every question he answered with an uneasy chuckle, followed by some other question. A rare exception came when he was asked, “Why do you always answer a question with another question?” “Clarity,” he said. 
 Zoran also seemed to assume that his new colleagues would fail to understand the difference between what he could control and what he couldn’t. In one thirty-day span after he joined IEX, he shot out fifteen emails on this one subject—to hammer home the mystery inherent in any stock market technological failure. He even invited a speaker to come in to reinforce the point. “It was one the few times that the people in the room wound up at each other’s throats,” said Brad. “The tech people were all agreeing with him, and the business people were saying, ‘If something melts down, how could it not be someone’s fault?’ ” Brad’s breaking point came after the guest speaker had left and Zoran circulated a blog post called “A Short Story on Human Error.” The gist of it was that when complex systems broke, it was never the fault of any one person. The post described some computer catastrophe and then concluded, “. . . you’ll notice that it wasn’t just one little thing that caused it. It wasn’t the developer who just so happened to delete the wrong table. It was a number of causes that came together to strike hard, all of them very likely to be bigger issues inside the organization rather than a problem with the individual.” At which point Brad finally walked the ten yards from his desk to Zoran’s desk and shouted, “Stop sending these fucking emails!” 
 And he did, finally. “I know what to do when things are exploding around me,” he later said. “But when nothing is exploding, the overthinking comes into play.” 
 Initially Brad was mystified: How could a guy who thrived under pressure also have such a fear of being blamed if things went wrong? “He’s so good in a crisis,” said Brad later. “In game-time situations. Under pressure. I’ve seen it. But it’s like a quarterback who is great in the game, then spends the other six days explaining how it isn’t his fault if he throws an interception. ‘ Dude, your passer rating is 110. Stop it .’ ” Brad realized something: “It comes from a sense of insecurity that comes from the fact that he will be more recognized when things go wrong than when things go right.” Brad further realized that the problem was not peculiar to Zoran but general to Wall Street technologists. The markets were now run by technology, but the technologists were still treated like tools. Nobody bothered to explain the business to them, but they were forced to adapt to its demands and exposed to its failures—which was, perhaps, why there had been so many more conspicuous failures. (The exception was the high-frequency trading firms, where the technologists were kings. But then, the HFT firms didn’t have clients.) Nasdaq’s famously talented engineers were an extreme Wall Street case. The constant pressure on Nasdaq’s tech guys to adapt the stock markets’ code to the needs of high-frequency traders had created a miserable, politicized workplace. The Nasdaq business guys foisted all these unreasonable demands on the tech guys and then, when the demands busted the system, blamed the tech guys for the failure. The tech guys all wound up with this abused animal quality to them. “You just have to unabuse them,” Brad explained, “and let them know they aren’t going to be blamed just because something goes wrong.” We all know that things will go wrong and it isn’t necessarily anyone’s fault. 
 Rob and John Schwall seemed to agree that this was the correct approach to take with the people they hired from Nasdaq: to tell them over and over that they weren’t to blame for whatever had just happened, to include them in every business discussion so that they could see why they could be a part of it, and so on. Ronan had no patience for any of it. “C’mon, they came from a corporate American job,” he said. “They didn’t come from Auschwitz.” On the other hand, in time, even Ronan saw that Zoran possessed useful qualities he hadn’t at first perceived. “Someone who will be good at running the market—you need to be the most paranoid fuck in the world,” said Ronan. “And he’s the most paranoid fuck in the world. He thinks ten steps down the road of what could go wrong—because he’s thinking of what could happen to him if it goes wrong. He’s really good at it.” 
 On the morning of October 25, 2013, Zoran Perkov took the subway from his home to Wall Street, as he always did. As usual, he read some book or white paper, and tried to pretend that the people around him didn’t exist. The difference between that morning and the others was that he was running early and had a stock market to open—and it was unlike any market he’d ever run. Spare, clean, single-minded, and built from the ground up by people he not only admired but now trusted. “Every single morning, the system is stateless,” he said, of exchange matching engines generally. “It doesn’t know what it’s supposed to do. Ninety-nine percent of the time, it’s the same thing it did the day before.” On this day, that could not possibly have been true, as the IEX matching engine had never actually done anything. Zoran sat down at his desk in IEX’s office and punched a few buttons and watched code scroll down his screen. He pulled out an old, battered computer mouse—then noticed it was dead. He frowned. “It’s my war mouse,” he said. “Every single market I have opened in the past ten years has been with this mouse.” He knocked it against the desk, realized that its battery had probably died, and wondered, briefly, how to replace it. “My wife mocks me because I can’t work the microwave oven but I can run a market,” he said. He switched out his war mouse for another, and checked his computer screens. The seconds ticked down; it was approaching nine thirty in the morning, when the U.S. stock market would open and, with it, this new market inside of it that aimed to transform it. He waited and watched for something to go wrong. It didn’t. 
 A minute before nine thirty, Brad walked over to Zoran’s desk: By popular agreement, Brad was to open the market that first day. He looked down at the keyboard, perplexed. 
 “What do I do?” he asked. 
 “Just hit Enter,” said Zoran. 
 The entire room counted down the final seconds before the opening. 
 “Five . . . four . . . three . . . two . . . one.” 
 Six and a half hours later, the market closed. Zoran had no idea whether the market as a whole had finished up or down for the day. Ten minutes after that he could be found, alone, pacing outside the 9/11 memorial, smoking a cigarette. “This is like the first day of the battle against complacency,” he said. 
 TWO AND A half months later, sixteen people—the chief executives or the head traders of some of the world’s biggest stock market money managers—gathered in a conference room on top of a Manhattan skyscraper. They’d flown in from around the country to hear Brad describe what he’d learned about the U.S. stock market since IEX had opened for trading. From that trading, he’d gotten new information. To afford people interested in the truth even a glimpse of it was now considered faintly seditious. § “This is the perfect seat to figure all this out,” said Brad. “It’s not like you can stand outside and watch. We had to be in the game to see it.” 
 The sixteen investors controlled roughly $2.6 trillion in stock market investments among them, or roughly 20 percent of the entire U.S. market. Collectively, they paid to the big Wall Street banks roughly $2.2 billion of the $11 billion a year the Street earned from stock market commissions. ¶ They weren’t exactly of one mind or spirit. A few of them were also investors in IEX, but most were not. A couple held the knowing, seemingly grown-up view that it was naïve to think that idealism could have any effect on Wall Street. A few thought it was important to remember that technology had lowered their trading costs from what they had been decades earlier—and half-turned a half-blind eye to the stunts Wall Street intermediaries had pulled to prevent technology from lowering those costs even further. But whatever their predispositions, they were all at least a little bit angry, because they all had spent the past few years listening to Brad’s descriptions of the inner workings of the U.S. stock market. They now thought of him less as a guy trying to sell them something than as a partner, in a possibly quixotic attempt to fix a financial system that had become deeply screwed up. “You kind of know what’s going on, but you don’t have a good explanation for it,” said one. “He gave us the explanation.” A second said, “This isn’t about execution. It’s about a movement. I’m sick and tired of getting fucked. When I go into the market I want to know it’s clean.” A third added, “All of a sudden the market is all about algos and routers. It’s hard to figure this stuff out. There’s no book you can read. It’s just calling up people and talking to them. From the people at the banks you can’t get a straight answer to any question. You say, ‘The sky is blue.’ They say, ‘The sky is green.’ And you’re like, ‘What are you talking about?’ And after half an hour it comes out that they have changed the definition of ‘sky.’ You know what you’re asking. They know what you’re asking. But they don’t want to answer it. The first time I talked to Brad and he was telling me how it all actually worked, my jaw must have hit the floor.” 
 Another investor had a question about Brad. “Why does a person take the harder path? It’s a different situation from what you typically see. If it works, he will make money. But he’ll make less” than if he had stayed at RBC. 
 The sixteen were all men. Most wore suits, with deep creases on the backs of their jackets that looked as if they’d been made with a bullwhip. They were different from the people who worked at the big Wall Street banks, and from the HFT guys. They were a lot less likely to bounce from firm to firm—a lot more likely to have a career in one place. They were more isolated, too: They didn’t know each other well and didn’t, until Brad suggested it, have any reason to organize themselves into any kind of fighting force. Many had just landed in New York City, and a few of them were obviously weary. Their tone was informal and familiar, with none of the usual jockeying for status. They might not all have been capable of outrage, but they were all still capable of curiosity. 
 At some level, they all now realized that this thirty-five-year-old Canadian guy somehow had put himself in a position to understand the United States stock market in a way that the system, possibly, had never been understood. “The game is now clear to me,” Brad said. “There’s not a press release I don’t understand.” On August 22, Nasdaq had experienced a two-hour outage caused by what they said was a technical glitch in the SIP. Brad thought he understood why it had happened: Nasdaq threw vast resources into the cool new technology used by HFT to speed up its trading and little into the basic plumbing of the market used by the ordinary investor. “Nasdaq’s got this state-of-the-art facility for HFT,” he said. “Seventeen-kilowatt liquid-cooled cabinets and cross-connects everywhere and all this shit, and then they have this single choke point in the entire market—the SIP—and they don’t care about it. The B team is servicing it.” Four days later, two of the public exchanges, BATS and Direct Edge, revealed their intention to merge. In a normal industry, the point of a merger of two companies that performed identical functions would be to consolidate—to reduce costs. But, as a subsequent press release explained, both exchanges intended to remain open after the merger. To Brad the reason was obvious: The exchanges were both at least partially owned by high-frequency trading firms, and, from the HFT point of view, the more exchanges the better. 
 A few weeks later, both Nasdaq and the New York Stock Exchange announced that they had widened the pipe that carried information between the HFT computers and each exchange’s matching engine. The price for the new pipe was $40,000 a month, up from the $25,000 a month the HFT firms had been paying for the old, smaller pipe. The increase in speed was two microseconds . Brad understood that the reason for this was not that the market was better off if HFT had information two microseconds faster than before, but that the high-frequency traders were all terrified of being slower than their peers, and the exchanges had figured out how to milk this anxiety. In a stock market now defined by its technology accidents, nothing actually happened by accident: There was a reason for even the oddest events. For instance, one day, investors woke up to discover that they’d bought shares in some company for $30.0001. Why? How was it possible to pay ten-thousandths of a penny for anything? Easy: High-frequency traders had asked for an order type that enabled them to tack digits on the right side of the decimal, so that they might jump the queue in front of people trying to pay $30.00. The reason for change was seldom explained; change just happened. “The fact that it is such an opaque industry should be alarming,” Brad said. “The fact that the people who make the most money want the least clarity possible—that should be alarming, too.” 
