
If you’re patient and wait for price action to provide you with confirmation that a
directional move or trend is indeed reversing, essentially confirming that the observed chart
pattern is playing out as you expected, you’re reducing the risks of being wrong-sided or
premature in your trade. The trade-off is that you may sacrifice a better entry level for a
higher degree of certainty in the overall trade setup. Looked at the other way around, you’re
reducing the risks of getting into a trade setup too soon and being wrong if the setup doesn’t
play out as you expected. The difference is not making as much money as possible or losing
money outright. Which would you prefer?

Technical-based observations provide you with a heads-up alert that a price shift may soon
take place — for example, prices may be stalling in a move higher, potentially setting up a
reversal lower. Confirmation comes when prices break an established trend line, prior high

or low, or other key technical levels of support or resistance. Be careful about looking for
confirmation from multiple technical indicators, because they may be measuring the same
thing, just in slightly different formats. Price is the key element of confirmation.

The Art of Technical Analysis
Chart analysis is at the heart of technical analysis. Don’t become reliant on all the fancy indicators
and technical studies on your charting system. The most powerful technical indicators you have are
your eyes and what’s behind them.
In this section, I show you the basics of drawing trend lines and look at some of the most common,
yet significant, price patterns you’ll encounter over and over again in your trading. In Chapter 12, I
go into greater detail and suggest practical approaches to drawing and applying trend lines on a
regular basis, as well as how to trade the chart formations you observe.

Bar charts and candlestick charts
In this section, I introduce the two main types of charts you’ll likely be using as you pursue your
own technical analysis.

Measuring markets with price bars
Most charting systems are set to default to show bar charts, probably the most widely used form
of charting among Western traders. Bar charts are composed of price bars, which encompass the
key points of each trading period — namely, the open, high, low, and close. A period is the time
interval you’ve selected to analyze, such as 5 or 15 minutes for short-term traders, and 1 hour, 4
hour, daily, or weekly for longer-term traders (though short-term traders need to be aware of the
longer periods, too). Each bar is displayed as a vertical line with a tick mark on each side of the
bar. The tick mark on the left side of the price bar represents the open of the period; the tick mark
on the right side is the close of the period; and the upper and lower levels of the bar are the
period’s highs and lows. For example, Figure 11-1 is a bar chart.
You can use bar charts to draw trend lines, measure retracement levels, and gauge overall price
volatility. Each bar represents the trading range for the period; the larger the bar, the greater the
range and the higher the volatility (and vice versa for smaller bars). Bar charts are best suited to
relatively basic analysis, such as getting a handle on an overall trend.

Lighting the way with candlesticks
I put my favoritism right out front for everyone to see: I love using candlestick charts to spot trade
setups, especially impending price reversals. I think candlesticks are among the more powerful

predictive tools in the trader’s arsenal, and I strongly recommend that you study them further. In
particular, I highly recommend reading Steve Nison’s Japanese Candlestick Charting
Techniques, 2nd Edition (see Chapter 20 for more on Nison’s book).
Candlestick charts are among the earliest known forms of technical analysis, dating back to trading
in the Japanese rice markets in the 18th century. Candlestick charts, or just candles for short,
provide a more visually intuitive representation of price action than you get from simple bar
charts. They do this through the use of color and by more clearly breaking out the key price points
of each trading day — open, close, high, and low.

Figure 11-2 shows the components of two candlesticks. Immediately, you can see that one
candle is light, and the other is dark. What does that mean? Think of yin and yang, good and
bad, up and down. The light candlestick indicates that the close was higher than the open — it
was an up day. The dark candle indicates that the close was lower than the open — a down
day.

Figure 11-2:
The anatomy
of a
candlestick.
Candlesticks
provide a
highly intuitive
visual
representation
of price
movements.

Source: FOREX.com

The light/dark portion in the middle of the candle is called the real body or just body; it displays
the difference between the open and the close. The lines above and below the body are called

tails (the term I’ll use going forward), shadows, or wicks; these lines represent the high and low
of the period. (I look more at candlesticks in the “Candlestick patterns” section, later in this
chapter.)

Candlestick charts are best analyzed using daily or weekly periods rather than intra-day
periods like 1 hour or 30 minutes. The philosophy behind candle stick analysis is that a full
day or week of trading is needed before the market has rendered a verdict, potentially
offering signals about future direction.

Drawing trend lines
Probably no exercise in technical analysis is more individualistic than identifying and drawing
trend lines. Very often, it comes down to a matter of beauty being in the eye of the beholder. But in
the case of chart analysis, beauty is order, and the trend lines you draw are the outlines of that
order. Ultimately, drawing trend lines is not that complicated — with a bit of practice, you’ll get
the hang of it pretty quickly.
What is a trend line? Basically, a trend line is a line that connects significant price points over a
defined time period on a price chart. The significant price points are usually the highs and lows of
bars or candles, though in the case of candles you can also use the open or close levels of the
candle’s real body.

Connecting the dots
The starting point in drawing trend lines is looking at the overall price chart in front of you. What
do you see? If it’s your first time looking at a price chart, it probably looks like a jumble of
meaningless bars or candles. The key is to turn that jumble into a meaningful visualization of
what’s happening to prices. (I offer several graphical representations of trend lines throughout
Chapter 12.)
Scan the chart from left to right, starting in the past and looking into the present. What are prices
doing? Are they moving up, down, or a little of both? (If you’re looking at a currency chart, you
can bet they’re doing a little bit of both.) Draw your first trend lines to connect the highest highs
(you need only two points to form a line) and the lowest lows, to capture the overall range in the
observed period. Always use the extreme points of the price bars or candles when connecting
price points (lows with lows, highs with highs).
Look at what’s happening between those two trend lines. You’ll invariably see a number of
smaller, distinct price movements making up the whole. You can draw trend lines to connect the
highs of price moves down and the lows of price moves up. Be sure to extend your trend lines all
the way to the right edge of the chart, regardless of other bars or candles that later break it. Look

for evenness, whether it’s horizontal, sloping down, shooting steeply higher, or anything in
between. Eventually, that evenness will be broken by price moves that break through the trend
lines.
Your ultimate focus will be on the prices on the right side of the chart, because that’s the most
recent price action, and beyond lies future price developments. The idea is to winnow out trend
lines from the past that appear to have little relevance (they’re frequently broken), and keep the
trend lines that have the most relevance (prices reverse course when they’re hit, and they’re
largely unbroken) and extend them into the future. Those trend lines are going to act as support and
resistance just as they did in the past and provide you with guidance going forward.

Looking for symmetry
When you’re drawing trend lines, be alert for symmetrical patterns, such as parallel
channels, sloping up or down, or simply horizontal. Look for horizontal tops and bottoms to
be made where prior high and lows were reached. Note that a rising trend line may be
heading for a falling trend line, forming a triangle. The two lines are set to intersect at some
point in the future, and one of them will be broken, sparking a price reaction.
Charting systems usually have a trend-line function that allows you to draw a line parallel to
another line, or copy an existing line and move it to a parallel position. Experiment with that tool,
and you’ll be surprised how frequently price points match up to it.

Recognizing chart formations
Pattern recognition, or the identification of chart formations, is another form of technical analysis
that helps traders get a handle on what’s happening in the market. In the following sections, I cover
some of the most widely observed chart formations and what they mean from a trading standpoint.
While you’re looking through them, keep in mind that the formations can occur in different charting
time frames (for example, 15 minutes, hourly, daily).

The key to trading on chart formations is to recognize the time period in which they’re
apparent and to factor that into your trade strategy. A reversal pattern that occurs on an hourly
chart, for example, may constitute a reversal that lasts for only a few hours or a day and
retrace a relatively smaller pip distance. A reversal pattern on a daily chart, in contrast,
could signal a significant multiweek reversal spanning several hundred pips. Keep the
formations you observe in the proper time-frame perspective.

Basic chart formations

Chart formations are part and parcel of trends. They’re generally grouped into categories that
reflect what they mean in the context of a trend. The two most common types of chart patterns are
Reversal patterns: A reversal pattern indicates that the prior directional price movement
is coming to an end. It does not necessarily mean that prices will actually begin to move in
the opposite direction, though in many cases they will.
Consolidation and continuation patterns: Consolidation and continuation patterns
represent pauses in directional price moves, where prices undergo a period of back-andforth consolidation before the overall trend continues.
Double tops and double bottoms
Double tops and double bottoms are typically considered among the most powerful chart
formations indicating a reversal in the direction of an overall trend. Double tops form in an
uptrend, and double bottoms form in a downtrend. Figure 11-3 shows a double-bottom pattern on a
daily AUD/USD chart, and Figure 11-1 shows a double top on a four-hour AUD/USD chart (not
labeled, but you can see the two highs).
In terms of market dynamics, the idea behind both is that a directional move (up or down) will
make a high or low at some point. After a period of consolidation, the market will frequently test
the prior high or low for the trend. If the trend is still intact, the market should be able to make a
new high or low beyond the prior one. But if the market is unable to surpass the prior high or low,
it’s taken as a signal that the trend is over, and trend followers begin to exit, generating the
reversal.
As with most chart formations, double tops and bottoms rarely form perfectly. The second high or
low may come up short of the prior high/low; that inability even to retest the prior high/low can
create a more rapid and volatile reversal. Other times, the first low may be surpassed by a brief
amount and for a brief time (possibly due to stops at the prior low being triggered), as in Figure
10-3, only to be rejected, leading to the reversal.
Head and shoulders and inverted head and shoulders
Head-and-shoulders (H&S) formations are another form of reversal pattern, sometimes referred
to as a triple top. The H&S top formation develops after an uptrend, and an inverted H&S comes
after a downtrend. Figure 11-4 shows a classic example of an inverted H&S formation, signaling
the end of the EUR’s decline after the Eurozone debt crisis. In the case of an uptrend, a high is
made at some stage followed by a pullback lower, creating the left shoulder. A subsequent new
high is made, generating the head, followed by yet another correction lower. A third attempt to
move higher fails to reach the second or highest high and may surpass, equal, or fall short of the
left shoulder. Failure to reach the prior high typically triggers selling, and confirmation of a
reversal is received when prices fall below the neckline, which is formed by connecting the lows
seen after each pullback from the shoulder and the head.

Figure 11-3:
A doublebottom
formation
suggests that
the prior trend
down may
reverse.

Source: www.eSignal.com

The standard measured move objective (the price move suggested by a chart pattern) in an
H&S pattern is the distance from the top of the head to the neckline. When the neckline is
broken, prices should subsequently move that distance.
Flags
Flags are consolidation patterns that typically form in a counter-trend direction. For example, if
prices have moved higher (the trend is up) and run into resistance above, for a flag to form, prices

will begin to consolidate in a downward (counter-trend) channel. The formation suggests that the
flag consolidation channel will eventually break out in the direction of the prior trend, and the
directional move will resume. Perhaps somewhat confusingly, a bull flag actually slopes
downward, but it’s called a bull flag because after it breaks, the bullish trend resumes. A bear
flag slopes upward, but after it breaks to the downside, the bearish trend resumes.

Figure 11-4:
An inverted
head-andshoulders
formation in
EUR/USD
signals that
the euro’s
declines may
be ending
after the
worst of the
Eurozone debt
crisis.

Source: www.eSignal.com

If the opposite side of the flag channel is broken (the lower end of a bull flag/upper end of a
bear flag), the pattern is invalidated and it may signal a larger reversal.
Flags have a measured move objective based on the flagpole, or the distance of the prior move
that ultimately stalled, resulting in the formation of the flag. When the flag is broken, the price
target is usually equal to the length of the flagpole projected from the flag break, as shown in
Figure 11-5.
Triangles
Triangles are another type of consolidation pattern, and they come in a few different forms:
Symmetrical triangles: These formations have downward-sloping upper edges and
upward-sloping lower edges, resulting in a triangle pointing horizontally. Symmetrical
triangles are mostly neutral for the direction of the ultimate breakout, but they have a
slightly greater tendency to break out in the direction in which they entered the triangle

consolidation, meaning the trend is resuming.
Ascending triangles: These formations have a flat or horizontal top and an upwardsloping lower edge (see Figure 11-6). Ascending triangles typically break out to the
upside after resistance on the top is overcome. The rising lower edge signifies that buyers
keep coming back at ever-higher levels to push through the horizontal top. The minimum
measured move objective on a breakout is equal to the distance between the rising bottom
and where the flat top is first reached.
Descending triangles: These formations are the inverse of ascending triangles, where the
horizontal edge and the expected direction of the breakout are to the downside.
Figure 11-5:
A break of a
bear flag
consolidation
pattern on an
hourly chart
of NZD/USD
signals that
the move
down is
resuming.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Candlestick patterns
Candlestick patterns are some of the most powerful predictors of future price direction.
Candlesticks have little predictive capacity when it comes to the size of future price movements,
so you need to look at other forms of technical analysis to gauge the extent of subsequent price
moves. But if you can get the direction right, you’re more than halfway there. (I look more at using
candles to develop trade strategies in Chapter 12.)
Candlestick formations come in two main forms:

Reversal patterns: Where a preceding directional move stops and changes direction
Continuation patterns: Where a prior directional move resumes its course after a period
of consolidation
I like to look at candlestick patterns primarily for reversal signals because they’re among the most
reliable of the candlestick patterns.

The key to interpreting a candle formation as a reversal indicator is that there has to be an
identifiable directional move in the preceding days. The directional price move may be part
of an extended uptrend or downtrend, or simply a day or two of a clear directional move
higher or lower, as shown by relatively large real bodies.
Literally dozens of different candlestick reversal patterns exist, but I focus on the most common
patterns in the following sections. Keep in mind that some candle reversal formations consist of a
single candle, whereas others depend on two or three candles to constitute the pattern. Look
closely, and you’ll see that many of them are variations on the same theme (namely that a
directional move is losing force, increasing the potential for a price reversal). A good source of
candlestick reference can be found for free at www.candlesticker.com.
Doji
Doji are among the most significant of the candlestick patterns because their basic shape forms the
basis for many other candlestick patterns. A doji occurs when the close is the same as the open,
generating a candlestick with no real body — simply a vertical line with a cross on it.

Figure 11-6:
The break of
the flat top in
an ascendingtriangle
formation
signals an
upside
breakout.
Note that the
top of the
triangle
subsequently
acted as
support.

Source: www.eSignal.com

On days when the close is only a few points apart from the open, generating a candle with
an extremely small real body, you can take some artistic license and consider it a potential
doji depending on the preceding candles. If the prior days’ candles were composed of long
real bodies, that increases the likelihood that the very small real body should be viewed as a
doji (or a spinning top, which I cover later in this section). Figure 11-7 is a good example of
this — the open and close were only 5 pips apart. Whenever you spot a doji after a daily
close, you should note it and consider that the preceding directional move may be ending or
set for a reversal.

Figure 11-7:
After a move
higher in
AUD/USD, a
doji signals the
gains may be
about to
reverse.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Doji are significant because they represent indecision and uncertainty. When viewing a doji, think
of buyers and sellers fighting to a draw. In the case of a preceding decline lower, for example, it
signals that sellers are losing power and buyers have emerged. Figure 11-7 shows a classic doji,
where the open and close are the same and about in the middle of the day’s trading range. The
longer the upper and lower tails are in a doji, the greater the sense of uncertainty displayed by the
market and the more likely the prior trend is to be ending.
A double doji occurs when two doji appear in successive periods. The increased uncertainty
associated with a double doji tends to signal that the subsequent price move will be more
significant after the market’s indecision is resolved. A long-legged doji, one with larger tails, is
another indication that the market’s uncertainty may resolve with a more pronounced move.

On its own, a doji is considered neutral. You need to wait for subsequent price action, such
as a trend-line break, to confirm that the doji is signaling a reversal.
Hammers and shooting stars
Hammers and shooting stars are single-candle formations that indicate a reversal may be in store.
Hammers appear after a decline and are notable for a long lower tail (at least twice the height of
the real body) and a small real body at the upper end of the candle (akin to a doji or spinning top).
A shooting star is the mirror image after a move higher — a long upper tail and a small real body
at the bottom of the day’s range. The color of the candle can be either light or dark. In both cases

the market dynamic is the same: After a price rise, in the case of a shooting star, buyers attempted
to extend the advance, but by the end of the day were beaten back by sellers, and vice versa with
hammers.
The size of the tails is an important indication of the strength of the signal — the larger the tail, the
greater the opposing force to the prior move and the more likely prices are to reverse course.
Figure 11-8 shows a shooting star signaling recent gains may be set to reverse. (See Figure 11-10
for a hammer as part of another candle pattern.)

Hammers and shooting stars are one of my major alerts for price reversals. They’re a signal
to exit or at least reduce positions in the direction of the prior trend, and a good basis to
establish a position in the opposite direction. If the high of a shooting star or the low of a
hammer is exceeded, then the signal is negated and you have to get out. (See more in Chapter
12 for trading tactics using candles.)
Spinning tops
A spinning top (see Figure 11-9) is a single-candle formation that has a small real body and
typically short tails, sort of like a fatter version of a doji, but with larger tails. (Larger tails may
signify a greater potential price move; however, the size of the tails is secondary.) The formation
gets its name because it resembles a child’s toy top. A spinning top frequently appears in pairs,
similar to a double doji. The significance of a spinning top is that it has a small real body, which
represents a drop in directional momentum after a series of up or down candles, which may signal
a directional move is stalling and is ripe for a correction. Spinning tops require confirmation by
subsequent candles, but be on alert for potential reversals if you spot a spinning top.

Figure 11-8:
A shooting
star signals a
price peak
and potential
for a
downside
reversal. The
bullish
engulfing line
suggests a
decline is over
and a rebound
may follow.
Note the
white candle’s
body
completely
engulfs the
prior candle’s
body.
