
465

Figure 23.10

466

I also like to note where the close was in relation to the day’s range. Did the market close at the top of its range? If so, there is a good chance for upward
continuation tomorrow. Did it close near the bottom of its range? Or did it close in the middle—indicating massive indecision.
Next, I want to see where the highs and lows for the prior day, prior week, and prior month are located. These are all important support and resistance levels, and I
want to know where they are sitting in relation to current market prices. I like to note whether we are trading above any of these levels, which is bullish, or below any
of these levels, which is bearish. If we are stuck in the middle, then I call that neutral.
After this, I look at the HOLP and LOHP levels (as discussed in Chapter 19). Any moves above or below these key levels are a major opportunity. I also like to
note whether we are trading above or below these key levels, because that is also bullish or bearish.
The next number I want to know is the number of days in the current trend. The reason for this is that many trends reverse after three days, so if we are in the third
day of a trend, I want to be aware of it. Also, after six to seven consecutive days, markets just lose their gas and fail to move any further. I want to know about this so
that I’m not the last one jumping on the bandwagon.
Finally, I want to know where all the open gaps are sitting. Remember in Chapter 7 when we talked about open gaps filling within 5 to 10 trading days? It’s
important to know where those gaps are located.

Pivot Numbers, of Course
We talked extensively about pivots in Chapter 8, so I’m not going to explain again why I look at them. However, I do like to have them handy so that I can look at
them before the trading day. By placing them in this easy-to-use Excel spreadsheet (see Figure 23.11), I can quickly glance at these levels and see if any of them line up
with the key price levels we just talked about. Is the daily pivot also lined up with an open gap? That is important because that level will be particularly strong on that
trading day.
In addition to the daily pivots, I’m looking for confluence with my list of key numbers among the weekly and monthly pivots (see Figure 23.12).

467

468

Figure 23.11

469

470

Figure 23.12

Key Sentiment Readings
We talk about the put/call ratios in Chapter 6. I like to record where the put/call ratio closes on the day, and also note where the 10-day moving average of the put/call
ratio is trading. While the daily number is good for gauging market direction on that particular trading day, the 10-day moving average pinpoints major market turns.
The following chart (Figure 23.13) from Decision Point shows the key turning points in the markets based on the reading of the 10-day moving average on the put/call
ratio. You can get these data from TradeStation, but I just subscribe to www.decisionpoint.com and get it there. It’s $20 a month, it provides nearly every key
historical technical study on the planet, and it’s where I spend a lot of quality time each weekend.

Figure 23.13
Figure 23.14 shows that whenever the put/call ratio gets near 1.00, this excessive bearishness in the form of put buying creates a bottom in the market. All these
shorts then spend the next several weeks frantically covering their positions. The opposite is also true. When the crowd gets frothy and overly bullish, driving the PC
ratio to 0.70, the market is overloaded with bulls and either halts its advance or rolls over.

471

Figure 23.14
I also like to look at AAII investor sentiment, because this is a good gauge of how traders are feeling about the current market. This is also a contrarian indicator.
When there are too many bears, look for the markets to bottom out and reverse. When there are too many bulls, look for markets to take a breather or roll over.

472

Figure 23.15
Figure 23.15 is a chart from April 5, 2005, the day I’m writing this. You can see that we are at excessive bearish levels. This tells me that the market is looking to
473

bottom out and is starting to beat up on all the shorts.
The other item I have listed in Figure 23.13 is the daily Arms Index reading, which is shown in Figure 23.15. This is the indicator we discuss in Chapter 6, and I’m
looking for readings of over 2.0 or under 0.50 as key action signals.

It’s a Good Idea to Know What These People Are Doing
The last key number in this series is the NYSE member net buy/sell numbers, which I get from www.decisionpoint.com. This shows whether NYSE members are net
long or short. If they are net long, it is because they have very strong reasons to believe that they will be able to distribute their holdings to the public at a higher price.
If they are net short, they have strong reasons to believe that they will be able to buy back their inventory at a cheaper price. These people make a lot of money, and I
like to follow what they are doing.
Figure 23.16 shows a couple of huge readings that came into play over the past few years. The first was during the M arch 2003 bottom. These people loaded the
boat with a record amount of longs. Lo and behold, the markets moved significantly higher shortly thereafter. They sold their inventory all the way up and then
reloaded the boat in October 2003, just before the next leg higher. Finally, in September 2004, they loaded the boat again with a record number of long positions. The
markets chopped around for six weeks and then rocketed into 2005. If these people are loading the boat one way or the other, I want to know about it.

474

Figure 23.16

Miscellaneous Items
The final things I want to know about are any key economic and earnings reports that are coming out on the day. I’m not concerned with every company that is
reporting, but I want to know if a big company like M SFT or IBM is going to be coming out with numbers after the close. I also want to know when key economic
475

reports are going to be hitting the tape. There are two main reasons for this. First, if traders are waiting for a key earnings number or an economic report, they will
generally stand aside to see how the market reacts. This means that the markets are going to be choppy, and I don’t want to be trying to catch trends intraday if the
markets are going to be choppy. On these days, I will focus on fading pivot levels and fading extreme tick readings—these are the best plays I’ve found for days where
the trading is light and choppy. The second thing I’m looking for isn’t the actual number itself, but how the markets react to it. The number, whether it is earnings or
economic, has no importance. What is important is whether the market sells off on the news, rallies on the news, or ignores the news.
The market is efficient at pricing in information before it ever comes out. In addition, large firms have access to the same research as the government, and they hire an
army of economists to figure out what the numbers are going to be before they are announced. These reports mean little in the grand scheme of things because they get
priced into the market well before the actual number is released.
The moral of the story? Find a couple of setups and stick to them, and don’t get sucked into the “waiting for the next report” game. Just because a report is hyped
on CNBC doesn’t mean that it’s a good idea to place a lot of importance on it.

What Does Your Mother Think?
M y final piece of research has to do with random comments that I hear from people who are not in the industry. A classic example is a recent conversation I had with
my mother, who mentioned that she had read about eBay in Business Week. Was it a good time to buy? In situations like this, I normally just run out and look for a
short setup on the stock, but, because it was my mother, I told her I would hold off on buying it for now. Then I shorted it. A few weeks later, it got killed on earnings.
Anything that is just now hitting the ears of the nontrading public is a major signal. This typically means that the people who are usually the last to know are
thinking about finally getting in. I can’t think of a better topping signal in my arsenal of trading tools.
As I’m writing this, there is this same flurry of activity going on in real estate. M ore and more random people are talking about things like buying parcels of land
sight unseen from out of the back of magazines because “real estate is doing so well.” It’s almost at the same ferocity as when Beanie Babies topped out and crashed
back to earth. Pretty soon we are going to start seeing major magazine covers talking about how everyone is making money in real estate. Shortly thereafter, prices will
start to soften. And no, it’s not different this time.

Summing Up the Premarket Checklist
I’ve got a quote on my wall that says, “Fortune favors the prepared mind.” There is a big difference between getting lucky on one trade and being able to make money
in the markets consistently. There is also a delicate balance between being prepared and overanalyzing, but the basic set of tools and numbers discussed in this chapter
will give traders a huge leg up without drowning them in barrels of information.
All these data are available to every trader. It’s a good practice to take the time to go through and line up this information each day. If you don’t have the time, or if
you would like supplemental information, this is the same routine I go through each evening. I post the same daily checklist I’ve reviewed in this chapter in a
newsletter that comes out five evenings per week (each night the stock market is open). In addition to this information, I also post the swing trades I’m setting up the
next trading day, with the exact entry, exit, target, and stop loss levels. I typically focus on stock options, futures, and currencies, as well as some individual stocks.
In addition to these key levels, I also include a nightly video that’s embedded in the newsletter and records my computer screen. With this technology, I’m able to
flip through my charts and make comments, discussing the way the various markets are setting up and talking about what I think is going to happen during the next
trading day—and the orders that I am placing. This technology is great, as it allows a person to look over my shoulder as I’m doing my research each night. I don’t
rehearse—it’s all recorded live, so you get my first impressions, along with the coughs and telephone interruptions. A trader can just click on the video link, turn up
the speakers on her computer, and watch and listen.
For information on the newsletters, you can visit the following websites:
• www.tradethemarkets.com/freetrial
• www.simpleroptions.com/freetrial
Trade The M arkets focuses on futures and currencies along with the bigger-picture outlooks, while Simpler Options focuses on, of course, stocks and stock options.

476

24
The Trader’s Business Plan
No one ever won a war by dying for his country. He won it by making the other poor dumb bastard die for his country.
—GENERAL GEORGE S. PATTON
One thing is certain. Praying for luck in the getting of money is futile. If Lady Luck exists, she is highly perverse, choosing to visit those who have little apparent
need of her and ignoring others desperate to worship at her shrine. I’ve found the best thing is to ignore her. To “treat her mean and keep her keen.”
—FELIX DENIS, BILLIONAIRE PUBLISHER

Who Gets to the World Series—the Team with a Plan or
the Team That Decides to Wing It?
A two-foot-long arrowana is a voracious predator fish. A single-minded creature, it has one basic rule of thumb that it follows each and every day: if it thinks
something will fit into its mouth, it will eat it. When traders visit my office to watch me trade, they are often surprised to learn that their first assignment is to feed
M artha, my two-foot-long pet arrowana. They have to take the net, dip it into the feeder tank filled with goldfish, and choose a victim. M artha is used to this routine
by now, and she begins to shimmer with excitement and anticipation. The goldfish is released. The water boils and churns as the predator lunges, and a few seconds
later, all that remains of Nemo is a few scales and a bit of fin. Steve Patrow, a visiting trader, summed it up succinctly when he said, “That just seems really cruel.”
“Yep,” I replied. “Almost as cruel as sending a trader out into the markets without a fully developed trading plan.” A trader who is trying to make a living in the
markets without a fully developed trading plan is in exactly the same position as the goldfish. Whereas one is merely a meal for an arrowana, the other is routinely
preyed upon by professional traders. At least for the goldfish, the pain is over quickly. Traders without a plan can stretch out their torment for years.
M y first trading plan was created in 1993, eight years after I started trading. It was a one-page document that has evolved over the years into the 15-page plan that I
use today. This plan evolved out of experience and from having other traders share their plans with me. I update this plan annually. M y plan expanded over the years
as I realized the following truths:
• A superior per-trade tracking system had to be set in place.
• A specific day-to-day money management system had to be set in place.
• A methodology for holding specific trading setups accountable for performance had to be set in place.
• A reward and punishment system for myself had to be set in place.
• M y plan had to evolve and take into account the setups and markets that best fit my personality.
• Not only did I have to incorporate trading into my plan, but I had to incorporate it into my whole life to really make the plan work. One reality of trading is that this
is a profession that can take over a person and dominate his life. It is important that you recognize this and bring a more holistic approach to your overall trading
plan. This keeps a trader in the game for the longer term, helping to prevent burnout—a common occurrence in the trading world.
Every trader I’ve worked with has mentioned that the comprehensive business plan that I make him write has been the deciding factor in his own performance. “It
was when I turned the corner,” is a common phrase I’ve heard used to describe the results of writing out such a detailed plan. What’s in the plan? I’ll show you the
questions I make myself answer every year and take you through them step by step. After I’m done with this, I’ll share a plan that was developed by one of the
traders I’ve worked with. What follows are the questions and excerpts from the answers in my actual trading plan for 2005.

Why Am I Trading Again This Year?
The first question I ask myself each year is, why am I trading again this year? Although this might seem obvious, it is important to deliberately choose this occupation
over everything else that’s available out there. This applies whether you are trading part time while you’re holding down another job or are trading full time. Here is
my answer:
The main reason I’m going to continue trading in 2012 is that I enjoy the financial independence and freedom that trading has to offer. I also love the fact that I can
do this from anywhere, because I don’t like to be tied down to any one location. I’ve never been good at taking orders, so I appreciate that I don’t have a boss whom I
have to placate. I enjoy meeting other traders because they are the most random, eclectic, crazy, and interesting people on the planet. I enjoy the mental challenge and
stimulation that come from trading, and I know that if I stopped, I would miss it. As long as I’ve been doing this, I’ve yet to encounter two trading days that have been
the same. Just as I get comfortable, the market reminds me who is running the show. There truly is never a dull moment.

Happy Wife, Happy Life
This is where I take stock of everything else that is going on in my life and how it might affect my trading. By doing this, I figured out when I needed to hire my first
assistant, when I needed to bring in another partner, and whatever else needed to be done in order to streamline my life for trading. Here’s what I wrote down for 2005:
I have a lot of activities going on in my life besides trading. I’m actively involved in real estate investing, coin collecting, and traveling, and I have a lot of stuff going
on with my website and other financial market–related programs. I also have a lovely wife who expects me to notice that she is a living and breathing human being, and
I’ve realized how important it is to include her in my plans and keep her involved in the process, as well as being able to “leave trading at the door” and spend quality
477

time with her. It’s good for her, it’s good for me, and it’s good for us. Happy wife, happy life.
M y wife and I are expecting our first child, and we are considering moving from Boston to Austin, Texas, where most of our family is located. I know that trading is
my main occupation, and that the only way I can continue with these other things is if I’m making profits from my trading. It is possible that I will drop some of these
other activities if they become a distraction. I will compartmentalize and focus on trading during trading hours. To help with this, I have someone who runs the day-today operations of the website, I have a cook and a maid to handle all routine daily chores around the house and the office, and I have someone else who helps manage
my other investments. I will focus on writing newsletters that pertain only to my own trading, instead of writing about what I think other people want to know about.
These newsletters are mostly for me to help force myself to clarify my own research and continue to find new trading ideas. I will not try to please all the people all
the time.
I won’t try to day-trade if I am traveling or on vacation. It’s okay to have swing trades on and manage existing positions, as long as I have a stop and a target in place
and I don’t try to “outthink” the position intraday. If I have distractions going on, I will not trade. I will get rid of the distractions first. Examples include having
uninvited guests over, morning phone calls, people instant messaging me in the morning asking about a trade, and so forth. I will take care of the distractions. I will
ignore phone calls and instant messages until after 11:00 a.m. eastern or, better yet, turn them off. I will not be accommodating just to be nice. The path to hell is paved
with good intentions.
Fast-forward to 2012, and things are busier, with three kids in the mix and a growing website business and trading operation. This year has been particularly busy,
and I’m consciously trying to get things in place to “simplify.” This means getting key people in place to help out, and focusing on what is important. The truth is, I
could always check out and just trade, but the business aspect is also interesting. The key is setting things up so that I don’t have to work a 16-hour day to get
everything done. This means asking for help, and recharging. And saying no, which isn’t easy. For me, I’ve found that being able to get away on the weekends has been
invaluable in terms of being able to spend quality time with my family and rejuvenate. We have a place in the country where we can head out on Friday, hang out with
our goats and llama (in no particular order), and unplug for 48 hours. To me, this was an important enough goal to find a way to make it work. As an added bonus, the
place is crawling with scorpions, which makes walking through the house barefoot an adventure.

What Markets Am I Going to Trade?
This is where I lay out all the markets I’m going to trade. Beginning traders should be focusing on only a few markets. Once a trader decides on the markets she wants
to trade, she should stick with those markets for a year instead of looking for the “next great thing.”
For day trades, I’m going to trade the mini-sized Dow (YM ), the E-mini S&Ps (ES), the E-mini Russell (TF), 30-year bonds (US), and the major currency pairs. For
swing trades, I will trade the E-mini Nasdaq (NQ), 10-year notes (TY), corn (C), wheat (W), soybeans (S), crude oil (CL), gold (GC), silver (SI), single-stock futures,
individual stocks, and stock options, in addition to taking swing trades in the major currency pairs in the forex markets. I will allocate my total trading funds as follows:
• 25 percent intraday trades (ES, YM , TF, US, forex markets)
• 25 percent swing trades on futures (NQ, TY, C, W, S, CL, GC, SI, single-stock futures, forex markets)
• 25 percent swing trades on stocks
• 25 percent swing trades on stock options

Why These Markets? What Specific Trading Strategies
Am I Going to Use?
This is a really important part of the plan. Traders should have a specific setup for each market they are trading. This way, the setup can be tracked for performance.
Each setup should be independent in itself. This means that a trader could have a short on the YM for a gap play and a long on the ES for a pivot play simultaneously,
and then track the performance of each setup separately.
For intraday trades, I will use the following plays:
• YM : gap plays, tick fades, and pivot plays
• ES: squeeze plays, waves, and market internals
• TF: squeeze plays and pivot plays
• US: break of the high/low 15-minute bar, squeeze plays
• Forex markets: box plays, squeeze plays, break of the high/low 15-minute bar

For swing trades, I will use the following plays:

• All futures and forex plays: daily squeeze plays, box plays, break of the high/low day, 8/21-period EM A for swings (for single-stock futures)
• All stock plays: daily squeeze plays, box plays, break of the high/low day, 8/21-period EM A for swings
• All stock options plays: daily squeeze plays, break of the high/low day, 8/21-period EM A for swings
The key with this is that if I don’t have a specific setup in one of these markets, then I’m not taking a trade. I just wait until something sets up.
478

How Much Money Am I Going to Allocate to
Each Trading Strategy and Setup?
Determining how much money to allocate to each trading strategy and setup is, of course, critical. The key is to find an allocation that doesn’t cause any stress, allows
the chance for a trade to do its work, and won’t violate any daily drawdown rules. One of the biggest problems I see with newer traders is that they are trading way
too big in relation to their account size. Trading 10 lots on a $10,000 account is like introducing your mistress to your wife. Yes, you can do it, but that doesn’t make it
a good idea. (Luckily, my wife has a great sense of humor.)
The following allocations are based on a per $100,000 basis. The number of contracts or the position size to be used is as follows:
