
The Henry theory—
statistically corroborated,
of course—is that assets,
once in motion, tend to
stay in motion without
changing direction, and
that turns the old saw—
buy low, sell high—on
its ear.27

244

Enron stock was rated as
“Can’t Miss” until it
became clear that the
company was in
desperate trouble, at
which point analysts
lowered the rating to
“Sure Thing.” Only when
Enron went completely
under did a few bold
analysts demote its stock
to the lowest possible
Wall Street analyst rating,
“Hot Buy.”
Dave Barry
February 3, 200228

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

After breaking down a number of wrongheaded trading beliefs
and actions in which, like Casey Jones, investors “still don’t see,” it
makes sense to break down the daily strategy of a trend follower.
The following chapter looks at what makes a trend following trading
system work.

Key Points
• Wall Street works hard to make what they do, which is nothing
more than buying and holding, appear complex and
sophisticated.
• Why would you be a buy-and-holder when the best in the
business don’t do it that way?
• Stop your search for “value.” Even if you locate value, that
alone does not ensure your ability to make money in the
market.
• The buy-and-hold dream as a retirement solution is toast.
• Stock tips don’t work. They are incomplete. They indicate only
the buy side of the equation. When do you sell?
• Trend trader Charlie Wright states: “It took me a long time to
figure out that no one really understands why the market does
what it does or where it’s going. It’s a delusion to think that you
or any one else can know where the market is going. I have sat
through hundreds of hours of seminars in which the presenter
made it seem as if he or she had some secret method of
divining where the markets were going. Either they were
deluded or they were putting us on. Most Elliott Wave
practitioners, cycle experts, or Fibonacci time traders will try
to predict when the market will move, presumably in the
direction they have also predicted. I personally have not been
able to figure out how to know when the market is going to
move. And you know what? When I tried to predict, I was
usually wrong, and I invariably missed the big move I was
anticipating, because it wasn’t time. It was when I finally
concluded that I would never be able to predict when the
market will move that I started to be more successful in my
trading. My frustration level declined dramatically, and I was at
peace knowing that it was okay not to be able to predict or
understand the markets.”

Part IV

245

This page intentionally left blank

Trading Systems

10

“If you don’t risk anything, you risk even more.”
—Erica Jong
“No matter what kind of math you use,
you wind up measuring volatility with your gut.”
—Ed Seykota1

Trend followers take a specific philosophy rooted in crowd
behavior and reduce it to rules to guide them in daily decision
making of when to buy and when to sell. These rules comprise what
are commonly called trading systems. There is no limit to the
number of different types of trading systems. That being said, most
trend following systems are similar as they seek to capture the same
trends.
Unlike Holy Grails, such as buy and hold or subjective
fundamentals, trading systems must be quantified with rules that
govern your decision making. Bill Dunn, for example, says his
trading system has a “programmed risk of a 1 percent probability of
suffering a monthly loss of 20 percent or more.”2 That’s what I
mean by quantifying. That’s what the pros do.

247

I think it’s much too early
to tell. I think all we’ve
learned is what we already
knew, is that stocks have
become like commodities,
regrettably, and they go up
to limit and they go down
to limit. And we’ve also
known over the years that
when they go down, they
go down faster than they
go up.
Leon Cooperman3

248

The best place to live on
this curve is the spot
where you can deal with
the emotional aspect of
equity drawdown
required to get the
maximum return. How
much heat can you
stand? Money
management is a
thermostat—a control
system for risk that keeps
your trading within the
comfort zone.
Gibbons Burke5

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Risk, Reward, and Uncertainty
Trend followers understand that life is a balance of risk and
reward. If you want the big rewards, take the big risks. If you want
average rewards and an average life, take average risks. Charles
Sanford gave a commencement address that is timeless. It said in
part:
“From an early age, we are all conditioned by our families,
our schools, and virtually every other shaping force in our
society to avoid risk. To take risks is inadvisable; to play it
safe is the counsel we are accustomed both to receiving and
to passing on. In the conventional wisdom, risk is
asymmetrical: it has only one side, the bad side. In my
experience—and all I presume to offer you today is
observations drawn on my own experience, which is hardly
the wisdom of the ages—in my experience, this
conventional view of risk is shortsighted and often simply
mistaken. My first observation is that successful people
understand that risk, properly conceived, is often highly
productive rather than something to avoid. They appreciate
that risk is an advantage to be used rather than a pitfall to
be skirted. Such people understand that taking calculated
risks is quite different from being rash. This view of risk is
not only unorthodox, it is paradoxical—the first of several
paradoxes which I’m going to present to you today. This
one might be encapsulated as follows: Playing it safe is
dangerous. Far more often than you would realize, the real
risk in life turns out to be the refusal to take a risk.”4
Life is fraught with risk. There is no getting away from it.
However we try to control the direction of our lives, there are times
when we fail. Therefore, we might as well accept that life is a game
of chance. If life is a game of chance, to one degree or another, we
must be comfortable with assessing odds in the face of risk.
Bottom line, there is no way to avoid making choices, and those
choices create risk. Money under a mattress is no good. Buy a
house? The house could burn down or the real estate market might
tank like it did in 2007–2008. Invest in your company? If the
company fails, you lose your employment and your nest egg at the
same time. Buy mutual funds? Pray that the empty mantra of “buy

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

249

and hold” works for you, and that you do not face a bear market at
the age of 65? 2008 burned down that idea!
How should we proceed in the face of risk? We should begin by
accepting the fact that markets do not reward stupidity in the long
run. They reward those with the brains, guts, and determination to
find opportunity where others have overlooked it and to press on
and succeed where others have fallen short and failed.
Think about your money from a business perspective. Every
business is ultimately involved in assessing risk. Putting capital to
work in the hopes of making it grow is the goal. In that sense, all
businesses are the same. The right decisions lead to success and the
wrong ones lead to bankruptcy (Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers,
AIG, IndyMac, and so on). Here are key issues that are addressed in
a good business plan:
• What is the market opportunity in the market niche?
• What is our solution to the market need?
• How big is the opportunity?
• How do we make money?
• How do we reach the market and sell?
• What is the competition?
• How are we better?
• How will we execute and manage our business?
• What are our risks?
• Why will we succeed?
Those same questions must be answered by a good trading
system as well. It is important to answer those questions to assess
the risk of a business venture, and it is equally important to answer
them if you are going to trade.
Bright minds know that the amount of risk we take in life is in
direct proportion to how much we want to achieve. If you want to
live boldly, you must make bold moves. If goals are meager and few,
they can be reached easily and with less risk of failure, but with
greater risk of dissatisfaction once you have achieved them. One of
the saddest figures is the person who burns with desire to live big,
but to avoid risk chooses to embrace fear and lives lost instead. He

[I]f you’re trying to
reduce the volatility or
uncertainty of your
portfolio as a whole, then
you need more than one
security. This seems
obvious, but you also
need securities which
don’t go up and down
together [reduced
correlation]… It turns out
that you don’t need
hundreds and hundreds
of securities [to be
diversified]. Much of the
effective diversification
comes with 20 or 30 wellselected securities. A
number of studies have
shown that the number of
stocks needed to provide
adequate diversification
are anywhere from 10
to 30.
Mark S. Rzepczynski
John W. Henry & Co.6

250

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

is worse off than someone who tries and fails or someone who never
had any desire in the first place.
But there is hope. If you study risk, you will find there are two
kinds: blind risk and calculated risk. The first one, blind risk, is
suspect. Blind risk is the calling card of laziness, the irrational hope,
something for nothing, the cold twist of fate. Blind risk is the
pointless gamble, the emotional decision, and the sucker play. The
man who embraces blind risk demonstrates all the wisdom and
intelligence of a drunk stepping into traffic.
However, calculated risk builds fortunes, nations, and empires.
Calculated risk and bold vision go hand in hand. To use your mind,
to see the possibilities, to work things out logically, and then to
move forward in strength and confidence is what places man above
the animals. Calculated risk lies at the heart of every great
achievement and achiever since the dawn of time. Trend followers
thrive on calculated risk.
People tend to use
discretion or gut feeling
to determine the trade
size.
David Druz7

Trend followers don’t worry about what the markets are going
to do tomorrow. They don’t concern themselves with forecasts,
fundamental factors, or technological breakthroughs. They can’t
undo the past and can’t predict the future. Does a 50 percent drop
in stocks mean the bull has finally run its course? No one knows.
Think about it this way. Most traders focus only on how to enter
a market. Many will say, “Hey, I’ve got a way to beat the markets
because this trading system I have, it’s right 80 percent of the time.
It’s only wrong 20 percent of the time.” They need to take a step
back for a second and say, “Okay. What does 80 percent right
mean?” If 80 percent of the time you don’t win much, but 20
percent of the time you lose a lot, your losses can far outweigh your
gains even though you’re right 80 percent of the time. You must
take the magnitude of wins and losses into account.
Lotteries, for example, can reach jackpots of hundreds of
millions of dollars or more. And as the jackpot gets bigger, more
people buy tickets in the buying feeding frenzy. But as they buy
more tickets, the odds of winning do not increase in any
appreciable fashion. The ticket buyers still have a better chance of
being struck by lightning as they leave the convenience store.
For example, the odds of winning the California Super Lotto
Jackpot are 1 in 18 million. If one person purchases 50 Lotto tickets
each week, he will win the jackpot about once every 5,000 years. If

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

251

a car gets 25 miles per gallon, and a gallon of gas is bought for every
Lotto ticket bought, there will be enough gas for about 750 round
trips to the moon before the jackpot is won. If you know the odds
are against you why would you even play?
Likewise, if your trading system says that you have a 1 in
30,000 chance of winning, or roughly the same chance as being
struck by lightning, you might not want to bet everything on that
trade. When you trade, you must have a mathematical expectation,
or “edge,” or you can’t win. For example, consider a coin-flipping
game.
Imagine for a moment a coin toss game with an unbiased coin.
Suppose also that we are offered the opportunity to bet that the
next flip will be heads and the payoff will be even money when we
win (we received a $1 profit in addition to the return of the wager).
The mathematical expectation in this example is:
(.5) (1) + (.5) (–1) = 0
The mathematical expectation of any bet in any game is
computed by multiplying each possible gain or loss by the
probability of that gain or loss and then adding the two figures. In
the preceding example, you can expect to gain nothing from playing
this game. This is known as fair game, one in which a player has no
advantage or disadvantage. Now, suppose the payoff was changed to
3/2, a gain of $1.50 in addition to a $1 bet—the expectation would
change to:
(.5) (1.5) + (.5) (–1) = +.25
Playing this game 100 times would give us a positive
expectation of .25.8
This is the kind of edge cultivated and honed daily by trend
followers. You might ask, “If everyone knows about expectation,
how can I ever find my edge?”
Think about it this way. Consider a scene from the movie A
Beautiful Mind, the biography of mathematician John Nash. Nash
and some of his mathematician buddies are in a bar when a sexy
blonde and four brunettes walk in. After they admire the new
arrivals, Nash and his friends decide to compete for the blonde.
However, Nash has reservations, correctly observing that, if
everyone goes for the same woman, they will just end up blocking
each other out. Worse, they will offend the rest of the women. The

Volatility, risk, and profit
are closely related.
Traders pay close
attention to volatility
because price changes
affect their profits and
losses. Periods of high
volatility are highly risky
to traders. Such periods,
however, can also present
them with opportunities
for great profits.9

252

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

only way for everyone to succeed is to ignore the blonde and hit on
the brunettes. The scene dramatizes the Nash Equilibrium, his
most important contribution to game theory. Nash proved that in
any competitive situation—war, chess, even picking up a date at a
bar—if the participants are rational and they know that their
opponents are rational, there is only one optimal strategy. That
theory won Nash a Nobel Prize in economics and transformed the
way we think about competition in both games and the real world.10
Building off Nash’s general thoughts, Ed Seykota lays out a basic
risk definition from a trading perspective: “Risk is the possibility of
loss.” That is, if we own some stock, and there is a possibility of a
price decline, we are at risk. The stock is not the risk, nor is the loss
the risk. The possibility of loss is the risk. As long as we own the
stock, we are at risk. The only way to control the risk is to buy or
sell stock. In the matter of owning stocks, and aiming for profit, risk
is fundamentally unavoidable and the best we can do is to manage
the risk. To manage is to direct and control. Risk management is to
direct and control the possibility of loss. The activities of a risk
manager are to measure risk and to increase and decrease risk by
buying and selling stock. In general, good risk management
combines several elements:
1. Clarifying trading and risk management systems until they can

translate to computer code.
2. Inclusion of diversification and instrument selection into the

back-testing process.
3. Back-testing and stress-testing to determine trading parameter

sensitivity and optimal values.
4. Clear agreement of all parties on expectation of volatility and

return.
5. Maintenance of supportive relationships between investors and

managers.
6. Above all, stick to the system.
7. See #6, above.

As you navigate this chapter, keep in mind Seykota’s wisdom.

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

Five Questions for a Trading System
Answer the following five questions and you have the core
components of a trend following trading system and you are on your
way to having your edge:
1. How does the system determine what market to buy or sell at

any time?
2. How does the system determine how much of a market to buy

253

Sound investment policy
is really about intelligent
risk management. There
is no such thing as a risk
free investment. The real
issue is not whether you
want to take risk, but
which risks and how
many of them you are
willing to accept.
Jim Little and Sol Waksman11

or sell at any time?
3. How does the system determine when you buy or sell a

market?
4. How does the system determine when you get out of a losing

position?
5. How does the system determine when you get out of a winning

position?
Although these five questions are seminal to trend following, no
less critical is your attitude. Don’t forget to ask yourself:
“What do you really want? Why are you trading? What are your
strengths and weaknesses? Do you have any emotional issues? How
disciplined are you? Are you easily convinced? How confident are
you in yourself? How confident are you in your system? How much
risk can you handle?”
When I discussed trend following with Seykota and Charles
Faulkner, they both said that the first thing any person should do
before trading is to complete a personal inventory by asking:
• What is my nature and how well am I suited to trading?
• How much money do I want to make?
• What level of effort am I willing to make to reach my goals?
• What, if any, is my investing/trading experience?
• What resources can I bring to bear?
• What are my strengths and weaknesses?

If you have a $100,000
account and you’re going
to risk 5 percent, you’d
have $5,000 to lose. If
your examination of the
charts shows that the
price movement you’re
willing to risk equals
$1,000 per contract, then
you can trade five
contracts. If you want to
risk 10 percent, then do
10 contracts.
Craig Pauley12

254

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Answering these questions in advance helps when you are in
the middle of the zero-sum game and the adrenaline and sweat are
flowing.

What Market Do You Buy or Sell at Any Time?
One of the first decisions any trader makes is what to trade.
Will you trade stocks? Currencies? Futures? Commodities? What
markets will you choose? While some people might focus on
limited, market-specific portfolios, such as currencies or bonds,
others pursue a more widely diversified portfolio of markets. For
example, The Adam, Harding, & Lueck (AHL) Diversified Program
(the largest trend following fund in the world now run by Man
Financial) trades a diversified portfolio of over 100 core markets on
36 exchanges. They trade stock indices, bonds, currencies, shortterm interest rates, and commodities (energy, metal, and
agricultural contracts):
CHART 10.1: AHL Portfolio

Currencies: 24.3%
Bonds: 19.8%
Energies: 19.2%
Stocks: 15.1%
Interest rates: 8.5%
Metals: 8.2%
Agriculturals: 4.9%
AHL does not have fundamental expertise in all of these
markets. I know of no trend follower who keeps fundamental
experts on staff. They do not have in-depth understanding of each
of the companies that comprise whatever stock index. Their
expertise is to take these different markets and “make them the
same” through price analysis.
When you look at a breakdown of performance at any given
time, losses are typically negated by winners. This is by design
because no one ever knows which market will be the one to take off
with a big trend that pays for all of the losses—hence the need for
diversification. AHL is even more precise about its need for

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

255

diversification in an uncertain world: “The cornerstone of the AHL
investment philosophy is that financial markets experience
persistent anomalies or inefficiencies in the form of price trends.
Trends are a manifestation of serial correlation in financial
markets—the phenomenon whereby past price movements inform
about future price behavior. Serial correlation can be explained by
factors as obvious as crowd behavior, as well as more subtle factors,
such as varying levels of information among different market
participants. Although they vary in their intensity, duration, and
frequency, price trends are universally recurrent across all sectors
and markets. Trends are an attractive focus for active trading styles
applied across a diverse range of global markets.”
How can AHL’s words act in practice? Trend following trader
Justin Vandergrift of Chadwick Investments spoke to me about
diversification and his lessons:
“Portfolio diversification is often said to lose its importance
after you have 7–10 different instruments in your portfolio.
We found this simply not to be the case. Pre June 2007, we
traded with 18 major markets in the program and we were
in 7–8 of them most of the time. In short, our exposure was
7–8 markets at any one time, while signals in 18 were
possible. After evaluating the program we discovered that
most of our losses [at the time] were coming from one or
two sectors that hit their maximum loss at roughly the
same time. A breakout in the Ten Year Notes was most
likely followed by a breakout in the Five Year Notes. Trading
several highly correlated markets had led to exaggerated
losses because these markets triggered a larger drawdown
as they were stopped out together.”
Vandergrift went on to explain that in June 2007 he increased
his portfolio to over 40 markets with the goal of being in 15+
markets most of the time. He kept his core trading system (entry
and exits) the same. The turnaround in results for his firm was
dramatic and it was from simply changing his portfolio
diversification.
Paul Mulvaney (Mulvaney Capital) is a more established trend
follower based in London. Mulvaney made over 40% for the single
month of October 2008. What performance did he generate from
what markets? Consider:

The most important
aspect of any trading
decision is never the
condition of the market,
but rather that of your
own position. The trick is
to be constantly moving
toward a position of
strength, both within an
individual trade and
within the marketplace at
large. Just like basketball,
chess or any other
activity that requires
focus, you know you’re in
the “zone” of trading
when you start playing
for position, not for
points.
Jonathan Hoenig, Portfolio Manager,
Capitalistpig Hedge Fund LLC

256

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Currency: 8.91%
Interest Rates: 2.78%
Stocks: 14.59%
Metals: 9.83%
Energy: 3.43%
Crops: 7.84%
Livestock: 4.51%
Is that one great outlier month? Yes. Will all sectors always be
positive? Of course not, but Mulvaney’s performance during one of
the worst months ever for most investors should be a wake up call.
