
Parker Downplays Intelligence
Trend following success is much more predicated on discipline
than pure academic achievement. Parker is candid about the
intelligence required at his firm:
“We have a system in which we do not have to rely on our
intellectual capabilities. One of the main reasons why what
we do works in the markets is that no one can figure out
what is happening.”79
The best trend followers are willing to admit that pure I.Q. is
not the key. They also know that the latest news flash of the day is
not information that figures into their decisions about when to buy,
when to sell, or how much to buy or sell at any time. Parker adds,
“Our pride and opinions should not interfere with sound trading
approaches.”81
Parker has also trained and influenced other traders. Look no
further than an associate of Parker’s, Salem Abraham.

Salem Abraham
Salem Abraham does it differently than most trend followers.
He truly proves physical location is meaningless for success.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

75

It would be hard to find a financial firm in the United States as
removed from Wall Street, geographically and culturally, as the
Abraham Trading Company. Housed in the same building where his
grandfather Malouf Abraham once chewed the fat with local
politicians and ranchers while building a sizable land-speculation
business, the company has evolved into one of the nation’s most
unusual trading operations.82
It was while he was a student at Notre Dame University that
Abraham found he had a natural ability for and interest in trading.
Like Greg Smith, one of Seykota’s students, he researched which
traders were the most successful and discovered trend following.
Abraham returned home to the family ranch in Canadian, Texas
after graduating and discussed the idea of trading for a living with
his “granddad,” who cautiously agreed to help him get started.
According to Abraham, he was to “try it out for six months,” and
then discard the idea (“throw the quote machine out the window”)
if he failed.83
There was no failure for Abraham. He quickly developed a Wall
Street business in the most anti-Wall Street way. Abraham’s firm’s
culture is astonishingly different from what people might expect
from a top trader:
“No one at the company has an Ivy League degree. Most of
the employees at Abraham Trading have backgrounds
working at the area’s feedlots or natural-gas drilling and
pipeline companies. Their training in the complexities of
trading and arbitrage is provided on the job. ‘This beats
shoveling manure at 6 in the morning,’ said Geoff Dockray,
who was hired as a clerk for Mr. Abraham after working at
a feedlot near Canadian. The financial markets are
complicated but they’re not as relentless as dealing with
livestock all the time.”84
Abraham‘s “meat-and-potatoes” approach to trading is no
nonsense:
“The underlying premise of ATC’s [Abraham Trading
Company] trading approach is that commodity interests
will, from time to time, enter into periods of major price
change to either a higher or lower level. These price
changes are known as trends, which have been observed
and recorded since the beginning of market history. There

I think the only cardinal
evil on earth is that of
placing your prime
concern within other
men. I’ve always
demanded a certain
quality in the people I
liked. I’ve always
recognized it at once—
and it’s the only quality
I respect in men. I chose
my friends by that. Now
I know what it is. A selfsufficient ego. Nothing
else matters.
Ayn Rand86

76

Abraham Trading was up
+74.65 percent for 2003.

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

is every reason to believe that in free markets prices will
continue to trend. The trading approach used by ATC is
designed to exploit these price moves.”85
When asked about his relationship with Parker, Abraham gave
an example of six degrees of separation and the randomness of life:
“We do in fact know Jerry Parker with Chesapeake Capital.
The shortest version I can give you is he is my dad’s sister’s
husband’s brother’s daughter’s husband. I’m not sure you
can call that related but something like that. I first learned
about the futures industry by talking to him while he visited
in-laws in Texas.”
A lesson learned? Keep your eyes open to possibilities, as you
never know where opportunity will appear. Parker knows
Abraham’s age (and success) can cause problems:
“Sometimes people have a tendency to resent a young guy
who’s making so much money,” said Jerry Parker, himself a
hedge fund manager from Richmond, Virginia, who has
been an investor in Mr. Abraham’s fund for the last five
years. “I just think he has a lot of guts.”87
Consider Abraham’s trading performance (see Chart 2.13).
If there is a lesson to be learned from Abraham, it is simply that
if you want to become a trend follower, it doesn’t hurt to get out
there and meet the players.
Parker and Abraham are ultimately realists. They play the zerosum game hard in similar ways and excel at it, but they have also
found a way to balance key components of their lives. Without
compromising integrity, they have found a way to apply their
trading philosophy and at the same time please clients.

77

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

Comparison of Abraham Trading to the S&P 500 Cash Index
January 1988–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded
$35,000.00
$30,000.00
$25,000.00
$20,000.00
$15,000.00
$10,000.00

Abraham
S&P 500

$5,000.00

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

$Abraham Final Value:

$34,051

S&P 500 Final Value:

$4,280

CHART 2.13: Hypothetical $1000 Growth Chart for Abraham Trading Company

Key Points
• Parker: “A key to successful traders is their ability to leverage
investments…many [traders] are too conservative in their
willingness to leverage.”
• Parker: “A lot of traders as well as clients don’t like trend
following. It’s not intuitive, not natural, too long term, not exciting
enough.”
• Parker: “The market is never wrong.”
• Trend following success is not predicated on academic
achievement.
• More on Parker and Abraham can be found in my second book
The Complete TurtleTrader (Collins, 2007).

78

Trading was even more
teachable than I
imagined. In a strange
sort of way, it was
almost humbling.
Richard Dennis89

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Richard Dennis
Richard Dennis is retired from trading. Unfortunately, his exit
has been misinterpreted by some in the press as sounding the
death-knell of trend following. It is true that Dennis’ career had big
ups and downs, but trend following itself is doing just fine.
Dennis was born and raised in Chicago in close proximity to the
exchanges. He began trading as a teenager with $400 saved from his
pizza delivery job. Because he was too young to qualify for
membership on the exchange, he would send signals to his father,
who would do the actual trading. At 17, he finally landed a job in
the pit as a runner on the exchange floor and started trading.88

Dennis’ Students: The Turtles
Eventually, Dennis would achieve fantastic wealth with profits
in the hundreds of millions of dollars. However, his real fame would
come from his experiment in teaching trading to new traders.
In 1983, he made a bet with his partner William Eckhardt.
Dennis believed that trading could be taught. Eckhardt belonged to
the “you’re born with it or you’re not” camp. They decided to
experiment by seeing whether they could teach novices successful
trading. Twenty-plus students were accepted into two separate
training programs. Dennis called his students “Turtles,” after
visiting a turtle-breeding farm in Singapore.

I agree with the
metaphysics of technical
analysis that the
fundamentals are
discounted. You don’t get
any profits from
fundamental analysis;
you get profit from buying
and selling. So why stick
with the appearance
when you can go right to
the reality of price and
analyze it better?
Richard Dennis91

How did it start? Dennis ran classified ads saying “Trader
Wanted’’ and was immediately overwhelmed by some 1,000 queries
from would-be traders. He picked 20+ novices, trained them for two
weeks, and then gave them money to trade for his firm. His turtle
traders included two professional gamblers, a fantasy-game
designer, an accountant, and a juggler. Jerry Parker, the former
accountant who now manages more than $1 billion, was one of
several who went on to become top money managers.90
Although Dennis appears to own the mantle of trend following
teaching professor, there are many other trend followers, including
Seykota, Dunn, and Henry, who have served as teachers to a
number of successful traders. Also keep in mind that not all the
Turtles turned out to be winners. After they left Dennis’ tutelage
and traded on their own, there were several Turtles who failed

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

79

(i.e. Curtis Faith). Their root problems might be traced to poor
personal discipline coupled with an incomplete understanding of
the psychology needed to win. Perhaps, after some Turtles went out
on their own, they could not cope without the safety net of being
under Dennis’ wing. Of course, Jerry Parker is a monster exception
to this theory—he is absolutely the most successful of the turtle
traders.
This is not a criticism of the system Dennis taught his students.
It is rather an acknowledgement that some people could not stick
with the trading system as it was taught them or perhaps were never
comfortable with it to begin with. In stark contrast, Bill Dunn was
completely unknown to the general public when the Turtles burst
onto the scene in the 1980s. Since that time, Dunn has slowly
overtaken most, if not all, trend followers in terms of absolute
performance. You have to wonder if something about the initial
small one-man shop of Dunn set in motion the habits that enabled
him to roar past the Turtles that seemingly had the superior head
start. For years, many of the Turtles also refused to acknowledge
they were even trend followers while Dunn was always candid. Did
the hype and mystery of the Turtles set forward in the Market
Wizards books help most of them in the long run?
All this said, the story of the Turtles is so widespread that the
criteria Dennis used to select his students is still insightful (see
more in The Complete TurtleTrader, my second book).

Turtle Selection Process
Dale Dellutri, a former executive at Dennis’ firm, managed the
Turtle group. He said they were looking for “smarts and for people
who had odd ideas.” Ultimately, they selected several blackjack
players, an actor, a security guard, and a designer of the fantasy
game Dungeons and Dragons. One of the ways they screened
candidates was by having them answer true or false questions. What
questions were asked?
The following true/false questions were sent out to the second
group of Turtles. These questions were used to help decide who was
picked and who was not:
1. One should favor being long or being short, whichever one is

comfortable with.

There’s nothing quite as
good or bad as trading.
They give you a number
every day. That’s what’s
good about it, and that’s
what’s bad about it.
That’s what makes it
hard. That’s what makes
it worth doing.
Richard Dennis92

80

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

2. On initiation, one should know precisely at what price to

liquidate if a profit occurs.
3. One should trade the same number of contracts in all markets.
4. If one has $100,000 to risk, one ought to risk $25,000 on every

trade.
5. On initiation, one should know precisely where to liquidate if a

loss occurs.
6. You can never go broke taking profits.
7. It helps to have the fundamentals in your favor before you

initiate.
8. A gap up is a good place to initiate if an uptrend has started.
9. If you anticipate buy stops in the market, wait until they are

finished and buy a little higher than that.
10. Of three types of orders (market, stop, and resting), market

orders cost the least skid.
11. The more bullish news you hear and the more people are going

long, the less likely the uptrend is to continue after a
substantial uptrend.
12. The majority of traders are always wrong.
13. Trading bigger is an overall handicap to one’s trading

performance.
14. Larger traders can “muscle” markets to their advantage.
15. Vacations are important for traders to keep the proper

perspective.
16. Under trading is almost never a problem.
17. Ideally, average profits should be about three or four times

average losses.
18. A trader should be willing to let profits turn into losses.
19. A very high percentage of trades should be profits.
20. A trader should like to take losses.
21. It is especially relevant when the market is higher than it’s been

in 4 and 13 weeks.
22. Needing and wanting money are good motivators to good

trading.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

23. One’s natural inclinations are good guides to decision making

in trading.
24. Luck is an ingredient in successful trading over the long run.
25. When you’re long, “limit up” is a good place to take a profit.
26. It takes money to make money.
27. It’s good to follow hunches in trading.
28. There are players in each market one should not trade against.
29. All speculators die broke.
30. The market can be understood better through social

psychology than through economics.
31. Taking a loss should be a difficult decision for traders.
32. After a big profit, the next trend-following trade is more likely

to be a loss.
33. Trends are not likely to persist.
34. Almost all information about a commodity is at least a little

useful in helping make decisions.
35. It’s better to be an expert in one to two markets rather than try

to trade ten or more markets.
36. In a winning streak, total risk should rise dramatically.
37. Trading stocks is similar to trading commodities.
38. It’s a good idea to know how much you are ahead or behind

during a trading session.
39. A losing month is an indication of doing something wrong.
40. A losing week is an indication of doing something wrong.
41. The big money in trading is made when one can get long at lows

after a big downtrend.
42. It’s good to average down when buying.
43. After a long trend, the market requires more consolidation

before another trend starts.
44. It’s important to know what to do if trading in commodities

doesn’t succeed.
45. It is not helpful to watch every quote in the markets one trades.
46. It is a good idea to put on or take off a position all at once.

81

82

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

47. Diversification in commodities is better than always being in

one or two markets.
48. If a day’s profit or loss makes a significant difference to your net

worth, you’re overtrading.
49. A trader learns more from his losses than his profits.
50. Except for commission and brokerage fees, execution “costs”

for entering orders are minimal over the course of a year.
51. It’s easier to trade well than to trade poorly.
52. It’s important to know what success in trading will do for you

later in life.
53. Uptrends end when everyone gets bearish.
54. The more bullish news you hear, the less likely a market is to

break out on the upside.
55. For an off-floor trader, a long-term trade ought to last three or

four weeks or less.
56. Others’ opinions of the market are good to follow.
57. Volume and open interest are as important as price action.
58. Daily strength and weakness is a good guide for liquidating

long-term positions with big profits.
59. Off-floor traders should spread different markets of different

market groups.
60. The more people are going long, the less likely an uptrend is to

continue in the beginning of a trend.
61. Off-floor traders should not spread different delivery months of

the same commodity.
62. Buying dips and selling rallies is a good strategy.
63. It’s important to take a profit most of the time.

Not all the questions were true or false. Dennis also asked
candidates essay questions:
1. What were your standard test results on college entrance

exams?
2. Name a book or movie you like and why.
3. Name a historical figure you like and why.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

83

4. Why would you like to succeed at this job?
5. Name a risky thing you have done and why.
6. Explain a decision you have made under pressure and why that

was your decision.
7. Hope, fear, and greed are said to be enemies of good traders.

Explain a decision you may have made under one of these
influences and how you view that decision now.
8. What are some good qualities you have that might help in

trading?
9. What are some bad qualities you have that might hurt in

trading?
10. In trading would you rather be good or lucky? Why?
11. Is there anything else you’d like to add?

At first glance, these questions might seem simplistic, but
Dennis did not care what anyone might think:
“I suppose I didn’t like the idea that everyone thought I was
crazy or going to fail, but it didn’t make any substantial
difference because I had an idea what I wanted to do and
how I wanted to do it.”93
Dennis placed the passion to achieve at the top of his list. You
have to wake up with that inner drive and desire to make it happen.
You have to go for it. Dennis also outlined the problem with profit
targets (a key lesson taught to the Turtles):
“When you have a position, you put it on for a reason, and
you’ve got to keep it until the reason no longer exists. Don’t
take profits just for the sake of taking profits.”94
Dennis makes it clear that if you don’t know when a trend will
end, but you do know it can go significantly higher, then why get
off?

Aftermath
Although some of his Turtle students have had successful
money management careers (some not), Dennis seems to especially
not do well when trading for clients. If Dennis just traded for
himself, he might be fine (and much richer). His problems seem to

Whatever you use should
be applied in some
quantitative, rigorous
fashion. You should use
science to determine what
works and quantify it.
I’m still surprised today
at how I can expect so
strongly that a trading
methodology will be
profitable but, after
running it though a
simulation, I discover it’s
a loser.
Paul Rabar95

84

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

No trader can control
volatility completely, but
you can improve your
odds.
Observation made by a
student of Richard Dennis

arise when he trades for clients who do not truly understand the
nature of trend following trading. His most recent stab at managing
money for others, which ended in the fall of 2000, resulted in a
compounded annual return of 26.9 percent (after fees), including
two years when performance exceeded 100 percent. But, he
stopped trading for clients after a drawdown in 2000. His clients
pulled their money right before his trading would have gone straight
up. Doubt me that he would have gone up? Use Dunn Capital
Management and just about any other trend follower as a proxy and
you will see what happened in the fall of 2000. If those impatient
clients had stayed with Dennis from the fall of 2000 to the present,
they would have been richly rewarded, far surpassing stock market
buy and hold gains by comparison.

I don’t think trading
strategies are as
vulnerable to not working
if people know about
them, as most traders
believe. If what you are
doing is right, it will
work even if people have
a general idea about it. I
always say that you could
publish trading rules in
the newspaper and no
one would follow them. A
key is consistency and
discipline.
Richard Dennis96

One of the biggest lessons a trader can learn is that trading for
your own account and trading for clients are two different things.
John W. Henry told me that it never gets easy losing money for
clients. Traders who concentrate on expanding just their own
capital often have a great advantage over money managers. Money
managers must deal with the pressure and expectations of clients at
all times.
There may have been other reasons for Dennis’ problems
beyond pressure and expectations from clients. For example,
Dennis said he could not program a computer if it walked in and bit
him. He outsourced his programming, as many traders do. But there
is something to be said about knowing how everything under the
hood works. Ed Seykota is generally acknowledged to have
programmed the first computerized trading system. Bill Dunn and
his staff wrote their original programming for their trading systems.
In other words, there may be value in learning all you can about
every aspect of trading if you are going to trade a trend following
trading system.

Key Points
• Dennis: “Trading was even more teachable than I imagined. In
a strange sort of way, it was almost humbling.”
• Dennis: “When you have a position, you put it on for a reason,
and you’ve got to keep it until the reason no longer exists.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

85

Don’t take profits just for the sake of taking profits. You have to
have a strategy to trade, know how it works, and follow through
on it.”
• Dennis: “You don’t get any profits from fundamental analysis;
you get profit from buying and selling.”
More on Dennis can be found in my second book, The Complete
TurtleTrader.

Richard Donchian
The Father of Trend Following
Although Richard Donchian passed away many years ago, his
influence resonates. He is known as the father of trend following.
His original technical trading system became the foundation on
which later trend followers would build their systems. Where do
you think the Turtle system evolved from? He is noteworthy among
traders in general, as he was the originator of the managed money
industry. From the time he started the industry’s first managed fund
in 1949 until his death, he shared his research and served as a
teacher and mentor to numerous present-day trend followers.

About Richard Donchian
Donchian was born in 1905 in Hartford, Connecticut. He
graduated from Yale in 1928 with a BA in economics. He was so
fascinated by trading that even after losing his investments in the
1929 stock market crash, he returned to work on Wall Street.
In 1930, he managed to borrow some capital to trade shares in
Auburn Auto, what William Baldwin in his article on Donchian
called, “the Apple Computer of its day.” The moment after he made
several thousand dollars on the trade, he became a market
“technician,” charting prices and formulating buy and sell
strategies without concern for an investment’s basic value.98
From 1933 to 1935, Donchian wrote a technical market letter
for Hemphill, Noyes & Co. He stopped his financial career to serve
as an Air Force statistical control officer in World War II, but
returned to Wall Street after the war and he became a market letter
writer for Shearson Hamill & Company. He began to keep detailed,
