
Risk-return tradeoff
Economists say that there’s no such thing as a free lunch. Whatever return
you get, you get because you took some risk and gave up another opportunity for your time and money. In that sense, there’s no secret to making
money. It’s all about work and risk.
This concept is known as the risk-reward tradeoff. The greater the potential
reward, the greater the amount of risk you’re expected to take and thus the
greater potential you have for loss. But if you understand the risks you’re
taking, you may well find that they’re worth it. That’s why you have to think
about the risks and rewards up front.

Chapter 4: Defining Trading: Risk, Reward, and Timing

Market efficiency in the real world
The reason a balance exists between risk and reward is that markets are
reasonably efficient. This efficiency means that prices reflect all known
information about the companies and the economy and that all participants
understand the relative tradeoffs available to them. Otherwise, you’d have
opportunities to make a riskless profit, and that just won’t do, according to
the average economist. “You can’t pluck nickels out of thin air,” they like to
say. In an efficient market, if an opportunity exists to make money without
risk, someone would have taken advantage of it already.
Here’s how market efficiency works: You have information that says that
Company A is going to announce good earnings tomorrow, so you buy the
stock. Your increased demand causes the price to go up, and pretty soon, the
stock price is where it should be, given that the company is doing well. The
information advantage is rapidly eliminated. In most cases, everyone gets the
news — or hears the rumor — of the good earnings at the same time, so the
price adjustment happens quickly.
Wouldn’t it be great to get the news of a good earnings report before everyone
else and make a quick trading profit? Yep. At least until the Feds show up and
haul you off to prison — talk about your opportunity costs. Trading on material inside information (information that is not generally known that would
affect the price of the security) is illegal. And yes, the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the exchanges monitor trading to see whether trading patterns suggest illegal trading based on inside information because they want all
investors and traders to feel confident that the investment business is fair. Be
very wary of tips that seem too good to be true.
The markets may be more or less efficient, but that doesn’t mean they work
by magic. Price changes happen because people act on news, and the people
who act the fastest are day traders. In the example, notice that it was the
activity of traders that caused the price of Company A stock to go up to
reflect the expected good earnings report.
In economic terms, arbitrage is a riskless profit. A hard-core believer in
academic theory would say that arbitrage opportunities don’t exist. In practice, though, they do. Here’s how arbitrage works: Although Company A is
expected to have a good earnings announcement tomorrow, you notice that
the stock price has gone up faster than the price of a call option on Company
A, even though premium should reflect the stock price. So you sell Company
A (borrowing shares and selling it short if you have to) and then use the proceeds to buy the option. When the option price goes up to reflect the stock
price, you can sell the option (that is, close out your short position) and
lock in a riskless profit — at least, before your trading costs are considered.
Chapter 10 discusses arbitrage in more detail.

75

76

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

The oldest economics joke ever told
After you become wise to the ways of risk
and return, this joke should make sense
to you:
Two economists are walking down the street.
One sees a $20 bill on the sidewalk and stops
to pick it up. “Don’t bother,” says the other.

“If it were real, someone would have taken it
already.”
“Don’t be so sure,” says the first economist. He
picks it up, sees that it is real, then turns to his
friend and says, “How about if I buy you a free
lunch?”

Market efficiency isn’t perfect. It can take a while for people to make a logical
decision about what an asset is worth, and until that happens, trading can
be irrational and inefficient. Whether it’s Japanese stocks, Internet stocks,
condominiums in Florida, or gold, the markets have pockets of craziness that
defy rhyme and reason. In the short term, a wave of panic or euphoria can
overtake the market during a single trading day, pushing prices into inefficient territory. On days like that, your ability to keep calm and steer into the
trend, rather than getting swept up into an uncontrollable craze, will help you
have more winning trades.
Bubbles and panics happen, and they happen more often than academic economists like to admit. However, most days, trading is efficient. Your edge comes
from knowing the markets, having good risk management, and being able to
walk away. Don’t count on crazy price action every day.

Differentiating Trading, Investing,
and Gambling
Day trading is a cousin to both investing and gambling, but it is not the same
as either. Day trading involves quick reactions to the markets, not a long-term
consideration of all the factors that can drive an investment. It works with
odds in your favor, or at least that are even, rather than with odds that are
against you.
Still, the three activities overlap. Many day traders also invest, and some
came to trading after years of watching the markets as an investor. In addition, more than one day trader claims that good poker skills are useful for
understanding market psychology, and many day traders can point to a winning trade that was made for no particular reason at all. To help you keep

Chapter 4: Defining Trading: Risk, Reward, and Timing
straight the differences between day trading, investing, and gambling, this
section explains which is which so that you can better understand what
you’re doing when you day trade. After all, you can increase your chances of
success if you stick to the business at hand.

Investing is slow and steady
Investing is the process of putting money at risk in order to get a return.
It’s the raw material of capitalism. It’s the way that businesses get started,
roads get built, and explorations get financed. It’s how our economy matches
people who have more money than they need, at least during part of their
lives, with people who need it in order to grow society’s capabilities.
Investing is heady stuff. And it’s very much focused on the long term. Good
investors do a lot of research before committing their money because they
know that it will take a long time to see a payoff. That’s okay with them.
Investors often invest in things that are out of favor, because they know that,
with time, others will recognize the value and respond in kind.
One of the best investors of all time is Warren Buffett, chief executive officer of
Berkshire Hathaway. His annual letters to shareholders offer great insight. You
can read them at www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/letters.html.
What’s the difference between investing and saving? When you save, you take
no risk. Your compensation is low; it’s just enough to cover the time value of
money. Generally, the return on savings equals inflation and no more. In fact,
a lot of banks pay a lot less than the inflation rate on a federally insured
savings account, meaning that you’re paying the bank to use your money.
In contrast to investing, day trading moves fast. Day traders react only to
what’s on the screen. There’s no time to do research, and the market is
always right when you’re day trading. You don’t have two months or two
years to wait for the fundamentals to work out and the rest of Wall Street to
see how smart you were. You have today. And if you can’t live with that, you
shouldn’t be day trading.

Trading works fast
Trading is the act of buying and selling securities. All investors trade, because
they need to buy and sell their investments. But to investors, trading is a rare
transaction, and they get more value from finding a good opportunity, buying
it cheap, and selling it at a much higher price sometime in the future. But
traders are not investors.

77

78

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Traders look to take advantage of short-term price discrepancies in the
market. In general, they don’t take a lot of risk on each trade, so they don’t
get a lot of return on each trade, either. Traders act quickly. They look at
what the market is telling them and then respond. They know that many of
their trades won’t work out, but as long as more than half work, they’ll be
okay. They don’t do a lot of in-depth research on the securities they trade,
but they know the normal price and volume patterns well enough that they
can recognize potential profit opportunities.
Trading keeps markets efficient because it creates the short-term supply
and demand that eliminates small price discrepancies. It also creates a lot of
stress for traders, who must react in the here and now. Traders give up the
luxury of time in exchange for a quick profit.
Speculation is related to trading in that it often involves short-term transactions. Speculators take risks, assuming a much greater return than may be
expected, and a lot of what-ifs may have to be satisfied for the transaction to
pay off. Many speculators hedge their risks with other securities, such as
options or futures.

Gambling is nothing more than luck
A gambler puts up money in the hopes of a payoff if a random event occurs.
The odds are always against the gambler and in favor of the house, but
people like to gamble because they like to hope that, if they hit it lucky, their
return will be as large as their loss is likely.
Some gamblers believe that the odds can be beaten, but they are wrong.
(Certain card games are more games of skill than gambling, assuming you
can find a casino that plays under standard rules. Yeah, you can count cards
when playing blackjack with your friends, but doing so is a lot harder in a
professionally run casino.) They get excited about the potential for a big win
and get caught up in the glamour of the casino, and soon the odds go to work
and drain away their stakes.
There is such a thing as a fair lottery, which takes place when the expected
payoff is higher than the odds of playing. You won’t find it at most casinos,
although sometimes the odds in a sports book or horse race favor the bettor,
at least in the short term. A more common example takes place in lotteries
when the jackpots roll over to astronomical amounts. For example, in May
2013, the multi-state Powerball lottery had a jackpot of $590 million, but the
odds of winning were 1 in 175 million. This means that a $1.00 ticket had an
expected value of $3.37, making it a fair proposition. (That $590 million was a
record that has not been beaten.)

Chapter 4: Defining Trading: Risk, Reward, and Timing
Trading is not gambling, but traders who are not paying attention to their
strategy and its performance can cross over into gambling. They can view the
blips on their computer screen as a game. They can start making trades without any regard for the risk and return characteristics. They can start believing
that how they do things affects the trade. And pretty soon, they are using the
securities market as a giant casino, using trading techniques that have odds as
bad as any slot machine.

Managing the Risks of Day Trading
When you know more about the risks, returns, and related activities of day
trading, you can think more about how you’re going to run your day-trading
business. Before you flip through the book to find out how to get started,
consider two more kinds of risk that you need to think about:
✓ Business risk
✓ Personal risk
You need to understand and manage both in order to better manage the risks
of the trading day.

It’s your business
Business risk is the uncertainty of the timing of your cash flow. Not every
month of trading is going to be great, but your bills will come due no matter
what. You’ll have to pay for subscriptions while keeping the lights turned on
and the computer connected to the Internet. Taxes come due four times a
year, and keyboards hold a mysterious attraction for carbonated beverages,
causing them to short out at the most inopportune times.
Keep track of your business expenses and keep them as low as is reasonable.
You should invest in your business, obviously, but only to the extent that you
can pay your bills even if you have an off month in the market.
Regardless of what happens to your trading account, you need cash on hand
to pay your bills or you’ll be out of business. The best way to protect yourself
is to start out with a cash cushion just for covering your operating expenses.
Keep this cushion separate from your trading funds. Replenish it during good
months. Walk away from trading if it goes down to zero.

79

80

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

It’s your life
The personal risk of trading is that it becomes an obsession that crowds out
everything else in your life. Trading is a stressful business, and the difference
between those who succeed and those who fail is often psychological. You
need to be on when you are trading and then, at the end of the trading day,
close out the emotions the same way that you close out your positions. It’s
not easy, so you need to have ways to manage your mood. Figure those out
before you start trading, and you’ll be ahead of the game.
In fact, the personal risk is so great that I devote an entire chapter to
managing it — Chapter 14. Go there if anything you have read in this chapter
alarms you.

Chapter 5

Regulation and the Modern Trader
In This Chapter
▶ Identifying the regulators
▶ Considering basic brokerage requirements
▶ Avoiding insider trading tips
▶ Protecting the markets in crisis situations
▶ Following procedure when you take on partners

T

he financial markets are wild and woolly playgrounds for capitalism at its
best. Every moment of the trading day, the actions of buyers and sellers
determine what the price of a stock, commodity, or currency should be at
that moment, given the supply, the demand, and the information out there.
It’s beautiful.
One reason the markets work well most of the time is that they are regulated.
That may seem like an oxymoron: Isn’t capitalism all about free trade, unfettered by any rules from nannying bureaucrats? Ah, but for capitalism to work,
people on both sides of a trade need to know that the terms will be enforced.
They need to know that the money in their accounts is there and is safe from
theft. And they need to know that no one has an unfair advantage. Regulation
creates the trust that makes markets function.
As a day trader, you may not be managing money for other investors, and you
may not answer to an employer, but that doesn’t mean you don’t have rules
to follow. Day traders have to comply with applicable securities laws and
exchange regulations, some of which specifically address those who make
lots of short-term trades. Likewise, brokers and advisors who deal with day
traders have regulations that they need to follow. Understanding all these different rules and regulations can help you make better decisions about whom
to deal with. In this chapter, you find out who does the regulating, what they
look at, and how they affect you.

82

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Looking Back on the Road to Regulations
With the advent of the telegraph, traders were able to receive daily price
quotes. Many cities had bucket shops, storefront businesses where traders
bet on changes in stock and commodity prices. These traders weren’t buying
the security itself, even for a few minutes; instead they were placing bets
against others. These schemes were highly prone to manipulation and fraud,
and they were wiped out after the stock market crash of 1929.
After the 1929 crash, small investors began trading off the ticker tape, which
was a printout of price changes sent by telegraph, or wire. In most cases,
traders made these transactions by going down to their brokerage firm’s
office, sitting in a conference room, and placing orders based on the changes
they saw come across the tape. Really serious traders got wires installed in
their own offices, but the costs were prohibitive for most individual investors. In any event, traders still had to place their orders through a broker.
Because they didn’t have direct access to the market, they couldn’t count on
timely execution.
Another reason there was so little day trading back then is that all brokerage
firms charged the same commissions until 1975. That year, the Securities and
Exchange Commission ruled that this practice amounted to price fixing. After
this ruling, brokers could compete on their commissions. Some brokerage
firms, such as Charles Schwab, began to allow customers to trade stock at
discount commission rates, which made active trading more profitable. Some
brokerage firms don’t even charge commissions anymore (but don’t worry;
they get money from you in other ways).
The system of trading off the ticker tape more or less persisted until the
stock market crash of 1987. Brokerage firms and market makers were flooded
with orders, so they took care of their biggest customers first and pushed the
smallest trades to the bottom of the pile. After the crash, the exchanges and
the Securities and Exchange Commission called for several changes designed
to reduce the chances of another crash and improve execution if one were
to happen. One of those changes was the Small Order Entry System, often
known as SOES, which gave orders of 1,000 shares or less priority over
larger orders.
Then, in the 1990s, Internet access became widely available, and several electronic communications networks started giving small traders direct access
to price quotes and trading activities. This meant that traders could place
orders on the same footing as the brokers they once had to work through.
In fact, thanks to the SOES, the small traders had an advantage: They could
place orders and then sell the stock to the larger firms, locking in a nice
profit. Day trading looked like a pretty good way to make a living.

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
SOES coincided with the rise of the commercial Internet, making the late
1990s a golden era for day traders, at least in the popular imagination. More
and more discount brokerage firms offered Internet trading while Internet
stocks became wildly popular. No one needed SOES to make profits when
Pets.com and Webvan were going up in price day after day, at least for a
while. (Remember that? No? Well, it was fun while it lasted.)
Then market for tech stocks cratered in 2000, in part because so many of
the companies cratered, too. For much of the next decade, the markets were
mostly quiet while new products were introduced that appealed to day traders, including exchange-traded funds and miniature commodities contracts
(both of which are discussed in Chapter 3).
And then things got crazy. In 2008, brokerage firms failed, and the financial
markets came darn near close to collapse. All that volatility was a lot of fun
for those traders who could handle it. The brokerage firms developed larger
and more sophisticated trading programs that seemed to work well until
a single large order on the afternoon of May 6, 2010, caused everything to
go haywire. That so-called “flash crash” exposed the risks created by highfrequency trading programs; at first, no one wanted to blame technology and
instead tried to place the blame on traders whose fingers were too big to
punch the numbers on their order-entry machines.
The financial system received generous government bailouts in the fall of
2008 in the hopes of staving off another depression. The exchanges and
the federal government created new regulations in the major institutions,
although little has changed for day traders — at least so far.
So what are the regulations that affect day traders? Well, keep reading!

Reviewing the Regulators
In the United States, financial markets receive general regulatory oversight
from two government bodies: the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Both have similar
goals: to ensure that investors and traders have adequate information to
make decisions and to prevent fraud and abuse.
Neither body has complete authority over the markets, though. Instead, much
of the responsibility for proper behavior has been given to self-regulatory
organizations that brokerage firms join, and to the exchanges themselves.
It’s not straightforward, but the overlap between these organizations seems
to ensure that problems are identified early on and that the interests of
­companies, brokers, and investment managers are fairly represented.

83

84

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Stock and corporate bond
market regulation
The stock and corporate bond markets are the most prominent. Regulators
are active and visible because these markets have a relatively large number
of relatively small issuers. In the currency market, by contrast, the only issuers are governments, and there are a lot fewer of them than there are public
companies. When one of these companies turns out to have fraudulent numbers, the headlines erupt, and suddenly everyone cares about what the SEC
is up to. That’s just the first layer in regulating this market.
Given the rate at which exchanges are merging and organizations are
rearranging themselves, the following list may well have changed by the time
you read it. But even if the organizations go away, the regulations won’t.

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
The SEC (www.sec.gov) is a government agency that ensures that markets
work efficiently. The Commission has five commissioners, appointed by the
President and confirmed by Congress, who serve staggered five-year terms.
This structure is designed to keep the SEC nonpartisan. One of the
commissioners is designated as the chair.
The SEC has three functions:
✓ To ensure that any companies that have securities listed on exchanges
in the United States report their financial information accurately and on
time so that investors can determine whether investing in the company
makes sense for them
✓ To provide oversight to the markets by ensuring that the exchanges and
self-regulatory organizations have sufficient regulations in place and that
those regulations are enforced
✓ To regulate mutual funds, investment advisors, and others who make
decisions for other people’s money
In addition to its standard regulations, which brokerage firms know by heart, the
SEC occasionally passes temporary regulations in times of market stress that
may affect day traders. For example, during the 2008 financial crisis, the SEC
placed restrictions on short-selling the stock of different financial companies.
