
75

76

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

Figure 3.13 Reverse-Collar Delta vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
delta is ⫹100 anywhere outside the two strikes where both options are inthe-money and on the verge of either being exercised or assigned, resulting
in a ⫹100-share stock position. The sensitivity is less severe with greater
amounts of time until expiration.
• Gamma
Figure 3.14 clearly shows how the gamma of the reverse-collar depends
on the location of the underlying and the time until expiration. With the
option positioning now reversed, the position has a negative gamma when
the underlying is near the lower strike short put and a positive gamma
when the underlying price is near the upper strike long call.
When expiration is near and the underlying price is close to the strike
price of the long call, the position will have a large positive gamma; when
expiration is near and the underlying price is close to the strike price of the
short put, the position will have a large negative gamma; and when the
underlying is exactly between the two strikes, the gamma will approach
zero. Once again notice that moving further away from expiration (back in
time) decreases the sensitivity of the gamma of the position.
• Vega
Figure 3.15 shows how the vega of the collar depends on the location
of the underlying price and the time until expiration. The vega is positive
when the underlying price is near the upper strike long call, and it is negative
when the underlying is near the lower strike short put. As with the collar,
the vega of a reverse-collar, whether positive or negative, is greater in absolute terms when there is a larger amount of time left until expiration. When
the underlying is between the two strikes, the vega will approach zero.

The Greeks of Collar and Reverse-Collar Spreads

Figure 3.14 Reverse-Collar Gamma vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

Figure 3.15 Reverse-Collar Vega vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
• Theta
As can be seen in Figure 3.16, the theta of the reverse-collar, as with the
other Greeks, is dependent on the location of the underlying price and time
until expiration. Notice that the theta of the position is positive when the
underlying is near the lower strike short put, negative when the underlying
price is near the upper strike long call, and neutral when the underlying

77

78

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

Figure 3.16 Reverse-Collar Theta vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

price is more or less between the strikes, or on the extremes. As with the collar, the theta of the reverse-collar, in absolute terms, reaches its peak when
the underlying is at the upper or lower strike price at expiration, and the
relationship softens as the time to expiration increases.

COLLARS AND REVERSE-COLLARS (HEDGED
AGAINST UNDERLYING POSITIONS)
Collar-Hedged Stock
With the exception of delta, the Greek exposure of a hedged collar position—long stock with a collar wrap—will amount to exactly the
same strategy as the collar (Figure 3.17). The stock position only contributes to the delta portion of the Greeks, so the gamma, theta, and
vega of the positions will be identical to their positions in a traditional
collar.
Note that this is the same profile as the delta of the bull spread from
Chapter 2 because a long stock position hedged with a collar on a 1-to-1
basis is synthetically equivalent to a bull spread.

Reverse-Collar-Hedged Stock
Once again, note (Figure 3.18) that this is the exact same profile as the
delta of the bear spread from Chapter 2 because a short stock position
hedged with a reverse-collar on a 1-to-1 basis is synthetically equivalent to
a bear spread.

Investment Objectives

Figure 3.17 Delta of Collar-Hedged Stock vs. Underlying Price and Time
to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

Figure 3.18 Delta of Reverse-Collar-Hedged Short Stock vs. Underlying
Price and Time to Expiration Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
Collars and reverse-collars (without stock) are directional strategies, with
the “long” option component positioned in the direction of the forecast move
and the “short” option component positioned in the opposite direction. The
usual reason traders choose a collar or reverse-collar, instead of another option
strategy, to trade a directional forecast is that they are unsure of their timing.

79

80

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

If a trader is simply buying calls or puts, inaccurrate timing can be a very
expensive proposition. An outright long call or long put position is subject to
negative time decay, and if a trader is off on his or her timing forecast, each
day that passes costs money. In addition, long calls and puts have a positive vega, and if the market slips into an unexpected holding pattern before
the move, implied volatility may decline, lowering the value of purchased
options. This scenario is the dreaded “double whammy” of poor timing.
Because the structure of the collar and reverse-collar is one long option
and one short option, the timing issue is softened, so that time decay and
implied volatility risks largely offset one another, allowing the trader to stay
with the position longer while he waits for the forecast directional move to
occur.

Market Outlook
• Sharp Directional Underlying Movement
The trader of a collar or reverse-collar should be forecasting a sharp
directional move, beyond the strike of the long option of the position. The
owner of a collar should be expecting the underlying price to move sharply
below the strike of the long put component of the collar; the owner of a
reverse-collar should be expecting the underlying price to move sharply
above the strike of the long call component of the reverse-collar. As mentioned, the timing does not need to be precise with this type of position.
Figures 3.19 and 3.20 are good general examples of the type of movement
the collar and reverse-collar trader should be expecting.

Short Call

Long Put

Figure 3.19 Market Forecast Suitable for the Collar
• Mind the Risk!
As with many option positions, the collar and reverse-collar positions are double-edged swords. They allow for the luxury of waiting for
a sharp directional move without having to pay for time decay or risking

Strategy Component Selection

Long Call

Short Put

Figure 3.20 Market Forecast Suitable for the Reverse-Collar
a markdown in implied volatility levels, but this comes at a price: the
severe risk of a naked short option position in the opposite direction of
the forecast.
So, in addition to the forecast of a sharp directional move, the trader
of the collar also should be prepared both financially and psychologically
for the prospect of the underlying price moving in the opposite direction.
Ultimately, this type of movement would give the trader the same position,
but with momentum moving the wrong way.
The trader of a collar, with a bearish view of the underlying, should be
prepared to become delta short if the underlying rises through the strike
of the short call portion of his or her position, or have a stop-loss in place
to close the short call. The trader of a reverse-collar, with a bullish view of
the underlying, should be prepared to become delta long if the underlying
drops below the strike of the short put portion of his or her position, or
have a stop-loss in place to close the short put.

STRATEGY COMPONENT SELECTION
In addition to a large-magnitude bullish or bearish forecast, choosing
the structure of a collar or reverse-collar requires an analysis of several
market parameters:
• What is the current market forecast?
— Bullish
— Bearish
• What is the trigger price for the forecast move?
• Where is significant resistance (in the case of a collar)?
• Where is significant support (in the case of a reverse-collar)?

81

82

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

• What is the time horizon of the forecast move?
• What are current implied volatility conditions?
— What is the base level of implied volatility?
— Is there a significant implied volatility skew?
• What is the trader’s risk appetite?
— Large, able to accept open-ended risk
— Moderate to small; must use a stop-loss

What Is One’s Current Market Forecast?
This one is pretty simple. As we have stated, the collar is best suited
to a forecast of a bearish move of large magnitude. A reverse-collar is best
suited to a forecast of a bullish move of large magnitude. If one’s forecast does not fall into one of these two categories, then a different strategy
should be used.

What Is the Trigger Price of the Forecast Move?
For structuring purposes, it is important to have an idea of the trigger
price—that is, the price that will be the “launch pad” of the forecast bullish
or bearish move. This is important information because, ideally, the long
put (in the case of a collar) or the long call (in the case of the reverse-collar)
portion of the position should be located as close to the trigger price as
possible to capture the majority of the forecast move.

Example
ABC is trapped in a range between 100.00 and 105.00. The trader
believes that the next time it trades through 105.00 ABC is going to
break out for a large upside move. In this case 105.00 is the trigger
price. (In technical analysis lingo, this is sometimes referred to as the
pivot price.)

Where Is the Significant Resistance (Collar)?
Again, for structuring purposes, it is important for the trader of a collar
to have an idea of where significant overhead resistance lies. Ideally, this is
where the short call portion of the position is located.

Example
The investor believes that GHF will collapse if it trades below 95.00.
Currently GHF is trading at 100.00, and there is large overhead resistance
at 105.00. The trader believes this is the ideal situation for a 95.00/105.00
collar. He decides to buy the 95.00 put at the trigger price and to sell the
105.00 call at resistance.

Strategy Component Selection

Where Is the Significant Support (Reverse-Collar)?
The trader of a reverse-collar will need to have an idea of where significant underlying support lies. Ideally, this is where the short put portion of
the position should be located.

Example
The investor believes that ZYX will explode if it trades above 89.75.
Currently ZYX is trading at 87.50, and there is significant support below
the market at 85.00. The trader believes this is the ideal situation for an
85.00/90.00 reverse-collar. He decides to buy the 90.00 call at (approximately) the trigger price and sell the 85.00 put at support.

What Is the Time Horizon of the Forecast Move?
Even though the collar and reverse-collar are deliberately structured to
allow for some sloppiness in timing, it is still important to have an idea—
however it is arrived at—regarding when the underlying is going to make
its move. The expiration chosen for construction of the collar or reverse-collar should comfortably cover this time horizon, with a couple extra weeks
thrown in for good measure. There is nothing worse than being “right”
about direction and not being “in” the marketplace.

Example
HIJ has been consolidating and the trader believes that if HIJ trades
through 120.00 it will explode to the upside. Previous consolidation periods in HIJ have lasted between ten and fifteen business days (two and
three weeks). Some of the available options expire in twenty-eight calendar
days, and others expire in sixty calendar days. The trader believes that he
needs the additional margin of error of the sixty-day option and constructs
his reverse-collar using options of that expiry.

What Are the Current Implied Volatility Conditions?
Implied volatility structure sometimes can be the deciding factor
when a trader is considering several different strategies to address a market view. When the possibilities include the collar or reverse-collar, the
following implied volatility information should be a part of the decisionmaking process.
• Base Level of Implied Volatility
The base level of implied volatility is the general level of at-the-money
implied volatility. Base level volatility should be evaluated in a historical
context when approaching any trade, including a collar or reverse-collar.
As mentioned, the structure of the collar or reverse-collar of one long option and one short option softens the exposure of the overall position to
implied volatility. The positive vega of the long option and the negative

83

84

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

vega of the short option act to cancel out the overall vega exposure of the
position (when the underlying is between the strikes). This means that the
collar and reverse-collar are good choices when one is looking to play a
large-magnitude directional move and base levels of implied volatility are
moderate to high.
However, if the base level of implied volatility happens to be low, it
might be better to choose a long put over a collar or a long call over a
reverse-collar, especially from a risk/reward standpoint. One would still
have the right position for a large-magnitude move, but without the risk
aspect of the collar or reverse-collar in the opposite direction.
• Implied Volatility Skew
Generally, in the case of equity and index options, the implied volatilities of the lower strike option rise as the strike prices fall, and vice versa.
This often is referred to as the implied volatility skew. Trying to explain the
implied volatility skew and the reason it exists could open a can of worms,
and it probably deserves its own chapter, if not its own book.
It suffices to say, for our purposes, that different strikes of the same expiration often trade at different implied volatilities, depending on market
conditions. In addition, implied volatilities of lower strike options tend to
be higher than those of higher strike options.
When the implied volatilities are plotted against strike prices on a
graph, they often exhibit a “smirk” or “smile.” Figure 3.21 is a good example of the implied volatility skew smirk.
If the market demonstrates a large implied volatility skew, sometimes a
reverse-collar trade becomes more appetizing to the bullish trader because
the implied volatility of the put option being sold could be much higher
than the implied volatility of the call option being bought, giving the trader

Figure 3.21 Implied Volatility Skew, January 2008

Trade Management

an additional “edge” to work with. Conversely, if the implied volatility
skew is unusually flat, it can make a collar trade more appetizing to the
bearish trader because the implied volatility of the call option being sold
could be equal to or higher than that of the put option being bought, giving
the trader a potential “skew” edge.

Example
The trader believes XYZ is about to make a substantial upside move, and
is considering several bullish option strategies. The trader notices that, due
to recent weakness, XYZ options have a steep implied volatility skew, meaning the out-of-the-money puts trade at much higher implied volatilities than
the out-of-the-money calls. The trader decides he can address this implied
volatility skew by using a reverse-collar for his bullish strategy.

What Is the Trader’s Risk Appetite?
Risk breaks two ways. If the trader has plenty of capital to work with
and is comfortable with the possibility that she might end up with a position if the underlying moves in the opposite direction—getting long delta
with the market moving lower or getting short delta with the market moving higher—then there is no problem. The trader is simply getting long on
weakness or short on strength instead of the other way around.
If the trader has a moderate-to-low risk appetite, though, an exit strategy
will have to be put in place. In addition, stop-loss orders to close the openended risk of the short call component will need to be in place when trading
collars, and stop-loss orders to close the semi-open-ended risk of the short
put component will need to be in place when trading reverse-collars.
All traders should keep in mind that stop-loss orders do not provide any
guarantees for how and when they will be executed, and they provide no
coverage when the market is closed. If a trader loses sleep over the idea of a
stock gapping up through his short call or down through his short put, then
the collar and reverse-collar are not strategies that should be considered.

TRADE MANAGEMENT
There are several important issues to consider when contemplating
using a collar or reverse-collar:
• What is the most efficient way to take any profits?
• How should one deal with adverse market movement?
• Where should the stop-loss orders be placed?
• What does one do if the underlying move fails to be triggered and
expiry is approaching?
Collar and reverse-collar trade management must be broken into two
categories: directional strategy and hedge. Both must be examined separately because the motivation for them is different.

85

86

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

Managing Speculative Directional Strategy
Managing collars and reverse-collars falls into the following categories:
• Managing the successful position (directional move in the forecast
direction)
• Managing the unsuccessful position (directional move opposite the
forecast direction)
• Managing the position that fails to trigger

Managing the Successful Position
When the trade goes along as hoped, it is important to actively manage
the long put or long call component of the trade to squeeze the maximum
profitability out of that portion of the position, while either closing out or
deciding what to do about the residual and risky short option component
of the trade that is now far out-of-the-money. This is usually accomplished
by “rolling” the long option position along with the underlying by selling
vertical spreads.
Rolling a long option position is an excellent way to manage a position
that is “going your way.” Rolling accomplishes three important things:
• It maintains the exposure in the direction of the breakout.
• It reduces risk and takes “money off the table.”
• By accomplishing the above, it puts the trader in a strong psychological position and increases his “staying power.”

Examples of Rolling
• Scenario 1
The trader, expecting a breakout to the downside after a period of consolidation, executes a 100/105 collar position. The market does indeed
break down, and the trader aggressively manages the position by executing a series of rolling trades, accomplished by selling vertical put spreads,
as shown in Figures 3.22 and 3.23.
In this scenario, the trader is rolling the long put portion of the collar
down with the market. Every time the underlying appears to lose downward momentum, the trader sells a put vertical in order to reduce risk
and take money off the table, all while maintaining exposure. The trader
would continue to do this as long as he or she felt the down move would
continue.
• Scenario 2
The trader, expecting a breakout to the upside after a period of consolidation, executes a 90/95 reverse-collar position. The market does indeed
break out, and the trader aggressively manages the position by executing

Trade Management

105.00

Short Call

100.00

Long Put

95.00

Roll Point 1

90.00
Roll Point 2

Figure 3.22 Collar Rolling Points in a Breakdown Situation

Calls

Strike

Calls

Strike

Puts

90

90

95

95

+1

100

+1

100
–1

Puts

+1

105

Original Position

–1

–1

105

Rolled Position

The long 100 put position is rolled down to the 95 strike. This is accomplished by
selling the 95/100 put vertical spread. The act of rolling the trade reduces
risk and takes profit while maintaining exposure.

Figure 3.23 Put Roll Diagrammed
a series of rolling trades, accomplished by selling vertical call spreads, as
shown in Figures 3.24 and 3.25.
The long positions in scenarios 1 and 2 can be rolled as long as the trader
feels the directional move is likely to continue. As soon as the trader feels
the move is over, the position should be closed. It is also very important that
the trader not forget the trailing short call of the successful collar or short
put of the successful reverse-collar. Even though these options are out-ofthe-money, it is never a good idea to leave short option positions open, no
matter how far out-of-the-money they might be. Once the breakout has been
confirmed in a particular direction and the short option side of a collar or
reverse-collar loses most of its value, it should be closed. The trader should

87

88

Chapter 3

Collars and Reverse-Collars

105.00
Roll Point 2

100.00
Roll Point 1

95.00

Long Call

90.00

Short Put

Figure 3.24 Reverse-Collar Rolling Points in a Breakout Situation
Calls

Strike

90
+1

Puts

Calls

–1

95

Strike

90
–1

100

+1

95

+1

100

105

105

Original Position

Rolled Position

Puts

–1

The long 95 call position is rolled up to the 100 strike. This is accomplished by
selling the 95/100 call vertical spread. The act of rolling the trade reduces
risk and takes profit while maintaining exposure.

Figure 3.25 Call Roll Diagrammed
be looking to profit from the opposing long position instead. Also note that
additional execution costs associated with each spread used to roll the position will reduce profits.

Managing the Unsuccessful Position
When the trade is going against the trader, he will have to actively
manage the short call or short put component of the trade while deciding
what to do with the residual long put or long call component that is now
far out-of-the-money.
Whenever one considers entering a trade, it always is important to have
a risk-management strategy in place ahead of time. If, in fact, it becomes
clear that one’s forecast is incorrect, then it is time to get out the position,
hopefully in an orderly fashion. This usually is accomplished through the

Trade Management

use of stop-loss orders. As mentioned, stop-loss orders are buy or sell orders placed in the market that trigger if certain price conditions are met, at
which point they are turned into market orders. Traders usually will use
stop-loss orders to close losing positions if key price levels are violated,
indicating an incorrect price forecast.

Example
The trader, expecting a breakout to the upside after a period of consolidation, executes a 90/95 reverse-collar position. Support is strong at
the 90.00 level, and if this level is violated it will indicate that the trader’s
forecast is incorrect. The trader places a stop-loss order to buy back the 90
put with an 89.99 stop. Unfortunately, the market does break down and the
stop-loss order is triggered, closing out the short put portion of the position
at a loss, as shown in Figure 3.26.
100.00
