
8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 139

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 139 •

When Dorothy, or “Mousie,” as Livermore now called her, was
done with her remodeling, she placed a large brass plaque in one
of the front columns and renamed Locust Lawn “Evermore.”
The dining room table was shiny black walnut and sat 48 for
dinner. The kitchen would have been a proud fixture in most
hotels. The permanent staff of four worked at giant hooded stoves,
preparing food retrieved from the massive refrigeration units.
Dorothy loved dinner parties where she could shine and be
admired, and Livermore loved to participate in his quiet, powerful way.
She had as many parties as she could; any excuse, and she threw
a party. Even the powder room became a legend, with its huge,
perfect magnified mirrors circled by glowing stage-lamps, fronted
with tufted satin seats and damask-covered chaise lounges where
the women could relax and reapply their makeup while spreading
delicious gossip.
Livermore loved it all, and he loved the fact that he did not have
to do any of the planning or arrange any party details. That was
Dorothy’s job, and she loved it. Thanks to Dorothy, he made the
acquaintance of many people, including many beautiful women
and show-business people. Unfortunately for Mousie, he had a
passion for women in show business.
Livermore tried to limit the parties to the weekends when the
market was closed. During the week, when the market was open,
he followed a strict discipline, like an athlete in training. He went
to bed at 10 and was up in the morning no later than 6 for his quiet
time, his solitary strategy time. He ate breakfast alone in the nook
off the kitchen, where he could see the sprawling lawn that ran
down to Long Island Sound and his 300-foot yacht, with its crew
of 14, glimmering in the rising sun. He could also see the yachts
belonging to his neighbors, Alfred Sloan of General Motors and

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 140

• 140 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Walter P. Chrysler, both equal in size to his own. He went to work
by himself in his chauffeured Rolls; or, in the summer, he took the
Chris-Craft from his pier to the yacht. Then he would take the
yacht into the city. It was about an hour’s cruise.
After they moved in, Dorothy learned that one of the servants
knew how to make beer, and she had a brewery built in the basement. Prohibition was in full bloom. Eventually, Dorothy would
go around to the neighboring estates and deliver beer. She would
take the orders on Friday night and Saturday morning and deliver
the beer in her chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce convertible on Saturday afternoon. Sometimes she would have Livermore’s Rolls
trail hers, also stacked with cases of beer for their friends. She had
the time of her life, laughing and gossiping with her friends, fielding calls from people like Walter Chrysler, Alfred Sloan, and Charlie Chaplin, as they placed their beer orders and chatted her up.
Chaplin would often drop by, play a game of billiards on the
imported English billiard table, and pick up his beer. Chaplin
played a good game of billiards, and so did Livermore. Chaplin
loved Dorothy’s humor, and would listen to her for hours trying to
figure out how she could be so naturally funny.
In the living room stood a Steinway grand piano. Livermore
loved opera and classical music, and he would often have famous
opera singers like Madam Shumann-Heink, renowned pianists and
composers, Broadway stars, and popular singers of the day sing and
play at parties.
Their existence was romantic and exciting. In 1923, just before
the house was completed, Dorothy delivered a second boy, Paul.
Livermore had been actively trading for 32 years by 1923. He was
46 years old, but he still had an unquenchable thirst for knowledge
about his chosen profession, and he was a constant student of
the technical side of the market as well as its psychology. He

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 141

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 141 •

concluded that there might be millions of minds at work in the
market, but there was basically only one psychological pattern that
had to be studied and understood. Human nature is fundamentally
the same.
Later in life, Livermore was asked an important question by his
sons, Paul and Jesse: “Dad, why are you good in the market and
other people lose all their money?”
“Boys, the stock market must be studied, not casually either, but
deeply, thoroughly. It’s my conclusion that most people pay more
care and attention to the purchase of an appliance for their house,
or when buying a car, than they do to the purchase of stocks. The
stock market, with its allure of easy money and fast action, induces
people into foolishness and the careless handling of their hardearned money, like no other entity.
“See, the purchase of a stock is simple, easily done by placing
your purchase order with a broker, and later a phone call to sell
completes the trade. If you profit from this transaction it appears to
be easy money with seemingly no work. You didn’t have to get to
work by nine and labor for eight hours a day. It was simply a paper
transaction, requiring no labor. It appears to be an easy way to get
rich. Simply buy the stock at ten dollars and sell it later for more
than ten dollars. The more you trade, the more you make, that’s
how it appears. That’s ignorance, and ignorance is dangerous.
“There’s also fear to deal with, which you will find out when
you grow up. Fear and violence lie buried just beneath the surface of all normal human life. Fear, like violence, can appear in
a single heartbeat, a fast breath and the blink of an eye, the grab
of a hand, the noise of a gun. When it appears, natural survival
tactics come alive, normal reasoning is distorted. Reasonable
people act unreasonably when they are afraid. And people
become afraid when they start to lose money, their judgment
becomes impaired. This is our human nature in this stage of our

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 142

• 142 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

evolution. It cannot be denied. It must be understood, particularly in trading the market.
“The unsuccessful investor is best friends with hope, and hope
skips along life’s path hand in hand with greed when it comes to
the stock market. Once a stock trade is entered, hope springs to life.
It is human nature to be positive, to hope for the best. Hope is an
important survival technique. But hope, like its stock market cousins
ignorance, greed, and fear, distorts reason. See, boys, the stock market only deals in facts, in reality, in reason, and the stock market is
never wrong. Traders are wrong. Like the spinning of a roulette
wheel, the little black ball tells the final outcome, not greed, fear, or
hope. The result is objective and final, with no appeal.”
Both boys wondered if the stock market was for them. Was it
too dangerous? Should they just leave it to their father?
Livermore asked to be given no tips, and he, in turn, gave no tips.
He realized that, in many cases, tips were offered on a good-faith
basis by people who really did have the other person’s best interest
at heart. Tips could come from a relative, a loved one, or a friend
who had just made a serious investment and wanted to pass on
their good fortune. His motto was simple: All tips are dangerous.
They take all different forms. Take none of them.
There were tips that were purposely spread to provide false and
misleading information. These tips usually concealed an agenda
that might never be disclosed. Tips, Livermore knew after years of
trading, could come from any source. They could be disguised as
real and irrefutable information. A respected banker or an influential person interviewed by the press who had performed well in the
past might provide the tip. A well-known insider who had fully
disclosed a large position in the stock, or an executive with the
company, might provide the tip.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 143

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 143 •

And the tip very often made logical sense. An example: “Our
industry has taken a severe beating over the last two years and the
public reaction has been overdone. Our current prospects never
looked better. I have to say, based on objective valuation, we are
the biggest bargain in the stock market right now.”
There were tips spread by rumors about pending buyouts or
mergers. They were easily spread and passed along by the press,
often as scoops or exclusives.
There were also those who managed vast amounts of money
and honestly believed what they were saying and had put their
money where their mouths were. They had put up good hard cash
to back up their opinions, and they wanted the public to follow
suit. Like the old bucket-shop saying went, “The only way a stock
goes up is if some sucker buys it.”
Said Livermore to his son Paul: “I believe that the public wants
to be lead, to be instructed, to be told what to do. They want reassurance. They will always move en masse, a mob, a herd, a group,
because people want the safety of human company. They are afraid
to stand alone because they want to be safely included within the
herd, not to be the lone calf standing on the desolate, dangerous,
wolf-patrolled prairie of contrary opinion.
“This is where it gets slightly complicated because I always
wanted to trade along the line of least resistance, so I was generally
moving along with the crowd, the herd, most of the time. It was
when the change in trend started to appear, the change in market
direction, that was the most difficult change to catch and act upon.
So I was always hunting for the clues to the change. So I was
always ready to separate myself from the popular thinking, the
group thinking, and go the opposite way.
“It is the most difficult time in a speculator’s trading life. These
major changes in trends were hard to catch, but I did not want to

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 144

• 144 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

ride the sled downhill with the crowd, unless I had sold stocks
short.
“With this in mind, I developed two rules that I followed all the
time.
“First, do not be invested in the market all the time. There are
many times when I have been completely in cash, especially when
I was unsure of the direction of the market and waiting for a confirmation of the next move. Whenever I deduced that a change
was coming, and I wasn’t sure exactly when, or how severe the
change might be, I cashed in my positions and waited.
“Second, it is the change in the major trend that hurts most
speculators. They simply get caught invested in the wrong direction, on the wrong side of the market. To determine if I was right
in my appraisal, that a change in market trend was coming, I used
small position probes, placing small orders, either buy or sell,
depending on the direction of the trend change. I did this to test
the correctness of my judgment.
“There were other factors as well to mark the end of a major
market move. There was usually heavy volume, but the prices
stalled, they did not go up and make new highs on the leading
stocks. There was no strong continuation of the current move.
This was a clue, a warning. At the end of a market move it is usually pure distribution, as stocks go from strong hands to weak
hands, from the professionals to the public. It is deceptive to the
public who view this heavy volume as the mark of a vibrant,
healthy market going through a normal correction, not a top or a
bottom.
“I was always alert to look toward volume indications as a key
signal at the end of a major move, either in the entire market or an
individual stock. Also I observed that at the end of a long move, it
was not uncommon for stocks to suddenly spike up in a straight
shot with heavy volume and then stop, roll at the top, exhausted,

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 145

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 145 •

FIGURE 7.7 Capital One Financial Corporation, July 15, 1997 to
July 15, 1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

and then retreat, never to make a “new high” before the onslaught
of a major correction.*
“This last gasp of heavy volume also provides a great opportunity to sell out any illiquid large holdings. I knew it was foolish to
ever try to catch the tops or the bottoms of the moves. It is always
better to sell large holdings into an advancing market when there
is plenty of volume. The same is true on the short side; you are best
to cover the short position after a steep fast decline.
“Remember the most important thing to successful speculation
is to determine the direction of the line of least resistance. Put the
*Figure 7.7 provides an example. Capital One Financial’s terrific volume and
downward spike in early October 1998 shows a clear high-volume climax bottom that indicates the downward trend has changed. Volume is often a key confirming signal to indicate a change in direction.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 146

• 146 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

wind at your back and sail forward easily. Keep the wind out of
your face, and when the market hits the doldrums getting
nowhere, moving sideways, then get out, take a break, have some
fun, go fishing.
“Come back into the market when the wind has picked up
again, and the sailing is clear and good. Staying out of the action is
always difficult for an active trader, but I grew to know it was
essential at times to be out of the market. There is nothing more
important than your emotional balance.”
On October 5, 1923, in order to practice his new techniques and
theories, Livermore moved his offices uptown, from 111 Broadway to 730 Fifth Avenue, the Heckscher Building. He designed
the offices very carefully. He wanted to be away from the Wall
Street atmosphere, out of earshot of any tips. He also wanted to
gain more secrecy in his operations and more security, so that no
one would know his trades.
He hired Harry Edgar Dache as his assistant, a hulking bruiser
whose sheer size belied his intelligence. Dache had been in the
merchant marines and had traveled the globe many times. He
spoke six languages, including Latin. He was a voracious reader,
knowledgeable in many areas, and a terrific administrator. He ran
the office with secrecy and perfection. He was completely loyal to
Livermore and very protective. The boys loved Dache; Jesse Jr. and
Paul were enthralled with his magical stories of traveling the seven
seas. He was their unofficial tutor, chauffeur, companion and
bodyguard, especially when they went to Palm Beach.
There were no windows in the anteroom of Livermore’s new
offices, only a few chairs and Dache’s desk. Behind Dache was the
solid floor-to-ceiling door to Livermore’s private offices. There
were no signs or identification on any of the doors. When letting
someone in to see Livermore, Dache would always first confirm

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 147

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 147 •

the appointment by intercom. Then he would rise from his desk
and use his key to open the door for the visitor. It was a theatrical
ritual that Dache performed to show the visitor the difficulty in
gaining entrance to the inner sanctum of the great trader’s offices.
Behind the door was the massive open room with the green
chalkboard that ran the entire length of the room. At least four
markers would be working in silence, each covering a section of the
board and responsible for specific active stocks or commodities that
Livermore was trading or observing closely. Each marker wore headphones that connected to callers on the floor of the exchange, who
would call up the quotes on each individual stock transaction—
the bid, asked, and sold price. This gave Livermore an edge on the
ticker tape, which was usually delayed at least 15 minutes. Livermore
wanted the most current information he could get. He had learned
as a young man how important fresh quotes were.
If Livermore was active in several stocks or commodities, he
would often increase his staff on the chalkboard from four to six.
These markers would work all day on the catwalk in silence, only
taking a break for lunch, when they would usually be replaced by
Dache, so no quotes were lost. These board markers would always
track two or more stocks in the same group. If Livermore was trading General Motors, he would track Chrysler as well, to observe
the group action.
In the middle of the office was a massive conference table of
shiny mahogany with eight comfortable leather office armchairs.
On the rare occasions when Livermore had guests to his office, he
would always sit facing the chalkboard so he could watch the
quotes as he listened. Often he would break off the meeting to
enter his office and place trades in private.
Livermore’s private office was very large, with heavy paneling of
oak and mahogany. His desk was large, made out of highly polished mahogany. On his desk were in- and out-baskets, a pad and

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 148

• 148 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

pencil, and nothing else. The entire wall across from the great
mahogany desk was clear plate glass, so he could see the market
action on the board as it happened.
There were also three black telephones on his desk. One was a
direct wire to London, the second to Paris, and the third to the
floor of the Chicago grain pits. Livermore wanted first-hand, fresh
information, and he was willing to pay for it. He knew that wars
were won on information—intelligence—and that the general
with the best intelligence was the general most likely to win. He
wanted no “rumors of war”—he wanted specific, accurate information.
Paul Livermore, his son, would often come to this office as he
grew up, especially on his summer breaks. He would sometimes be
allowed to work the board. The board markers were trained to
work with a code. If a stock suddenly had a deep price fluctuation,
they would use a secret code to note this on the board. Only the
board crew and Livermore knew these codes. This was what Livermore later disclosed as his market key. On occasion, guests in the
office would ask, “J.L. what are those weird columns on the chalkboard, some kind of hieroglyphics?”
“They make perfect sense to me,” Livermore would respond.
“You wanna explain them to me?”
“No,” he would smile. “If I did, then you would be as smart as
I am.”
“Just tell me what to buy and sell and when. Keep it simple for
me.”
“You know I never recommend a stock, but I would be glad to
tell you whether I believe the market is going up or down.”
“It always goes up or down, J.L.”
“You’re right, of course, but the trick is when it is going to go
up or down.”

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 149

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 149 •

“And what’s going to go up or down, J.L. Don’t forget, it’s what
stocks are going to go up or down—that’s what we all want to
know. What stock will rise, and when.”
“Anyone who knows the general trend of the market should be
able to do well.”
“Whatever you say, J.L. Whatever you say.”
One day Livermore was sitting in his office talking to his son
Paul. “Turn around Paul, and look at the stock board,” Livermore
ordered. Paul turned and studied the markers as they moved on the
catwalk like well-choreographed dancers.
Livermore continued, “You see, son, those markings on that
board are as clear to me as a musical score is to a great conductor.
I see these symbols as alive, a rhythm, a pulse that makes beautiful
music. It all makes perfect sense to me.
“You see, son, for me the board is alive, like music. We are able
to communicate. It’s something that has come to me only after
years of hard work and practice, not unlike a great conductor of a
great orchestra. What I feel when I look at that board can’t be
shared, any more than a conductor could articulate what he feels
when he plays Mozart just the way it should be played. The board
and those men are playing a symphony to me, a symphony of
money that sings to me, that makes love to me, that envelops me
in its song.”
Paul studied his father and he believed every word. It was a rare
moment for Paul, to get so intimate with his father, who was so
private, stingy with his emotions, frugal with his love.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 150

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 151

*

chapter eight

*

Stock Pools and Scandals

The principles of successful stock speculation are based on the
supposition that people will continue in the future to make the
same mistakes that they have made in the past.
Thomas F. Woodlock

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 152

• 152 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE LOVED TO PLAY CARDS, ESPECIALLY BRIDGE.

He played a high-stakes game of bridge every Monday night at his
home in Great Neck. He would invite his neighbors, Walter
Chrysler and Alfred Sloan, and usually his good friend Harry
Aronhson, a silk merchant who lived in New York. Aronhson was
extremely rich, and he loved to watch Livermore and his raids.
Once in a great while he would participate in a raid, as well. He
would go to Livermore’s offices and sit in silence, just watching
the great trader at work.
One day Livermore got a call at his office from Ely Culbertson,
the world champion bridge player.
“Mr. Livermore, I understand you are quite a bridge player,”
Culbertson said.
“We play a friendly game once in a while. We’re not in your
class, Mr. Culbertson.”
“Please call me Ely.”
“Well then, call me J.L.”
“I had a favor to ask you. I have been told you are very skilled
with numbers, and I wondered if you could figure out some probabilities for me. You know, the probabilities for certain finesses to
work and certain point counts, the probabilities of making a game
with certain card point counts, things like that.”
“Well, Ely, give me the problems, and I’ll see what I can do.”
Culbertson spent the next 30 minutes outlining his questions to
Livermore, who took specific notes. One week later, he called
Culbertson back and read off his answers. Culbertson was
impressed. Livermore invited him to join their game on Monday
nights.
“I’m afraid your games are too rich for me, J.L.”
There was a silence. “Look, don’t worry about the money,
whoever has you for a partner will cover the bet for your team,
you can keep the money if your team wins. We just would all
