
218
FIGURE 5.1

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Markets Have Only Two Phases: Horizontal and Vertical

Vertical
through
Price
Horizontal through Time

Technical Analysis Is Simple in Theory—Difﬁcult
in Practice

Ask almost anyone, “What can a market do?” and you’ll most often hear,
“Markets can only move up, down, or sideways.” In teaching technical analysis to market professionals worldwide, we further simplify this by saying
that market movements are displayed in charts in only one of two mutually
exclusive phases: horizontal and vertical.
Markets move either horizontally through time—or vertically through
price (up or down)—but never both simultaneously like in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Yet, as simple as this is, one of the most common sources of trading losses—and
therefore among the greatest risks to traders and market participants—is
simply being on the wrong side of a market that’s rapidly moving higher
or lower through vertical price levels. It is a market that is already moving
vertically and fast through price while seeking supply at higher and higher
price levels—or one that is unloading supply at lower and lower price levels.
Basically, it is an interim trending market versus a nontrending market.
As such, two of the biggest risks and costs in trading are:
1. Simply being on the wrong side of a market phase
2. Using the wrong trading tactics for the phase that the market is in
We have to ask, though: If the majority of a trader’s losses come from simply being on the wrong side of the market, why does this occur so frequently
despite well-deﬁned trading rules? One must question even simple rules such
as: “The trend is your friend—until the end,” or “In an uptrend, buy higher
price pivot lows; in a downtrend short lower price pivot highs.”
We know for certain that there are no certainties in the market, only
probabilities. And we can use simple probability concepts to enhance our
trading. For example, we can say that when a market is in an uptrend, the
lower-probability trade would be to stay away from the short side. At a purely

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.2

219

Keep Things Simple: In an Uptrend, Don’t Be Short; in a Downtrend, Don’t

Be Long

foundational level the technical analysis method we teach states: “The highest
possible high-probability trade starts with the mind-set and very basic rules
of: In an uptrend, don’t be short; in a downtrend, don’t be long.”
In sequence, the three rules are actually this simple:
1. Determine which side of the market has a very low or near-zero chance of
prevailing.
2. Eliminate that side of the market from consideration.
3. From the remaining two sides, start looking for entries and if none are
available, don’t take the trade—or reserve the trade idea for better timing
or other technical considerations later.
We can take this one step further and narrow the possibilities to a single
choice (see Table 5.1).
But as humans—and despite the plethora of trading rules, tactics, methods, and superb literature on technical analysis—market participants have
a natural propensity to succumb to perceptual blindness that comes from a
variety of cognitive biases, such as:
r Selection bias
r Expectation bias
r Attention bias
r Retention bias
r Distinction bias
r Proﬁciency bias
r Conﬁrmation bias
r Hindsight bias

220

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

TABLE 5.1

Narrow Choices Down to the Highest-Probability Single Event

Eliminated from Consideration

If Market Is. . .

Only Allowable Trading Tactics*

Long side

Sideways

Only short highs in the range

Downtrending

Only short lower price pivot highs

Uptrending

Only buy higher price pivot lows

Downtrending

Only short lower price pivot highs

Sideways

Only buy lows in the range

Uptrending

Only buy higher price pivot lows

Sideways

Short side

*Only allowable trading tactics other than standing aside—which is often the best choice.

r Negativity bias
r Outcome bias
r Distinction bias
r Focusing effect

As human market participants, it often happens that we tend to see
what we want to see and react based on limited information, while ignoring
information that would prevent us from even considering a trade premise. In
other words, more information is actually available, but we see only the factors
that conﬁrm what we are looking for. Warning signs may be in the charts but
because of our bias (our perceptual blindness) we ignore the warning signs
and go with our gut feelings, which are hardly objective.
Discretionary traders have more than just their perceptual blindness to
overcome. They have dozens and dozens of human factors to contend with
that automated strategy trading simply doesn’t face, such as those listed in
Figure 5.3.
On the other hand, our minds have an amazing power to help us bring
order out of chaos. Consider the following example:
I cnduo’t bvleiee taht I culod aulaclty uesdtannrd waht I was rdnaieg. Unisg
the icndeblire pweor of the hmuan mnid, aocdcrnig to rseecrah at Cmabrigde
Uinervtisy, it dseno’t mttaer in waht oderr the lterets in a wrod are, the olny
irpoamtnt tihng is taht the frsit and lsat ltteer be in the rhgit pclae. The
rset can be a taotl mses and you can sitll raed it whoutit a pboerlm. Tihs is
bucseae the huamn mnid deos not raed ervey ltteer byistlef, but the wrod as
a wlohe. Ins’t that aaznmig?

Somewhere between our inherent human limitations and the amazing
power of our minds lies the answer. Our minds do have the ability to make

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.3

221

Human Traders Face a Myriad of Obstacles That Automated Trading Is Not

Prone To

order out of chaos and, in the trading realm, that means converting random
market generated data into actionable information. We understand these naturally occurring human facets well and have bridged the limitations gap by
developing automated strategy trading systems to overcome them. And we
have supplemented these systems with adaptive trading and training methods
for discretionary traders that harness the natural power of the human mind.
Rules-Based Trading: Automated Strategy Trading
versus Discretionary Trading

Automated strategy trading systems overcome human trading limitations
because:
r They are mostly driven by market technicals, not fundamentals.
r They are entirely rules based—and they don’t break rules.
r They are risk managed with very speciﬁc and objective entry, trade man-

agement, and exit criteria.

222

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

r And most important, the computers running automated trading systems

don’t question rules or develop biases of their own: they simply do what
they are instructed to do—which is a characteristic desired by all market
participants.
Our experience in prop trading shows us that simplifying the process of
turning massive amounts of trading data into simple, rules-based, actionable
information allows market participants to focus on what matters most. We
break this information into three categories:
1. The past: A clear distillation and read of the past and how price, and
therefore traders, respond to key areas in the chart.
2. The present: Insight into the immediate present and what price is trying
to do (go higher, lower, stall, etc.), and whether it is succeeding at doing
that.
3. The future: A glimpse into high-probability price movements and scenarios of the future by forecasting what the crowd is likely to do if and when
certain price levels and/or key reference areas are hit.
In our training and development of discretionary traders, we decided that
we needed to drastically simplify what we taught and how we taught—to get
traders to mimic as closely as possible the inherent rules-based methodologies
that are the backbone of automated strategy trading, thereby overcoming the
inherent limitations common to so many traders. We knew in our hearts
that if we could get traders to eliminate the very obvious 10–20 percent of
trades where they are clearly on the wrong side of the market, then we could
take unproﬁtable traders to breakeven, breakeven traders to proﬁtable, and
proﬁtable traders to even greater heights—and at a lower overall cost, due to
fewer yet higher-quality executions.
Balance versus Imbalance: Distinguishing the Two
Phases of Market Activity

Our training methodology at TAS Professional starts with a very basic premise:
markets are very simple in the sense that they have only two repeatable but
mutually exclusive price movements in any particular timeframe: horizontal
and vertical (see Figure 5.4 and 5.5).
Horizontal markets are supply balanced and move slowly through a relatively narrow price range over time, accommodating the needs of both buyers
and sellers. And vertical markets are supply imbalanced and move rapidly

223

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.4

Markets Move Either Horizontally through Time or Vertically through Price

Vertical
through
Price

Horizontal through Time

• Supply is balanced here, as it is

• Supply is imbalanced here, and

meeting the needs of all traders
in this timeframe.

cannot meet the needs of all
traders in this timeframe.

• Balanced markets are an
expression of time dimension.

• Imbalanced markets are an
expression of price dimension.

through price levels, favoring either buyers or sellers—not both. Following is
a list of synonyms for these two states or phases of market activity:

Horizontal
Sideways
Nontrending
Nondirectional
Balanced
Rotational
Consolidation
Efﬁcient
Nonrandom
Range-bound
Bracketing
Overlapping value
Price-controlled
Constrained by liquidity
Moving through time
Slow
Boring

Vertical
Sloping
Trending
Directional
Imbalanced
Nonrotational
Nonconsolidation
Inefﬁcient
Random
Non-range-bound
Nonbracketing
Nonoverlapping value
Non-price-controlled
Unconstrained by liquidity
Moving through price
Fast
Exciting

224
FIGURE 5.5

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
A Sideways, Nontrending Market Segment

These horizontal and vertical market components are the “building
blocks” of all markets. They are building blocks in the sense that, because
the two phases are mutually exclusive, when a market is trading in one of the
phases, we know what’s next: the other phase. We say that balance leads to
imbalance—and back to balance again. We know that a slow, low-volatility,
horizontal movement will be followed by a relatively fast, higher volatility,
vertical movement, and that a fast, higher-volatility, vertical market will eventually lead back to a slower, horizontal market.
There Are Only Three Market Segments: Nontrending,
Uptrending, and Downtrending

All markets are composed of three technical components: nontrending, uptrending, and downtrending segments. Each segment has a speciﬁc deﬁnition
and speciﬁc trading tactics. In a simple sense, properly identifying the segment, then applying the proper trading or analysis techniques on the segment,
produces the highest-probability outcome.

Trading Horizontal Markets: The Sideways, Nontrend
The formal deﬁnition of a sideways, nontrending market is a market that is
exhibiting two or more relatively equal price pivot highs and price pivot lows
(Figure 5.6), as follows:
This is a market that is constrained by liquidity on both the supply and
demand sides and, hence, the market trades within a relatively narrow range
when compared to its vertical and trending counterpart.
We trade sideways, nontrending markets as follows:
r Long: Buy only the price pivot lows of the range if you have a higher-

timeframe long bias.

r Short: Sell/short only the price pivot highs of the range if you have a

higher-timeframe short bias.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.6

225

Trade Nontrending Markets by Buying Lows, Shorting Highs—or Both

r Long and short: Buy the price pivot lows and short the price pivot highs if

you are undecided or ambivalent about the higher timeframe.
Note: Obviously, there are many variations to trading all markets and
trends. What we are trying to distinguish here is that, since there are only three
trends (up, down, and sideways) but only two basic movements (horizontal
versus vertical), the trading tactics for these two movements are decisively
different.
As we will discuss, the TAS PRO Indicator SuiteTM allows market participants to quickly and easily distinguish between these two market phases and
to make high-probability decisions about a market based on market structure
and market dynamics. And since the majority of market calls and losing trades
occur by simply being on the wrong side of the market, accurately knowing
which phase a market is in and improving trading odds by decisively eliminating one side of the market from consideration are paramount to making
better decisions and improving market calls—immediately.

Trading Vertical Markets: The Uptrend
The formal deﬁnition of an uptrend is a market that is exhibiting a series
(two or more) of higher price pivot lows and higher price pivot highs (see
Figure 5.7).
FIGURE 5.7

A Vertical, Uptrending Market Segment

226
FIGURE 5.8

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
A Vertical, Downtrending Market Segment

This is a market that is unconstrained by liquidity in that more and more
buying volume and/or buyers are coming into the market. Therefore, we
typically have higher odds trading in the direction of the ﬂow of capital
(going long) as opposed to going against it (shorting this market).
We trade uptrends by buying consecutively higher price pivot lows.
Note: Shorting the price pivot highs—fading the uptrend—is a comparatively lower-odds trade, albeit a trading tactic that many skilled traders use
to their advantage.

Trading Vertical Markets: The Downtrend
The formal deﬁnition of a downtrend is a market that is exhibiting a series (two or more) lower price pivot highs and lower price pivot lows (see
Figure 5.8).
This is a market that is unconstrained by liquidity in that more and more
selling volume and/or sellers are coming into the market. Therefore, we have
higher odds trading in the direction of the ﬂow of capital (going short) as
opposed to going against the downtrend by buying this market.
We trade downtrends by shorting lower price pivot highs.
Note: Buying the price pivot lows—fading the downtrend—is a comparatively lower-odds trade, albeit a trading tactic that many skilled traders use
to their advantage.

Relative Balance Leads to Relative Imbalance
Each mutually exclusive horizontal and vertical market segment of balance
and imbalance repeats in an endless ebb and ﬂow, as Figure 5.9 illustrates.
As we have seen, each of these three market components has decisively
different trading tactics. Therefore, success in trading and market analysis
is dependent on knowing with near-certainty which one of the three market components a market is exhibiting. Having knowledge, experience, and
incisive trading tools is a start.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.9

227

Relative Balance Leads to Relative Imbalance—and Vice Versa
Balance

Balance

Imbalance
Imbalance

Balance

But if we are looking to get long a market and wait for the market to
actually exhibit an uptrend, we will have often missed the lower volatility,
lower-risk trading opportunity by the time the uptrend ﬁts the formal deﬁnition. Remember, to be considered an uptrend, we need at least two higher
price pivot lows and highs. And in our previous discussion, we stated that we
often get only what we are looking for, so if we are looking for uptrends to
get long, many things look like an uptrend but may in fact not ﬁt the formal
deﬁnition. How do we resolve these issues?
We resolve these issues with a simple logic premise: rather than look
for the beginnings of or conﬁrmation of a new phase, we look for clues
that a current stage is coming to an end. For example, rather than look
for the beginning clues of an uptrend or a much later (and higher-priced)
conﬁrmation of an uptrend, we teach our traders to look for the potential end
of current horizontal movement. Or, rather than look for a horizontal market
movement (which we know will take at least two relatively equal price pivot
lows and highs), we teach our traders how to identify the potential end of a
current vertical move.
To understand what some of the market’s ending-phase clues are, we need
to move from our line-chart illustrations to bar charts for the moment. In
bar format, markets leave clues about which phase they are in, based on bar
formations. (See Figure 5.10.)

228

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 5.10

Each Market Component Leaves Unmistakable and Revealing Clues

Slow, Overlapping Bars

Slow, Overlapping Bars

Fast, Nonoverlapping
Bars Down

Fast, Nonoverlapping
Bars Up

Slow, Overlapping Bars

Typically, in balanced markets:
r The bars are trading within a well-deﬁned range.
r The bars are also relatively narrow range in amplitude.
r Throughout the horizontal range, the bars tend to overlap each other.
r As discussed, the movement slowly churns through time.

Contrast the foregoing characteristics with bars that are moving vertically
once price breaks out of a horizontal range:
r The bars are relatively wider in range (low to high).
r There is very little overlap between bars.
r The open of each new bar tends to coincide with the close of the prior bar.
r As discussed, the movement rapidly moves through price levels (either up

or down).
Four Market Participants—and Then a Fifth . . .

The essence of what causes these two disparate market segment formations has
to do with how supply is rationed. In a balanced market, supply is rationed
between the crowd of both buyers and sellers who are able to transact at
nearly the same price levels. However, each group of traders in these rangebound markets has a slightly different agenda. Let’s consider the example of a
range-bound and narrowing market that breaks out, as shown in Figure 5.11.

229

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.11

Market Participants Have Different Agendas and Respond/React for

Different Reasons
(5)
NB
PS
(4)
NB
PS

(3)
NB
PS

(2)
NB
PS

(1)
NB
PS
TL

(4)
PB
NS

(3)
PB
NS

(2)
PB
NS

(1)
PB
NS

(5)
PB
NS

(6)
PB
NS

There are four primary market participants stacked up in this horizontal
formation (refer to Figure 5.11).
1. PB—Professional buyers who are correctly buying the lows of the range.
2. PS—Professional sellers who are correctly selling the highs of the range.
3. NS—Nonprofessional (novice) sellers who are shorting the lows in anticipation of a breakdown.
4. NB—Nonprofessional (novice) buyers who are buying the highs of the
range in anticipation of a breakout.
As the horizontal formation develops sideways, competition among the
four participants increases: both professional buyers and sellers are entering
sooner and sooner at higher and lower prices, respectively. And both novice
buyers’ and sellers’ hopes are increasing over time because of the amount of
time they had to endure after buying price pivot highs in a range, only to
watch the market immediately go lower—or shorting price pivot lows in a
range, only to watch the market immediately go higher.

230

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Over time, this increasingly competitive buying and selling narrows the
range to the point of diminishing opportunity because even the most perfectly
placed buy or sell within the range has no range left within which to move.
Throughout this development, volume also tends to decrease as the activity
tapers off.
Then an event occurs in the market—perhaps a large buyer enters the
market or a news event is announced—that causes the market to break to one
side or the other, in the case of this example, to the upside. What happens on
the breakout is of particular interest.
r PB—Professional buyers who are now net positive, add to their existing

positions.

r PS—Professional sellers who shorted the highs have the tightest stops—and

buy to cover their positions.

r NB—Nonprofessional buyers who anticipated the breakout breathe a sigh

of relief that the formation didn’t break down—but they tend not to add to
their positions.
r NS—Nonprofessional sellers are caught off guard and scramble to exit their
positions at any cost by buying to cover, typically placing market orders in
panic.
Lastly, notice the sequence in which these events occur: numbered left
to right, as each prior pivot high is exceeded, each of the four groups responds/reacts in kind. The most remarkable part of this breakout is what is
signiﬁcant: all (or most) of the volume in this timeframe moves to one side
of the market; in this example, to the upside. And then as each successive
prior pivot high is exceeded, more buying volume accumulates as short stops
are hit and more new buyers, who were not originally positioned (the “ﬁfth
players”) in the move, are following the move up. It is this accumulating and
increasing buying that causes the increasingly wider-range bars to form.
Since the vertical movement is fast, being on the wrong side of a vertical
move is especially costly since the wrong-sided trade is going against the major
ﬂow of capital.
This ﬁve-player event is endlessly repeated in all markets and in all timeframes. From a technical analysis standpoint, this is a fairly straightforward
market event. Yet again, it begs the question: If this is such a common occurrence and the dynamics of this transitional phase-to-phase event are so well
known, why do so many market professionals get it wrong?
We have exhaustively researched and studied this issue in our own discretionary and propriety trading. To manage trading risk, get market participants

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

231

on the right side of market movements, and overcome market participants’
propensities toward bias and other psychological factors that cause them to
R
, Auction Market
break simple rules, we use principles of Market Proﬁle
Theory, plus volume and volatility analysis to clearly illuminate which of
the two phases a market is in and then adjust analysis and trading tactics
accordingly.
Market Proﬁle

All market activity can be expressed in terms of horizontal or vertical activity
and, during transition from one phase to the next, it is sometimes a combination of both. To what extent either horizontal or vertical movement prevails
determines our response in terms of analysis and trading, as follows:
r More vertical and less horizontal calls for trading a trend.
r More horizontal and less vertical calls for trading a rotation.
