
Download at www.wowebook.com

412

Part V Trend Confirmation

In markets where considerable arbitrage exists, volume statistics can sometimes be misleading. For example, arbitrage between two differently dated commodity contracts can cause
volume figures in each to be distorted due to the arbitrage and not the price trend. This arbitrage
problem in volume statistics is particularly troublesome in the stock market where there is not
only arbitrage against index futures markets, but also arbitrage between baskets, ETFs, and
options. This arbitrage is known as “program trading,” and as of 2010, it accounted for approximately 25%–50% of all traded volume on the New York Stock Exchange each day. In the heavily traded stocks included in averages and widely owned by institutions, large levels of volume
may thus be due simply to arbitrage trades and not the trend direction or strength. Any analyst
using these volume figures for these actively traded stocks must be aware of this potential problem in analysis.
Indeed, one criticism of program trading voiced by professional traders is that it distorts the information typically provided by trading volume. As our analysis here suggests, introducing trading volume unrelated to the underlying information structure
would surely weaken the ability of uninformed traders to interpret market information accurately. (Blume, Easley, and O’Hara, 1994, p. 178)

How Is Volume Portrayed?
Analysts display volume on a price chart in many ways. Some analysts like to see the volume statistics separately from the price statistics. Others have developed means of integrating volume
data into the price chart.
Bar/Candle
The most common portrayal of volume is a vertical bar representing the total amount of volume
for that period at the bottom of the price chart. A chart showing daily price data, for example,
would show the volume for each day in a vertical bar below the price bar. Figure 18.2 shows volume statistics for Apple Computer using this method. This method is simple and assumes no
direct relationship between price and volume. It just displays the data.
Equivolume
Many attempts have been made to integrate volume directly into a bar chart. Gartley (1935) mentions how traders before 1900 would record on a chart a vertical bar for every 100 shares traded
at a certain price. For example, if 300 shares traded at a certain price, traders would record three
bars at that price. A wide number of bars at a certain price showed that the majority of activity
took place at that price. From this chart, traders could determine the price at which supply and
demand were equalized and, thus, the support and resistance zones.
The first published service using a combination of price and volume was the Trendograph
service by Edward S. Quinn (Bollinger, 2002; Gartley, 1935). Quinn produced charts using a bar
for the high and low each day separated by a horizontal distance based on volume traded during
the day. More recently, Richard W. Arms, Jr. (1998) designed, utilized, and reported “Equivolume” charts. These are available in some of the current charting software programs.

Download at www.wowebook.com

413

Chapter 18 Confirmation

275.00

AAPL-Apple Computer

270.00
265.00
260.00
255.00
250.00
245.00
240.00
235.00

40,000,000

Volume

30,000,000
20,000,000
17

24

Jun

7

14

21

28 Jul

12

19

26

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.2

Price and volume (AAPL daily: May 10, 2010–July 21, 2010)

Arms’ method widens the vertical price bar into a rectangle and, thus, widens the horizontal axis in proportion to the volume traded during the same period. For an example of an Equivolume shape, see Figure 18.3. The Equivolume chart resembles a regular bar chart except that the
bars vary in width. Thus, wide bars portray large volume, and thin rectangles portray thin volume. The horizontal axis of the entire chart adjusts accordingly.
Arms first interpreted the Equivolume charts by considering the rectangular shapes displaying the price range by the height of the rectangle and volume by the width. For example,
after a strong upward trend, the formation of a box shape or flat rectangle suggested little price
motion but heavy volume. This would indicate that the trend was meeting some heavy resistance.
Arms also found that the standard patterns used in bar chart analysis also occur in Equivolume
charts, and interestingly, trend lines and channel lines appeared to work as well. One would think
that a trend line was totally price- and time-related in a bar chart, but Arms demonstrated that
trend lines in price-to-volume also occur.
More recently, with the introduction of picturesque candlestick charts, some services have
adopted the principles of Equivolume to include open, close, shadows, colors, and indications of
direction. (An example is the charts used in www.incrediblecharts.com.) These charts have the
same rectangular appearance as the Equivolume charts but include other factors. Their interpretation is similar to Equivolume interpretation. The same trends, formations, and support and
resistance levels as displayed in regular bar charts are visible.

Download at www.wowebook.com

414

Part V Trend Confirmation

Equivolume Shapes
Power
Narrow

Square

Oversquare

Easy
movement

Difficult
movement

Strong
commitment
from both sides

Strong
commitment
by one side

Source: www.incrediblecharts.com
FIGURE 18.3

Equivolume style chart

Point-and-Figure
Point-and-figure charts, by their nature, do not include volume. This omission has forced pointand-figure analysts who believe that volume is important to find ways to integrate volume statistics into each point-and-figure box, usually through symbols or colors. The standard method is to
sum the volume that took place while each box was in effect and portray it on the chart. From
this, the analyst can quickly visualize where volume occurred in the formation. The individual
analyst using the method must determine whether this information is helpful. A purist in pointand-figure would argue that volume is unimportant because the price action implies it.

Do Volume Statistics Contain Valuable Information?
Academic papers using volume to confirm technical trading rules are rare. Most academic papers
on volume are concerned with bid-ask spreads and intraday trading versus option trading. The
intraday spread has been of interest because it is a cost of trading that has not been well quantified. Studies in this sector arose out of the legal requirement of institutions to measure the effectiveness (“best execution”) of their traders and the brokerage firms that handled their orders. The
difference between best execution and the execution received is a cost above the commission and
slippage cost. Often, institutions traded through firms that did not receive the best execution but
provided research and other benefits to the institution. The legal question was, should the customer of the institution pay an extra cost for execution through a firm that did not receive the best
execution? Determining the best execution then became a major area of study that remains relatively unanswered today.
Intraday trading relative to option trading was of interest to those attempting to explain
why option prices lagged behind stock prices.

Download at www.wowebook.com

415

Chapter 18 Confirmation

Stock buyer-initiated volume (that which transacts at the ask) minus seller-initiated
volume (that which transacts at the bid) has strong predictive ability for subsequent
stock and option returns, but call or put net-buy volume has little predictive ability.
(Chan, Chung, and Fong, 2002)
Finally, studies done on daily volume and subsequent price action came to the conclusion
that volume statistics had valuable information.
Where we believe our results are most interesting is in delineating the important role
played by volume. In our model, volume provides information in a way distinct from
that provided by price …. Because the volume statistic is not normally distributed, if
traders condition on volume, they can sort out the information implicit in volume
from that implicit in price. We have shown that volume plays a role beyond simply
being a descriptive parameter of the trading process. (Blume, Easley, and O’Hara,
1994, p. 177)

How Are Volume Statistics Used?
Volume indicators and signals are usually derived not from volume itself, but from a change in
volume. Volume by itself may be a measure of liquidity in a security, but it is not helpful for price
analysis. Volume is usually different in every security, based on factors beyond the ability for the
security to rise and fall. For example, at the end of 2005, average daily volume for Wal-Mart was
around 15 million shares. The average daily volume for Coca-Cola was only about half of that.
The term “volume” used in conjunction with indicators and technical signals really refers to
change in volume. We also use that convention.
How should a change in volume be interpreted? These general rules date back to the work
of H. M. Gartley in 1935:
1. When prices are rising:
a. Volume increasing is impressive.
b. Volume decreasing is questionable.
2. When prices are declining:
a. Volume increasing is impressive.
b. Volume decreasing is questionable.
3. When a price advance halts with high volume, it is potentially a top.
4. When a price decline halts with high volume, it is potentially a bottom.
In other words, price change on high volume tends to occur in the direction of the trend,
and price change on low volume tends to occur on corrective price moves. Higher volume is usually necessary in an advance because it demonstrates active and aggressive interest in owning the
stock. However, higher volume is not necessary in a decline; prices can decline because of a lack
of interest and, thus, potential buyers in the stock, resulting in relatively light volume.

Download at www.wowebook.com

416

Part V Trend Confirmation

As in all technical indicators, exceptions to the preceding rules can occur. These rules are
only guides. Bulkowski, in his analysis of chart patterns, for example, found many profitable
instances of patterns breaking out on low volume rather than the traditionally expected high volume. Larry Williams has reported on short-term studies of volume accompanying advances and
declines and found little or no correlation. In a study of price-volume crossover patterns, Kaufman and Chaikin (1991) demonstrated that the prevailing wisdom is not always born out by fact.
In a price-volume crossover chart, price closes within short trends are plotted on the vertical axis,
and corresponding volume is plotted on the horizontal axis. Lines are drawn connecting these
successive points, and when the lines cross, a crossover has occurred. Thus, the charts display the
sequence of rising or falling price versus rising or falling volume. Kaufman and Chaikin found,
for example, that rising volume in an advance was not necessarily positive, and that declines
could occur on both rising and declining volume.
Nevertheless, we look at specific examples in the indicator descriptions next. We will see
that volume is a secondary indicator to price analysis, and that though it is not always consistent,
it can often be useful as a warning of trend change, especially on any sharp increases. As always,
one must thoroughly test each assumption made about volume characteristics. The correlations
between signals and price are not reliable enough to be absolute rules, and using the traditional
rules too strictly can often lead to incorrect conclusions about price action.

Which Indexes and Oscillators Incorporate Volume?
Let us look at some specific examples of indicators that analysts use when looking at volume as
a confirming indicator. These indicators are divided principally into two categories: indexes and
oscillators.
Volume-Related Indexes
Technical analysts have developed a number of volume related indexes. On-Balance-Volume is
probably the most well known of these.
On-Balance-Volume (OBV)
On-Balance-Volume (OBV) is the granddaddy of all volume indexes. Joseph Granville proposed
OBV in his 1976 book, A New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing for Maximum Profit. The
daily data that is cumulated into the index is the volume for the day adjusted for the direction of
the price change from the day before. Thus, it is the total daily volume added to the previous day
index if the price close was higher and subtracted from the previous day index if the price close
was lower than that of the previous day. This index is a cumulative sum of the volume data and is
plotted on a daily price chart. Figure 18.4 shows what a plot of OBV volume looks like.

Download at www.wowebook.com

417

Chapter 18 Confirmation

230.00

AAPL-Apple Computer
220.00

210.00
2
200.00

1

190.00

500,000,000.00
2

OBV-On Balance Volume

350,000,000.00
200,000,000.00

1
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

The idea behind the OBV index is simply that high volume in one direction and low volume in the opposite
direction should confirm the price trend. If high volume is not confirming the price trend, then light volume in
the price trend direction and heavy volume in the opposite direction suggests an impending reversal. Observing the OBV line by itself, therefore, is not helpful, but observing its trend and its action relative to price action
is. For example, in a trending market, when prices reach a new high, confirmation of the price strength comes
when the OBV also reaches a new high. If the OBV does not reach a new high and confirm price strength, negative divergence has occurred, warning that the price advance may soon reverse downward. A negative divergence suggests that volume is not expanding with the price rise.

FIGURE 18.4 On-Balance-Volume (AAPL daily: October 1, 2009–March 26, 2010)

How can the OBV be used in prices that are in a consolidation pattern or trading range
rather than trending? When prices are in a trading range and the OBV breaks its own support or
resistance, the break often indicates the direction in which the price breakout will occur. Therefore, it gives an early warning of breakout direction from a price pattern.
Let us look a little more closely at Figure 18.4. At the beginning of the chart, prices seem
to be in a trading range. Then, notice how a positive divergence developed at Marker 1. The low
in the OBV did not confirm the new low in price. At Marker 2, the OBV broke above its entire
trading range while price broke upward from a small pennant. The OBV thus confirmed the
breakout that later formed a runaway gap and a large price rise. The “seeds” to that price rise
were sown with the OBV breakout. Finally, notice that after Marker 2, each successive high in
price was accompanied by an equivalent new high in the OBV, continuing to confirm the upward
price trend.

Download at www.wowebook.com

418

Part V Trend Confirmation

Price and Volume Trend
Another way of calculating a combination of price and volume is to determine daily the percentage price change, up or down, times the total volume for the day. This figure is then cumulated
into an index called the price-volume trend. This index will be more heavily impacted when large
percentage price changes occur on heavy volume. Signals are triggered in the same manner as for
the OBV.
In Figure 18.5, notice that this method, using the same data as Figure 18.4, shows the
price-volume trend confirming only after the upward gap breakout in March. Indeed, this method
in this case merely tracks the price changes and shows little in the way of signals of impending
trend change.

235.00

AAPL-Apple Computer

225.00
215.00
205.00
195.00
185.00

2,000,000.00
0.00
-2,000,000.00

price volume trend
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.5 Price Volume Trend (AAPL daily: October 1, 2009–April 1, 2010)

Williams Variable Accumulation Distribution (WVAD)
Larry Williams believes that the open and close prices are the most important price of the day.
The Williams Variable Accumulation Distribution (WVAD) calculates the difference between
the close and the open and relates it to the range as a percentage. For example, if a stock opened
at its low price of the day and closed at its high price of the day, this percentage would be 100%.
The other extreme would be if a stock opened at P1, moved higher (or lower) during trading, but
returned to close at P1, then the percentage would be 0%. This percentage is then multiplied by
the daily volume to estimate the amount of volume traded between the open and close.

Download at www.wowebook.com

419

Chapter 18 Confirmation

The new volume figure is then added or subtracted from the previous day WVAD and
drawn on a price chart. It can also be converted into a moving average or oscillator. Interpretation
of the WVAD is identical to the other volume indexes.
Accumulation Distribution (AD)
In 1975, financial newspapers no longer published the opening prices of stocks. Marc Chaikin,
using the Williams WVAD formula as a base, created the Accumulation Distribution (AD) index
that uses the high, low, and close prices each day. The basic figure determines where within the
daily price range the close occurs in the formula:
Volume × ([close – low] – [high – close]) / (high – low)
Thus, if the close occurs above its midpoint for the day, the result will be a positive number, called accumulation. Conversely, a negative number occurs when a stock closes below its
midpoint for the day, and distribution is said to occur. Each daily figure is then cumulated into an
index similar to the OBV, and the same general rules of divergences apply.
Figure 18.6 shows a plot of the AD index using Chaikin’s formula. The trend was generally
downward during the large consolidation period but then suddenly turned upward and broke
above a lengthy trend line. This index tends to form trends and channels. The signal breakthrough anticipated the later upward break to a new high by six days.

230.00

AAPL-Apple Computer
220.00

210.00

200.00

190.00

160,000,000.00
100,000,000.00
40,000,000.00
Chaikin AD Index
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.6 Chaikin Accumulation Distribution (AAPL daily: March 1, 2009–March 26, 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

420

Part V Trend Confirmation

Williams Accumulation Distribution (WAD)
Not to be confused with the earlier Williams Variable Accumulation Distribution (WVAD) or
Chaikin’s Accumulation Distribution (AD), the Williams Accumulation Distribution (WAD) also
eliminates the use of the open price no longer reported in the financial newspapers. This indicator uses the concept of True Range that J. Welles Wilder developed during the same general
period.
The True Range uses the previous day’s close as a benchmark and avoids the problems that
arise when a price gaps between days. The calculations for the True Range high and low are
based on a comparison. The True Range high, for example, is either the current day’s high or the
previous day’s close, whichever is higher. The True Range low is either the current day’s low or
the previous day’s close, whichever is lower.
In the WAD, accumulation occurs on days in which the close is greater than the previous
day’s close; the price move on these days is calculated as the difference between the current day
close and the True Range low. Distribution occurs on a day when the close is less than the previous day’s close; the price move on these days is the difference between the current day close and
the True Range high, which will result in a negative number. Each price move is multiplied by
the volume for the respective day, and the resulting figures are cumulated into an index, the
WAD.1
Volume-Related Oscillators
Unlike indexes, volume-related oscillators are somewhat bounded. When an oscillator
approaches the upper bound, an overbought condition occurs; when it approaches the lower
bound, an oversold condition occurs. Oscillators are especially useful during trading ranges.
Volume Oscillator
The volume oscillator is the simplest of all oscillators. It is merely the ratio between two moving
averages of volume. Its use is to determine when volume is expanding or contracting. Expanding
volume implies strength to the existing trend, and contracting volume implies weakness in the
existing trend. It is, thus, useful as a confirmation indicator for trend and for giving advanced
warning in a range or consolidation formation of the direction of the next breakout. For example,
if within the range, the oscillator rises during small advances and declines during small declines,
it suggests that the eventual breakout will be upward.
Let us look at Figure 18.7. Like volume itself, the volume oscillator should confirm the
price trend. In this example, the oscillator confirmed the price trend until November (the period
marked 1). Then this relationship broke down, and volume failed to confirm the upward trend.
From marked period 2 until March, a declining oscillator accompanied each subsequent price
rally, and a rising oscillator accompanied each price decline. This series of divergences was a
warning that the stock trend was no longer healthy. Finally, at the period marked 3, the oscillator
confirmed the price rally. This signaled that a new upward trend had begun. As you can see, the

1. Steven B. Achelis introduced a variation of the WAD in this book, Technical Analysis from A to Z (2001). This variation eliminates the multiplication by volume and is thus not a volume index but a price index. Achelis’s variation is often
incorrectly identified in software programs on price indicators as the Williams Accumulation Distribution.

Download at www.wowebook.com

421

Chapter 18 Confirmation

relationship between volume and trend is longer-term and not something that is useful for
trading.

235.00

AAPL-Apple Computer

225.00
215.00
205.00
195.00
3

2

1

185.00
6,000.000.00
2,183.910.32
-2,000.000.00
-6,000.000.00

volume oscillator
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.7 Volume oscillator (AAPL daily: October 1, 2009–April 1, 2010)

Chaikin Money Flow
The Chaikin Money Flow is an oscillator that uses the (Chaikin) AD calculation for each day. It
is calculated by summing the ADs over the past 21 days and dividing that sum by the total volume over the past 21 days. This produces an oscillator that rises above zero when an upward
trend begins and declines below zero when the trend turns downward.
Remember that each daily Chaikin AD calculation is based only on that particular day’s
high, low, and closing prices; therefore, if a gap occurs, it is not reflected in this oscillator.
Another potential problem with this oscillator, as with all oscillators constructed using simple
moving averages, is that simply dropping the number that occurred 21 days prior from the calculation can influence the current value of the oscillator. Remember that as an oscillator, this tool
is used for confirmation, not signal generation.
Twiggs Money Flow
Colin Twiggs of www.incrediblecharts.com has adjusted the Chaikin Money Flow to account for
the potential problems of gaps and the 21st-day drop-off. Twiggs eliminates the problem of gaps
influencing the price strength by using Wilder’s True Range, similarly to how Williams uses it in
his WAD. In addition, using Wilder’s calculation of an exponential moving average solves the
problem of the drop-off figure affecting the current oscillator.
