PERCENTAGES MEAN NOTHING WHEN TRADING
Great traders are only right 50 to 60 percent of the time. They make lots of
money because they keep their losses small and gains big. If I said I was a
good trader, but I lost 70 percent of the time, would you give me your
money to trade? Percentages mean nothing in trading.
For example, you can be wrong 70 percent of the time and still make
lots of money:
Seven losses out of 10 at $400 apiece is $2,800.00.
Three gains at $1,500 apiece equals $4,500 in profit.
Subtract the losses from the gains and you have a net gain of $1,700
being wrong 70 percent of the time.
Look what happens to your profit if you are able to trade with smaller
losses and larger profits (see Figure 12-3).
When greed exceeds your need, it will usually take you down a path of
self-destruction.
You know what has always amazed me is that when the average couple’s
refrigerator breaks, the first thing they do is immediately get a cooler to save
the food. If they don’t have one, they will go out and buy one. Then they will
take the leftover, unmelted ice and dump it in the cooler. If there is not
enough ice, they will go out and buy some. After they calm down from the
frustration of the refrigerator breaking, over the next seven days, they will

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

196

FIGURE 12-3

Winning and Losing Percentages

Percentages Mean Nothing…
Can you be a 30% winner and
70% loser and still make money?
No. of Wins
3 or 30% X $2,000 gain per trade = $6,000
No. of Losses 7 or 70% X $300 loss per trade = $2,100
Net Profit = $3,900

Focus on your losses
Make sure they are small

Let your profits run
And success will come your way

go directly from work every night and not only price a new refrigerator but
also will learn everything there is to know about refrigerators. They will
learn how many cubic inches it has, how many ice cubes it make per hour,
how much electricity it consumes per day, as if any of that really matters. All
any of us need is place to keep food cold. Period. At the end of seven days of
intense research, the husband and wife sit down and have one of the deepest
conversations they have had in three years over which model they should
buy. Just as a decision is about to be made, one of them will say, “Let’s sleep
on it one more night before we make this major $995 decision.”
Sound familiar? Now watch what happens when a neighbor comes over
and says, “You’ve got to get involved with this deal. I just heard about a hot
tip from a stock clerk at work. He told me a $5,000 investment in this deal
will bring $50,000 inside of 90 days.” Before you know it, you are handing
over $5,000 within 24 hours to a broker, so you can become broker.
Think about it. You research everything there is to possibly know about
a refrigerator, a necessary and tangible asset in your life that is only going
to cost $1,000, yet your neighbor, who is dumber than you are, comes over
and tells you about this great inside tip he heard about from a stock clerk,
who is dumber than the two of you, and you immediately scramble to find
as much money as you can to invest. If you had $10,000, you would invest
it. As a matter of fact, the very next morning when you call your broker to
invest, you tell him you only can invest $5,327, because that is everything
you have, and you continue talking in an apologetic tone telling him you
wish you had more to invest.

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

197

At the end of 90 days, guess what? Surprise! You are not rich! As a matter of fact, you are $5,327 poorer.
Financially successful people have learned to educate themselves
about any opportunity before they get involved or they don’t get involved
at all.
As they do their due diligence, they educate themselves about the
opportunity in detail, because when you find out as much as you can about
something, it gives you options. Their number one focus is to determine
how much they could lose if this opportunity does not work out. They quantify a potential loss before they get involved. They attach a dollar amount to
it and a deadline to the opportunity, and whichever one is hit first, they are
disciplined enough to get out and walk away. They refuse to attach their
emotions or self-worth to any opportunity. When their idea or opportunity
does not work, they don’t keep going deeper and deeper in the red. They get
out and move on.
Savvy investors have one major focus: the preservation of their initial
capital. They already know the price they had to pay to get that money.
They are not driven by greed, and they don’t want to re-earn the principal
again. They first look at risk, then the consequences of taxes, and, lastly, the
potential of returns.
Poor investors are people with limited funds for a reason. They look
first at return and say, “I am not worried about the taxes, after all, when this
opportunity pays off, and it will, I will have plenty of money for taxes.”
They look at preservation of capital and their risk factor last. That is why
they are poor.

CONCLUSION
A trader’s journey can and needs to be fun, and losses need to be avoided
at all cost. A 300-pip, or $3,000, potential loss is not a prosperous,
happy event to experience. It is terrifying. If you hate trading with tight
stops, trade with larger ones, but, whatever you do, protect yourself at
all times.
Here is what you need to understand as you move forward in trading.
You will be introduced to emotions in a way you never thought possible.
As you trade and incur losses along the way, you must remember, the
absolute worst thing that could happen to you is that you will lose all
the money in your trading account. Allow me to put that into perspective
for you.

198

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

As you trade, no one is going to kill you or your family. The mean tax
man is not going to come and take away everything you own. You won’t
lose your house or your car as you trade. No one is going to expose your
deepest and darkest secret. The worst thing that can happen to you is you
lose your money in your margin account and your ego gets bruised from not
being right in the trade. That’s it.
If you can put this into perspective as you continue to learn how to
trade, you will be well on your way to becoming a successful trader.
The next time you pull the trigger to trade, ask yourself, “Can I afford
to take the loss?” If the answer is no, then don’t trade. It is that simple. If
the answer is yes, enter the trade and move forward hoping for the best and
preparing for the worst, and the worst thing that can happen is your stoploss order gets hit and you take a predetermined loss (that you were willing
to risk).
Create a disaster plan before you get involved with anything. That way,
when disaster strikes, it is not a disaster, it was merely part of the plan.
Anticipate your future challenges and potential problems. In thinking
through what might, and can, happen, you save yourself from having to
deal with the problem in an emotional state of fear. Get rid of your fear
before you trade. If, by chance, life or the market surprises you with something you were not expecting, calm down and start to think through the
problem logically. In the past, when you were faced with a problem and you
were fearful, it was because you didn’t have or see the answer or solution to
your problem. Fear only goes away when you have a solution. You avoid
fear in the market by quantifying a protective stop and trading with a stoploss order.
We get involved in trading because it is exciting and holds the promise
of financial success. We also see it as a way to make money on our terms,
trading from home, not having a boss, no employees, no inventory or
receivables, no headaches, making money 24 hours a day at our convenience. Then, whack, you take your first loss, and the money is gone right
out of your account.
You say, “No problem, they told me about this.” Then, whack, another
loss, and more money is gone. Now you become a little concerned. Then,
whack, another loss, and even more money is gone. Market losses are quick
and non-negotiable. You see all this money gone and you are scared and
fearful. Your judgment is challenged. Your ego is challenged. Your common
sense is challenged. More importantly, everyone you told about this is
watching you and expecting a favorable report. What are you going to do?

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

199

Don’t fear the market—respect it. It is not to be feared, it is only to be
understood. You will not become a good trader if plagued with fear. You
have to face that fear head-on with all the courage in the world, as the only
difference between hero and a coward is how they respond in time of fear.
Both are scared to death; however, the coward cowers down and runs the
other way, whereas the hero faces his fear, attacks it head-on, and triumphs
over it.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

13
A

P

T

E

R

THE FINAL
ANALYSIS
REALLY ENJOYED WRITING this book and hope you have enjoyed

I

reading it. I have read a lot of technical books on trading, and most
of them have been extremely boring and hard to understand, so I’ve
tried hard to make this one more entertaining.

We have an office in Derry, Ireland, and a dear friend of mine, Kevin
McGowan, owns it. He has been a real blessing in my life and has taught me a
lot, starting soon after we first met. As I was getting ready to teach him what I
knew about the Forex, he pulled me aside and said, “Chief, as you move forward teaching me about the Forex, explain it to me as if I were a 2-year-old
and then I will understand.” Since then, I have thought of that statement every
time I have attempted to explain something to someone.
I want to end this book with a dramatic battle between the bulls and the
bears. It is a battle where the bulls seek to destroy the bears, marching out
of the wilderness by night catching the bears off-guard as they lie in hibernation, slaying every bear in their sight in an attempt to finally end the
ongoing war between the bulls and the bears. To their surprise, the tables
turn. The bulls underestimated the strength and endurance of the bears, and
the bears once again rise in the fullness of their wrath, forcing the bulls to
flee for safety back into bull country to regroup. However, this time, a clear
sentiment is surfacing in each respective camp. The next battle will need to
201

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

202

be fought with the determination and commitment of total annihilation; a
final battle that frees the world of any and all future conflict; a battle that
finally brings peace to the land.
Each respective camp prepares for war, the bulls charge once again
hoping to catch the bears off-guard only to find them well prepared and
ready for battle. So great and lasting becomes this war that there is no time
to bury the dead. There is only time to fight and survive. A battle that completely and utterly destroys two nations committed to their causes and
beliefs. In the end they all fall by the sword, leaving only two surviving
warriors, an exhausted bull and an exhausted bear, perhaps, the nations’
leaders or generals, standing eye-to-eye.
As they gaze into each others eyes and at their surroundings, they both
finally realize they are the only two standing and that they are both covered
with massive battle wounds. The realization that millions of bulls and bears
including all their loved ones and their personal possessions have been
destroyed is beyond their mortal comprehension. Barely able to stand, they
contemplate what their opponents’ next move might be and their minds
begin to wonder:
●

Was their cause just?

●

Was it even worth it?

As they stand there filled with pain, the bull begins to remember the
words of his father “that in life, you either control your own destiny or
someone else will!”
Resting on his sword, the bear is caught off-guard as the bull
charges one last time, cutting off the head of the bear. With the decapitated
bear’s head on the ground, the bear’s body stands on its two hind legs, claws
extended and begins to charge as if it just found new energy to attack one
last time … struggling as it steps forward, the bears body takes one last
breath, then falls to the ground and dies. Standing in shock and disbelief of
what just took place, the bull collapses from sheer exhaustion. Lying there
lifeless and filled with sorrow, the bull concludes there is no reason to live.
These words begin to resonate from the bull: “Life is clearly about
suffering, and happiness only comes to those who can find meaning in the
suffering.”
With no ability to find any meaning at everything that just happened,
the bull takes his last breath and dies of a broken spirit, leaving all their
bodies to become prey for the other beasts of the world.
In the end, if this were the course of events, I would then want to analyze what happened. Why it was that the war had to be an all-or-nothing
war? Why couldn’t there have been a compromise? What exactly was it that

CHAPTER 13

THE FINAL ANALYSIS

203

drove them to such madness, such hatred, and eventual self-destruction?
But I can’t because the war continues and will continue.
You see, the world is round and is a place where there is no beginning
and there is no end, only a continuation; an infinite marathon where the
baton is passed from one generation to another. What might seem like an
ending to some becomes the beginning to others. Either way, life needs to
be about progression not regression.
Trading has changed my life.
I am who I am because of what I have seen, heard, and experienced.
Good and bad. We are all a compilation of everything we have seen, heard,
and experienced. I am grateful for everything I have been able to experience, including all the negative. I don’t think I would have amounted to
much if it weren’t for the adversity in my life. I have learned that adversity
is the blow or strike that sharpens the sword.
As you learn to trade on the Forex, or any market for that matter, put it
all into perspective. Make sure trading is a part of your life and not your
entire life. Make sure you are able to digest your food and sleep at night
when you are in a long-term trading position. Sure, there is no success
without sacrifice, but never forget the market moves on its own time frame,
not yours. As it moves on its time frame, be disciplined and control your
desire for instant gratification, because it is only the delayed gratification
that will bring you long-term success.
I hope you realize that there really is no true secret to success. It is for
you, it is for me, it is for everyone. If there was a secret to success, it would
be to straighten out what is between our ears. Ignorance has its price. In
reality, success is achieved in inches, not in miles.
My grandson, Jeffery, came home from school one day and said, “I
know why you are so rich, Grandpa!”
I said, “Why?” (Remember, wealth is relative at his age: $1,000 is all
the money in the world.)
He said, “I learned today from a guest speaker in school that most poor
people read one book every 5 to 10 years. Average income earners read one
book every 3 to 5 years, but rich people read at least one book a month.” He
looked at my bookshelf, filled with hundreds of books, and asked, “Which
book do you want me to read, Grandpa?” I smiled at him and handed him a
book titled Children the Challenge.
Obviously, his guest speaker read the same article I did. The article
goes on to describe how a university conducted a study on the daily habits
of low-, average-, and high-income earners. To their surprise, they
discovered that low-income earners read on average one book every
10 years. Average-income earners read a book, on average, once every five

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

204

years. But, not surprisingly, they found that high-income earners read, on
average, one book every month, and that book often has to do with either
their current profession or self-improvement. Pretty amazing, and I would
say fairly accurate, as I have read well over 500 books in my life, half on
self-improvement. How many books have you read in the past year? What
were they about? “Education has its reward, and ignorance has its price.”
USA Today, America’s largest newspaper, did a study and was able to Q1
prove this statement: education has its reward, and ignorance has its price.
Look at their findings:
Average Salary by Education Level
No high school
High school graduate
Some college
Bachelor’s degree
Advanced degree

$16,053 per year
$23,594 per year
$27,566 per year
$43,782 per year
$63,473 per year

Think about it as you look at the above facts. The difference between
dropping out of high school versus finishing what you started and
receiving a diploma equates with an average of $7,541 more per year in
income.
If you are going to learn how to trade on the Forex and don’t take
the time to educate yourself first or be guided by a mentor trader who is
already successful, you will probably lose all the money you start with.
If you say, “I cannot afford to take the time to educate myself before I
trade,” remember, “ignorance has its price.” If you are one of the people
who say, “I would rather take any money I would spend on education and
put it into my live trading account, giving me more money to trade with,”
then don’t trade. If you do, you will pay the price in trading losses. Remember: “Experience is what you get, when you don’t get what you want.” In
trading, you need experience and education.
Our company talks to people every day from around the world, many of
whom say, “I can’t afford the price of education.” Our only response is,
“You can’t afford not to educate yourself.”

EDUCATION FIRST
Before you begin trading on the Forex, you need to know:
1.
2.

How to make money
How to protect yourself financially

CHAPTER 13

THE FINAL ANALYSIS

205

The only difference between successful traders and unsuccessful
traders is that the unsuccessful ones don’t know what they are doing and
keep losing more money in a desperate attempt to get it all back. They are
no different than all the gamblers who go to casinos.
Successful traders know exactly what happens when they lose money
and know how to put the losses into perspective. They don’t desperately
chase the market, trying to make up for past losses. They don’t waste any
time dwelling on the past, rather, they stay focused on what future trading
opportunities exist—and that is what makes them successful.

OUR HABITS CONTROL OUR LIVES
In Chapter 1, I talked about how important it is to establish a solid moral and
ethical constitution in our lives and the value of having a solid work ethic.
Don’t forget, who and what you are is what you will bring to the trading table.
You will bring all your good habits and all your bad habits alike. All your good
habits will enhance your trading, but all your bad habits will be magnified and
most certainly intensify as you trade and could potentially destroy you.
I pointed out that we are not what we think we are. We are not what we
tell other people we are. We are not what we verbally promise to other
people. We are what we do. What we do is who we are. Our actions are our
automatic habits. Those habits force us in a position to either manage our
daily poverty, daily mediocrity, or daily success.
Learning to become a successful currency trader is a dream of thousands of
people around the world. Let me assure you, it is a worthy goal. I have learned
that every dream is in the mind of the believer and in the hands of the doer. We
are not given dreams without being given the power to make them come true.
If you are not making the money in your life you always dreamed of, perhaps it is because you are locked into a series of unproductive work habits or
a self-destructive mindset. Perhaps you have created a mental block that has
stopped you from earning more than you think you are worth. If you want
to earn more than you are earning right now, you must upgrade your selfconcept. Hopefully, this book can get you started in upgrading your
self-concept. Always remember: “If another person can do it, you can do it.”

FINDING YOUR POT OF GOLD
Learning to trade on the Forex is your new rainbow. Your greater pot of gold
at the end of this rainbow surprisingly will have nothing to do with money,
it will be who you become as you slowly purge yourself of all your

206

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

self-destructive habits that have stood in the way of earning more than you
thought you were worth. Remember in life, it is not about what you acquire
that counts, it is what you become!
As you trade on the Forex, you will have a choice to make: conquer or
crumble. If you choose to conquer and persist until you succeed, you will
become a totally different person. Your new productive habits will have an
impact not only in your work life but also in your home, family, and personal life.
No journey is complete, however, without surprises and complications.
Frustrations and even bad things will happen along the way. You will, no
doubt, incur some “trading scars.”
Your mistakes, setbacks, and failures will not only create disappointment, they will also place you in a pressure cooker of performance. Do not
fear the pressure—embrace it. Remember that if there is no pressure, there
are no diamonds. Life keeps striking only those who are prepared to
become that perfect diamond. Be grateful for every blunt strike that comes
your way. There is nothing wrong with getting rid of the rough edges in
your life, which is really getting rid of your bad habits.
You will need to master the art of forgetting, forgiving, and moving on.
Remember that the reason the windshield on your car is 50 times larger
than the rearview mirror is because we are to stay focused on where we are
going in our journey and not where we have been. You cannot waste time
dwelling on the past. The market is constantly on the move, creating new
opportunities for those traders prepared to take advantage of them. You
must stay focused on those new opportunities, learn from your mistakes,
and move on.
Don’t ever forget that the most valuable things in life cannot be bought
with money. You cannot buy love, you cannot buy loyalty, you cannot buy
respect, and you most certainly cannot buy time.
I often wondered what experiences Mother Theresa went through as
she dedicated her time serving the world that allowed her to write “The
Final Analysis”. Her final analysis changed everything.
“The Final Analysis,” by Mother Theresa
People are often unreasonable, illogical and self
centered … forgive them anyway!
If you are kind, people may accuse you of selfish,
ulterior motives … be kind anyway!
