spoke: “Jimmy? Marianne?” They looked up. So entirely stunned from the
game, they didn’t ask how Harvey knew their names. But it freaked me out
that he knew them by name.
They both looked up at Harvey. The husband was still fishing in his
pockets and the wife had her hand in her purse.
“You’re going to be late for the show. Let me walk you outside,” he
said. And with that, they quickly gathered up their belongings. He put his
arms around them, escorted them outside onto Amsterdam Avenue, where
through the window I could see him chatting with them. They started to
laugh. He handed the $100 to the husband, who initially refused, and then
Harvey leaned in and whispered something in his ear. Whatever he said did
the trick and soon the couple was happily trotting down the street on their
way to the show. When Harvey sat back down, the rest of the crowd had
dissipated and we were alone in the booth. He said: “Did you see, Harry,”
he started, “did you see what just happened there?”
I had to admit that the only thing that I had seen were two stupid people overpaying for currency. I told him so.
“Okay. Does that apply to trading?”
I thought for a moment. This depressed me. I didn’t want to think about
my losses from that morning. “I am sure that it does,” I replied. “I am sure
that there is a lesson in here for me. I honestly don’t want to talk about it,
though.” I paused. The truth struck me then: Harvey would soon leave and I
would never trade successfully. Soon I would return to work at some crap
law firm if anyone would still take me. My eyes welled up with tears.
“Harvey, I am not sure I can talk about this. I lost almost all of our savings today.”
He eyed me sternly: “I already know that.” Not an ounce of sympathy
from a man who had just given $100 to some complete strangers. “I know
that. Tell me something I don’t know, or let me finish.”
I didn’t let him finish. I stood up and walked out of the restaurant.
With a step outside the restaurant, he gripped my shoulder and spun
me around. He was very, very angry. His eyes were on fire. Then he began
to speak.

THE INTERVENTION
HARVEY: Now, Harry. Answer the question. How was that game like trading currency.
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: You don’t have to answer, then. You can just sit around for the
rest of your life and hide from your own mistakes. If you take a nap

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

138

2:25 PM

Page 138

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

after your horrible mistakes, then you can sleep through the part
where you’re supposed to learn something. You can just keep on making mistakes and avoiding the consequences. Running out of the diner
is just an excuse to avoid confrontation with your worst self. If you go
home and nap again, you might never wake up. Sure, you won’t sleep
forever in the bed. But you’ll be a walking zombie. This experience
will scar you forever, and you’ll never take responsibility for your financial future.
ME: Harvey, I don’t have any money left to trade with. I lost five thousand dollars in a matter of minutes today. There is no way that
my wife is going to forgive me for that. I don’t have a financial future.
I gave all the possible trading capital that I have to my currency
dealer. Sure, we have some additional savings, but I can’t use that
now. I can’t be trusted with that money. We need that money to live
on. I can’t believe how fast I let it go. It disappeared so fast. I can’t
even talk about it.
HARVEY: Harry, sit here on the curb and talk to me for just a few moments.
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: That’s better. That’s the reasonable Harry Banes that I know.
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: Maybe that was the last trading you’ll ever do. That’s a possibility.
But I gotta talk to you about this. You’ve got to come to terms with what
happened.
ME: Okay. I’m willing to do that. I am willing to listen.
HARVEY: First of all, let’s look at what just happened in the restaurant.
How was that like currency trading?
ME: I suppose that this morning I engaged in the dollar auction game.
HARVEY: Or the pip auction game.
ME: Right. The pip auction game.
HARVEY: Did you notice that Jimmy and Marianne started off thinking
about how much money they were going to win? They were thinking
about how they could outsmart the other person and get a discount
for a $100 bill. They wanted to spend the least amount of money for
the greatest amount of money, and they put very little thought into
their bidding.
ME: That sounds familiar. It sounds like what I did today. Just with
my trading account. I didn’t want to end up a loser, so I kept trading,
hoping that I could end up a winner, no matter how much I lost along
the way.
HARVEY: Right! Perfecto! This is the next lesson. When you trade like you
did this morning, you are chasing after money, no matter what the cost.
It was only important to you that you did not have to look like a loser.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Breakfast with Harvey

Page 139

139

Any amount of gain would be acceptable. Remember how just a short
time into the dollar auction game, Jimmy and Marianne lost sight of the
money that they wanted to gain? Then they started to worry only about
not being the loser.
ME: Yes, I did notice that. I realized that they didn’t want to look bad. Each
one didn’t want to be the one that had to pay something for nothing.
This morning, when I was trading, I would have been happy to earn
back anything at all. When I had $1,250 left, all I wanted back was another $1,250. It was like I was trading to make up for my previous trade.
No focus at all on whether the next trade was truly a good idea. Just totally wanting to make back what I lost.
HARVEY: Any trader can fall into this trap. I call it the pip auction game.
Even bank traders can fall into this. Every trade you take is simply an
opportunity to bid for pips! You make a bid—
ME: In the form of margin.
HARVEY: No, not really. You think that’s what you’re risking, but it’s not.
What are you really risking when you take a trade?
ME: I’m risking a loss. The loss of capital if the trade doesn’t work out.
HARVEY: And what was your risk threshold today?
ME: I didn’t have one.
HARVEY: So your risk was infinite.
ME: Yes.
HARVEY: And your profit potential? What was your profit target on these
trades?
ME: Well, for some of them it was determined, and for others I didn’t have
a profit target.
HARVEY: So you were willing to bid your entire trading account for the
chance to win an indefinite amount.
ME: That sounds horrible.
HARVEY: And it sounds like the truth.
ME: I remember what you said about George Sisler and his first experience managing money. I don’t want to compare myself to a successful
trader like George, but this does sound familiar. At a point, he stopped
knowing what he was in the trade for—and he kept the trade open just
to not lose. He was, for a while, willing to lose an infinite sum of money
in order to win an indefinite profit.
HARVEY: You remember George now! But you did not remember him this
morning.
ME: I did forget George completely.
HARVEY: That’s because it happened to George! Now we’re getting someplace. When you become a great trader, these lessons will not be far off
in your mind. You’ll remember what you did this morning much more
clearly than what happened to George.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Page 140

140

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

ME: I am not sure I am ever going to become a great trader. I don’t think
I’m ever going to trade again.
HARVEY: Oh, you’ll trade again.
ME: I don’t have any money to trade with.
HARVEY: Yes, you do.
ME: I am not going to touch that money. I have to live off that money while
I find a job!
HARVEY: Yes, you have to live off that money. You do have to find a job.
Those things are true. But it doesn’t mean that you won’t ever trade
again. Look at George. See how he’s doing. He lost over $100 million in
his bad trading experiences. Can you top that story?
ME: Not really.
HARVEY: Exactly. You still haven’t even started out. You had your first big
loss. You can still do this.
ME: But you told me that you weren’t going to continue to work with me.
If I were you, I wouldn’t.
HARVEY: I said that because you lost a lot of trust with me. And it still
might be true. There are some important things that you are going to
have to do. And if you do them, then we can work together again. But it
won’t be easy. And this is where 50 percent of all the people I work with
totally give up.
ME: I don’t want to give up.

OMELET AND HUMBLE PIE
“What is your first concern, above everything else?” Harvey asked.
We were back inside the diner and I was eating a Mexican omelet. It
tasted just as good as it was supposed to. If Harvey hadn’t stopped me on
the street, I am sure that a lot of bad things would have happened—it’s not
inconceivable that my marriage would have ended over this. It didn’t
(more on that later). It’s probable that I would still be working for someone
else today. Which I am not doing. It’s possible that I would have done
something drastic. I didn’t.
Instead, we were inside the Utopia Restaurant and I was experiencing a frontal pipotomy, a not-so-delicate surgery to remove all of my
ridiculous assumptions about how to become a successful trader. Already this discussion had freed me from some of the weight of what I had
done to my trading account: I realized that other traders, even superprofitable ones, had experienced similar lapses of trading sanity. Even
George Sisler recovered well enough to eventually run a multibilliondollar hedge fund.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Breakfast with Harvey

Page 141

141

With Harvey’s help (if he would still work with me), I could see myself
doing better one day. Not making the same mistakes. Perhaps even managing money. But that was far off. Now, instead of thinking of the next trade,
or imagining that I could follow along with Harvey’s or Hank’s or Craig’s or
anyone else’s trading, I concentrated on how I would change my thinking
first. I told this to Harvey.
“My first concern,” I said, “Is that I change my way of thinking. That I
change my mind-set. I have let myself be guided by my greed, or my emotions. I don’t want that anymore.”
“You want discipline.”
“Yes. I do. I don’t ever want to find myself in the same position I was in
today. Ever again.”
“I have a secret for you, then,” he told me. And he leaned in closer.
Then he said: “There is no secret.”
He sat back and waited for my response.
I didn’t offer one, so he started again: “There is no secret to obtaining
discipline. There are ways you can increase your self-discipline. But there
is no secret formula.”
“But there has to be a way for me to do something about my lack of
discipline. I need something. Anything. What did the other traders you
worked with do? It’s not like George woke up one day, said, ‘Well, I’m never
holding onto a trade that long again,’ and then was over and done with it.”
Harvey simply looked back at me for a moment or two. “Really?” he
then asked. “That’s not how it went for George Sisler? Why don’t you tell
me what happened with George? If he didn’t wake up one day and make a
decision to change for the better, then what did he do?”
I didn’t have an answer. “I don’t know,” I admitted. “I just figured that
you would have some sort of action plan for a guy in my position. With my
problems.”
“I have an action plan, Harry,” he replied. “I’ve got one. But it presupposes that you are fully committed to changing your life. I can’t force you
to have discipline. I can’t live inside your body, or push the buttons on your
trading platform, or sit in your house all the time and tell you when to stop
trading. I can’t force you to exercise, to stop hiding things from your wife,
or to never risk losing half your account on a single trade. I can tell you
those things but I can’t make you do them.”
“That does make sense. But where does that leave me?”
“It leaves you with yourself. That’s why I don’t want to work with you
right now. It’s why you’re going to be on your own for a while. You’ve earned
yourself some downtime. We could have made a huge amount of progress in
a very short period, but we’re going to back it up. I am going to move on and
work with a fellow named Larry Ho, in Topeka, Kansas. He’s a commodities
trader and he’s nearing the absolute destruction of his trading account.”

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Page 142

142

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Please stop him before he does it.”
He raised his voice: “Harry! I’ve just finished telling you that I am not
going to be your conscience. You’ve already got one! I have been working
with traders for more years that you would believe. I am not in the business of becoming your mother. If you want to torpedo your trading account, then do it! Do it and get it over with and you can move on with your
life! But I am not going to step in and hold your hand. Otherwise I’ll never
trust you. If you are going to do this, you have to do it on your own. You
have to be trustworthy.”
“I haven’t been worthy of anyone’s trust. I get it. I really do understand
this time. I still hope that Larry doesn’t torpedo his trading account, as
you said.”
Harvey sighed. “Me too, Harry Banes. Me too.”
This gave me an idea. “I want to ask a favor that I don’t deserve, Harvey. You can say no if it’s not appropriate.”
“All right,” he answered. “What is it?”
“I want to talk to Larry Ho if he does not savagely destroy his trading
account.”
The request surprised Harvey. But he answered immediately. “No. Absolutely not.”
“Why?”
“The two of you talking together? That would be like having two hurricanes mesh with each other in the Atlantic Ocean before hitting New York
City. You would be a terrible influence on each other. Who knows what
kind of trade ideas you would come up with.”
“What if I spoke to him with you present? Like on the phone?”
He thought for a moment. This suggestion warmed him up to the idea.
“Or in person. Then I could cut you off.”
“Sure. I can’t afford a plane ticket to Topeka.”
He had an answer for everything. “But Larry can definitely afford a
plane ticket to New York. I’ll think about it, Harry. I promise to do that. But
first we’re going to dive into the next law of trading, and then I am going to
leave you for a week.”
“I am ready.”

MY PERSONAL DAYLIGHT LIMIT
HARVEY: Harry, how much of your account do you think it’s okay to lose?
ME: None?
HARVEY: No. That’s a lame answer. Of course you’re going to have to lose
some money in the course of ordinary trading. But how much is too

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Breakfast with Harvey

Page 143

143

much? In percentage terms, tell me when you think a trader ought to get
out and stop trading.
ME: This is going to come as no surprise, but I have never thought of this
before.
HARVEY: Most traders never consider this. But remember when we talked
about George Sisler, working at the bank? George had a Daylight Limit,
which was supposed to be a loss level at which he would be instructed
to stop trading.
ME: I do remember that now. And it would be expressed in terms of a
percentage of the trading capital lost. When he reached a certain
threshold, it would stop trading. Or he would be forced to stop trading.
HARVEY: I am going to repeat again one of the only advantages that
trading in a bank has over someone like you, Harry. It’s a forced Daylight Limit. If you had been trading in a bank this morning, you
never would have been able to draw down the account so far. Your
manager would have known you were drowning in losses and would
have cut you off. Your trades would be closed, and you would then
go into the conference room and, depending on your boss, you’d
get fired, or you’d get some help. But you most certainly would not
be allowed, at Ernest Wellington, to keep trading your account into
the toilet.
ME: I like that. I know you’re not a fan of forced discipline, but—
HARVEY: Right. I hate it. This is why so many bank traders leave the bank,
go out on their own, and have all sorts of problems.
ME: Because they no longer have a boss, right? A Daylight Limit that holds
them accountable no matter what.
HARVEY: The bank has a systematic way of forcing you to discipline yourself. It’s institutionalized self-discipline. The bank is an entity fully concentrated on making the most amount of money possible for the lowest
possible investment. These days, they employ risk managers and mathematicians to make sure that they are not over-risking. They’re not
going to let a trader with even the most spectacular track record go
crazy. No way.
ME: All right, then. I’ve got to organize my life or something so that I can
develop the same amount of discipline. I have to say, that it’s attractive
to have some forced discipline.
HARVEY: But it’s the easy way out. Do you see that?
ME: Yes. Because it still depends on someone else to take responsibility
for my wins and losses. If I have a supervisor or someone who presses
the buttons when I get out of control, then what happens?
HARVEY: When that person is no longer available? You’ve got it! You’ve figured this out. You don’t want to depend on me. Or your wife or George
Sisler or Craig Taylor or anyone else. You want to develop the ability to

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

144

2:25 PM

Page 144

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

be a self-directed and responsible trader. It’s a big job, but you can do it.
And it starts by changing your mind-set.
ME: I am ready to do that.
HARVEY: Good. Now back to the original question. How do you know
when you have lost too much? Let’s back it up and ask some questions.
What do you think a trader should do if he loses 1 percent of his account? If he’s trading five thousand dollars and he loses fifty dollars,
what should he do?
ME: Umm.
HARVEY: “Umm” is not a satisfactory reply. You get no credit for “Umm.”
ME: Well, I don’t want to be totally off base here, but I think the trader
shouldn’t worry about it.
HARVEY: Wrong answer!
ME: I knew it. I knew there was some clever answer you were looking for.
I feel like I am working in the law firm again. People asking me questions they already know the answers to.
HARVEY: Try again.
ME: The trader should worry about it.
HARVEY: Better. But why?
ME: Because we’re in the job of making money. Sheez, I don’t know, Harvey! If you’re telling me that I can’t lose more than 1 percent of my account on a trade, then I really won’t ever be able to trade.
HARVEY: That’s not what I’m saying. Think about it differently. Remember
when we said that without a Daylight Limit, or a money management
program, a good trading system is worthless?
ME: I do remember that. Now I remember. I think I see what you’re trying
to tell me. You’re saying that the maximum possible loss is really dependent on the bigger picture.
HARVEY: And the bigger picture is?
ME: A trading system. If I have a trading system, I know how much that
system can lose. I know what it should be losing or winning on a regular
basis. I get it! I can understand this now. I wasn’t trading with any set
system at all, and I had no idea how much was too much to lose. I didn’t
care, even. How in the world was I going to ever know when to stop
with profits or losses? I wasn’t.
HARVEY: Make sense now?
ME: Yes. It’s way clearer now.
HARVEY: Good. Now, assuming you have a set of rules, a tested system—
and we are going to talk about that later—how much is too much to
lose?
ME: This time I’ll guess—10 percent?
HARVEY: Higher. It’s 25 percent. That’s the cutoff point.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Breakfast with Harvey

Page 145

145

ME: The cutoff point? For everyone? No matter who it is? Anyone? What
about the tested system stuff?
HARVEY: Good questions. Here is what I’ve found. I have worked with
thousands of traders who trade from home. I have found that if they
draw down 25 percent of their account, that they are more than 75 percent likely to destroy the rest of the account. It’s what I call the 25/75
rule.
ME: So, you’re saying, once a trader loses two thousand five hundred dollars of a ten-thousand-dollar account, he’s likely to kill the whole thing.
HARVEY: Exactly. He has a 75 percent chance of demolishing the rest of
the trading capital.
ME: Why?
HARVEY: Give me some reasons that you were willing to continue to lose
today.
ME: Oh! I didn’t think about it that way. I was willing to keep losing for all
the reasons we talked about—I didn’t want to show a loss. I felt that
once I’d lost a bunch of the money, it didn’t matter if I lost the rest trying
to get back some of my money. I was trading on revenge.
HARVEY: Revenge trading is like stacking dynamite underneath your trading capital.
ME: Got it. Understood. I can commit to this. I can promise that I will
never let myself lose more than 25 percent of my account. Now that I’m
thinking of it, I now understand that if I have this as a rule, I am automatically going to cut myself off earlier than that—I am not going to let
it get that far. Because when it gets that far . . . well . . . what would I do?
Stop trading, for sure. But then what? Call you?
HARVEY: Heck no!
ME: Right. You don’t want to be a part of those situations. You don’t want
to force me into anything. Instead of calling you, I’d take a break. That’s
what I would do.
HARVEY: For how long? How would you know you are ready to return to
the world of trading?
ME: I don’t know. Seems like if I just stopped for an arbitrary period of time,
it wouldn’t prove anything. I’d have to do something. Like punishment. Or
something to ensure that I didn’t do it again. Otherwise—
HARVEY: Otherwise, you’d just be planning out the slow bleeding to death
of your trading account in chunks of 25 percent.
ME: I don’t want to do that. There’s got to be something else you want me
to say here.
HARVEY: In terms of trading, what is the worst punishment you can think
of?
ME: Telling my wife I lost five thousand dollars.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

146

2:25 PM

Page 146

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

HARVEY: If that was the worst punishment, then you wouldn’t have lost it.
Right? So that’s not the right answer. What do you fear the most?
ME: Going back to my job. Working for someone else.
HARVEY: Right!
ME: Oh, no. I shouldn’t have said that.
HARVEY: Yes, you should have said that. Because it’s true. You don’t want
to work for Wakeman, Butterball, and Bonehead ever again. Having to
go back there and ask for your job back—
ME: No way. There is no way I am going back there.
HARVEY: You can deliver pizza instead. I’ll let you borrow my 1925
Schwinn.
ME: Thanks. But no thanks. I am not going back to the law firm, and I
would in fact rather deliver pizza on your old bicycle.
HARVEY: So I’ve reached the innermost part of your brain where you store
your most sensitive buttons. I am pushing the “go back to work for other
people” button right now and you don’t like it.
ME: No. I want to trade for a living.
HARVEY: You haven’t earned the right to trade for a living! Every day, I refuse to work with traders who are even willing to pay me tens of thousands of dollars. You know why? Because they believe that it’s their
right to trade for a living. But it’s not. It’s not a right. It’s a privilege that
you earn through discipline. And I will not work with a trader who is not
disciplined. Including you, Harry Banes.
ME: All right.
HARVEY: And you know what is going to happen tomorrow when you go
back to Wayfarer, Sunshine, and Doodlebug, or whatever the name of
that law firm is? You know what? You are going to think to yourself,
“Gosh, Harry, you could be trading the Euro right now, shorting it at
1.2200, but you’re not. You’re not because you have to earn more money
