
nothing and hear nothing. At last, when his eyes ached, he said he could see a vague
indistinct shadow; but nothing more. Dee was in despair. The deception had been carried
on so long, that he was never so happy as when he fancied he was holding converse with
superior beings; and he cursed the day that had put estrangement between him and his
dear friend Kelly. This was exactly what Kelly had foreseen; and, when he thought the
Doctor had grieved sufficiently for his absence, he returned unexpectedly, and entered the
room where the little Arthur was in vain endeavouring to distinguish something in the
crystal. Dee, in entering this circumstance in his journal, ascribes this sudden return to a
"miraculous fortune," and a "divine fate;" and goes on to record that Kelly immediately
saw the spirits, which had remained invisible to little Arthur. One of these spirits
reiterated the previous command, that they should have their wives in common. Kelly
bowed his head, and submitted; and Dee, in all humility, consented to the arrangement.
This was the extreme depth of the wretched man's degradation. In this manner they
continued to live for three or four months, when, new quarrels breaking out, they
separated once more. This time their separation was final. Kelly, taking the elixir which
he had found in Glastonbury Abbey, proceeded to Prague, forgetful of the abrupt mode in
which he had previously been expelled from that city. Almost immediately after his
arrival, he was seized by order of the Emperor Rudolph, and thrown into prison. He was
released after some months' confinement, and continued for five years to lead a vagabond
life in Germany, telling fortunes at one place, and pretending to make gold at another. He
was a second time thrown into prison, on a charge of heresy and sorcery; and he then
resolved, if ever he obtained his liberty, to return to England. He soon discovered that
there was no prospect of this, and that his imprisonment was likely to be for life. He
twisted his bed-clothes into a rope, one stormy night in February 1595, and let himself
down from the window of his dungeon, situated at the top of a very high tower. Being a
corpulent man, the rope gave way, and he was precipitated to the ground. He broke two
of his ribs, and both his legs; and was otherwise so much injured, that he expired a few
days afterwards.
Dee, for a while, had more prosperous fortune. The warming-pan he had sent to Queen
Elizabeth was not without effect. He was rewarded, soon after Kelly had left him, with an
invitation to return to England. His pride, which had been sorely humbled, sprang up
again to its pristine dimensions; and he set out for Bohemia with a train of attendants
becoming an ambassador. How he procured the money does not appear, unless from the
liberality of the rich Bohemian Rosenberg, or perhaps from his plunder. He travelled with
three coaches for himself and family, and three waggons to carry his baggage. Each
coach had four horses, and the whole train was protected by a guard of four and twenty
soldiers. This statement may be doubted; but it is on the authority of Dee himself, who
made it on oath before the commissioners appointed by Elizabeth to inquire into his
circumstances. On his arrival in England he had an audience of the Queen, who received
him kindly as far as words went, and gave orders that he should not be molested in his
pursuits of chemistry and philosophy. A man who boasted of the power to turn baser
metals into gold, could not, thought Elizabeth, be in want of money; and she, therefore,
gave him no more substantial marks of her approbation than her countenance and
protection.

Thrown thus unexpectedly upon his own resources, Dee began in earnest the search for
the philosopher's stone. He worked incessantly among his furnaces, retorts, and crucibles,
and almost poisoned himself with deleterious fumes. He also consulted his miraculous
crystal; but the spirits appeared not to him. He tried one Bartholomew to supply the place
of the invaluable Kelly; but he being a man of some little probity, and of no imagination
at all, the spirits would not hold any communication with him. Dee then tried another
pretender to philosophy, of the name of Hickman; but had no better fortune. The crystal
had lost its power since the departure of its great high-priest. From this quarter then Dee
could get no information on the stone or elixir of the alchymists, and all his efforts to
discover them by other means were not only fruitless but expensive. He was soon
reduced to great distress, and wrote piteous letters to the Queen, praying relief. He
represented that, after he left England with Count Laski, the mob had pillaged his house
at Mortlake, accusing him of being a necromancer and a wizard; and had broken all his
furniture, burned his library, consisting of four thousand rare volumes, and destroyed all
the philosophical instruments and curiosities in his museum. For this damage he claimed
compensation; and furthermore stated, that, as he had come to England by the Queen's
command, she ought to pay the expenses of his journey. Elizabeth sent him small sums of
money at various times; but, Dee still continuing his complaints, a commission was
appointed to inquire into his circumstances. He finally obtained a small appointment as
Chancellor of St. Paul's cathedral, which he exchanged, in 1595, for the wardenship of
the college at Manchester. He remained in this capacity till 1602 or 1603, when, his
strength and intellect beginning to fail him, he was compelled to resign. He retired to his
old dwelling at Mortlake, in a state not far removed from actual want, supporting himself
as a common fortune-teller, and being often obliged to sell or pawn his books to procure
a dinner. James I. was often applied to on his behalf, but he refused to do anything for
him. It may be said to the discredit of this King, that the only reward he would grant the
indefatigable Stowe, in his days of old age and want, was the royal permission to beg; but
no one will blame him for neglecting such a quack as John Dee. He died in 1608, in the
eighty-first year of his age, and was buried at Mortlake.
THE COSMOPOLITE.
Many disputes have arisen as to the real name of the alchymist who wrote several works
under the above designation. The general opinion is that he was a Scotsman, named
Seton; and that by a fate very common to alchymists, who boasted too loudly of their
powers of transmutation, he ended his days miserably in a dungeon, into which he was
thrown by a German potentate until he made a million of gold to pay his ransom. By
some he has been confounded with Michael Sendivog, or Sendivogius, a Pole, a professor
of the same art, who made a great noise in Europe at the commencement of the
seventeenth century. Lenglet du Fresnoy, who is in general well-informed with respect to
the alchymists, inclines to the belief that these personages were distinct; and gives the
following particulars of the Cosmopolite, extracted from George Morhoff, in his
"Epistola ad Langelottum," and other writers.

About the year 1600, one Jacob Haussen, a Dutch pilot, was shipwrecked on the coast of
Scotland. A gentleman, named Alexander Seton, put off in a boat, and saved him from
drowning, and afterwards entertained him hospitably for many weeks at his house on the
shore. Haussen saw that he was addicted to the pursuits of chemistry, but no conversation
on the subject passed between them at the time. About a year and a half afterwards,
Haussen being then at home at Enkhuysen, in Holland, received a visit from his former
host. He endeavoured to repay the kindness that had been shown him; and so great a
friendship arose between them, that Seton, on his departure, offered to make him
acquainted with the great secret of the philosopher's stone. In his presence the Scotsman
transmuted a great quantity of base metal into pure gold, and gave it him as a mark of his
esteem. Seton then took leave of his friend, and travelled into Germany. At Dresden he
made no secret of his wonderful powers; having, it is said, performed transmutation
successfully before a great assemblage of the learned men of that city. The circumstance
coming to the ears of the Duke or Elector of Saxony, he gave orders for the arrest of the
alchymist. He caused him to be imprisoned in a high tower, and set a guard of forty men
to watch that he did not escape, and that no strangers were admitted to his presence. The
unfortunate Seton received several visits from the Elector, who used every art of
persuasion to make him divulge his secret. Seton obstinately refused either to
communicate his secret, or to make any gold for the tyrant; on which he was stretched
upon the rack, to see if the argument of torture would render him more tractable. The
result was still the same, - neither hope of reward nor fear of anguish could shake him.
For several months he remained in prison, subjected alternately to a sedative and a
violent regimen, till his health broke, and he wasted away almost to a skeleton.
There happened at that time to be in Dresden a learned Pole, named Michael
Sendivogius, who had wasted a good deal of his time and substance in the unprofitable
pursuits of alchymy. He was touched with pity for the hard fate, and admiration for the
intrepidity of Seton; and determined, if possible, to aid him in escaping from the clutch of
his oppressor. He requested the Elector's permission to see the alchymist, and obtained it
with some difficulty. He found him in a state of great wretchedness, -- shut up from the
light of day in a noisome dungeon, and with no better couch or fare than those allotted to
the worst of criminals. Seton listened eagerly to the proposal of escape, and promised the
generous Pole that he would make him richer than an Eastern monarch if by his means he
were liberated. Sendivogius immediately commenced operations. He sold some property
which he possessed near Cracow, and with the proceeds led a merry life at Dresden. He
gave the most elegant suppers, to which he regularly invited the officers of the guard, and
especially those who did duty at the prison of the alchymist. He insinuated himself at last
into their confidence, and obtained free ingress to his friend as often as he pleased;
pretending that he was using his utmost endeavours to conquer his obstinacy and worm
his secret out of him. When their project was ripe, a day was fixed upon for the grand
attempt; and Sendivogius was ready with a postchariot to convey him with all speed into
Poland. By drugging some wine which he presented to the guards of the prison, he
rendered them so drowsy that he easily found means to scale a wall unobserved, with
Seton, and effect his escape. Seton's wife was in the chariot awaiting him, having safely
in her possession a small packet of a black powder, which was, in fact, the philosopher's
stone, or ingredient for the transmutation of iron and copper into gold. They all arrived in

safety at Cracow; but the frame of Seton was so wasted by torture of body and starvation,
to say nothing of the anguish of mind he had endured, that he did not long survive. He
died in Cracow in 1603 or 1604, and was buried under the cathedral church of that city.
Such is the story related of the author of the various works which bear the name of the
Cosmopolite. A list of them may be found in the third volume of the "History of the
Hermetic Philosophy."
SENDIVOGIUS.
On the death of Seton, Sendivogius married his widow, hoping to learn from her some of
the secrets of her deceased lord in the art of transmutation. The ounce of black powder
stood him, however, in better service; for the alchymists say that, by its means, he
converted great quantities of quicksilver into the purest gold. It is also said that he
performed this experiment successfully before the Emperor Rudolph II, at Prague; and
that the Emperor, to commemorate the circumstance, caused a marble tablet to be affixed
to the wall of the room in which it was performed, bearing this inscription, "Faciat hoc
quispiam alius, quod fecit Sendivogius Polonus." M. Desnoyers, secretary to the Princess
Mary of Gonzaga, Queen of Poland, writing from Warsaw in 1651, says that he saw this
tablet, which existed at that time, and was often visited by the curious.
The after-life of Sendivogius is related in a Latin memoir of him by one Brodowski, his
steward; and is inserted by Pierre Borel in his "Treasure of Gaulish Antiquities." The
Emperor Rudolph, according to this authority, was so well pleased with his success, that
he made him one of his counsellors of state, and invited him to fill a station in the royal
household and inhabit the palace. But Sendivogius loved his liberty, and refused to
become a courtier. He preferred to reside on his own patrimonial estate of Gravarna,
where, for many years, he exercised a princely hospitality. His philosophic powder,
which, his steward says, was red, and not black, he kept in a little box of gold; and with
one grain of it he could make five hundred ducats, or a thousand rix-dollars. He generally
made his projection upon quicksilver. When he travelled, he gave this box to his steward,
who hung it round his neck by a gold chain next his skin. But the greatest part of the
powder he used to hide in a secret place cut into the step of his chariot. He thought that, if
attacked at any time by robbers, they would not search such a place as that. When he
anticipated any danger, he would dress himself in his valet's clothes, and, mounting the
coach-box, put the valet inside. He was induced to take these precautions, because it was
no secret that he possessed the philosopher's stone; and many unprincipled adventurers
were on the watch for an opportunity to plunder him. A German Prince, whose name
Brodowski has not thought fit to chronicle, served him a scurvy trick, which ever
afterwards put him on his guard. This prince went on his knees to Sendivogius, and
entreated him in the most pressing terms to satisfy his curiosity by converting some
quicksilver into gold before him. Sendivogius, wearied by his importunity, consented,
upon a promise of inviolable secrecy. After his departure, the Prince called a German
alchymist, named Muhlenfels, who resided in his house, and told him all that had been
done. Muhlenfels entreated that he might have a dozen mounted horsemen at his
command, that he might instantly ride after the philosopher, and either rob him of all his
powder or force from him the secret of making it. The Prince desired nothing better; and

Muhlenfels, being provided with twelve men well mounted and armed, pursued
Sendivogius in hot haste. He came up with him at a lonely inn by the road-side, just as he
was sitting down to dinner. He at first endeavoured to persuade him to divulge the secret;
but, finding this of no avail, he caused his accomplices to strip the unfortunate
Sendivogius and tie him naked to one of the pillars of the house. He then took from him
his golden box, containing a small quantity of the powder; a manuscript book on the
philosopher's stone; a golden medal with its chain, presented to him by the Emperor
Rudolph; and a rich cap ornamented with diamonds, of the value of one hundred
thousand rix-dollars. With this booty he decamped, leaving Sendivogius still naked and
firmly bound to the pillar. His servants had been treated in a similar manner; but the
people of the inn released them all as soon as the robbers were out of sight.
Sendivogius proceeded to Prague, and made his complaint to the Emperor. An express
was instantly sent off to the Prince, with orders that he should deliver up Muhlenfels and
all his plunder. The Prince, fearful of the Emperor's wrath, caused three large gallows to
be erected in his court-yard; on the highest of which he hanged Muhlenfels, with another
thief on each side of him. He thus propitiated the Emperor, and got rid of an ugly witness
against himself. He sent back, at the same time, the bejewelled hat, the medal and chain,
and the treatise upon the philosopher's stone, which had been stolen from Sendivogius.
As regarded the powder, he said he had not seen it, and knew nothing about it.
This adventure made Sendivogius more prudent; he would no longer perform the process
of transmutation before any strangers, however highly recommended. He pretended, also,
to be very poor; and sometimes lay in bed for weeks together, that people might believe
he was suffering from some dangerous malady, and could not therefore by any possibility
be the owner of the philosopher's stone. He would occasionally coin false money, and
pass it off as gold; preferring to be esteemed a cheat rather than a successful alchymist.
Many other extraordinary tales are told of this personage by his steward Brodowski, but
they are not worth repeating. He died in 1636, aged upwards of eighty, and was buried in
his own chapel at Gravarna. Several works upon alchymy have been published under his
name.
THE ROSICRUCIANS.
It was during the time of the last-mentioned author that the sect of the Rosicrucians first
began to create a sensation in Europe. The influence which they exercised upon opinion
during their brief career, and the permanent impression which they have left upon
European literature, claim for them especial notice. Before their time, alchymy was but a
grovelling delusion; and theirs is the merit of having spiritualised and refined it. They
also enlarged its sphere, and supposed the possession of the philosopher's stone to be, not
only the means of wealth, but of health and happiness; and the instrument by which man
could command the services of superior beings, control the elements to his will, defy the
obstructions of time and space, and acquire the most intimate knowledge of all the secrets
of the universe. Wild and visionary as they were, they were not without their uses; if it
were only for having purged the superstitions of Europe of the dark and disgusting forms

with which the monks had peopled it, and substituted, in their stead, a race of mild,
graceful, and beneficent beings.
They are said to have derived their name from Christian Rosencreutz, or "Rose-cross," a
German philosopher, who travelled in the Holy Land towards the close of the fourteenth
century. While dangerously ill at a place called Damcar, he was visited by some learned
Arabs, who claimed him as their brother in science, and unfolded to him, by inspiration,
all the secrets of his past life, both of thought and of action. They restored him to health
by means of the philosopher's stone, and afterwards instructed him in all their mysteries.
He returned to Europe in 1401, being then only twenty-three years of age; and drew a
chosen number of his friends around him, whom he initiated into the new science, and
bound by solemn oaths to keep it secret for a century. He is said to have lived eightythree years after this period, and to have died in 1484.
Many have denied the existence of such a personage as Rosencreutz, and have fixed the
origin of this sect at a much later epoch. The first dawning of it, they say, is to be found
in the theories of Paracelsus, and the dreams of Dr. Dee, who, without intending it,
became the actual, though never the recognised founders of the Rosicrucian philosophy.
It is now difficult, and indeed impossible, to determine whether Dee and Paracelsus
obtained their ideas from the then obscure and unknown Rosicrucians, or whether the
Rosicrucians did but follow and improve upon them. Certain it is, that their existence was
never suspected till the year 1605, when they began to excite attention in Germany. No
sooner were their doctrines promulgated, than all the visionaries, Paracelsists, and
alchymists, flocked around their standard, and vaunted Rosencreutz as the new
regenerator of the human race. Michael Mayer, a celebrated physician of that day, and
who had impaired his health and wasted his fortune in searching for the philosopher's
stone, drew up a report of the tenets and ordinances of the new fraternity, which was
published at Cologne, in the year 1615. They asserted, in the first place, "that the
meditations of their founders surpassed everything that had ever been imagined since the
creation of the world, without even excepting the revelations of the Deity; that they were
destined to accomplish the general peace and regeneration of man before the end of the
world arrived; that they possessed all wisdom and piety in a supreme degree; that they
possessed all the graces of nature, and could distribute them among the rest of mankind
according to their pleasure; that they were subject to neither hunger, nor thirst, nor
disease, nor old age, nor to any other inconvenience of nature; that they knew by
inspiration, and at the first glance, every one who was worthy to be admitted into their
society; that they had the same knowledge then which they would have possessed if they
had lived from the beginning of the world, and had been always acquiring it; that they
had a volume in which they could read all that ever was or ever would be written in other
books till the end of time; that they could force to, and retain in their service the most
powerful spirits and demons; that, by the virtue of their songs, they could attract pearls
and precious stones from the depths of the sea or the bowels of the earth; that God had
covered them with a thick cloud, by means of which they could shelter themselves from
the malignity of their enemies, and that they could thus render themselves invisible from
all eyes; that the eight first brethren of the "Rose-cross" had power to cure all maladies;
that, by means of the fraternity, the triple diadem of the Pope would be reduced into dust;

that they only admitted two sacraments, with the ceremonies of the primitive Church,
renewed by them; that they recognised the Fourth Monarchy and the Emperor of the
Romans as their chief and the chief of all Christians; that they would provide him with
more gold, their treasures being inexhaustible, than the King of Spain had ever drawn
from the golden regions of Eastern and Western Ind." This was their confession of faith.
Their rules of conduct were six in number, and as follow:-First. That, in their travels, they should gratuitously cure all diseases.
Secondly. That they should always dress in conformity to the fashion of the country in
which they resided.
Thirdly. That they should, once every year, meet together in the place appointed by the
fraternity, or send in writing an available excuse.
Fourthly. That every brother, whenever he felt inclined to die, should choose a person
worthy to succeed him.
Fifthly. That the words "Rose-cross" should be the marks by which they should recognise
each other.
Sixthly. That their fraternity should be kept secret for six times twenty years.
They asserted that these laws had been found inscribed in a golden book in the tomb of
Rosencreutz, and that the six times twenty years from his death expired in 1604. They
were consequently called upon, from that time forth, to promulgate their doctrine for the
welfare of mankind. [The following legend of the tomb of Rosencreutz, written by
Eustace Budgell, appears in No. 379 of the Spectator:-- "A certain person, having
occasion to dig somewhat deep in the ground where this philosopher lay interred, met
with a small door, having a wall on each side of it. His curiosity, and the hope of finding
some hidden treasure, soon prompted him to force open the door. He was immediately
surprised by a sudden blaze of light, and discovered a very fair vault. At the upper end of
it was a statue of a man in armour, sitting by a table, and leaning on his left arm. He held
a truncheon in his right hand, and had a lamp burning before him. The man had no sooner
set one foot within the vault, than the statue, erecting itself from its leaning posture, stood
bolt upright; and, upon the fellow's advancing another step, lifted up the truncheon in his
right hand. The man still ventured a third step; when the statue, with a furious blow,
broke the lamp into a thousand pieces, and left his guest in sudden darkness. Upon the
report of this adventure, the country people came with lights to the sepulchre, and
discovered that the statue, which was made of brass, was nothing more than a piece of
clock-work; that the floor of the vault was all loose, and underlaid with several springs,
which, upon any man's entering, naturally produced that which had happened.
Rosicreucius, say his disciples, made use of this method to show the world that he had reinvented the ever-burning lamps of the ancients, though he was resolved no one should
reap any advantage from the discovery."]
