
26

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Daily
Bearish Bat—March 2000
Much like the Bearish Gartley in the S&P 500, the Bearish Bat shown in Figure 1.5 was the
harmonic pattern that marked the beginning of the bear market for the NASDAQ.

Figure 1.5

This was the first significant failure of a prior high within the established bullish trend in
nearly five years. For the NASDAQ Composite, the prior two years represented one of the
strongest bull markets in history. Although I maintained a bullish position from 1998 until
September 2000, this pattern was clearly signaling trouble for the NASDAQ Composite on a
long-term basis, and its completion was one of the primary reasons for my bearish position.

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Daily
Bearish Bat—August 2000
After the initial decline from the peak at 5000 was complete, the NASDAQ Composite
consolidated to form another Bearish Bat pattern at the 4200 level in August 2000
(see Figure 1.6).

Figure 1.6

The price action following the completion of the pattern signaled another devastating
continuation of the severe bear market at hand. In fact, this Bearish Bat resulted in an
acceleration of the entire bear market, as the index quickly declined from just above 4000 to
well below the 3000 level.

27

28

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Daily
Bearish Bat—January 2001
As if 2000 was not devastating enough, the index formed its third Bearish Bat for the year.
Although the NASDAQ Composite reversed shy of the 0.886 retracement, the index reversed
sharply, as another distinct PRZ marked the continuation of the devastating bear market (see
Figure 1.7).

Figure 1.7

After losing nearly half its value, this pattern marked another corrective peak within the
downtrend. Although it might have seemed that the pattern would not result in a significant
decline due to the devastation of the past year, this Bearish Bat led to largest percentage
decline of the entire bear market.

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

The Monster Bullish Gartley That Failed
After a few nasty continuations from distinct Bearish Bat patterns, the index was clearly in
the midst of a historic decline. The decisive bearish continuation throughout this decline was
indicating the severity of the downtrend. In fact, as early as October 2000 in my NASDAQ
Composite Market Report, I discussed this technical possibility long before it was actually
realized.
“If the index breaks below these lows at 3000, the NASDAQ will
most likely fall quickly in crashing fashion… there is ‘nothing but
air’ below this area… the overwhelming convergence of harmonic
numbers is in the 2200 area. This would be an extreme target on the
downside and represent a significant buying opportunity.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/nasd1000.htm)

29

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

30

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Weekly
Failed Bullish Gartley—April 2001
After realizing the next convergence of weekly projections indicated that the index was headed
for the 2200 area, as illustrated in Figure 1.8, I truly believed that this would be a substantial
low for the NASDAQ Composite Index. However, this was merely a brief stop in a further slide
that would take the index much lower. Although it did not seem possible at the time, I knew that
a severe violation of this long-term harmonic support would trigger another steep continuation
of the bear market. Although a minor bounce was experienced on the initial test of the upper
range of the PRZ, the price action severely lagged in this area. Furthermore, the eventual
continuation of the decline underscored the severe bearish condition that would require much
more time to stabilize and to reverse the downtrend.

A

C

B

8

0.61

0.786

X

Figure 1.8

D

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

31

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Weekly
Failed Bullish Gartley Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
The chart in Figure 1.9 shows the overwhelming convergence of harmonic numbers that
defined the PRZ range between 2165–2275. The weekly PRZ clearly shows the decisive price
action that violated this harmonic support. In fact, the index bounced briefly after exceeding
this area on the initial test, only to continue lower after reversing from the prior failed PRZ.
I remember thinking at this point: “Can it get any worse?”

B
18

1.6

0.786

D

Figure 1.9

No More Harmonic Scenarios—Now What?
At this point, the persistent downtrend that violated the monster weekly Bullish Gartley was
signaling more trouble ahead. One of the dilemmas with the monster Bullish Gartley was that
its structure could have possibly been interpreted as a Bat pattern. Specifically, the B point of
the pattern was not an exact 0.618 retracement. Hence, the possibility that the entire four-year
price structure could actually result in a completion of a Bullish Bat in the 1700 area quickly

32

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

became reality, as the index sank under the 2200 level. Below the multiyear 0.786, the only
other harmonic number to consider was the multiyear 0.886 retracement at 1750. This scenario
was difficult to imagine at the time, but the overwhelming bearish trend eventually drove the
index to test under this area, as well.
Although the alignment of the structure was somewhat in question, the pattern was distinct
enough to have been interpreted as a Bat and not a Gartley. Regardless, the index continued
well beyond this level too. Eventually, the NASDAQ Composite even violated the original low
point (X) of the pattern that was established in 1998—essentially erasing all of the gains made
from the past four years.

NASDAQ Conclusion
Despite bottoming above the all-important psychological 1000 level, the total destruction of this
multiyear bear market was on par with the greatest declines of all time. Quite frankly, the
multiyear NASDAQ Composite chart is similar in structure and magnitude to the Dow Jones
Industrial Average Crash of 1929. Although the Crash of 1929 was more severe, the NASDAQ
Composite lost an astounding 80% of its total value and the devastation remains to this day.
Despite the upside progress since the bear market low, the index has languished in comparison
to the other major indices, as it has barely retraced to the all-time 38.2% minimum bear market
level, as of this writing date.
The parabolic rise and ultimate decline of the NASDAQ Composite during this time was one
of the most challenging trading environments that I have ever faced. Although I realized the
extent of the impending bear market early on and stayed exclusively on the short side for most
of this period, the initial failures of substantial bullish patterns, especially in those first nine
months, taught me a great deal about their importance as continuation signals. Furthermore,
the action in the NASDAQ Composite led me to respect the importance of the predominant
trend in all trading situations more than ever before. Whether I am trading on a 5, 15, 60minute, or daily time frame, I now analyze all setups with respect to the predominant trend. For
the NASDAQ Composite, the price action eventually broke out of the multiyear established
downtrend channel after reversing from the bear market low. But, this required quite a bit of
time before the trend reversal was confirmed.
The most important consideration from the NASDAQ Composite advisory experience was
the respect that I now possess for the ability of distinct patterns to define critical turning points
in the price action. Whether a harmonic pattern reverses successfully or fails the PRZ, the
technical information provided by this phenomenon to act as “action spots” of the overall
direction of the price action that can define excellent trading opportunities.
The lessons learned from the NASDAQ’s performance during this time reinforced some
important concepts within the Harmonic Trading approach. Despite the devastating decline, the
various harmonic patterns and long-term Fibonacci ratios proved to be extremely effective
measurement tools that provided consistently accurate information in the NASDAQ Composite
analysis during an era of market extremes that comes along once every century!

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

33

Dow Jones Industrial Average 2000-2010 Review
Although the 2000 bear market in the Dow Jones Industrial Average was severe, the index
endured an even more devastating decline in its second bear market of the decade. The drop in
2008 was sudden in comparison to the price action earlier in the decade, which required most
of three years to reach its ultimate low.
The volatility of the Industrials during the last two decades is remarkable. Starting with a
substantial drop in 2000, the index rallied to new highs by mid-decade only to retrace the entire
move and more. As the index enters another decade, the action of these two bear markets
holds tremendous long-term significance. The action of the 2000 bear market established the
parameters for the rest of the decade. After the decline of 2008, the long-term price history has
established several critical technical and structural considerations. First, let’s review the
conditions of the 2000 bear market that preceded 2008’s demise.

The 2000 Bear Market—The Top, the Distribution, and
the Eventual Decline
Throughout 2000 as the other indices were breaking down substantially, the Dow Jones
Industrials were still consolidating after violating their multiyear uptrend. Although many have
argued that the bull market of the 1990s began from the 1987 (some suggest the 1982 low was
the real bottom) the bull market mania began in earnest with the breakout in 1995. For the next
several years, the Dow Jones Industrial Average rallied sharply, as the index continued to attain
year-over-year new highs. The interesting aspect of the longer-term price action during this
five-year accelerated period between 1995 and 2000 was the fact that the index was able to
hold at a critical Fibonacci retracement of each of the prior year’s rally. In essence, the weekly
price action possessed a strong technical upside, as the index was able to make higher highs
and higher lows for five years in a row. After the peak in early 2000, the index stalled and
started to roll over on the weekly chart. The long-term trend line starting from the 1995 low was
violated in mid-2000, and the index languished from that point forward. The five-year series of
weekly bullish retracements was violated at this time, as well. Therefore, the price action was
clearly beginning to signal a change at hand.
As I mentioned previously, the Dow Jones Industrial Average did not suffer the extent of the
decline as did the NASDAQ Composite in the early stages of the bear market. In fact, the
action in this index appeared weak, but it managed to hold in the 10,000 area for quite some
time before declining sharply. On its own, the price action in the Industrials was not terribly
negative until the latter half of the bear market. However, the steady distribution as evidenced
by the weak sideways action in combination with the severe declines of the other two indices
were the most critical factors that signaled lower prices.

34

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Dow Jones Industrial Average (^DJI): Weekly
Bullish Retracements 1994–2001
The weekly chart in Figure 1.10 shows the sequence of annual harmonic retracements. The
structural pattern each year rallied to a new all-time high, retraced to a distinct Fibonacci
retracement of the prior year, and continued higher.

0

0.5

6

0.78
18

2

0.6

38

0.

0.618
0.786

Figure 1.10

As long as the index was able to maintain this uptrend, holding the prior year’s critical
retracement, the long-term trend remained up. However, the series of retracements came to an
end in 2000, as the index violated its critical 50% retracement.

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

Dow Jones Industrial Average (^DJI): Daily
Bearish Retracements
After an initial sharp decline from the early 2000 peak where the index sank to the low 9000
level, the Industrials consolidated in an ever-tightening series of bearish retracements for the
rest of that year (see Figure 1.11).

6

8
0.7
0.7

86
0.886

0.886

Figure 1.11

In my June 2000 Dow Jones Industrial Market Report, I wrote:
“The action in the Dow Industrials continues to trade in a tighter
range. Sooner rather than later it is going to break in a direction
that will define the trend for the next few months. As the chart
illustrates, the index has traded in a downward trending channel,
where it has continually rallied to the 78.6% retracement of each
prior sell-off.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
harmonic/markets/dow0600.htm)

35

36

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The 9/11 Crash, Rebound, and Another Sell Signal
As terrible as the events of September 11, 2001, were, the crash in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average as a result of that fateful day had been building for quite some time. The clear
distribution from the year prior and the more severe action in the other indices were dominant
factors that contributed to the severe bearish trend developing in the Industrials. Furthermore,
the index lacked any clear patterns or distinct harmonic bullish setups on either the daily or the
weekly chart to suggest that a low had been completed. Although the 9/11 crash was severe,
the net result after the crash and corresponding bounce was actually a further reinforcement of
the existing bearish channel. The 9/11 crash was a challenging technical situation due to the
fact that it did appear to be the capitulation event, which most market pundits believed would
mark the bear market low. Despite the bullish consensus, I did not share this view. In my Dow
Jones Industrial Average March 2002 report, I wrote:
“For now, the index is trading above its current downtrend
channel.… The whole scenario appears to be another monster bear
trap. Also, the impulsive action off the September lows does not
represent a “stable” and “maintainable” trend. In fact, the 1974 and
1987 collapses required years to recover their losses—which is a
more favorable technical scenario than the current recovery. In
addition, the existence of many bearish patterns that have yet to
completely resolve their action suggests that the index needs time,
if it is going to assert itself to new highs. For these reasons, I
remain bearish on the index.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/dow0302.htm)

As I stated in the March report, I believed that the index needed to retest the 9/11 crash low
or at least retest a portion of this initial rally. The impulsive nature of the rally following the crash
was not sustainable, as the index started to stall at the top range of the bear market channel.
Although the technical action was clear, many “gurus” were calling for a new bull market. In my
April 2002 market report, I reiterated my case for a continuation of the bear market:
“The Dow Industrials have chopped around quite a bit in the past
month without much net result. The index has sold off recently,
closely testing the 10,000 mark. The action has been lackluster, as
most of the rallies are a one-day phenomenon, while the declines
have slowly dragged. … There are many market analysts making
claims of the beginning stages of the first bull market of the 21st
century. I’ve heard overly bullish targets anywhere from 15,000 to a
recent call by a well-known money manager for 30,000 in six years.
I think these claims warrant caution. Technically, these price targets
cannot be even considered until certain resistance levels are
breached.… The ‘Line in the Sand’ for such a breakout is above the
11,300 area—the all-time 0.886 retracement from the January 2000
high to the September 2001 low. It is a number that I have in the
back of my mind and I have mentioned it in a few past reports. But,
I continue to stick with my bearish overall position for several
reasons.”

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

37

• First of all, the trend is still down. It is amazing that some
analysts are calling for a new bull market when there are no
technical signs that would support such an argument. As
noted by the red channel, the Dow Industrials have failed to
break out of the two-year downtrend.
• Lower highs and lower lows. Each successive critical high and
low since the January 2000 peak has continued to trade at
lower levels.
• Lack of clear pattern. Throughout the Dow’s history, the index
has signaled new market uptrends with distinct bullish
patterns, including distinct secondary tests of prior critical
lows. The rally since September has been more impulsive than
constructive. This impulsive action can be observed in the Dow
Jones Transports, as well. Essentially, the index must provide a
significant retest of the September low to establish a
constructive and stable base.
…I will outline my longer-term downside targets over the next few
Dow Industrial reports. Although it is a long way down from current
levels, my first target for the Dow Jones Industrial Average is 6800.
There, I said it. In May’s report, I will explain my reasons. In the
short term, the Industrials have declined after testing an important
0.618 retracement at 10,400, serving as the critical resistance. I
favor a continuation of the recent selling, and I’m looking for the
index to begin to break under 10,000 to as low as the 9500 level.
Remember, the longer-term trend remains bearish and unless
convincing upside action materializes, the Industrials will continue
to slide.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
harmonic/markets/dow0402.htm)

Finally, A Low in Sight…One Problem, It’s 3000 Points
Lower
Quite simply, the index was clearly stalling at a critical 0.618 retracement at the top range of
the bear market trend channel. As the index continued to slide further, I knew that the next
breakdown and continuation of the primary bearish trend could lead to a much further decline.
As the index started to roll over, it became apparent that this next leg down would possibly
trigger a massive Bullish AB=CD.

38

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Dow Jones Industrial Average (^DJI): Weekly
Figure 1.12 shows the actual chart from the April market report. Clearly, the breakdown was
beginning to accelerate. The impending breakdown of the sharp up trend line and the reversal
at the weekly 0.618 retracement were distinct signs of the continuation of the bear market.

A

50% Retracement 1987-2000 @ 6760

0.7

07

C

61.8% Retracement 1994-2000 @ 6750
Bullish AB=CD @ 6750

B

1.4

1
D

Figure 1.12

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

39

Dow Jones Industrial Average (^DJI): Weekly
Monster Bullish AB=CD
The chart in Figure 1.13 is the original post from the initial prediction of an eventual low in the
6800 area. The breakdown following the test of the 0.618 weekly retracement turned out to be
a critical continuation point within the predominant bearish trend. In fact, it was probably the
best shorting opportunity of the entire bear market, as the index accelerated to the downside
after reversing at the C point of the massive AB=CD.

A

0.61

8
C

B

1.61

8
D

Figure 1.13

40

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The steady downside continuation in the months following confirmed the continuation of the
bear market. I reiterated this position in my May 2002 Dow Jones Industrial Average market
report and explained the longer-term reasons for the bear market low to occur at the
completion of the Bearish AB=CD:
“As I mentioned in last month’s report, the longer-term picture
remains bearish. This 15-year chart—starting from the crash low of
1987—reveals several interesting aspects of the future action.
Clearly, the sharp uptrend from the 1994 low to the 2000 high has
been violated. Furthermore, the chart shows that the 15-year bull
trend from the 1987 low is quite a distance from the current level. It
is important to be mindful of these two trend realities:
1. Obviously, the 1994–2000 rally, as defined by the sharp
uptrend, is over.
2. The 15-year trend line represents substantial support and
defines the lower limit of any significant potential correction.
The Dow Industrials are consolidating—more aptly termed
distributing—below the bull market uptrend of the second half of
the 1990s.… The Harmonics of the long-term price action confirm
the potential support of the long-term uptrend. Assuming the
current year’s high will remain untested, a potential Bullish AB=CD
completes at 6,700. This area is complemented by two critical
retracements from the 1987 low and the 1994 low, a 50%
retracement at 6,760 and a 61.8% retracement at 6,700, respectively.
These levels converge with the 15-year trend line and would
represent a correction worthy of resuming the long-term bullish
trend.… The overall market position for the Dow Jones Industrials
remains bearish.… I felt compelled to outline the larger scenario
that I have been monitoring for quite some time. I have been
officially bearish on this index for two years, and I will not change
this position until one of two things happens:
1. A significant correction to the aforementioned long-term
levels.
or
2. A clear and substantial violation of the primary bearish trend.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
harmonic/markets/dow0502.htm)

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

41

Price Action Just Above the Potential Reversal Zone
(PRZ): The Bullish Bat at the Bear Market Low
The Industrials continued to slide for another year after making the initial call for the bear
market low in the 6700–6800 range in April 2002. In combination with the psychological 7000
level, I firmly believed the index would test this immensely critical long-term harmonic support.
As the price action sank under the 7500 level, I knew the index was close. But, I firmly believed
in the “magnet effect” of so many technical factors to “attract” the ultimate low to occur in this
area. Furthermore, the S&P 500 possessed a similar long-term setup, and both indices were in
the midst of completing their respective harmonic patterns. In October 2002, the index nearly
tested the 7000 level, as the Dow declined sharply during this ominous seasonal time period.
The Industrials sank under the 7200 level before bouncing sharply. Despite another nearcompletion of the long-awaited PRZ, I remained bearish. In my opinion, the harmonic support in
the 6700–6800 area was so substantial that the index would eventually test it. Furthermore, the
Industrials lacked any other substantial technical possibility.
After a sharp but brief rally, the index rolled over again, sinking to retest the October lows.
This retest presented a dilemma, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average formed a distinct Bullish
Bat. In addition, the S&P 500 formed the same pattern; however, it had already tested its longterm harmonic support zone. In my April 2003 Dow Jones Industrial Average market report,
I discussed this dilemma:
“After completing this Dow Bullish Bat, the index has continued to
move higher and hold weekly lows. This is crucial for the stability
of the index. But what about 6800? The patterns indicated at a
minimum that this was a primary target for this bear market.…
Recent weeks have confirmed these lows as critical support,
indicating inherent strength.… Since last summer, the index has
tested the low 7000s three times and has been able to hold this
area for eight months. With this type of action, the index is poised
to make another attempt to retest the upper bear channel—at a
minimum. For the Dow Jones Industrials, its defining resistance is
the 9000 area. As I stated in last month’s report, ‘The next few
weeks, if not days, will likely resolve the entire Dow Jones 6800
scenario.’ The following few days were the beginning of this
resolution, as the index was able to hold the third test of the 7000
area.… The biggest question of all is: ‘Are we looking at a historic
low for the index?’ Possibly. However, the index must provide
confirmation and take out the aforementioned resistance levels
before committing to such a stance.…”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/dow0403.htm)
