
62

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

The chart examples used here, however, show the yen futures contract
traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the finest exchange in the
world for currency trading for a position trader or someone who wants to
trade options on currencies. The first is a monthly chart (Figure 4.33) of the
Japanese yen from late 1996 through February 2002. What does this chart
reveal to you? Some might conclude that the lows in 1998 could be retested
and that the market has more room to go lower. However, I saw an area
where the 2002 market was testing the lows of the moving averages in 1998,
not the actual lows. Go back in time and think what was happening in
1998—the Asian financial crisis, Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund
collapse, the Fed lowered interest rates, and Japanese Central Bank intervention was helping to prop up the yen.
The second chart (Figure 4.34) is a daily chart of the March yen contract that indicates a potential bottom forming in February 2002. A potential
bullish piercing pattern and the inability of the market to show any followthrough weakness near a substantial low pretty well gave a clue that a
benchmark low was being established.

FIGURE 4.33
permission.)

Monthly yen: What does it say? (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

Candles Plus

FIGURE 4.34

63

Daily yen: Go long? (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

One more aspect about deciding on the future price direction of this market was that the overall pessimism of analysts, traders, and the media was
high. Bullish Consensus and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission’s Commitments of Traders report revealed that large and small speculators were mostly short this market and that commercial traders were
long. (These reports are discussed in detail in Chapter 9.)
Here’s a summary of how a decision was made to go long or to buy call
options:
• The investment community was extremely bearish.
• The monthly long-term chart showed the current market price was digging into the area where the moving average lows (not price lows) had
occurred in 1998.
• The daily chart was demonstrating that prices were supported near the
7450 level.
• On a fundamental note, the Japanese Central Bank was intervening to
support the yen’s value, adding a strong buying force to the market mix.

64

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

Now you have a market that has made a significant decline back down
to an area where governments step in to provide price protection and the
speculating community was bearish after the fact. The daily candle charts
were signaling to me that the downmove was subsiding. The third chart
(Figure 4.35) shows what had happened on the June yen chart and why it
helps not to get too “bearish in the hole.” The fact that the charts from different time frames helped me conclude that a buying opportunity might exist
was also the correct call.
The move that occurred between the 7450 and 7950 levels resulted in a
short, sharp 500-point rally. Notice that it took this market nearly another
month to begin moving, but move it did! Of course, you might say, “Well,
that was too long to wait around to make money.” Fine. The important point
is that you can see that selling short would have been a bad decision with
prices near the 7450 area. This type of charting analysis may not have gotten you to buy the low and stay with the position, but I do believe that by
checking different time periods you would not have sold short either, risking
a lot of money.

FIGURE 4.35
permission.)

Daily yen: getting the reward. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

65

Candles Plus

The weekly bond chart (Figure 4.36) provides another example of multiple candle patterns that come together to confirm price direction and give
you confidence to act to stay on the right side of the market. The morning doji
star that formed in March signaled that a major bottom was in place and
gave a clear buy signal. Then the continuation pattern of a rising three
method provided a clue that the trend was going to continue. Acting like the
western bull flag formation, this pattern projected prices would reach the 108
level. As you can see from the chart, that price objective was attained, plus
another 5 points.
One other point about different time frames: If it takes, for example,
three time frames for a pattern to develop, it usually takes at least three or
more time frames for the results—in this case, the price advance—to
develop.
These aren’t the only candle chart patterns and signals. However, if you
would like more information on the complexities of this technique and want
to continue your studies in this field, I can refer you to several books on this

Rising three methods
formation

Morning doji star

FIGURE 4.36
permission.)

Multiple buy patterns in bonds. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

66

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

subject. Start with Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques by Steve
Nison. Then study his other book, Beyond Candlesticks, or his recent video
course. Libraries often have copies of these books, or you can go to a bookstore or to www.candlecharts.com to buy a copy for your personal library.
Also, as mentioned in Chapter 3, if you ever have the opportunity to
take a trading course taught by Dan Gramza, I strongly recommend that you
consider taking it.
One final point: Like other techniques, candle chart analysis is not an
exact science. It is always necessary to validate signals and chart patterns
manually, even when you have expert software designed to identify various
patterns for you. I still believe the best way to get a feel for the market and to
watch for certain identifiable patterns is by looking at the chart and incorporating other techniques such as moving averages and other forms of technical analysis for confirmation of a tradable setup. Looking at a chart with the
pivot point numbers in front of you allows a more three-dimensional look
into daily, weekly, or monthly price projections that could be of immeasurable value to your trading.

CHAPTER 5

Chart Analysis
Volume, Open Interest,
Price Patterns

Choose a job you love, and you will never have to
work a day in your life.
—Confucius

ow we are getting to the real meat and potatoes of technical analysis.
This chapter explains and illustrates the importance of various chart
patterns and analysis typically associated with bar charting but applicable to other types of analysis as well.
We look first at volume and open interest, two items included on many
data services but which, for the most part, seem to be ignored by a lot of individual traders with whom I have talked. These are important tools so let’s
review the basics.

N

VOLUME
Volume is simply the number of trades executed during a specified period—
one trader buys and one trader sells and the volume is one. The volume figure usually released by the exchange is a total for all of the contract months
of a given market. For example, if the e-mini S&P trades the March, June,
September, and December contract months, the volume represents the total
of all the trades, long and short combined, for all the months.
Most technical analysts believe that volume is an indicator of the
strength of a market trend. Because it is also a relative measure of the dominant behavior of the market, analysts regard volume as an important aspect

67

68

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

of analysis, particularly when trading stocks. Futures exchanges do not release volume figures for a regular session until the next day for many contracts. As a result, futures traders have had to adapt by using other methods
to detect market strength such as pivot point analysis, moving average studies, Bollinger bands, or simply chart pattern recognition skills. When the volume numbers are released by the exchanges, they can be used to verify the
trend or price action from a daily charting perspective.
John Bollinger, one of my radio show guests, contends that “volume is
everything,” especially when combined with a trading tool such as Bollinger
bands, which he developed, or Larry Williams’s accumulation/distribution
indicator. In fact, Bollinger, who has a Chartered Market Technician designation from the Market Technicians Association and has been an analyst
for FNN and CNBC, calls volume “the crux of analysis.” He also suggests
that one of the best things a new trader can do to learn about the markets is
to take a course in human psychology at a local community college. Bollinger
has a wealth of technical knowledge, so his opinion is widely respected.
Volume is important because it is a measurement of the market’s acceptance or rejection of price at a specific level and time. There are several
guidelines for using volume analysis on price charts. The first one is that if
a market is increasing in price and volume is increasing, the market is considered to be in a bullish mode and can support further price increases. The
exact opposite is true for a declining market. However, if a substantial daily
market price increase or decrease occurs after a long steady uptrend or
downtrend and has an unusually high volume period, it is considered to be
a blow-off top or bottom and can signal a market turning point or trend
reversal.

OPEN INTEREST
Open interest reveals the total number of positions that are still open and
outstanding, that is, they have not been closed by an offsetting trade or delivered upon. Remember, futures trading is a zero-sum game so that for
every long there is a short and for every short there is a long—a buyer for
every seller and a seller for every buyer. The open interest figure represents
the longs or shorts but not the total of both.
Consider it like a money flow indicator. The general guideline for open
interest is that when prices rise and open interest increases, this activity
suggests that more new longs have entered the market and more new money
is flowing into the market, reflecting why the price increased. Of course,
the exact opposite is true in a declining market.

Putting the Data Together

69

PUTTING THE DATA TOGETHER
The value of open interest figures comes from combining them with both
price movement and data from volume to evaluate the condition of the market. If there is a price increase on strong volume and open interest increases,
then this is a signal that there is more buying interest that could mean a
continued trend advance. If prices increase but volume stays relatively flat
or declines and open interest declines, then this reflects a weakening market condition. This is considered to be a bearish situation because the combination of rising prices and declining open interest indicates that shorts
are covering by buying back their positions rather than new longs entering
the market. That activity would give a trader a clue that there is a potential
trend reversal coming.
It is important to understand the concept of matching price and trading activity. If you are watching a continuing long-term trend in a futures
contract, whether the direction is up or down, and prices start to fluctuate
with wider than normal daily swings or ranges—that is, extremely volatile
movements—combined with unusually strong volume and a decline in open
interest, you may be in a climaxing market condition and seeing a clue for
a potential major trend reversal coming. Figure 5.1 shows an example that
marked the end of a bull market in bond futures.
It appears that bond traders who were short threw in the towel by buying to cover their positions and that the longs took profits by selling out of
their positions. All of this activity would explain the higher than normal volume. When the longs liquidated their positions, this was reflected by a decline in open interest.
As for the wild price advance, shorts were bailing out of the market
almost in a panic state of mind, and longs were not willing to sell too cheap,
explaining the upward price behavior. These three characteristics are needed
to complete a climaxing top or bottom. Most volume and open interest
followers watch for this setup as a major sell signal. This condition is exactly what happened to the bonds, producing a truly remarkable textbook
sell signal.
These concepts of volume and open interest can help any trader understand the underlying market condition and the current trend. With that information, you may decide to buy dips instead of selling intraday rallies.
The fact that the exchanges do not publish open interest data for many
markets until the following day at about noon is a problem for analysts. Estimated volume figures are available after the markets close but not the actual numbers. Most financial papers report the information the day after that.
So it is important to know where to get the information faster than by reading it in the newspaper. If you want to learn to become an avid disciple of

70

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

Heavy spike
in volume

FIGURE 5.1

Spiking a bond bull. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

charting and want information on volume and open interest sooner, you
can go the exchange web sites.

CHART PATTERNS
Chart pattern recognition, without a doubt, provides a true sense of price
forecasting, but it works significantly better in hindsight than it does in anticipating a price pattern for the future. You can watch for many patterns or
formations on a typical bar chart, formations that have certain predictable
qualities as you try to forecast a future price move. But chart analysis is like
being an artist trying to paint a picture that some other artist started, illustrating why technical analysis is considered to be an art form rather than a
work of science.
At the very least, chart pattern recognition is a subjective method open
to different interpretations by different individuals. Every trader has to do
his or her own homework. I might see a head-and-shoulders top pattern; you

Chart Patterns

71

might be anticipating a long-term double bottom. Who is going to be right,
only the markets will tell.
Good brokers may point out to their customers some opportunities
that exist in the market, but really good brokers will insist that customers
do their own homework and look at a chart themselves. The problem is that
some customers don’t know how or even what to look at! This book is intended to help those people.
The real essence of trading is to buy near levels of support and to sell
near levels of resistance. The task of the analyst is to find out what is support and what is resistance. The job of a trader is to capture the market’s reaction off those levels and profit from it.
This chapter shows you what I believe are the more reliable and popular chart patterns and how they can be effective in identifying support and
resistance levels. More important is which ones generate reliable buy and
sell signals. It was once told to me that the most reliable signal is the one that
doesn’t work. At the time I thought that didn’t make sense until I understood
why there are no guarantees in this business. Remembering that nothing is
100 percent reliable in technical analysis or in trading, let’s look at some
chart formations, and you can test for yourself what you see.

M Tops, W Bottoms, or 1-2-3 Patterns
One of the more reliable chart patterns is a W bottom, also known as a double bottom, with a higher right-side breakout. You want to be sensitive to this
chart pattern because it has a higher frequency of occurring, but you want
to make a note: Not all W bottoms break out to the upside or have the same
type of reaction off the bottom.
The cocoa chart provided as Figure 5.2 illustrates how this pattern
forms. Price makes a low after a downtrend (point 1), then rallies to make
a reactionary high (point 2). Then the price falls back again to retest the low
but does not go as low as the previous low (point 3), followed by another
price rally that goes beyond the first reactionary high, generating a buy signal. In this case, the W or 1-2-3 formation was confirmed once the market
closed above the November 1 high (point 2).
The inverse of this pattern is dubbed an M top or 1-2-3 swing top formation. The market hits a high, sets back to an interim low, rallies but does
not exceed the earlier high, and falls back below the interim low, the point
at which a sell signal is generated.

Head-and-Shoulders Tops or Bottoms
The head-and-shoulders top or inverted head-and-shoulders bottom can
be used not only to indicate price direction but also as a measuring or

72

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

1-2-3 W
bottom formation
2
3
1

FIGURE 5.2

W reversal. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

projecting indicator (Figure 5.3). Head-and-shoulder tops or bottoms are
considered to be a strong indicator of major trend reversals, depending on
how the market reacts at the neckline of the pattern.
Four components are involved. Looking at the topping version of the
pattern, first, the left shoulder is formed as prices rally and then fall back.
Second, the market rallies again and a higher high occurs, forming the head.
Third, prices slip back, reaching a low that about matches the previous low;
rally to about the same height as the left shoulder high; then sink back again
to the earlier lows, forming the right shoulder. The fourth element is the socalled neckline, a trend line along the bottoms of the two lows. If prices drop
below the neckline, the reversing action of the head-and-shoulders topping
pattern is completed, and prices are expected to continue to move lower
after what is usually a tug-of-war in the vicinity of the neckline.
The symmetry or distance is important in the head-and-shoulders pattern. The distance from the left shoulder to the head should be about the
same as the distance from the head to the right shoulder. The levels of the
shoulder highs should be about the same as should the levels of the lows

73

Chart Patterns

Head
Shoulder

Shoulder

Neckline

Measuring
objective

FIGURE 5.3

Head-and-shoulders measurement. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

that form the neckline. Next, if you measure the distance from the shoulder
highs (some analysts use the top of the head) to the neckline and subtract
that distance from the neckline, the result is the next price target level.
You can use the same type of process with an inverted head-andshoulders bottom to project where the next higher price target should be.

Gap Analysis
The definition of a gap for a technical analyst is an area on a chart that is left
blank when the market trades from one period to another above or below the
previous time period’s high or low price range. Gaps do occur frequently in
illiquid markets and, thus, have no importance to you. However, when gaps
occur in liquid markets and on high volume, those are the gaps on which you
want to focus.
Gaps have several classifications and meanings. First, there are the common gaps, which are usually insignificant and are filled by prices retreating
into the gap sometime down the road as they retest that price area. Previous

74

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

levels left from gaps are considered targets of support when they are below
the current market price or targets of resistance when they are above the
current market price. The theory is that it took considerable energy to jump
from one point to the next to create the gap in the first place. Returning
back to that level is considered completing unfinished business.
The next type of gap often comes in a series of three (Figure 5.4). The
breakaway gap, as its name implies, signals a break from the previous price
direction and the beginning of a new direction. It usually occurs at an area
of congestion near a top or bottom. The second gap in this series is the midpoint or measuring gap. That terminology again is probably self-explanatory
as it signals that the move is about half over—that is, you can measure the
distance from the first gap to the second and use that distance to get an idea
where the market is headed. The third gap in this series is the exhaustion
gap, which signals that market participants are tired and capitulating. It
usually indicates that a directional trend is completed and a turning point
is coming.
To illustrate a point about the validity of multiple verification techniques,
not only were the three gaps on the sugar chart (Figure 5.4) present and ob-

Breakaway gap

Midpoint gap

Exhaustion gap

FIGURE 5.4

Three gaps down. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

75

Chart Patterns

vious but the distance of the gaps was essential in determining the bottom
as well. In addition, the monthly pivot point support number was 6.09. The
actual low was 6.11! But we’ll get to pivot point analysis in Chapter 6. The
soybean chart (Figure 5.5) also identifies a three-gap series clearly, in this
case, in an uptrend. Identifying the three gaps may not have convinced you
to enter a long position in soybeans, but I believe that if you identified them,
it would have at least prevented you from going long at the top.
The last classification of gaps and the most powerful of all gap formations is the island pattern that occurs at a top or bottom. In an island top,
the market gaps up from a previous bar, trades at the higher level for a bar
or maybe a few bars, and then leaves a gap below the previous bar’s range
as prices collapse into a downtrend. It is a combination of an exhaustion
gap on the upside and a breakaway on the downside and leaves a block of
price action isolated by a void. The more popular islands stay within a threebar period, but some technicians believe that price action over several days
and even weeks can still form the island pattern.

Exhaustion
gaps

Midpoint or
measuring gap
Breakaway gap

FIGURE 5.5

Three gaps up. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

76

CHART ANALYSIS: Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

Islands generate a very strong signal and should not be ignored, as suggested by the island bottom on the sugar futures chart shown as Figure 5.6.

Trend Line Analysis
Trend lines are the simplest, most basic means of market analysis but get at
the essence of what analysis and trading are all about. Identifying whether
the market is moving up, down, or sideways and being able to profit from
that information is the goal of every trader.
To draw a simple trend line, all you do is connect the dots, so to speak.
For an uptrend, you just draw a line from one low on the chart to the next
major low. The simple definition of an uptrend is a series of higher lows and
higher highs.
Trend line analysis can be applied several ways in making a trading decision. Some traders use trend line breaks to enter a position. Others use
the trend line as support in an uptrend, entering a long position when the
price is near the extended support line. Others note that when prices get
