Lessons from Institutional Day-Traders
Institutional traders work for banks, brokerage houses, and similar
firms. A company may have more than a hundred traders sitting behind
rows of expensive equipment. Maintaining each seat costs several
thousand dollars a month, not counting salaries and bonuses. Each
institutional trader narrowly focuses on a single market. One may trade
only two-year Treasury notes, another only five-year notes, and so on.
Institutional traders generate paper-thin returns on huge volumes of
capital. A friend of mine who trades bonds for a leading investment
bank in New York has access to essentially unlimited capital during the
day, but his overnight positions are capped at $250 million. His standard deviation, the amount he usually wins or loses in a trading day,
is $180,000. This is 0.072% of his overnight limit, and only about
0.010% of his intraday size.
His profits appear large until you express them as a percentage of his
account and ask yourself what you would earn if you traded as well as
him. Suppose your account is $250,000 or one-thousandth of his $250
million. If you could match my friend’s percentage gains, you’d earn
$180 on overnight trades and $25 at the end of a busy day-trading session. That would hardly cover your costs! Why do institutions do it?
The big boys benefit from economies of scale, but the main reason
they stay in the game is to keep themselves visible to potential customers. Their main income comes from commissions and spreads on
customer orders. Institutional traders accept paper-thin returns to maintain a presence in the market, which gives them first dibs on lucrative
customer business. They work to maintain visibility, and as long as they
do not lose money, they’re happy.
The main thing we can learn from institutional traders is their rigid
system of discipline, with managers forcing them to cut losses. A private trader has no manager, which is why he needs to design and
implement a strict system of money management rules. Institutional
traders benefit from focusing on a single market, unlike private traders
who may jump from cocoa today to IBM tomorrow. It pays to choose
just a few trading vehicles and learn them well.
Institutions are busy scalping, and a private trader is better off keeping out of this area to avoid getting trampled. If you see a trade that
offers only a few ticks, it is safer to pass it up because the institutions
can barge in at any moment. The longer your timeframe, the less competition you have from them.

142

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Private traders have one enormous advantage over institutions, but
most of them toss it away. Corporate traders must broadcast their bid
and ask in order to maintain a presence in the markets. “How are you
for 5 dollar/yen,” calls a customer, wishing to trade $5 million for yen
or vice versa. The bank trader must quote his bid and ask, ready to
take either side of that trade. He must trade at all times, while a private trader has the luxury of waiting for the best moment.
You are under no obligation to buy or sell. You have the freedom
of standing aside, but most private traders throw away this awesome
advantage. People get sucked into the excitement of the game. They
jump in instead of waiting for the best trades. Remember, the idea is
to trade well, not to trade often.

Getting the Data
Real-time data tends to be pricey, and you must cover its cost before
taking home a dime. Many exchanges make fortunes selling real-time
data, forcing vendors to delay free broadcasts to the public. The 20minute delay preserves entertainment value, but trying to use that data
for day-trading is like driving a car with cardboard for a windshield,
looking out through a side window. Day-trading is a very fast game,
played by some very clever people. Trying to compete against them on
the basis of delayed data is a joke.
Most day-traders use software to display, chart, and analyze their data.
Real-time analytic software has been around for years, but the great NASDAQ bull market led to an upsurge in the popularity of Level 2 quotes,
which show who is bidding and offering what stock. This is ballyhooed
as the new road to riches. Most of those riches go to vendors and brokers who benefit from hyperactive trading. I haven’t noticed any
improvement in the overall performance of private traders with Level 2
quotes. The early users may have had an advantage a few years ago,
when the concept was new, but once it became popular, the edge disappeared. This is a common story with new technologies—early users
get an edge, the tool becomes a fad, and the edge fades away.
A day-trader needs a dedicated computer, good analytic software,
and a fast connection to the Internet. This setup may cost several thousand dollars, plus a monthly bill of a few hundred dollars for live data
and exchange fees. You can reduce the cost of data by following just
one market, which is not a bad idea because it helps keep you focused.

TRADING

143

Some professional futures traders dispense with computers altogether. They quit their day jobs and go on the floor. Some move to a
city that has an exchange where they buy or lease a seat. Costs are
higher on bigger exchanges that handle high volumes in popular markets, and cheaper on smaller exchanges in lesser markets. The best
way to learn is to get a job as a clerk on the floor and work for someone, but this option is open only to the young—the floor generally
doesn’t hire people over 25. They want them young, pliable, and without any preconceived ideas.

Psychology
The great paradox of day-trading is that it demands the highest level of
discipline, while attracting the most impulsive, addictive, and gamblingprone personalities. If trading is a thrill, then day-trading provides the
best rush. It is a joy to recognize a pattern on your screen, put in an
order, and watch the market explode in a stiff rise, stuffing thousands
of dollars into your pockets. A former military pilot said that daytrading was more exciting than sex or flying jet aircraft.
Corporate traders are in the market because their companies gave
them jobs. Private traders enter for reasons that are partly rational and
partly irrational. The only rational reason is to make money, but a profitable day-trade delivers such a great high that it sweeps most people
off their feet. Flooded with pleasure, they go looking for the next high
and lose money.
The purpose of any business is to make money. A well-run business
also gratifies many of its owners’ and employees’ psychological needs,
but money is the pivot of the enterprise. Traders who become hooked
on thrills take their eyes off the money and jump into impulsive trades.
Vendors encourage day-traders because losers spend like drunken
sailors on software, data, systems, and even coaches, most of whom
have never traded or busted out. Go into any port area, and you’ll
see plenty of bars, brothels, and tattoo parlors. Go into day-trading,
and you’ll see more vendors than you can shake a stick at. There is money
to be made from turkeys whose market life is measured in months
or weeks.
Successful day-traders test patterns and systems, measure risks and
rewards, and focus on building equity. Winners tend to be emotionally
cool. If day-trading attracts you, you must answer several questions:

144

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Are you successfully trading with end-of-day charts? If the answer is
“no,” stay away from day-trading. You need a minimum of one
year successful trading experience before attempting to day-trade.
Do you have an addictive streak? If you have a history of drinking,
drugs, overeating, or gambling, stay as far away as possible from
day-trading because it will trigger your addictive tendency and
destroy your account.
Do you have a written business plan? How much money will you
trade? In what markets? How will you choose entries and exits?
How will you manage risks, use stops, and allocate capital? Do
not go near day-trading without a written plan. Be sure to keep
separate records for day-trading and position trading. Find out
which one is more profitable for you.

Choosing the Market
Day-trading compares to position trading like flying to driving.
Comfortably seated behind the wheel of a car you can lean back,
listen to music, use a cell phone, and even glance at a magazine while
stopped at a red light. Do not attempt that in a jet.
Day-trading demands total concentration on a single market. It is
like serial monogamy—you may trade several markets in your career,
but only one at any given time. What market will you choose? The two
essential features of a good day-trading market are high liquidity and
volatility.
Liquidity refers to the average daily volume of your trading vehicle—
the higher, the better. It is easy to join a huge crowd and just as easy
to leave without drawing attention to yourself and distorting the market with your order. When you place a market order to buy or sell a
thinly traded stock or a commodity, you give the pros a license to skin
you alive in slippage. If you use a limit order, it may never get filled.
Trading a big liquid market, such as IBM or soybeans, allows you to
get in and out more easily with less slippage.
Volatility refers to the average daily range of your trading vehicle.
The greater the distance between the high and the low of the day, the
bigger your target. Shooting at a big target is easier than shooting at a
tiny one. Remember our discussion of channels? If you know how to
trade, you will get more money from a wide channel, at any level of
skill. Someone who trades at C level and takes 10% from a channel will
get 1 point from a 10-point channel, but 2 points from a 20-point chan-

TRADING

145

nel. A C-level trader has no business day-trading, but even an A trader
wants as big a target as possible.
You can find good liquidity and volatility in the leading stocks,
futures, and currencies. Another important feature of a day-trading
market is its personality. Some markets move smoothly, others like to
jump. Bonds, for example, tend to spend a day or two in a very narrow range, then explode, moving more in half an hour than in several
preceding days, and then fall asleep again. Trading them is like infantry
fighting—90% sheer boredom and 10% sheer terror.
What markets should you day-trade? In stocks, look at those that
show up on the list of the most active issues of the day. That’s where
the action is. These stocks’ liquidity is very high, and their volatility tends
to be good. Explore the list of top gainers and losers for the day. When
the same name shows up on that list day in and day out, it is clearly
among the most volatile issues, with great day-trading potential.
When it comes to futures, make your first steps in such relatively peaceful markets as corn, sugar, or copper. Once you’ve learned the ropes,
consider moving up to stock index futures or the futures on the German
Bund, both among the favorite vehicles of professional day-traders.

Analysis and Decision Making
If you remove price and time markings from a chart, you won’t be
able to tell whether it is weekly, daily, or intraday. Markets are fractal,
to borrow a term from chaos theory. To recall our earlier discussion,
the seashore is fractal, since the coastline looks equally jagged from
any height. Since charts in different timeframes are so alike, we may
analyze them using similar methods.
Coming to day-trading after a year or more of successful position
trading gives you a great advantage. You can use the same methods,
and only have to speed them up. You can use the principles of Triple
Screen to make strategic decisions on longer-term charts and tactical
choices on shorter-term charts.
SCREEN ONE

Analyze your market on a longer-term chart, using trend-following indicators, and make a strategic decision to trade long, short, or stand aside.
Choose the timeframe you prefer to trade and call it intermediate. Let
us select a five-minute chart for our intermediate timeframe, with each
bar representing five minutes of trading. You can choose a longer chart

146

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A
Wed

Thu

Fri

Figure 6.3 Day-Trading—25-Minute Chart
If we prefer a five-minute chart for day-trading, we should start our analysis with a timeframe that is five times longer, a 25-minute chart. Different
stocks go in and of out of favor with day-traders. Human Genome
Sciences (HGSI) is popular today, with strong, healthy trends and no
gaps. There is a downtrend on Monday, which bottoms out on Tuesday,
turns up on Wednesday, and rises into Friday, with a pullback at the end
of that day as longs take profits before the weekend.
There is a strong buy signal right at the opening on Wednesday as the
EMA turns up, confirmed by the uptick of MACD-Histogram. As EMA
keeps rising, it tells us to trade HGSI from the long side; the first
screen of Triple Screen is bullish. This signal is much more important than
any uptick or downtick of MACD-Histogram. When MACD rises in gear
with the EMA, it suggests trading larger size, but when it declines, it is a
perfectly normal “breathing” behavior, as long as there is no bearish
divergence.
At the right edge of the chart the market is closing for the weekend.
The EMA is slightly rising, so bulls have to be given the benefit of doubt.
Also, MACD-Histogram has declined to the level normally associated
with bottoms; it is closer to a bottom than to a top. We should wait for the
opening on Monday, anticipating a buy signal, while being prepared to
trade from the short side if the EMA ticks down.

TRADING

147

if you wish, but not much shorter, as that might pit you against institutional scalpers. To stand completely apart from the crowd, you may
select an unorthodox length, such as seven or nine minutes.
Some day-traders, intoxicated by the promise of technology, use
one-minute or even tick charts. These provide the illusion that you are
present on the floor, even though it can easily take half a minute or
longer for the data to be keyed in, uploaded to the satellite, and broadcast to your screen. You are not on the floor, you are behind. When
markets begin to run, time lags get even worse.
Multiply your intermediate timeframe by five to find the long-term
timeframe. If your intermediate timeframe is five minutes, use a 25minute chart. If your software does not allow plotting 25-minute charts,
round it off to half an hour. A successful trader needs to stand apart
from the crowd. This is why it pays to use uncommon parameters for
charts and indicators. There are probably thousands of people using
half-hourly charts, but only a tiny minority uses 25-minute charts and
gets its signals a little faster.
Apply a trend-following indicator to the long-term chart and use its
direction to make a strategic decision to trade long, short, or stand aside.
Start with a 20- or 30-bar EMA and adjust its length until it tracks your
market with a minimum of whipsaws. When the 25-minute EMA rises, it
identifies an uptrend and tells you to trade from the long side or stand
aside. When the EMA falls, it identifies a downtrend and tells you to
trade only from the short side or stand aside. Make a strategic decision on
this long-term chart before returning to your intermediate-term charts.
Successful day-traders tend to rely less on indicators and more on
chart patterns. The gaps between trading days can distort intraday indicators. Still, some indicators, such as moving averages and envelopes,
also called channels, are useful even with intraday charts.
SCREEN TWO

Return to the intermediate (five-minute) charts to look for entries in the
direction of the trend.
Plot a 22-bar EMA on the five-minute chart and draw a channel
that contains about 95% of price action. Moving averages reflect the
average consensus of value, while channels show the normal limits of
bullishness and bearishness. We want to get long during uptrends, buying below the EMA on a five-minute chart, and short in downtrends,
above the EMA. Do not get long above the upper channel line, where

148

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

the market is overvalued, or sell short below the lower channel line,
where it is undervalued.
Use oscillators, such as MACD-Histogram and Force Index, to identify overbought and oversold areas. Trade in the direction of the tide,
entering when a wave goes against the tide. When the 25-minute trend
is up, falling prices and oscillators on a five-minute chart reflect a temporary bearish imbalance—a buying opportunity. When the 25-minute
trend is down, rising prices and oscillators on a five-minute chart reflect
a temporary bullish imbalance—a shorting opportunity.
Day-traders sometimes ask whether they should analyze weekly and
daily charts. The weekly trend is essentially meaningless for them, and
even the daily is of limited value. Looking at too many timeframes can
lead to “paralysis from analysis.”
Place SafeZone stops. After entering a trade, place a protective stop,
using the SafeZone method (see page 173). Consider making it “on close

A

B

C

D

Thu

E

Fri

Figure 6.4 Day-Trading—Five-Minute Chart
The long-term 25-minute chart has told us to trade HGSI from the long
side. The declines of the intermediate trend provide buying opportunities.
On Thursday, the five-minute chart heads down from the opening, punching below its EMA. Wait for the MACD-Histogram to tick up, confirming
a buy signal (point A). It shows that the decline is ending, and within half
an hour HGSI rallies to its upper channel line (point B), a good place to

TRADING

149

only”; watch the screen and give an order to exit only if the five-minute
bar closes beyond your stop level. This way, a brief penetration caused
by market noise will not touch off a stop. Naturally, there is no bargaining or waiting for another tick. To be a day-trader, you must have
iron discipline!
SCREEN THREE

This screen handles entries and exits.
Enter in the vicinity of a moving average on a five-minute chart. If
the 25-minute trend is up, buy pullbacks to the EMA on a five-minute
chart, especially when oscillators are oversold. Reverse the procedure
in downtrends. This is better than chasing breakouts, buying at the
highs, or shorting at the lows.
Take profits in the vicinity of the channel line. If you buy near the
moving average, aim to sell near the upper channel line. If your five-

take profits. It declines back to the EMA, giving ample opportunities to
position long, even if you missed the first signal. The MACD bottom in
area C is more shallow, showing that bears are weaker, reinforcing the
buy signal. Prices make four more attempts to reach the upper channel
line. You can sell at any of them, but if you have not sold during the first
three, the fourth is a must. It is getting late in the day, you already know
that today prices do not seem to be able to reach their upper channel
line, and as a day-trader you do not want to hold overnight. Sure enough,
during the last half-hour there is a downdraft, as day-traders who overstayed the uptrend start pushing through the door, trying to get out.
On Friday, there is a buy signal right at the opening, followed by a
quick rally to the upper channel line for profit taking, and then another
decline to the EMA (point D). The subsequent rallies never quite reach the
upper channel line, but there is another buying opportunity at point E,
during a pullback to the EMA. There are two weak rallies later in the afternoon, and if you do not use them to take profits, there is one last ring
for the hard of hearing when the EMA turns down. Intraday charts often
have countertrend moves late in the day, as traders with paper profits start
closing positions.
At the right edge of the chart, the trading day and the trading week are
over. You have no overnight risk and can relax before the opening on
Monday, when the 25-minute MACD-Histogram will tell you whether to
trade this stock from the long or the short side.

150

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

minute oscillators, such as MACD-Histogram, are making new highs
and related markets are rallying, you may wait for the channel to be
hit or penetrated. If the indicators are weak, grab your profit fast without waiting for prices to touch the channel.
Measure your performance as the percentage of the channel width.
You must be an A trader to make day-trading worthwhile. Even then,
you have to prove to yourself that you can make more money daytrading than position trading. Try to trade only a few times a day and
aim to catch at least a third of that day’s range. Enter cautiously, but
run fast. Do not trade during after-hours sessions when markets tend
to be very thin.

Taking Day-Trades Overnight
If you enter a trade early in the day and the market keeps moving in
your favor, should you hold that trade overnight? How about over the
weekend? Of course, those questions only apply to profitable trades.
Taking a loss overnight is strictly for losers.
A beginner must close his day-trades by the end of the day, but an
experienced pro has the option of holding them overnight. When a
market closes within a few ticks of its high, it usually exceeds it the
next morning. A market that closes on its lows usually flirts with lower
lows the next day. Those extensions are not guaranteed, as the market
may close on its high, get hit with bad news overnight, and open
sharply lower. This is why only experienced day-traders have the
option of taking their trades overnight.
Research, knowledge, and discipline put your trades on a cooler,
more rational footing. You have to research the past, calculate the
odds, and make informed decisions for the future. When you daytrade, there are plenty of hours when the market goes nowhere, leaving you free to crunch the numbers. You may use a single computer
or get two machines and dedicate one to trading and another to
research.
Get one year’s history for the market you’re day-trading. Drop it into
a spreadsheet and start asking questions. Every time the market closed
within 5 ticks of its high, how many times did it reach a new high the
next day? How far did it go the next day? What about the days when
that market closed within 5 ticks of the lows? How low did it go the
next day? Once you get the answers, find out what happened when
the market closed within 10 ticks of the high, and so on.

TRADING

151

Professionals tend to trade the same market month after month,
even though there is a huge turnover of amateurs. Professionals have
grown used to trading in a certain way, and to trade like them you
must find those patterns and express them in numbers. You must base
your trades on facts and probabilities, not on gut feel and hope. You
must do your own research. You cannot buy the answers, because only
finding them yourself will give you the confidence to trade.
