
138

The Intelligent Investor

Foreign Government Bonds
All investors with even small experience know that foreign
bonds, as a whole, have had a bad investment history since 1914.
This was inevitable in the light of two world wars and an intervening world depression of unexampled depth. Yet every few years
market conditions are sufficiently favorable to permit the sale of
some new foreign issues at a price of about par. This phenomenon
tells us a good deal about the working of the average investor’s
mind—and not only in the field of bonds.
We have no concrete reason to be concerned about the future history of well-regarded foreign bonds such as those of Australia or
Norway. But we do know that, if and when trouble should come,
the owner of foreign obligations has no legal or other means of
enforcing his claim. Those who bought Republic of Cuba 41⁄2s as
high as 117 in 1953 saw them default their interest and then sell as
low as 20 cents on the dollar in 1963. The New York Stock
Exchange bond list in that year also included Belgian Congo 51⁄4s at
36, Greek 7s at 30, and various issues of Poland as low as 7. How
many readers have any idea of the repeated vicissitudes of the 8%
bonds of Czechoslovakia, since they were first offered in this country in 1922 at 961⁄2? They advanced to 112 in 1928, declined to 673⁄4 in
1932, recovered to 106 in 1936, collapsed to 6 in 1939, recovered
(unbelievably) to 117 in 1946, fell promptly to 35 in 1948, and sold
as low as 8 in 1970!
Years ago an argument of sorts was made for the purchase of
foreign bonds here on the grounds that a rich creditor nation such
as ours was under moral obligation to lend abroad. Time, which
brings so many revenges, now finds us dealing with an intractable
balance-of-payments problem of our own, part of which is ascribable to the large-scale purchase of foreign bonds by American
investors seeking a small advantage in yield. For many years past
we have questioned the inherent attractiveness of such investments from the standpoint of the buyer; perhaps we should add
now that the latter would benefit both his country and himself if he
declined these opportunities.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: Negative Approach

139

New Issues Generally
It might seem ill-advised to attempt any broad statements about
new issues as a class, since they cover the widest possible range of
quality and attractiveness. Certainly there will be exceptions to any
suggested rule. Our one recommendation is that all investors
should be wary of new issues—which means, simply, that these
should be subjected to careful examination and unusually severe
tests before they are purchased.
There are two reasons for this double caveat. The first is that
new issues have special salesmanship behind them, which calls
therefore for a special degree of sales resistance.* The second is that
most new issues are sold under “favorable market conditions”—
which means favorable for the seller and consequently less favorable for the buyer.†
The effect of these considerations becomes steadily more important as we go down the scale from the highest-quality bonds
through second-grade senior issues to common-stock flotations at
the bottom. A tremendous amount of financing, consisting of the
repayment of existing bonds at call price and their replacement by
new issues with lower coupons, was done in the past. Most of this
was in the category of high-grade bonds and preferred stocks. The
buyers were largely financial institutions, amply qualified to protect their interests. Hence these offerings were carefully priced to

* New issues of common stock—initial public offerings or IPOs—normally are
sold with an “underwriting discount” (a built-in commission) of 7%. By contrast, the buyer’s commission on older shares of common stock typically
ranges below 4%. Whenever Wall Street makes roughly twice as much for
selling something new as it does for selling something old, the new will get
the harder sell.
† Recently, finance professors Owen Lamont of the University of Chicago
and Paul Schultz of the University of Notre Dame have shown that corporations choose to offer new shares to the public when the stock market is near
a peak. For technical discussion of these issues, see Lamont’s “Evaluating
Value Weighting: Corporate Events and Market Timing” and Schultz’s
“Pseudo Market Timing and the Long-Run Performance of IPOs” at http://
papers.ssrn.com.

140

The Intelligent Investor

meet the going rate for comparable issues, and high-powered
salesmanship had little effect on the outcome. As interest rates fell
lower and lower the buyers finally came to pay too high a price for
these issues, and many of them later declined appreciably in the
market. This is one aspect of the general tendency to sell new securities of all types when conditions are most favorable to the issuer;
but in the case of first-quality issues the ill effects to the purchaser
are likely to be unpleasant rather than serious.
The situation proves somewhat different when we study the
lower-grade bonds and preferred stocks sold during the 1945–46
and 1960–61 periods. Here the effect of the selling effort is more
apparent, because most of these issues were probably placed with
individual and inexpert investors. It was characteristic of these
offerings that they did not make an adequate showing when
judged by the performance of the companies over a sufficient number of years. They did look safe enough, for the most part, if it
could be assumed that the recent earnings would continue without
a serious setback. The investment bankers who brought out these
issues presumably accepted this assumption, and their salesmen
had little difficulty in persuading themselves and their customers
to a like effect. Nevertheless it was an unsound approach to investment, and one likely to prove costly.
Bull-market periods are usually characterized by the transformation of a large number of privately owned businesses into companies with quoted shares. This was the case in 1945–46 and again
beginning in 1960. The process then reached extraordinary proportions until brought to a catastrophic close in May 1962. After the
usual “swearing-off” period of several years the whole tragicomedy was repeated, step by step, in 1967–1969.*

* In the two years from June 1960, through May 1962, more than 850 companies sold their stock to the public for the first time—an average of more than
one per day. In late 1967 the IPO market heated up again; in 1969 an astonishing 781 new stocks were born. That oversupply helped create the bear
markets of 1969 and 1973–1974. In 1974 the IPO market was so dead that
only nine new stocks were created all year; 1975 saw only 14 stocks born.
That undersupply, in turn, helped feed the bull market of the 1980s, when
roughly 4,000 new stocks flooded the market—helping to trigger the over-

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: Negative Approach

141

New Common-Stock Offerings
The following paragraphs are reproduced unchanged from the
1959 edition, with comment added:
Common-stock financing takes two different forms. In the case
of companies already listed, additional shares are offered pro rata
to the existing stockholders. The subscription price is set below
the current market, and the “rights” to subscribe have an initial
money value.* The sale of the new shares is almost always underwritten by one or more investment banking houses, but it is the
general hope and expectation that all the new shares will be taken
by the exercise of the subscription rights. Thus the sale of additional common stock of listed companies does not ordinarily call
for active selling effort on the part of distributing firms.
The second type is the placement with the public of common
stock of what were formerly privately owned enterprises. Most of
this stock is sold for the account of the controlling interests to
enable them to cash in on a favorable market and to diversify their

enthusiasm that led to the 1987 crash. Then the cycle swung the other way
again as IPOs dried up in 1988–1990. That shortage contributed to the bull
market of the 1990s—and, right on cue, Wall Street got back into the business of creating new stocks, cranking out nearly 5,000 IPOs. Then, after the
bubble burst in 2000, only 88 IPOs were issued in 2001—the lowest annual
total since 1979. In every case, the public has gotten burned on IPOs, has
stayed away for at least two years, but has always returned for another scalding. For as long as stock markets have existed, investors have gone through
this manic-depressive cycle. In America’s first great IPO boom, back in 1825,
a man was said to have been squeezed to death in the stampede of speculators trying to buy shares in the new Bank of Southwark; the wealthiest buyers hired thugs to punch their way to the front of the line. Sure enough, by
1829, stocks had lost roughly 25% of their value.
* Here Graham is describing rights offerings, in which investors who already
own a stock are asked to pony up even more money to maintain the same
proportional interest in the company. This form of financing, still widespread
in Europe, has become rare in the United States, except among closed-end
funds.

142

The Intelligent Investor

own finances. (When new money is raised for the business it
comes often via the sale of preferred stock, as previously noted.)
This activity follows a well-defined pattern, which by the nature of
the security markets must bring many losses and disappointments
to the public. The dangers arise both from the character of the
businesses that are thus financed and from the market conditions
that make the financing possible.
In the early part of the century a large proportion of our leading
companies were introduced to public trading. As time went on, the
number of enterprises of first rank that remained closely held
steadily diminished; hence original common-stock flotations have
tended to be concentrated more and more on relatively small concerns. By an unfortunate correlation, during the same period the
stock-buying public has been developing an ingrained preference
for the major companies and a similar prejudice against the minor
ones. This prejudice, like many others, tends to become weaker as
bull markets are built up; the large and quick profits shown by
common stocks as a whole are sufficient to dull the public’s critical
faculty, just as they sharpen its acquisitive instinct. During these
periods, also, quite a number of privately owned concerns can be
found that are enjoying excellent results—although most of these
would not present too impressive a record if the figures were carried back, say, ten years or more.
When these factors are put together the following consequences
emerge: Somewhere in the middle of the bull market the first
common-stock flotations make their appearance. These are priced
not unattractively, and some large profits are made by the buyers of
the early issues. As the market rise continues, this brand of financing
grows more frequent; the quality of the companies becomes steadily
poorer; the prices asked and obtained verge on the exorbitant. One
fairly dependable sign of the approaching end of a bull swing is the
fact that new common stocks of small and nondescript companies
are offered at prices somewhat higher than the current level for
many medium-sized companies with a long market history. (It
should be added that very little of this common-stock financing is
ordinarily done by banking houses of prime size and reputation.)*

* In Graham’s day, the most prestigious investment banks generally steered
clear of the IPO business, which was regarded as an undignified exploita-

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: Negative Approach

143

The heedlessness of the public and the willingness of selling
organizations to sell whatever may be profitably sold can have
only one result—price collapse. In many cases the new issues lose
75% and more of their offering price. The situation is worsened by
the aforementioned fact that, at bottom, the public has a real aversion to the very kind of small issue that it bought so readily in its
careless moments. Many of these issues fall, proportionately, as
much below their true value as they formerly sold above it.
An elementary requirement for the intelligent investor is an ability to resist the blandishments of salesmen offering new commonstock issues during bull markets. Even if one or two can be found
that can pass severe tests of quality and value, it is probably bad policy to get mixed up in this sort of business. Of course the salesman
will point to many such issues which have had good-sized market
advances—including some that go up spectacularly the very day
they are sold. But all this is part of the speculative atmosphere. It is
easy money. For every dollar you make in this way you will be lucky
if you end up by losing only two.
Some of these issues may prove excellent buys—a few years
later, when nobody wants them and they can be had at a small
fraction of their true worth.

In the 1965 edition we continued our discussion of this subject
as follows:
While the broader aspects of the stock market’s behavior since
1949 have not lent themselves well to analysis based on long experience, the development of new common-stock flotations proceeded exactly in accordance with ancient prescription. It is
doubtful whether we ever before had so many new issues offered,
of such low quality, and with such extreme price collapses, as we

tion of naïve investors. By the peak of the IPO boom in late 1999 and early
2000, however, Wall Street’s biggest investment banks had jumped in with
both feet. Venerable firms cast off their traditional prudence and behaved
like drunken mud wrestlers, scrambling to foist ludicrously overvalued
stocks on a desperately eager public. Graham’s description of how the IPO
process works is a classic that should be required reading in investmentbanking ethics classes, if there are any.

144

The Intelligent Investor

experienced in 1960–1962.4 The ability of the stock market as a
whole to disengage itself rapidly from that disaster is indeed an
extraordinary phenomenon, bringing back long-buried memories
of the similar invulnerability it showed to the great Florida realestate collapse in 1925.
Must there be a return of the new-stock-offering madness
before the present bull market can come to its definitive close?
Who knows? But we do know that an intelligent investor will not
forget what happened in 1962 and will let others make the next
batch of quick profits in this area and experience the consequent
harrowing losses.

We followed these paragraphs in the 1965 edition by citing “A
Horrible Example,” namely, the sale of stock of Aetna Maintenance
Co. at $9 in November 1961. In typical fashion the shares promptly
advanced to $15; the next year they fell to 23⁄8, and in 1964 to 7⁄8. The
later history of this company was on the extraordinary side, and
illustrates some of the strange metamorphoses that have taken
place in American business, great and small, in recent years. The
curious reader will find the older and newer history of this enterprise in Appendix 5.
It is by no means difficult to provide even more harrowing
examples taken from the more recent version of “the same old
story,” which covered the years 1967–1970. Nothing could be more
pat to our purpose than the case of AAA Enterprises, which happens to be the first company then listed in Standard & Poor’s Stock
Guide. The shares were sold to the public at $14 in 1968, promptly
advanced to 28, but in early 1971 were quoted at a dismal 25¢.
(Even this price represented a gross overvaluation of the enterprise, since it had just entered the bankruptcy court in a hopeless
condition.) There is so much to be learned, and such important
warnings to be gleaned, from the story of this flotation that we
have reserved it for detailed treatment below, in Chapter 17.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 6

The punches you miss are the ones that wear you out.
—Boxing trainer Angelo Dundee

F

or the aggressive as well as the defensive investor, what you don’t
do is as important to your success as what you do. In this chapter,
Graham lists his “don’ts” for aggressive investors. Here is a list for
today.
J U N K YA R D D O G S ?
High-yield bonds—which Graham calls “second-grade” or “lowergrade” and today are called “junk bonds”—get a brisk thumbs-down
from Graham. In his day, it was too costly and cumbersome for an individual investor to diversify away the risks of default.1 (To learn how bad
a default can be, and how carelessly even “sophisticated” professional bond investors can buy into one, see the sidebar on p. 146.)
Today, however, more than 130 mutual funds specialize in junk bonds.
These funds buy junk by the cartload; they hold dozens of different
bonds. That mitigates Graham’s complaints about the difficulty of
diversifying. (However, his bias against high-yield preferred stock
remains valid, since there remains no cheap and widely available way
to spread their risks.)
Since 1978, an annual average of 4.4% of the junk-bond market
has gone into default—but, even after those defaults, junk bonds have

1

In the early 1970s, when Graham wrote, there were fewer than a dozen
junk-bond funds, nearly all of which charged sales commissions of up to
8.5%; some even made investors pay a fee for the privilege of reinvesting
their monthly dividends back into the fund.
145

146

Commentary on Chapter 6

A WOR LD OF H U RT
FOR WOR LDCOM BON D S
Buying a bond only for its yield is like getting married only for the
sex. If the thing that attracted you in the first place dries up,
you’ll find yourself asking, “What else is there?” When the
answer is “Nothing,” spouses and bondholders alike end up with
broken hearts.
On May 9, 2001, WorldCom, Inc. sold the biggest offering
of bonds in U.S. corporate history—$11.9 billion worth. Among
the eager beavers attracted by the yields of up to 8.3% were
the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, one of the
world’s largest pension funds; Retirement Systems of Alabama,
whose managers later explained that “the higher yields” were
“very attractive to us at the time they were purchased”; and the
Strong Corporate Bond Fund, whose comanager was so fond
of WorldCom’s fat yield that he boasted, “we’re getting paid
more than enough extra income for the risk.” 1
But even a 30-second glance at WorldCom’s bond prospectus would have shown that these bonds had nothing to offer but
their yield—and everything to lose. In two of the previous five
years WorldCom’s pretax income (the company’s profits before
it paid its dues to the IRS) fell short of covering its fixed charges
(the costs of paying interest to its bondholders) by a stupendous $4.1 billion. WorldCom could cover those bond payments
only by borrowing more money from banks. And now, with this
mountainous new helping of bonds, WorldCom was fattening
its interest costs by another $900 million per year!2 Like Mr.
Creosote in Monty Python’s The Meaning of Life, WorldCom
was gorging itself to the bursting point.
No yield could ever be high enough to compensate an investor
for risking that kind of explosion. The WorldCom bonds did produce fat yields of up to 8% for a few months. Then, as Graham
would have predicted, the yield suddenly offered no shelter:
• WorldCom filed bankruptcy in July 2002.
• WorldCom admitted in August 2002 that it had overstated
its earnings by more than $7 billion.3

Commentary on Chapter 6

147

• WorldCom’s bonds defaulted when the company could no
longer cover their interest charges; the bonds lost more than
80% of their original value.
See www.calpers.ca.gov/whatshap/hottopic/worldcom_faqs.htm and www.
calpers.ca.gov/whatsnew/press/2002/0716a.htm; Retirement Systems of Alabama Quarterly Investment Report for May 31, 2001, at www.rsa.state.al.
us/Investments/quarterly_report.htm; and John Bender, Strong Corporate Bond
Fund comanager, quoted in www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/01_22/
b3734118.htm.
2
These numbers are all drawn from WorldCom’s prospectus, or sales document,
for the bond offering. Filed May 11, 2001, it can be viewed at www.sec.gov/
edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html (in “Company name” window, enter
“WorldCom”). Even without today’s 20/20 hindsight knowledge that WorldCom’s
earnings were fraudulently overstated, WorldCom’s bond offering would have
appalled Graham.
3
For documentation on the collapse of WorldCom, see www.worldcom.com/
infodesk.
1

still produced an annualized return of 10.5%, versus 8.6% for 10-year
U.S. Treasury bonds.2 Unfortunately, most junk-bond funds charge
high fees and do a poor job of preserving the original principal amount
of your investment. A junk fund could be appropriate if you are retired,
are looking for extra monthly income to supplement your pension, and
can tolerate temporary tumbles in value. If you work at a bank or other
financial company, a sharp rise in interest rates could limit your raise or
even threaten your job security—so a junk fund, which tends to outperform most other bond funds when interest rates rise, might make
sense as a counterweight in your 401(k). A junk-bond fund, though, is
only a minor option—not an obligation—for the intelligent investor.

2

Edward I. Altman and Gaurav Bana, “Defaults and Returns on High-Yield
Bonds,” research paper, Stern School of Business, New York University,
2002.

148

Commentary on Chapter 6

