
Download at www.wowebook.com

362

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

charts is not so much the patterns but the visual ease with which the analyst can “see” intraday
pressures on price and the price trend. They also have peculiar but memorable names for specific
patterns that make them engaging.
As in all patterns, experience will separate the winners from the losers. Anyone using such
patterns should record in a notebook the successes and failures from interpreting short-term patterns. Reviewing this recording periodically will help the investor develop a better “feel” of his
ability to act profitably and learn where mistakes more frequently occur. Every trading vehicle
has its own “personality.” Success is often a function of understanding the peculiarities of the
trading vehicle most commonly traded.

PATTERN CONSTRUCTION AND DETERMINATION
The principal data used in short-term patterns—both traditional and candlestick, regardless of
bar time—is open, close, high, and low. The opening price is traditionally considered the price
established from any news, emotion, anticipation, or mechanical signals that have built up
overnight. Most professional day traders, scalpers, and even swing traders prefer to avoid it.
They wait for some action—a gap or opening range—to take place before judging the tone of the
market.
Because the closing price is the final price of the day and the one at which most margin
accounts are valued, it is like a summary of the bar’s activity. If the close is up, the majority and
most recent action was positive; if the close is down, the majority and most recent price action
was to the downside. Professionals use it as a benchmark with which to compare the next day’s
price action. Most people reading the financial news remember and use it to value their accounts.
The closing price becomes a benchmark for future action, both long and short term. Some traders
consider it the most important price of the day, even though it is somewhat arbitrary.
The high is the upper extreme reached by buyers during the bar and is, thus, a measure of
buying ability and enthusiasm. On the other hand, the low is the lower extreme reached by sellers during the bar and is, thus, a measure of selling ability and fear.
The configuration, length of the bar, position on the bar, preceding bar data, and price distance between each determine the pattern. As you might guess, there is a multitude of potential
combinations, and all have been investigated for ways to profit. We present next just a few of the
large array of short-term patterns that have shown promise in the past.

TRADITIONAL SHORT-TERM PATTERNS
Let us look at some of the short-term patterns and their trading implications. These are patterns
in use today that by themselves are warnings, at best, but not necessarily action patterns, that
should be followed without a cluster of other evidence. You will notice that none of the patterns
includes moving averages. Over short time periods, especially when the period is interrupted by
inactivity, moving averages are not reliable. For example, when using five-minute data, the only
moving average with any value would be very short because the period from one day to the next

Download at www.wowebook.com

363

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

is interrupted by a long period overnight when no trading activity occurs. In 24-hour markets,
short-term moving averages have more value because the markets are open continuously.

Gaps
Gaps occur when either the low for the current bar is above the high for the previous bar or the
high for the current bar is lower than the low of the previous bar. Figure 17.1 pictures a gap
down. The “hole” or “void” created in the price history is a “price range at which no shares
changed hands” (Edwards and Magee, 2007). A price gap might or might not have significance.
We have seen them before in analyzing breakouts from classic patterns, trend lines, and support
or resistance zones, and in those instances, the gaps were demonstrating the beginning of a new
trend. However, gap types differ based on the context in which they occur. Some are meaningful,
and others can be disregarded.

Gap Down

FIGURE 17.1 A gap down

Download at www.wowebook.com

364

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Gaps often do not occur in market averages that are not themselves traded. For example,
the day following Saddam Hussein’s capture on December 13, 2003, a majority of stocks opened
strongly upward on gaps, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average showed an opening price
roughly the same as that at the close of the previous day and then rose as the prices of the component stocks gradually opened. No gap existed in the DJIA because it is an average, not a security. On the other hand, the DJIA future showed a gap because it is a traded security.
Breakaway (or Breakout) Gaps
The most profitable gaps are those that occur at the beginning of a trend, called breakaway gaps.
We have seen these before when prices suddenly break through a formation boundary and a
major change in trend direction begins. Breakaway gaps signal that a pattern is completed and a
boundary penetrated. The size of the gap—the space between the two extremes in which no
activity occurs—appears to be proportional to the strength of the subsequent price move. Heavy
volume usually accompanies upward gaps but not necessarily downward gaps. The best manner
of trading breakaway gaps is to wait a short while for the initial fading or profit-taking by the
professionals to see if the gap is filled and if not, to enter in the direction of the gap with a stop at
the point where the gap would be filled. If the gap is filled immediately, a stop and reverse might
be appropriate, because a sudden failure in a gap is often followed by a large move in the opposite direction from the gap direction, similar to a Specialist’s Breakout.
David Landry (2003) suggests a method of mechanizing the breakaway gap known as the
“explosion gap pivot.” A reversal point, often called a pivot, establishes not only where prices
have reversed direction but also where supply and resistance are likely to occur in the future.1 In
Landry’s method, a pivot low is the low of a bar that is surrounded on both sides by a bar with a
higher low, as shown in Figure 17.2. This establishes a reversal point. Requirements that are
more restrictive can be placed on the pivot point; for example, higher lows may be required for
two or more bars on either side of the pivot point. For Landry’s method, however, one on both
sides is sufficient.
We know that a breakaway gap can be a false gap and that if it is “filled,” the odds of it
being false increase. Thus, we want a breakaway gap to establish a new high, for at least the past
20 days, and for the subsequent retracement not to fill the gap. If either of these requirements is
not met, the gap is ignored. When the retracement does occur, eventually it will create a pivot low
above the lower edge of the gap. Once this pivot low occurs, a buy entry stop is placed above the
high of the next bar from the pivot low (the one that establishes the pivot), and a protective stop
is placed just above the gap lower edge (or Landry suggests just below the pivot low). If the gap
is then filled, the protective stop will exit the position. Occasionally, the pivot low will be penetrated again, but as long as the gap is not filled, the position should be kept. The reverse configuration is equally applicable to downward breakaway gaps.

1. This reversal “pivot” should not be confused with the “pivot point” used in intraday trading for anticipating potential
support and resistance levels.

Download at www.wowebook.com

365

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

Entry Buy Stop

Breakaway Gap
(New High for
20 Days)
Pivot Low

Protective Stop

FIGURE 17.2 Explosion gap pivot

Opening Gap
When the opening price for the day is outside the range of the previous day, it is called an opening gap. After the opening, prices might continue in the direction of the gap, and the gap
becomes a breakaway gap, or prices might retrace from the opening and fill the gap. Figure 17.3
shows an opening gap to the downside, with prices retracing and filling the gap during the day.
This type of pattern is sometimes useful in determining a short-term trend reversal. The history
of opening gaps in index futures suggests that they should be “faded” (or sold into) on large
upward openings because they most often “fill” (retrace through the price vacuum) during the
day. In downward opening gaps, a fill is not as common (Kaufman, 1998). In individual stock
issues and commodities, a fill is a sign of weakness and should not occur in a breakaway gap. If
the gap is not filled, usually within the first half hour, the odds of the trend continuing in the
direction of the gap increase.

Download at www.wowebook.com

366

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Opening Down Gap
(Later Filled During Day)

FIGURE 17.3 Opening down gap

One way potentially to profit from an opening gap is to watch the first three five-minute
bars (a three-bar range) and determine the high and low of this range. A breakout of that range in
the direction of the gap often indicates that the trend will continue in the gap direction; a breakout that moves in the direction of filling the gap will often continue to fill the gap. A danger is
that the first run from the gap can last longer than the three bars. The three-bar range must, therefore, be obvious, not a continued run in the gap direction. In addition, the breakout from the
three-bar gap range in the direction of the gap may be false. A tight stop is necessary, or a wait
for a pullback or throwback from the breakout, a narrow range bar break, or even a small cup and
handle.
If the price breaks the three-bar range in the other direction toward the fill, the previous
day’s close, the fill line, will likely be the target. A bounce between the fill line and the range

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

367

breakout line suggests that the longer-term move will be in the direction of the fill, a reversal of
the gap. On the other hand, if the prices after a range break in the direction of the fill turn and
retest the outer extreme of the three-bar range, the odds increase that the longer-term move will
be in the direction of the gap.
Runaway Gaps (or Measuring Gaps)
Gaps that occur along a trend are called runaway gaps. They can appear in strong trends that
have very few minor corrections and just keep rising or declining without retracements or other
interruptions. They are also called measuring gaps because, like pennants and flags, they often
occur at about the middle of a price run, and, thus, the initial distance to them can be projected
above them for a target price. An upward runaway gap occurs on average 43% of the distance
from the trend beginning and the eventual peak, whereas a downward gap occurs on average
57% of the distance (Bulkowski, 2010).
Exhaustion Gaps
Exhaustion gaps occur at the end of moves but are not recognized at the time because they have
the same characteristics as runaway gaps. If a gap is later closed, it is likely an exhaustion gap.
These gaps appear when a strong trend has reached a point where greed or fear has reached its
apex. Usually they represent latecomers to the trend who are anxious to jump on or jump off.
They can occur on light volume but more often occur on heavy volume.
The sign that such gaps are not runaway gaps is an immediate fill within a few bars of the
gap. Remember that a runaway gap often occurs midstream in a price run. Prices should not
immediately reverse and fill a gap unless the end of the run is approaching. Exhaustion gaps
occur at the end of a move and signal a potential trend reversal. Usually more evidence of an
exhaustion gap is necessary before an action signal can be justified. Sometimes prices reverse
immediately, and sometimes they enter a congestion area.
Other Minor Gaps
Common gaps are those that occur frequently in illiquid trading vehicles, are small in relation to
the price of the vehicle, or appear in very short-term trading data. They are of no consequence.
Pattern gaps occasionally appear within the formation of larger patterns, and generally they are
filled. Their only significance is to suggest that a congestion area is forming. Ex-dividend gaps
sometimes occur in stock prices when the dividend is paid and the stock price is adjusted the following day. These have no significance and must not be misinterpreted. Often gaps occur in 24hour futures trading when one market closes and another opens, especially if one market is
electronic and the other open outcry. These are called suspension gaps and are also meaningless
unless they occur as one of the four principal gaps described previously.

Download at www.wowebook.com

368

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

BOX 17.1 GAPS AND CLASSIC PATTERNS—A CASE STUDY OF APPLE COMPUTER
Figure 17.4 contains daily bar charts for Apple Computer (AAPL) for September
2009 through May 2010. What actions might we have taken in this stock, given our
knowledge of classic patterns and gaps? Each paragraph number below corresponds
to the number on Figure 17.4.
1. First we see a small pennant formation with an upward breakout at $167.28.
We buy the stock on the breakout. Because we don’t have the past history, we
can’t, at this point make a measured move projection of the eventual target,
and we decide to just hold the stock with a protective stop below the pennant’s
lower bound at $164.11. Upward gap1 and gap2 appear next. We use them to
place trailing stops as the price progresses upward. The pivot low after the
gap1 is the first trailing stop at $169.70. We now have a locked-in profit even if
the stop is triggered. Gap2 is a runaway gap. A runaway gap should not retrace
back into the gap, or it is not a runaway. We, thus, raise the trailing stop to the
upper edge of the gap at $177.88. Because this is a runaway gap, we can now
project the target with the measured move method. We do this by measuring
the price difference between the move beginning ($167.28) and the midpoint
in the gap ($176.77). This $9.49 we add to the gap2 midpoint to arrive at an
estimated objective of $176.77 + $9.49 = $186.25. This price is reached two
days later, at which point we can sell or hang on with a close trailing stop so as
not to lose the gain we have already achieved. If we sell at the target price, we
will have profited by $18.97, about 11.3% in nine days.
2. The price then goes into a flag pattern and when it breaks out at $187.30, we
buy it again. This breakout is accompanied by gap3, which is later filled. We
place the protective stop at the low price of the flag at $180.70.
descending
triangle

11

Trading With Gaps And Classic Price Patterns

260.00
gap10

12

gap9

10

gap8

3
2

gap3
gap2

1 gap1

flag

gap5

4
flag

7

gap6

5

gap7

8

230.00

flag

210.00

9

200.00

6
symmetrical
triangle

240.00

220.00

broadening pattern

gap4

251.63

190.00

symmetrical
triangle

180.00
170.00

pennant

60,000.00
50,000.00
40.000.00
31,306,698
20,000.00
Sep 8 14 21

Oct

12 19 26 Nov 9 16 23 Dec 7 14 21 28 ‘10 11 19 25 Feb 8 16 22 Mar 8

15 22

Apr 12 19 26 May

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 17.4 Case Study: Apple Computer (August 25, 2009–May 7, 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

369

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

3. Gap4 occurs and has the initial appearance of a breakout or runaway gap. In
neither case should prices fill such a gap, and so we move our stop to the upper
limit of the gap4 at $197.85
4. Our trailing stop is triggered by an unexpected price decline that negates the
earlier interpretation of gap4. We profit by $10.55.
5. The price then forms a downward flag pattern and volume confirms as it
declines with price. The break upward from the flag triggers another buy at
$190.73. This is followed by gap5, another likely runaway gap. The measured
move projection from this gap is $200.73, which is reached on the day following gap5. We can sell at this level and reap another gain, this time of $10.00.
6. Had we not sold at the target price, we still would have placed a trailing stop at
the upper level of gap5 at $196.26 and sold the stock on the retracement. We
might also have sold the stock short on the trailing stop because the filling of
what’s thought to be a runaway gap is often an exhaustion gap and, therefore,
a price trend reversal.
7. Whether we sold the stock short or not, the upward breakout from a symmetrical triangle would require another entry buy at $196.05. Following that triangle, breakout gap7 forms. This also has the appearance of a runaway gap
(strong price move closing near high on increased volume), and we move a
trailing stop from below the triangle to the upper edge of the gap at $203.35.
We also calculate the measured move target of $209.68, which is reached two
days later. If we sell at the target, we achieve on the trade a profit of $13.63.
8. If we don’t sell at the target, we certainly are forced to sell when the price
breaks below our trailing stop at the upper bound of gap7. This breakout is not
only through the gap but also through the lower bound of a broadening pattern.
Indeed, with this combination, we will short the stock at the breakout price of
$203.35 and place a protective stop at the upper bound of the broadening pattern at $215.55. Following the breakout down, the price rallies in a pullback to
the breakdown level but fails to penetrate back through it on the upside. However, it also fails to continue downward after the pullback and instead forms a
symmetrical triangle. We place a buy stop each day along the upper bound of
the triangle as our trailing stop.
9. We get stopped out with the trailing stop at $196.60, and we buy the stock on
the basis of the triangle pattern confirmed with declining volume. We place a
protective stop at the cradle of the triangle where the two bounds meet at
$189.48 in case the breakout is false. Indeed, the price throws back shortly
after the breakout but doesn’t penetrate the cradle, and we remain long the
stock. Gap8 comes after a healthy rise in the stock price. This also has the
appearance of a runaway gap (high volume, large price move), and we move
our trailing stop to the upper bound of the gap at $219.70. The measured move
target from this runaway gap is $234.02. It is reached 18 days later.
continues

Download at www.wowebook.com

370

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

continued
10. We could sell at the target price, but before the target is reached, a flag pattern
formed. We move our trailing stop up to the lower edge of the flag at $220.15
to protect our profit. A flag pattern is also a measured pattern that will give an
additional price target. The calculation in this instance is to take the high point
in the flag at $227.73 minus the starting price of the move ($196.60) for an
estimated price distance of $31.13 that we add to the level at which the price
breaks out of the flat ($224.64). But prices broke upward from the flag and,
thus, projected $31.13 to a target of $255.77, our new target.
11. Our price target is reached 21 trading days after the upward breakout from the
flag pattern on a large upward gap (gap10). There was a small gap9 preceding
gap10 and a few others along the way. Each of these gaps failed to show the
characteristics of a runaway gap and were, thus, ignored. But gap10, aside
from reaching our objective was substantial and also likely a runaway gap, just
because of the size of the gap compared with others. If we don’t sell at the target price, we at least move the trailing stop to the upper level of the gap at
$255.73.
12. As it turns out, gap10 was an exhaustion gap, something that can only be recognized in retrospect. However, we were stopped out of our trade at the trailing stop and perhaps went short on the exhaustion gap breakdown because this
type of breakdowns often indicates a trend reversal. That the exhaustion gap
occurred at the price target from the earlier flag formation confirmed the likelihood of a trend reversal. The sell stop produced a profit of $59.13, a 30%
gain in less than 3 months.
The preceding example shows what can be done with just technical analysis alone.
We did not act on any news or outside market behavior. We simply watched the price
very closely. Stops were an important part of our strategy. If we had not moved stops
when we did, we would have suffered at the upward breakout from the symmetrical
triangle and from the failure of gap10. Risk control is sometimes more important
than entry technique. Technical analysis takes knowledge, patience, and close watching of price action, but profits can be made.

Spike (or Wide-Range or Large-Range Bar)
Spikes are similar to gaps except that the empty space associated with a gap is a solid line (in a
bar chart). Should a breakaway gap occur intraday, for example, the daily bar would not show the
discontinuity from the gap but instead would show a long bar. The importance of a spike, as in a
gap, depends on the context surrounding it. A spike can occur on a breakout from a formation,
midpoint in a strong, accelerating trend, and as the final reversal day at the end of a trend. In the

Download at www.wowebook.com

371

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

earlier discussion of breakouts, we demonstrated the Specialist Breakout. This is often a spike
because it usually occurs intraday. At the ends of trends when either gross enthusiasm or panic
appears, the last few bars are often spikes. At the end of an accelerated trend, the last bar within
the trend is often a spike called a climax (see Figure 17.5). Thus, spikes can represent the beginning or end of a trend. On the other hand, some stocks and commodities, especially those awaiting a news announcement, will have wide-range bars that subside almost immediately within the
next few days with little net change in trend direction. This behavior is generally associated with
a stock or commodity that will not follow standard technical rules.

Gasoline Futures
Spike Peak and
Buying Climax

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 17.5 Spike peak and buying climax (July 2005–September 2005)

Dead Cat Bounce (DCB)
“Dead Cat Bounce” is a graceless term for a failed rally after a sharp decline. Although the term
has been used for many years on Wall Street and in Chicago, it was probably first used in print
either in a 1985 Financial Times article by reporter Chris Sherwell in a comment on the sharp
decline in the Singapore stock market or by Raymond Devoe Jr., research analyst and professional cynic, who advocated using a bumper sticker “Beware the Dead Cat Bounce” in 1986.
