
45

Candle Patterns

High
Open

High
Upper
shadow

Close

Black
real body

White
real body

Close
Low

FIGURE 4.1

Upper
shadow

Open
Lower
shadow

Close below

open.

Low

FIGURE 4.2

Lower
shadow

Close above

open.

the open and close while the price action outside the body, the upper and
lower shadows, is less important.

CANDLE PATTERNS
Individual candles and formations have some very interesting and descriptive names. The hammer (Figure 4.3) indicates a reversal or a bottom is near
after a downtrend. When a similar candle formation appears after an uptrend, the name transforms into hanging man and indicates a top is near.
Three main characteristics are needed to hammer in a bottom:
1. The real body is at the upper end of the trading range. The color (white

or black) is not important.
2. The lower part, or the shadow, should be at least twice the length of the
real body.
3. The body should have little or no upper shadow and look like a shavedhead candle.

FIGURE 4.3

Hammer.

46

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

The star (Figure 4.4) appears at the top of an uptrend and can signal a
reversal. Again, the color does not matter, but the body should be at the
lower end of the trading range with a long upper shadow. The significance
here is that it shows the market opened near the low of the day, then had an
explosive rally that failed, and closed back down near the low of the day.
Usually there is little or no lower shadow, looking like a shaved bottom.
When this pattern is at the bottom of a downtrend, it is called an inverted hammer. The color (white or black) is not important. This is not a
tremendously reliable candle as a bottom indicator on its own. Usually a
white candle opening above the inverted hammer’s body in the next trading
session can verify the potential buy signal.
Spinning tops (Figure 4.5) have small real bodies usually with small
upper and lower shadows. These formations indicate a tug-of-war occurring between buyers and sellers
The doji (Figure 4.6) has nearly the same opening and closing price.
This candle typically indicates a change of direction. Doji are more powerful as an indicator of a market top, especially after a long white or hollow
candle, meaning the market closed above the open during the previous period. Doji signify indecision and uncertainty. They can also indicate bottoms,
but more signals are needed to confirm a bottom than just using a doji. There
are several types of doji: the gravestone (Figure 4.7), dragonfly (Figure 4.8),
and rickshaw (Figure 4.9).
An evening star (Figure 4.10) is a three-candle formation that signals a
major top. The first candle normally has a tall white or hollow real body. The
second candle has a small real body (white or black) that gaps higher and
can be a star candle. A doji can also be in the middle; that is considered even
more bearish. The third candle has a black body, and the important point
here is that it should close well into the first candle’s real body.

FIGURE 4.4

Star.

FIGURE 4.5

Spinning tops.

47

Candle Patterns

FIGURE 4.6

Doji.

FIGURE 4.7

Gravestone.

FIGURE 4.8

Dragonfly.

FIGURE 4.9

Rickshaw.

Another example of this type of pattern is the abandon baby. It is extremely rare and is a very potent top or bottom signal. Figure 4.11 illustrates
the similarities to the evening doji star.
Similar to the evening star, the morning star (Figure 4.12) is a major
bottom reversal pattern that is a three-candle formation. The first candle has
a long black real body. The second candle has a small real body that gaps

FIGURE 4.10

Evening star.

48

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

Doji top
abandon baby
(same as an
island top)

FIGURE 4.11

Abandon baby. (Source: Gecko Software, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)

lower than the first candle’s body. The third candle’s body sometimes gaps
higher than the second candle’s body, but this does not happen often. It is
important that the third candle be a white candle and close well above the
midpoint of the first candle’s real body.
The shooting star (Figure 4.13) is a two-candle pattern. The second candle gaps higher than the prior candle’s real body, which is usually a white or
hollow candle in an uptrending market. However, the color of the star, or
second, candle is not important. This pattern signals that the longs are failing
to maintain the upward momentum.
The bearish engulfing pattern (Figure 4.14) has a distinct look. The
black candle’s real body (close lower than the open) completely covers the
real body of the previous white or hollow candle (close higher than open).
It is important to note that the open is higher than the first candle’s real body,
and the close is below the lowest portion of the first candle’s body. The bearish engulfing pattern occurs during an uptrend and signifies that the momentum may be shifting from the bulls to the bears.
The bullish engulfing pattern (Figure 4.15) reverses everything you just
read about the bearish engulfing pattern. The real body of a white candle

49

Candle Patterns

FIGURE 4.12

Morning star.

FIGURE 4.14

Bearish

engulfing pattern.

FIGURE 4.13

Shooting star.

FIGURE 4.15

Bullish

engulfing pattern.

completely covers the previous black candle’s real body. It is also relevant to
note that the opening is lower than the first candle’s real body, and the close
is above the high end of the first candle’s body. The bullish engulfing pattern
appears during a downtrend, signifying that the momentum may be shifting
from the bears to the bulls.
The dark cloud cover (Figure 4.16) is another bearish reversal signal
that usually appears after an uptrend. The first white candle is followed by
a black candle. The important features are that the dark candle should open
higher than the white candle’s high and should close well below the midpoint of the white candle’s real body.
The piercing pattern (Figure 4.17) can be considered the opposite of
the dark cloud cover. The piercing pattern is a bottom-reversing, two-candle
pattern. It requires the first candle to be a long dark candle, and the second
candle must gap open lower than the first candle’s body (lower than the
previous bar’s close). The other important characteristic is that it closes
well above the midpoint of the long, dark first candle.

50

FIGURE 4.16

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

Dark cloud

cover.

FIGURE 4.17

Piercing

pattern.

The harami (Figure 4.18) has a small real body that is entirely within the
prior candle’s body. This is known as a reversal pattern or a warning of a
trend change, especially at market tops. It is not important what the colors of
the bodies are, but I notice that the more reliable signals are generated when
the colors are opposite. If the second candle looks like a doji instead of a
spinning top, this would be considered a harami cross. Those are rare and are
more powerful sell signals at market tops.
With a bearish harami cross (Figure 4.19), a long white candle signifies
the market closed above the open with little or no shadows at both ends, followed in the next time period by a doji in the middle of the real white body.
Especially after a long advance, this tells me that buyers are changing their
minds and the market is changing hands from bulls to bears or sellers are entering the market. If this formation occurred on high volume or at an important pivot point target near the high, a short position would be warranted or,

FIGURE 4.18

Harami.

51

Candle Patterns

FIGURE 4.19

Bearish

FIGURE 4.20

Bullish harami

cross.

harami cross.

at the least, further examination of a potential shorting opportunity should be
explored.
A bullish harami cross (Figure 4.20) occurs in a downtrending market,
and the exact opposite of a bearish harami would be true. The first candle is
usually a long dark candle signifying the market closed below the open
with little or no real shadows at both ends, followed in the next trading session by a doji within the real dark body.
The three crows (Figure 4.21) pattern has three long or relatively longer
than normal candles that close on or near their lows. This pattern can signify a potential top when the market is at a high, especially after a long extended trend.
The three white or advancing soldiers (Figure 4.22) generally demonstrates a sign of continuing strength, especially in the beginning stages of an
uptrend as prices start to advance from a bottom.

FIGURE 4.21

Three crows.

FIGURE 4.22
soldiers.

Three white

52

FIGURE 4.23

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

Bearish falling

three.

FIGURE 4.24

Bullish rising

three.

The bearish falling three method (Figure 4.23) is a bearish continuation
pattern often associated with a bear flag formation on a bar chart. The pattern starts with a long dark or black candle followed by three white candles
that close higher than the open. The three little candles usually remain within
the range of the first black candle, including both the real body and shadows.
Some argue that this pattern works with just two candles in the middle, but
the actual textbook classification is three white candles. The last portion of
this formation is a long dark candle that closes below the first black candle’s
close. This continuation pattern indicates prices will continue lower.
The bullish rising three method (Figure 4.24) is a bullish continuation
pattern with the same characteristics as the bearish falling three method but
with just the opposite types of candles. During the beginning stages of an
advancing price trend, an unusually long white candle is followed by three
smaller dark or black candles that stay within the range of the first long white
candle. The last candle is a powerful advancing white candle that should
open above the previous session’s close and should close above the first long
white candle’s close as well. This is like a bull flag formation on western bar
charts and often indicates still higher prices to come.

READING CANDLE CHARTS
Now it’s time to look at the charts to see these candle patterns in action. Figure 4.25 provides an excellent opportunity to examine several topping and
bottoming formations in Treasury bond futures. The first one highlighted is
a shooting star formation, indicating that a top in the bond market was developing. As a general guideline, market tops take more time to develop than
market bottoms. To illustrate this point, note the retest of the high that forms
a secondary bearish pattern, a bearish engulfing candle.

53

Reading Candle Charts

Shooting star
Bearish engulfing candle

Hammer

FIGURE 4.25

Candle tops and bottoms. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

Let’s focus on the meaning of this candle. The challenge of the bulls’ resolve to move the price higher is defeated by sellers when the price cannot
successfully reach and surpass a new high. The significance of the secondary
pattern is that it reinforces the first bearish pattern and graphically illustrates
the market’s rejection of an attempt to reach a higher price. It shows that
buyers were liquidating longs not only when near the close of the previous
day but also below the open of the previous day. That clearly shows sellers
wanted to exit the door in a hurry.
With that signal, you can develop a trading plan to sell short in whatever
form of trading vehicle that may be—selling futures, buying puts, taking a
reverse position in an opposite-like trading market such as a long stock position, and the like. You might decide, for example, to sell below the low of
the bearish engulfing candle. In this example, I would want to place a stop
above the high of the shooting star candle and then trail the stop lower according to your comfort level. (Stop placement techniques are covered in
more detail later in Chapter 12.)

54

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

The reverse of a shooting star formation is the hammer, which sets the
bottom for the market. As the shooting star indicated a top, the hammer is
a reliable bottom reversal candle. Look at the normal ranges for the majority of the candles in the downtrend, and you will not see a candle with a similar range and that long a lower shadow. The uniqueness of the hammer
candle after a long downdraft is the first clue that a bottom is in place. The
same type of price action occurred as with the shooting start but in reverse:
Sellers were drying up, and buyers took over as market participants accepted
the low in price.
You may also hear terms for such conditions as a blow-off top or exhaustion momentum patterns. These labels indicate that the price move or
trend has run its course and is ready for a reversal.
Figure 4.26 provides a valuable lesson for the importance of multiple
engulfing candles or more time periods that were consumed by one so-called
benchmark candle—in this case, we’ll call it a pillar of strength. In this significant and powerful reversal formation, notice that it takes only one candle to reverse the price action from the three previous periods. The long

The more candles that are engulfed,
the more power behind the buy signal!
The benchmark candle or “pillar of strength”
should demonstrate that the midpoint is a
solid support and then the opening is a
secondary support target.

The number 3
candle is “pierced”
(take candle 1 and
2 away).
A bullish piercing
pattern formed.

3
1st Support
2nd Support
2
1

FIGURE 4.26

Pillar of strength. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

55

Reading Candle Charts

white candle engulfed the preceding number 1 and number 2 candles and
then penetrated and closed at the midpoint of candle number 3. This occurrence makes a valuable point: The more candles that are engulfed, the more
power behind the signal.
With a benchmark, cornerstone, or pillar of strength candle (the reverse
would be a pillar of weakness for a bearish engulfing pattern), the midpoint
of the candle is a target for the first support level. The opening should always be considered the second level of support or the last bastion for a
bullish defense line. Note on the chart how the first support point held the
corrective pullback during the first few days in August as the price came
back down to retest that midpoint and then shot back up to continue the
advance.
Figure 4.27 shows another example of a pillar of strength bullish engulfing pattern on the cocoa futures chart. Notice the market retests the low
(point A) several sessions later as a hammer candle forms. The shadow is
about twice the measurement of the real body. The candle preceding the

Hammer
#2

#1
#4

Bullish engulfing pattern consumes
five prior candles and the real body
of the hammer!

1st low point “A”

FIGURE 4.27
permission.)

Consuming candles. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

56

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

hammer is a doji. That alone is a warning signal that a potential change in
direction is coming.
Look at how the pattern develops: doji, hammer, hammer, dark spinning
top, dark candle (lower close than open), and then the pillar of strength.
That single benchmark candle consumed the real bodies of four previous
candles. What a setup! The double bottom or, in essence, a triple bottom indicated the bottoming pattern was finalized with the benchmark candle.
That area of congestion where smaller real bodies were consumed was the
final blow for the bears. Remember, the benchmark candle should provide
the first support level at about the middle of the range of its real body. In
this case, a retest of that level never happened.
Let’s look at shooting stars as reliable top reversal candles. On the example silver futures chart shown as Figure 4.28, I identified a shooting star
followed by a potential doji in January 2002 (last two candles on right side)
after about a seven-week run to the upside. This market was due for a correction. I had made a sell recommendation in a weekly newsletter, The Bottom Line Financial and Futures Report. That formation indicated that a

FIGURE 4.28
permission.)

Shooting star top in silver. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

57

Reading Candle Charts

tug-of-war was going on between the bulls and the bears, and that a top had
formed based on those combined candles. More important, I had a secondopinion indicator using pivot point analysis (discussed in detail in Chapter 6).
Look at the after picture (Figure 4.29). It shows a powerful selling wave
took command of the price in silver after this topping pattern occurred.
The weekly U.S. Dollar Index futures chart (Figure 4.30) illustrates that
candle chart patterns work not only on daily charts but for other time periods
as well. This chart is a great example of a market that had multiple trading
signals. Look at the shooting star formation that exposed the turning point
for the market during the first week in July. The next candle was a hanging man that certainly warned that the trend was changing. The aftermath
was a complete market reversal that resulted in a 950-point decline within
21⁄2 months.
Look at the bearish harami that formed at the end of January. The market had made a long advance over nearly four months, and a long white candle formed (meaning the market closed above the open and there were little
or no shadows). The next candle was a doji where the market had a wide

Shooting star

FIGURE 4.29
permission.)

The market flamed out. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

58

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

Shooting star
formation
Bearish harami
cross

FIGURE 4.30

Candles signal changing trends. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

range but closed at or near the open. Another observation is that the market was forming a major double top with the June high.
A plan of attack might be to sell short a position and place an initial stop
as a close-only order above the January high. The reason I would have used
that as my risk target is that if the market retested that high, I would not want
to be stopped out and then have to watch the market price fall off from the
high. I would want to be out only if a new all-time high close above that level
signaled the market’s acceptance of a new high price and would probably
advance to newer highs.
Eight to ten new records is one candle formation that I have not used
often but does warrant mentioning. According to Japanese candle charting
practices, when the market price either advances or declines by making eight
to ten new highs or lows, it can signal that the advance or decline should subside. Such an occurrence could warrant establishing a position. In a bearish
market, for example, when the eighth or ninth new low occurs and a bullish candle such as a hammer or a doji appears within one or two days, then
a bottom potentially could be formed. I would construe that as a buy signal

59

Reading Candle Charts

and put a stop close-only order below the lowest low. If the market truly is
ready to turn around, it should not close below the established low at that
time. The opposite is true for bullish or advancing markets.
Look at the weekly U.S. Dollar Index chart again (Figure 4.30). If you
count how many higher highs were made after the low in September 2001,
you will see that nine record highs occurred prior to a bearish harami cross
in early 2002. The ninth high was actually made by a doji. This confirmation
by a different technique should have helped to initiate a response such as
developing a short trading strategy. In addition to just selling a futures position, a trader is now armed with a good indication that the market may fall
and may decide instead to buy put options, sell calls, or form some other
bearish option strategy.
Now examine Figure 4.31 for the after picture. Remember, this is a
weekly chart so this move did not just happen overnight. Also, note that another eight to ten new records situation developed again on the downtrend
in the first half of 2002. This chart demonstrates that candle patterns do
work on different time frames.

Bearish harami cross

FIGURE 4.31

Broken records. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

60

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

A casual investor who may want to pick trades more carefully should
be aware of the eight to ten new records high or low technique. When analyzing markets and trading for profits, the more studies that can strengthen
your conviction or give you more confidence to do the trade and or stay
with a position, the better.
The bearish harami cross is a short seller’s most powerful weapon. The
U.S. Dollar Index chart (Figure 4.31) provides a dynamic example of this
trading signal. The fact is that the longer the time period, the longer the
trade signal may work.
Looking at a shorter time frame, a bearish harami on a 15-minute chart
for the Dow Jones Industrial Average futures contract (Figure 4.32) warned
that a short-term uptrend might be coming to an end. The long white candle is followed by a doji, which forms the two-candle harami cross pattern.
The next candle is another doji, which appears to be the straw that breaks
the bulls’ backs as they toss in the towel.
The bearish harami cross is confirmed by yet another formation, a bearish engulfing pattern. Notice that the long dark candle engulfs the preceding
white candle plus the prior two dojis and even closes below the open, close,

Doji
Bearish
engulfing tower
of weakness!

Bearish
harami
cross

FIGURE 4.32

Crossing sign. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Candles Plus

61

and low for all three of those time frames. That bearish engulfing pattern—
or “tower of weakness” as I call it—was the sell signal that indicated you
should head for the hills if you were long or to sell and then place stops
above the high of that move. At the very least, identifying this sequence of
patterns may have kept you from staying long or, worse yet, buying the high
of that move.

CANDLES PLUS
Various candle patterns alone provide excellent trading signals for any
time frame. In addition, however, you should be using other technical studies such as stochastics and moving averages or perhaps moving average
convergence/divergence (MACD) as well as pivot point analysis to help give
you the confidence you need to execute a trade. Once you have the knowledge that you need to identify what the formation means as market conditions change, you will understand when and why to enter a trade or to bail
out of a position.
To further highlight my point about using different time frames and techniques, let’s look at three charts for Japanese yen futures. First, let me make
a few observations about the foreign exchange market, the largest financial
market in the world with a daily turnover of more than $1.5 trillion. Forex
markets have no physical location and no central exchange, operating
through an electronic network of banks, corporations, and individuals trading one currency against another.
Forex trading has increased tremendously since the late 1990s as more
individual traders have become aware of currency fluctuations and the advantages of cash forex trading over trading in currency futures. In addition
to 24-hour trading, most forex firms do not charge commissions or exchange
fees but pick up profits from their bid/ask spreads. Most forex dealers offer
free real-time quotes, charts, and online order entry platforms all on one
screen and provide demo accounts to practice trading with free real-time
quotes. One such company, Proedgefx.com, handles substantial volume
and offers some of the tightest spreads in the industry.
Technical traders are attracted to the forex market because candlestick charting and almost all forms of technical analysis work with this incredibly liquid market, because substantial leverage is available, and because
trends can persist for many months or even years due to the influence of government policies and political pressures. As participants, hedge funds and
large financial institutions also tend to exert their influence to keep currency values in line. Many U.S. forex firms are now registered with and regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and National Futures
Association.
