
316 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Taking Money off the Table
Here’s the simplest form of money management: When you’re up, take the
profit rather than waiting to make even more money. Fight the greed, take the
cash, and call it a day.
If you have a week, month, or year with particularly strong profits, take a
little money out of your trading account and put it in a retirement fund, use it
to pay off a debt, or move it into a low-risk investment to help diversify your
high-risk trading activities.
Even if you do nothing else, taking profits when you have them can help keep
you in the game longer.

Using Stops
Unless you’re a machine, staying disciplined all the time can be difficult.
Humans do goofy things. That’s why there’s a simple way to force discipline
on your trading to keep your losses from destroying your trading account: a
stop order.
A stop order, also called a stop-loss order, is an order to buy or sell a security
as soon as it hits a given price, known as a stop price. The order sits dormant in
the broker’s computer until the market price hits the stop, and then the order
is executed. This automated action helps you lock in a profit or cut a loss. Some
traders don’t like stops because on occasion one will be executed on a one-time
down trade or while a stock is shooting up at price, causing them to leave some
money on the table. However, stops are an easy way to force discipline into
trading. They can help you manage your money with very little extra effort.
Yes, some brokers charge an extra commission for a stop order. But it may be
worth it.

Applying Gann’s 10 Percent Rule
The Gann money-management system is part of a complicated system of
technical analysis used to identify good securities trades. The chart system
is complex, but the money-management system is simple. The core of it is
a limit on the money placed on any one trade to 10 percent of the account

Chapter 21: Ten Tested Money-Management Techniques
value, never more. The dollar value of that 10 percent goes up or down as the
account value changes, but the 10 percent limit ensures that you always have
some powder dry to stay in the market.
Most traders who follow Gann’s 10 percent rule combine it with stops to limit
losses.
You can’t take advantage of a profitable opportunity if you have no money to
trade. You can lose everything in your account if you let your losses run.

Limiting Your Losses with the Fixed
Fractional System
The fixed fractional system is misnamed; it’s actually a range of fractions that
determine how much of your trade capital to risk on any one trade. A larger
fraction is allocated to less risky trades; a smaller fraction to more risky ones.
The calculation can be found in Chapter 6.
To do the calculation, you need to know how much money you can lose on
any one trade. The study needed to determine that amount can go a long way
toward improving your trading without getting into the math. Fixed fractional
takes the stop a step further; it helps you limit your losses and pick up more
from your wins by considering how much to trade along with the potential
value of losses and gains.

Increasing Returns with the
Fixed-Ratio System
The fixed-ratio system of money management is related to fixed fractional
trade sizing. The key difference is that it looks at accumulated profit rather
than total account size. (Accumulated profit is the value of the account less
the capital that you put into it when you started trading.)
This system was specifically designed for options and futures trading by
Ryan Jones, a trader himself. The goal is to increase returns from winning
trades and protect profits from losing ones. The basic calculation is in
Chapter 6.

317

318 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Following the Kelly Criterion Formula
The Kelly Criterion is based on some statistical work by mathematicians
working at Bell Labs in the 1950s. They realized that it had applications to
gambling, so they went to Las Vegas and made a lot of money at blackjack.
I kid you not. The casinos changed the rules so that it no longer works at
Vegas, but it does work in securities markets.
What this formula does is ensure that you will never run out of money, so you
will always be able to place yet one more trade. In the real world, of course,
you can reach a point where you still have money but don’t have enough to
place a trade.

Kelly % = W −

(

1−W
R

)

The equation looks at the percentage of trades that are expected to make
money (W), the return from a winning trade, and the ratio of the average gain
from a winning trade relative to the average loss of a losing trade (R). You
may not be able to use the Kelly criterion until you have been trading long
enough to amass data to use in the equation, but that’s okay — you have
other choices here!
The Kelly criterion often generates a trade size larger than many traders are
willing to use. One alternative is a half Kelly trade, using half of the amount
recommended by the equation.

Figuring the Amount to Trade
with Optimal F
Optimal F is another money-management system that needs performance
figures to generate an ideal trade size. It was developed by Ralph Vince, a
trader, and it comes up with the ideal fraction of your account to trade based
on your past performance. The calculation changes with every trade, so it’s
usually done through a spreadsheet or an app.

Chapter 21: Ten Tested Money-Management Techniques

Measuring Risk and Sizing Trades with
Monte Carlo Simulation
The Monte Carlo simulation is another money-management system drawn
from gambling. It’s used for risk management in many different businesses,
including trading. You enter risk and return parameters into a computer program, and it tells you the likelihood of total loss and the optimal trade size.
The system can’t account for every possible thing that can go wrong, and it
requires a lot of computer power — even nowadays. That being said, many
trading and brokerage platforms have Monte Carlo applications that can be
used to help you measure risk and size trades.

Taking a Risk with the
Martingale System
Martingale is another simple money-management system, no calculator
required. It’s popular with gamblers and traders alike. You start with a small
amount per trade — you get to pick it yourself, but it should probably be
less than 5 percent of your account value. If the trade works, your next trade
should be the same amount. If the trade does not work, then you close it out
and place double the amount (double down, as they say) on the next trade so
that you win back the loss. That doesn’t work? Double again. After you have a
winning trade, go back to the initial amount for your next trade.
If you have to double down for a long series of trades, the money involved
quickly grows: from $2,000, for example, to $4,000, $8,000, $16,000, $32,000,
$64,000, and even $128,000 if you have six losing trades in a row. This is the
problem. If you have an infinite amount of money, you will come out ahead
using martingale. Of course, if you had an infinite amount of money, you
probably wouldn’t be reading this book.
With martingale, you can run out of money before you have a trade that
works. The method works best for aggressive traders with large accounts
who start with small initial trades. It’s a risky money-management strategy,
but it’s also far preferable to having no strategy at all.

319

320 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Throwing It to the Fates
Many traders have a logical problem with money management. If you have a
sure thing, why shouldn’t you put all your money on it? If you know the next
trade is going to be great, why should you close out the day with a balance
decline? Ah, but your logic is colored green with greed.
Few sure things are as sure as they seem. Lose on the sure thing, and you
won’t be around for the next trade. Exceed your daily loss limit, and you’ll
have even greater losses.
The wise sage Bart Simpson once said that years of watching television
taught him that miracles always happen to poor children on Christmas Eve.
Knowledge of money management is more of a sure thing than believing that
you will be the beneficiary of a miracle today.

Appendix

Additional Resources for
Day Traders

A

s much as I hate to admit it, Day Trading For Dummies, 3rd Edition,
doesn’t tell you absolutely everything there is to know to get started
in day trading. This appendix lists books, websites, periodicals, and other
resources offering trading strategies and techniques and ideas on managing
risk, taxes, and stress.

Great Books for Great Trading
Have a shelf that looks a little bare? Fill it up with a few of these beauties.

Basic trading guides
The following books offer nuts-and-bolts information on day trading:
✓ Algorithmic Trading and DMA: An Introduction to Direct Access
Trading Strategies, by Barry Johnson (4Myeloma Press): This is the
textbook on algorithmic and program trading. If you want to trade this
way, you’ll need the book; if you want to learn more about what other
traders are doing, you’ll probably want it. The downside is that this
volume is as much doorstop as book.
✓ The Bible of Options Strategies: The Definitive Guide for Practical
Trading Strategies, by Gary Cohen (FT Press): Many traders prefer
options to stocks, and this book covers the main strategies as well as
some of the more esoteric ones that may work for you.
✓ Day Trading the Currency Market: Technical and Fundamental
Strategies to Profit from Market Swings, by Kathy Lien (Wiley): The
foreign exchange (forex) market is popular with day traders, but it’s a

322 Day Trading For Dummies, 3rd Edition
little different from the stock and futures markets. Trading in currency
relies heavily on leverage, and market participants have more motivations than simply hedging or speculating. If you are interested in trading
currencies, this book can help you get started.
✓ Mastering the Trade, 2nd Edition, by John F. Carter (McGraw-Hill):
The author, an experienced trader, walks day traders and swing traders
through the ins and outs of the markets, offering specific advice on different trading opportunities. He includes charts and data that explain
when to place a trade and when to close it out. This book is practical,
useful, and detailed.
✓ The New Money Management: A Framework for Asset Allocation, by
Ralph Vince (Wiley): Money management can keep traders in the game
longer while maximizing potential returns. It’s a key discipline that can
mean the difference between long-run success and failure. Unfortunately,
many day traders completely overlook money management. This book
reviews Vince’s money-management system in great detail.
✓ Trading Rules that Work: The 28 Lessons Every Trader Must
Master, by Jason Jankovsky (Wiley): If it were possible to get rich
from knowing just a handful of specific trading indicators, every
trader would retire and run huge charitable foundations. But it’s not
that easy. Instead, a disciplined, professional approach to the market
makes a difference over the long run. This book is a useful overview
of different trading rules, why they work, and how traders should
apply them.
✓ Trading Systems and Methods, 5th Edition, by Perry J. Kaufman
(Wiley): This textbook on trading systems provides a detailed analysis
of the popular and the obscure alike. What makes it especially nice is
the book has a companion website with actual trading programs on it.
You can use them as a starting point for developing your own trading
systems.

Technical analysis guides
Technical analysis is a system of looking at price and volume trends to determine supply and demand levels in the market. Supply and demand, of course,
drive price changes, so understanding the dynamics is pretty darn useful.
Here are a few books that cover technical analysis in detail:
✓ Candlestick Charting For Dummies, by Russell Rhoads (Wiley):
Candlestick charts were developed in Japan and are the basis of a
system of technical analysis that’s popular with short-term traders,
including day traders. This book explains how to identify and use
candlestick patterns.

Appendix: Additional Resources for Day Traders
✓ Mind Over Markets: Power Trading with Market Generated
Information, by James Dalton, Eric Jones, and Robert Bevan Dalton
(Traders Press): Don’t let the title fool you. This book is not about trading psychology. Instead, it covers a price-charting and technical-analysis
system in great depth, especially the relationships between price
changes and volume changes. The system, called market profile, is
especially useful for day traders working in futures markets.
✓ Tape Reading and Market Tactics, by Humphrey B. Neill
(Marketplace Books): In the early part of the 20th century, traders
looked at price and volume information that came across ticker tapes.
Traders still rely on an analysis of price and volume information, just
with different tools. This book was originally written in 1931, but many
day traders find that Neill’s advice on what to look for and what to avoid
when looking at price data still holds true.
✓ Technical Analysis For Dummies, by Barbara Rockefeller (Wiley): Day
traders use technical analysis to help gauge market activity, and this book is
a detailed guide on reading charts and applying the information to trading
in an intelligent way. What else would a For Dummies book offer?

Schools of price theory
Most day traders take an eclectic approach to the markets. They find a few
indicators that help them and then apply those indicators to the situation in
the market. Over time, they refine their systems. Some traders, however, rely
on specific theories for how prices should move. Here are some basic texts
on the different theories.
✓ Dow Theory Unplugged, by Charles Dow, Richard Russell, et al.
(W&A Publishing): The Dow Theory, developed by Charles Dow, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, predicts overall market performance
based on the performance of different industry sectors. It doesn’t work
quite the same way it once did, given how much less industrial the U.S.
economy is than in Dow’s time. This book includes Dow’s essays as well
as commentary and analysis from different experts.
✓ Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Market Behavior, by A.J. Frost and
Robert R. Prechter, Jr. (Wiley): The Elliott Wave theory is a strange
animal. It looks for really long-term patterns in the markets — over
decades and even centuries — based on the Fibonacci series, a number
series found in nature. It’s not widely used, but some traders swear by it.
✓ How to Make Profits in Commodities, by W.D. Gann (Lambert Gann):
This book isn’t exactly an easy read, but many analysts believe that
Gann’s system can help them figure out how prices change over time.
The original text dates from the 1940s. Some people find it dated; others
think it’s timeless.

323

324 Day Trading For Dummies, 3rd Edition
✓ How to Make Money in Stocks: A Winning System in Good Times or
Bad, by William J. O’Neill (McGraw-Hill): William O’Neill’s system is of
most interest to people who are swing trading or investing in common
stock, but it may help day traders understand what other participants
in the market are looking at when they place orders. The book explains
momentum investing, which looks for stocks of companies with
improving business trends and performance.

Trading psychology
Good traders are mentally tough. They need the confidence to face the
market, the decisiveness to place orders, and the fortitude to take losses —
and do it against a faceless mix of everyone else trading that day. Several
books address trading psychology specifically; others on mental strength are
also popular with traders because their lessons can be applied to the markets:
✓ The Art of War, by Sun Tzu: It seems like every trader I’ve ever met has
a copy of The Art of War. It’s a Chinese text describing military strategy,
including the importance of mental toughness and strict discipline. First
translated into a European language in 1782, several different versions
and translations are in print.
✓ Awaken the Giant Within, by Anthony Robbins (Pocket Books): This
basic self-help book is popular with all sorts of folks. Many traders find
that Robbins’s methods give them confidence and help them control
their minds when they’re trading.
✓ The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind, by Gustave LeBon (Dover
Books): In the 19th century, Gustave LeBon wrote this treatise on crowd
psychology. He didn’t think much of his fellow human beings, but many
traders have found that his insights explain some short-term irrational
behavior in the markets. Understanding why traders make mistakes can
help you make profits.
✓ The Disciplined Trader: Developing Winning Attitudes, by Mark
Douglas (Prentice Hall): Mark Douglas is a trader who lost a lot of
money and tried to figure out why. As he did that, he developed a great
deal of insight into the psychological aspects of trading. Namely, the
market doesn’t care about who is trading in it, so every trader is responsible for his or her own results. Many experienced day traders swear by
the information in this book.
✓ Trading in the Zone, by Mark Douglas (Prentice Hall): This book
covers the mental discipline of trading, emphasizing the practices and
routines that take the emotion out of it. A trader has a short time to
make a profit, and some panic at the idea. This book has helped many
traders focus on the key elements of trading rather than the fear, doubt,
and greed that can undo the best of them.

Appendix: Additional Resources for Day Traders

History and memoir
I’m not willing to accept the Elliott Wave and say that all market movements
are part of overarching trends, but market history — like all history — tends
to repeat. Why? Because people are people, and no matter how commerce
and the economy changes, people do the same things over and over again:
✓ Double Down: Reflections on Gambling and Loss, by Frederick
and Stephen Barthelme (Harvest Books): Want to see what a gambling addiction looks like? The Barthelme brothers are writers and
English professors who inherited $250,000 from their father’s estate
and then lost it all playing casino blackjack. It’s a story of how complicated relationships with money cause people to make bad decisions.
For a day trader, this book tells what happens when people cannot
place limits for emotional reasons, a route to ruin in the casino or
during the trading day.
✓ Fortune’s Formula: The Untold Story of the Scientific Betting System
that Beat the Casinos and Wall Street, by William Poundstone (Hill
and Wang): Claude Shannon and John Kelly were Bell Labs scientists
working on queuing theories for long-distance calls when they stumbled
on what is known as the Kelly Criterion: The ideal proportion of money
to bet can be found by the ratio of your edge in the market divided by
the odds of winning. Day traders can use this edge/odds formula to figure
out how much money to allocate to a trade. This book explains how the
system works, though it never quite proves that it works when applied
to legitimate casinos or to trading.
✓ Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin LeFevre (Wiley): This
classic, written before the 1929 market crash, tells of the adventures of
Jesse Livermore, one of the most successful traders of his time. It’s a disguised memoir of speculation, with a character named Larry Livingston
standing in for Livermore. Some traders like it for the lessons they can
learn from Livermore; others are just amused by how unchanged the art
of day trading is despite dramatic changes in technology.

The Trader’s Internet
Day trading was made possible by the Internet. When high-speed connectivity to market data became affordable, almost anyone could trade with
the same speed as folks working on the exchange floor or a brokerage
trading desk. And yet the Internet can be a terrible distraction to a day
trader or to anyone else working alone. Here are some good websites for
day traders, but you may want to limit your use of them to before and after
trading hours.

325

326 Day Trading For Dummies, 3rd Edition
✓ Cara Community: Bill Cara isn’t a day trader, but he is a full-time investor
who pays careful attention to the markets. Each day, he records his observations about what’s happening on his blog, www.caracommunity.com.
It’s good reading.
✓ Elite Trader: Elite Trader, www.elitetrader.com, is one of the big
trader communities online, with forums, book and software reviews, and
broker ratings. The participants can be passionate, but the information
is often great.
✓ IndexArb.com: Interested in trading futures on the market indexes?
This site, http://indexarb.com, has useful information. It lists the
premiums on different contracts, offers strategies for different market
conditions, and gives you some good background information to help
you make your own decisions.
✓ TraderInterviews.com: Looking for something educational and
inspirational for your MP3 player? TraderInterviews.com
(www.traderinterviews.com) features discussions with different
traders.
✓ Trader Mike: Every day, Michael Seneadza, a day trader, updates his
blog at www.tradermike.net. It includes his trading journal, thoughts
on the markets, and advice on day trading, which he admits is not definitive. This blog is often thought-provoking.
✓ Trade2Win: Are you looking for forums about trading? Want to find out
what other traders think about a service or a strategy? Looking to learn
more? Check out Trade2Win, www.trade2win.com, one of the most
comprehensive trader sites in cyberspace.
✓ Traders Laboratory: If you are interested in meeting other day traders
online, finding web-based seminars, reading traders’ blogs, or checking out economic release calendars, then Traders Laboratory,
www.traderslaboratory.com, is the site for you.

Other Mainstream Media
Even though traders are hooked to real-time market data through the
Internet, they still look to some old-style sources for information. Believe it
or not!
✓ Barron’s: Barron’s (www.barrons.com) is a weekly financial newspaper
published by Dow Jones & Company. The primary emphasis is on
long-term investing, but it carries in-depth market analysis and often
interviews outstanding traders. In addition, the regular “Electronic
Trader” column carries news and ratings of online brokerage firms, many
of which specialize in services for day traders.

Appendix: Additional Resources for Day Traders
✓ Bloomberg TV: Bloomberg TV (www.bloomberg.com/tv) is a cable
channel that carries news and information about the markets. Some
traders keep it running in the background while they trade. Others
watch the shows before and after market hours.
✓ Investor’s Business Daily: This newspaper, www.investors.com, is
published by the William O’Neill Company, which also publishes charts
and technical analysis systems used by stock investors. Every morning, IBD has new trade ideas and market analysis for active traders,
especially those in the stock market.
