gap is filled so quickly that it isn’t even visible on the 5-minute time frame after the
first 5-minute bar has closed.
Morning Gaps and Candlesticks

You may be thinking that the morning gap is an interesting and useful phenomenon, but what does it have to do with candlestick charting? Take a closer look
at Figures 8.11 through 8.15. The morning gap up in Figure 8.11 occurred after a warning from a bearish upper shadow the prior session (long shadows were
discussed in Chapter 5). In Figure 8.12 observe that the morning gap became a
bearish engulfing pattern that surrounded the small real body of a hanging man
that formed the prior day. The downside morning gap in Figure 8.13 turned
into a bullish engulfing pattern by the end of the session. Figure 8.14 became a
bullish piercing pattern. All of these events occurred after a price advance or a
decline, so there was a move to reverse.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

166

11:40 AM

Page 166 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Not all morning gaps will turn into candlestick reversal patterns. However, you may be surprised at how many reversal patterns do evolve from, or include, a morning gap. Make sure to carefully study the criterion of the reversal
patterns provided in Chapter 3 because several of them require an opening gap
for a valid pattern.
Example

Both the dark cloud cover and the piercing pattern start with a morning
gap; and the star patterns have a gap between the first and second real
bodies in their formations. Most engulfing patterns also develop from a
morning gap.

Interpreting the Morning Gap

Since all gaps start as opening gaps, you won’t know at the time price gaps open
how the day will unfold. Will a void remain on the chart (a true gap), or will
the gap be closed, resulting in a morning gap? Remember, though, that morning gaps occur frequently; much more so than true gaps. Therefore, when a
stock does gap open, it has a high likelihood of filling within the trading session and often early in the trading day. Keep that in mind when determining
how you’ll react to opening gaps.
The manner in which a trader chooses to react to an opening gap may
vary from one situation to the next. Again, the following should be considered:
• The size of the gap
• The price action that preceded the gap
• The surrounding chart landscape
• The style of trading utilized
• The trader’s risk tolerance and risk and money management rules
• The current volatility of the stock
• The current environment of the broader market
Since morning gaps are very common, traders who hold long-term positions may choose to ignore many opening gaps. Otherwise, they may exit a position prematurely. Even when holding longer term, though, situations may
arise in which an opening gap should not be ignored. Always consider the context in which the gap formed.
Swing traders are much less inclined to ignore an opening gap. Because of
the short hold time, the way they manage gaps may make a significant difference

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 167 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

167

in their profitability. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to discussion of
how morning gaps can affect short-term positions and how swing traders may
choose to respond to such events. The discussion and examples refer to trading
long positions; however, the same concepts apply inversely for shorting. Even if
most of your trades are longer term, you should review the remaining pages, as
you may pick up some valuable information.

The Opening Gap’s Role in
Swing Trading
The opening gap is an important concept to understand and is a component of
many day-trading and swing-trading techniques and strategies. Trading decisions should not be based on emotions; they should be based on logical conclusions. Knowing that most opening gaps will reverse direction intraday should
be a consideration when swing traders define their short-term strategies.
Location Matters

Just as it matters where a candlestick reversal pattern forms on a chart (it must have
a move to reverse), it matters where an opening gap occurs. It is important to consider the price action that preceded the gap. If a trader holds a long position in a
stock that has just started to move up, an opening gap, especially a small one, may
not be a significant event. However, if price has already moved a good distance
away from the average, an upside opening gap may be much more meaningful. It
may represent a signal to exit all, or at least part, of a swing position, particularly if
price gaps open substantially beyond the prior trading session’s close.
Recall from Chapter 7 that price tends to revert to the mean. Thus, when
price has moved away from the average on the daily chart, it becomes vulnerable to a pullback or at least a period of consolidation. Swing traders typically try
to avoid getting caught in a pullback that may take back part of the gains
achieved during a price advance (or sometimes all of the gains if proper risk
management is not employed). They should be on the alert for warning signs
that indicate a potential end of the short-term trend. In some cases, a warning
comes in the form of an opening gap.
Since most opening gaps reverse direction intraday, that means it is common
for price to decline back to the prior trading session’s close, and potentially farther.
When deciding whether to exit an opening gap, a trader should check the prior session’s close and determine if he would be willing to hold back to that point. If not,
the opening gap can be used to lock in additional profits. A stock’s volatility should
also be considered. If a stock is volatile, an opening gap may be bigger than it
appears on a percentage basis. Looks can be deceiving where volatility is concerned.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

168

Page 168 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 8.18 shows a daily chart of Biolase Technology Inc (BLTI). Price
rallied for several days from July 23 to 30, 2007. On July 31, price
gapped up open approximately 6 percent above the prior session’s close.
Price had already moved far away from the moving average prior to the
appearance of the opening gap. The opening gap offered a swing trader
an opportunity to sell near what may turn out to be the swing high. By
the close of market, the opening gap had evolved into a bearish dark
cloud cover pattern.

FIGURE 8.18 Upside opening gap turned into a bearish dark
cloud cover pattern
Source: TeleChart 2007®

The surrounding chart landscape should also be evaluated. Look for technical signs that indicate where the trade may run into trouble. Swing traders
typically determine targets in advance of initiating their trades. A ceiling above
would provide a target. A gap up to that ceiling would indicate the target has
been achieved. Conversely, if a short position is held and price gaps to a floor, in
most cases the position should be covered.
Swing traders should monitor their trades closely and be vigilant at the
open. Attention should be given to the circumstances in which the opening gap

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 169 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

169

occurs. If a stock gaps up open to a level where price is vulnerable to a change in
direction, it is not necessary to wait to see if the morning gap fills or if a candlestick pattern evolves by the end of the daily session. In many cases, the morning
gap is an early reversal signal.

Example

Figure 8.19 shows a daily chart of Denbury Resources Ltd. (DNR). A
swing trader who entered a long position when price pulled back to the
50-period simple moving average would have participated in the swing
up from July 27 to August 1, 2007. The July high would be a logical
target (dotted line). On August 2, price gapped up open approximately
7 percent to just above that ceiling. As you can see from the 15-minute
price action shown in Figure 8.20, the stock fell rapidly after the
opening gap, which pushed it back below the ceiling on the daily chart
and filled the gap within the first 45 minutes of trading. It would not
have been necessary to hold through that intraday decline had a swing
trader determined the target in advance and used the opening gap to
exit when that objective had been reached.

FIGURE 8.19

Price gapped up open to the swing target

Source: TeleChart 2007®

(continues)

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

170

Page 170 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

(continued )

FIGURE 8.20

Opening gap ﬁlled within the ﬁrst hour of trading

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Morning Gaps and Pullbacks

Swing traders may be concerned about opening gaps filling during the day and
robbing them of the extra profits they could have had if they exited the trade
earlier in the session. But that is not the only concern. Often, an opening gap
marks the beginning of a pullback on the daily chart. So not only are the additional profits in the opening gap at risk, but the stock may decline further during the following days. As a general rule, a short-term trader seeks to exit after a
price swing rather than holding through a pullback or consolidation.
Not all opening gaps will mark the beginning of a pullback. Morning gaps
are very common. Even though most of them may reverse the opening direction intraday, it does not necessarily mean the stock will continue to decline
during the following days. Sometimes opening gaps will occur day after day, filling (or partially filling) each day, but price continues in the direction of the trend.
And even if a stock has moved well away from the average prior to the gap-up
open, there will still be instances in which the stock will continue to rise instead
of moving sideways or pulling back. Remember, though, that type of scenario is
more the exception than the rule.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 171 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

171

Example

Figure 8.21 shows a daily chart of Clarcor Inc. (CLC). After a long white
shaven candle formed on August 8, 2007, price gapped up open in the
following session far above the prior bar’s high. Price turned down
immediately and quickly filled the opening gap. By the end of the trading
session, a dark cloud cover pattern had formed on the daily chart.
Although price did not pierce halfway or more into the prior candle’s
white real body, the penetration was substantial enough to provide the
same message as an ideal dark cloud cover pattern. The stock continued to
decline over the next several days, retracing most of the prior swing up.

FIGURE 8.21
to pull back

Price gapped up open, ﬁlled the gap, and continued

Source: TeleChart 2007®

There will always be situations where you exit a long position and then
watch the stock move higher. That is simply part of doing business in the uncertain world of trading, in which we must make our decisions at the right edge
of the chart instead of in the rearview mirror. Don’t get caught up in wishful
thinking by looking back at a stock like UIC in Figure 8.22 that you may have
exited. If your strategy called for exiting, you should commend yourself for following your rules rather than chastising yourself for doing so. Disciplined
traders survive in this business; undisciplined ones rarely do.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

172

Page 172 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 8.22 shows a daily chart of United Industrial Corp. (UIC). UIC
gapped up open every day for several days during May 2007 (arrows).
Some of the morning gaps were very small, while others were more
significant. Even though this stock got far away from the average, it
continued to move higher.

FIGURE 8.22

Multiple opening gaps occurred within the uptrend

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Some traders may elect to take partial profits in specific cases in the
face of an opening gap. For instance, they may sell a quarter, half, or more of
their shares and maintain a protective stop on the balance of the position.
That action maintains a partial position in the event that the stock continues
higher, while reducing the exposure in case price pulls back. Selling in increments is a practice referred to as scaling out. Other traders may prefer to utilize a strategy that includes raising the protective stop or implementing an
automatic trailing stop, in lieu of exiting when an opening gap occurs. With
practice, you’ll determine the method that is best suited to your risk tolerance and trading style.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 173 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

173

Exiting a Trade in Premarket

Since it is common for an opening gap to reverse within the first hour of trading, traders do not have a lot of time to ponder how to react to the gap. Traders
should decide before the opening bell whether they’ll wait until the open and
observe the price action, or if they’ll attempt to exit the position in premarket
trading.
The regular trading session for the major U.S.
stock exchanges runs from 9:30 AM to 4:00 PM Eastern
premarket
Time. Premarket trading occurs for a couple of hours
trading
prior to the open of the regular trading session. ParticiTrading that
pation by market makers and electronic communications
occurs prior to
networks (ECNs) in premarket trading is voluntary.
the open of the
Thus, liquidity may be significantly less than during nornormal daily
mal trading hours, and some stocks may not trade at all
trading
prior to the opening bell.
session.
Many novice traders are not familiar with, or have
some fear of, trading in the premarket session. Traders
should do so cautiously, as the bid-ask spreads can be significantly wider than
during regular trading hours. However, if a trader owns a stock that is trading
actively in premarket—heavily enough that the spread is not prohibitive—exiting in premarket is a viable option in many instances. Only limit orders will be
filled during premarket hours. Market orders will be held in queue until the
opening bell.
It is not usually necessary to wait until the opening
bell in order to determine if a stock will gap open to the
slippage
up or down side. If a stock is trading actively in premarket at a price higher than the prior trading session’s close,
The difference
then it has already gapped up. If it is trading at prices
between the
lower than the prior session’s close, it has already gapped
price at the
down. Unless something changes before the opening bell
time a trader
that pushes price back to the prior session’s close, it is
places an
destined to gap open when the normal trading session
order and the
begins.
price at which
Price may move quickly at the opening bell, and
the order is
slippage can sometimes be severe in a fast-moving
actually ﬁlled.
stock. Keep that in mind when determining your trading strategies.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 174 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 175 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

9
Chapter

Support and
Resistance

f you wish to become skilled at technical analysis, it is
imperative that you understand its primary focus.
The crux of technical analysis is the study of trends.
Chapter 7 was devoted entirely to discussion of trend
analysis. In Chapter 8 you learned about price gaps,
which can also play a part in a trend’s development. This
chapter adds one more layer to the study of trends by examining the role of support and resistance. Support and
resistance play a crucial part in chart analysis, trade selection, and trade management.
Support is an area below the current price that
traders recognize as a level in which buying may be sufficient to overcome selling pressure (Figure 9.1). When
price declines to a floor, it is referred to as a test of support. When support is tested and holds, the price decline
is halted, at least temporarily. Bulls step into long positions and bears cover short positions, keeping price from
descending further. Price may reverse direction after testing support, or it may move sideways. If price closes below a floor, it is referred to as a breakdown or a break of
support. When support is broken, it is a sign of weakness
and the downtrend may continue.

I

175

support
An area
beneath the
current price in
which demand
should be
sufﬁcient to
halt a price
decline.

breakdown
Price closes
below an
identiﬁable
support area.

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

176

Page 176 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 9.1 Support

resistance
An area above
the current
price in which
supply should
be sufﬁcient to
halt a price
advance.

breakout
Price closes
above an
identiﬁable
resistance area.

FIGURE 9.2 Resistance

Resistance is an area above the current price which
traders perceive to be a level where enough selling may
occur to overcome buying pressure (Figure 9.2). When
price rises up to a ceiling it is referred to as a test of resistance. When resistance is tested and holds, the price
advance is halted, at least temporarily. Bears sell short
and bulls exit long positions, keeping price from ascending further. Price may reverse direction or move sideways
after testing resistance. If price closes above a ceiling, it is
referred to as a breakout or a break of resistance. When
price breaks through a ceiling, it is a sign of strength and
the uptrend may continue.
Support and resistance levels are not arbitrary. They
are areas on a chart that are known to have the potential
of halting the trend. The most commonly referenced support and resistance areas are those created from price
peaks and bottoms. Peaks and bottoms are formed during a trend’s development, and they are also the building
blocks of Western reversal and continuation patterns.

Resistance and Support at Peaks
and Bottoms
As discussed in Chapter 7, peaks and bottoms are formed as a trend develops and
during trendless phases (consolidation). Now it is time to expand upon the roles of
peaks and bottoms as areas of resistance and support. Whether they have formed
recently, or farther in the past, peaks and bottoms have the potential to provide resistance or support, respectively, when price approaches those areas again.
As an uptrend develops, price typically rises and then pulls back or consolidates. The price action from those short-term trends leaves a series of minor
peaks and bottoms. Some of the peaks and bottoms will be more significant

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 177 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Support and Resistance

177

Example

Figure 9.3 shows a daily chart of Berry Petroleum Co (BRY). From late
March through mid-June 2007 price was in an uptrend. After each
pullback or period of minor consolidation, price was easily able to
surpass the prior peak (numbered 1 through 5) and move on to new
highs. Notice how price frequently found support at the prior peak
during subsequent pullbacks. For instance, after peak 4 formed price
pulled back and used peak 3 as support. The same occurred again when
peak 5 formed and pulled back to peak 4. Prior resistance often becomes
new support. The pullback after peak 6 was deeper than the prior dips
but held support at the prior swing low (at 4). Price moved up again
from early to mid-July, but that time the momentum was not sufficient
to break through the prior peak (at 6). Price declined back to support at
the June 8 and June 27 bottoms (at 4 again).

FIGURE 9.3 It is difﬁcult to determine, at the right edge of the
chart, whether the stock is consolidating or putting in a top
Source: TeleChart 2007®

than others, but each creates a potential resistance or support area. In order for
the uptrend to continue, price must be able to break up through those newly
formed peaks to new highs. In addition, when price pulls back it must hold
prior support levels in order for the uptrend to remain intact. Once price is no

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

178

11:40 AM

Page 178 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

longer able to take out the prior peak, the stock may either be transitioning into
a trading range or putting in a top. Conversely, in order for a downtrend to
continue, price must take out each newly formed bottom on subsequent declines. When it is no longer able to do so, the trend may be shifting into a
trendless phase or bottoming out.
In a scenario like that, which occurred on the chart of BRY in Figure 9.3,
when price is no longer able to surpass the prior peak, bearish traders may interpret it as a potential bearish Western double top setting up. They anticipate that
a trend reversal is likely. Bullish traders may view the same chart and, rather
than seeing a double top, they determine that price has entered a trading range.
They anticipate that price will break to the upside at some point, continuing
the prior uptrend. The double top that is present on the chart of BRY is just
consolidation until it is confirmed with a close below the middle of the “M.”
Thus, it is difficult to determine, at the right edge of the chart, whether the
stock is readying for a reversal or just resting before another move up. Only after price has broken down through support or up through resistance will you
know whether the bears or the bulls were right.
As the BRY example shows, recently formed peaks and bottoms can be
strong. Traders who have open positions will watch closely as price tests those
areas. But don’t underestimate the strength of ceilings and floors that formed
farther back on the chart. Price may reverse at a visible support or resistance
area that formed weeks, months, or even years in the past.
If you compress a daily chart and look back across its horizon, you’ll often
see very noticeable high and low points where the trend reversed direction.
(Those major support and resistance areas may even be 52-week highs or lows
for the stock.) When price approaches such an obvious ceiling or floor, the
trend is vulnerable once again to a change in direction. Those areas may be
tested again and again. It is a significant event when such a strong support or resistance area is finally broken.

Example

Figure 9.4 shows a daily chart of General Motors Corp (GM), which is
compressed so that over a year of data is displayed. The horizontal trend
lines show major support and resistance areas on the chart where the
stock trended back and forth between $28 and $38. Those are not just
minor peaks and bottoms within an up or down trend that can be
surpassed easily. Those peaks and bottoms create a significant floor and
ceiling for the stock (price was approaching the floor again at the time
of this writing).
