
M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

powerful follow-through days keeps you from being drawn prematurely into
rally attempts that ultimately end in failure. In other words, you have rules
that will continue to keep you from getting sucked into phony rallies. This is
how we were able to stay out of the market and in money market funds for
most of 2000 through 2002, preserve the majority of the gains we had made
in 1998 and 1999, and help those who read and followed our many basic
rules. There is a fortune for you in this paragraph.

Part I Review: How to Remember and
Use What You’ve Read So Far
It isn’t enough just to read. You need to remember and apply all of what
you’ve read. The CAN SLIM system will help you remember what you’ve
read so far. Each letter in the CAN SLIM system stands for one of the seven
basic fundamentals of selecting outstanding stocks. Most successful stocks
have these seven common characteristics at emerging growth stages, so they
are worth committing to memory. Repeat this formula until you can recall
and use it easily:
C = Current Quarterly Earnings per Share. Quarterly earnings per
share must be up at least 18% or 20%, but preferably up 40% to 100% or
200% or more—the higher, the better. They should also be accelerating
at some point in recent quarters. Quarterly sales should also be accelerating or up 25%.
A = Annual Earnings Increases. There must be significant (25% or
more) growth in each of the last three years and a return on equity of 17%
or more (with 25% to 50% preferred). If return on equity is too low, pretax profit margin must be strong.
N = New Products, New Management, New Highs. Look for new products or services, new management, or significant new changes in industry
conditions. And most important, buy stocks as they emerge from sound,
properly formed chart bases and begin to make new highs in price.
S = Supply and Demand—Shares Outstanding plus Big Volume
Demand. Any size capitalization is acceptable in today’s new economy as
long as a company fits all the other CAN SLIM rules. Look for big volume increases when a stock begins to move out of its basing area.
L = Leader or Laggard. Buy market leaders and avoid laggards. Buy the
number one company in its field or space. Most leaders will have Relative
Price Strength Ratings of 80 to 90 or higher and composite ratings of 90
or more in bull markets.

233

234 A WINNING SYSTEM
I = Institutional Sponsorship. Buy stocks with increasing sponsorship
and at least one or two mutual fund owners with top-notch recent performance records. Also look for companies with management ownership.
M = Market Direction. Learn to determine the overall market direction
by accurately interpreting the daily market indexes’ price and volume
movements and the action of individual market leaders. This can determine whether you win big or lose. You need to stay in gear with the market. It doesn’t pay to be out of phase with the market.

Is CAN SLIM Momentum Investing?
I’m not even sure what “momentum investing” is. Some analysts and
reporters who don’t understand anything about how we invest have given
that name to what we talk about and do. They say it’s “buying the stocks that
have gone up the most in price” and that have the strongest relative price
strength. No one in her right mind invests that way. What we do is identify
companies with strong fundamentals—large sales and earnings increases
resulting from unique new products or services—and then buy their stocks
when they emerge from properly formed price consolidation periods and
before they run up dramatically in price during bull markets.
When bear markets are beginning, we want people to protect themselves
and nail down their gains by knowing when to sell and start raising cash. We
are not investment advisors. We do not write and disseminate any research
reports. We do not call or visit companies. We do not make markets in
stocks, deal in derivatives, do underwritings, or arrange mergers. We don’t
manage any public or institutional money.
We are historians, studying and discovering how stocks and markets actually work and teaching and training people everywhere who want to make
money investing intelligently and realistically. These are ordinary people
from all walks of life, including professionals. We do not give them fish. We
teach them how to fish for their whole future so that they too can capitalize
on the American Dream.

Experts, Education, and Egos
On Wall Street, wise men can be drawn into booby traps just as easily as fools.
From what I’ve seen over many years, the length and quality of one’s education
and the level of one’s IQ have very little to do with making money investing in
the market. The more intelligent people are—particularly men—the more
they think they really know what they’re doing, and the more they may have to
learn the hard way how little they really know about outsmarting the markets.

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

We’ve all now witnessed firsthand the severe damage that supposedly
bright, intelligent, and highly educated people in New York and Washington, D.C., caused this country in 2008. U.S. senators, heads of congressional
committees, political types working for government-sponsored entities such
as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, plus heads of top New York-based brokerage firms, lending banks, and mortgage brokers all thought they knew
what they were doing, with many of them using absurd leverage of 50 to 1
to invest in subprime real estate loans.
They created sophisticated derivatives and insurance programs to justify
such incredible risks. No one group was solely to blame, since both Democrats and Republicans were involved. However, it all began as a wellintended Big Government program that was accelerated in 1995, 1997, and
1998, when the Glass-Steagall Act was rescinded, and things continued to
escalate out of control.
So maybe it’s time for you to take more control of your investing and
make up your mind that you’re going to learn how to save and invest your
hard-earned money more safely and wisely than Washington and Wall
Street have done since the late 1990s. If you really want to do it, you certainly can. Anyone can.
The few people I’ve known over the years who’ve been unquestionably
successful investing in America were decisive individuals without huge
egos. The market has a simple way of whittling all excessive pride and
overblown egos down to size. After all, the whole idea is to be completely
objective and recognize what the marketplace is telling you, rather than trying to prove that what you said or did yesterday or six weeks ago was right.
The fastest way to take a bath in the stock market is to try to prove that you
are right and the market is wrong. Humility and common sense provide
essential balance.
Sometimes, listening to quoted and accepted experts can get you into
trouble. In the spring and summer of 1982, a well-known expert insisted
that government borrowing was going to crowd out the private sector and
that interest rates and inflation would soar back to new highs. Things turned
out exactly the opposite: inflation broke and interest rates came crashing
down. Another expert’s bear market call in the summer of 1996 came only
one day before the market bottom.
Week after week during the 2000 bear market, one expert after another
kept saying on CNBC that it was time to buy high-tech stocks—only to
watch the techs continue to plummet further. Many high-profile analysts
and strategists kept telling investors to capitalize on these once-in-a-lifetime
“buying opportunities” on the way down! Buying on the way down can be a
very dangerous pastime.

235

236 A WINNING SYSTEM
Conventional wisdom or consensus thinking in the market is seldom
right. I never pay any attention to the parade of experts voicing their personal opinions on the market in print or on TV. It creates entirely too much
confusion and can cost you a great deal of money. In 2000, some strategists
were telling people to buy the dips (short-term declines in price) because
the cash position of mutual funds had increased greatly and all this money
was sitting on the sidelines waiting to be invested. To prove this wrong, all
anyone had to do was look at the General Markets & Sectors page in
Investor’s Business Daily. It showed that while mutual fund cash positions
had indeed risen, they were still significantly below their historical highs
and even below their historical averages.
The only thing that works well is to let the market indexes tell you when
it’s time to enter and exit. Never fight the market—it’s bigger than you are.

II

• PAR T •

Be Smart
From
the Start

This page intentionally left blank

10

• CHAPTE R •

When You Must Sell and Cut
Every Loss . . . Without Exception

Now that you’ve learned how and when to buy nothing but the best stocks, it’s

time for you to learn how and when to sell them. You’ve probably heard the
sports cliché: “The best offense is a strong defense.” The funny thing about
clichés is they are usually true: a team that’s all offense and no defense seldom wins the game. In fact, a strong defense can often propel a team to
great heights.
During their heyday, when Branch Rickey was president and general
manager, the Brooklyn Dodgers typically had good pitching. In the game of
baseball, the combination of pitching and fielding represents the defensive
side of a team and probably 70% of the game. It’s almost impossible to win
without them.
The same holds true in the stock market. Unless you have a strong
defense to protect yourself against large losses, you absolutely can’t win big
in the game of investing.

Bernard Baruch’s Secret Market Method of Making Millions
Bernard Baruch, a famous market operator on Wall Street and a trusted
advisor to U.S. presidents, said it best: “If a speculator is correct half of the
time, he is hitting a good average. Even being right 3 or 4 times out of 10
should yield a person a fortune if he has the sense to cut his losses quickly
on the ventures where he has been wrong.”
As you can see, even the most successful investors make many mistakes.
These poor decisions will lead to losses, some of which can become quite

239

240 BE SMART FROM THE START
awful if you’re not disciplined and careful. No matter how smart you are,
how high your IQ, how advanced your education, how good your information, or how sound your analysis, you’re simply not going to be right all the
time. In fact, you’ll probably be right less than half the time! You positively
must understand and accept that the first rule for the highly successful individual investor is . . . always cut short and limit every single loss. To do this
takes never-ending discipline and courage.
Marc Mandell of Winning on Wall Street has been reading Investor’s
Business Daily since 1987. He likes it for its many moneymaking ideas and
its emphasis on risk-management strategies. “Lose small and win big,” he
believes, “is the holy grail of investing.”
Baruch’s point about cutting losses was driven home to me by an account
that I managed back in 1962. The general market had taken a 29% nosedive, and we were right on only one of every three commitments we had
made in this account. Yet at the end of the year, the account was ahead. The
reason was that the average profit on the 33% of decisions that were correct was more than twice the average of the small losses we took when we
were off-target.
I like to follow a 3-to-1 ratio between where to sell and take profits and
where to cut losses. If you take some 20% to 25% gains, cut your losses at
7% or 8%. If you’re in a bear market like 2008 and you buy any stocks at all,
you might get only a few 10% or 15% gains, so I’d move quickly to cut every
single loss automatically at 3%, with no exceptions.
The whole secret to winning big in the stock market is not to be right all
the time, but to lose the least amount possible when you’re wrong.

You’ve got to recognize when you may be wrong and sell without hesitation to cut short every one of your losses. It’s your job to get in phase with
the market and not try to get the market to be in phase with you.
How can you tell when you may be wrong? That’s easy: the price of the
stock drops below the price you paid for it! Each point that your favorite
brainchild falls below your cost increases both the chance that you’re wrong
and the price that you’re going to pay for being wrong.

Are Successful People Lucky or Always Right?
People think that in order to be successful, you have to be either lucky or
right most of the time. Not so. Successful people make many mistakes, and
their success is due to hard work, not luck. They just try harder and more
often than the average person. There aren’t many overnight successes; success takes time.

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

In search of a filament for his electric lamp, Thomas Edison carbonized and
tested 6,000 specimens of bamboo. Three of them worked. Before that, he had
tried thousands of other materials, from cotton thread to chicken feathers.
Babe Ruth worked so hard for his home run record that he also held the
lifetime record for strikeouts. Irving Berlin wrote more than 600 songs, but no
more than 50 were hits. The Beatles were turned down by every record company in England before they made it big. Michael Jordan was once cut from
his high school basketball team, and Albert Einstein made an F in math. (It
also took him many years to develop and prove his theory of relativity.)
It takes a lot of trial and error before you can nail down substantial gains in
stocks like Brunswick and Great Western Financial when they doubled in
1961, Chrysler and Syntex in 1963, Fairchild Camera and Polaroid in 1965,
Control Data in 1967, Levitz Furniture in 1970–1972, Prime Computer and
Humana in 1977–1981, MCI Communications in 1981–1982, Price Company
in 1982–1983, Microsoft in 1986–1992, Amgen in 1990–1991, International
Game Technology in 1991–1993, Cisco Systems from 1995 to 2000, America
Online and Charles Schwab in 1998–1999, and Qualcomm in 1999. These
stocks dazzled the market with gains ranging from 100% to more than 1,000%.
Over the years, I’ve found that only one or two out of ten stocks that I’ve
bought turned out to be truly outstanding and capable of making this kind
of substantial profits. In other words, to get the one or two stocks that make
big money, you have to look for and buy ten.
Which begs the question, what do you do with the other eight? Do you sit
with them and hope, the way most people do? Or do you sell them and keep
trying until you come up with even bigger successes?

When Does a Loss Become a Loss?
When you say, “I can’t sell my stock because I don’t want to take a loss,” you
assume that what you want has some bearing on the situation. But the stock
doesn’t know who you are, and it couldn’t care less what you hope or want.
Besides, selling doesn’t give you the loss; you already have the loss. If you
think you haven’t incurred a loss until you sell the stock, you’re kidding
yourself. The larger the paper loss, the more real it will become. If you paid
$40 per share for 100 shares of Can’t Miss Chemical, and it’s now worth $28
per share, you have $2,800 worth of stock that cost you $4,000. You have a
$1,200 loss. Whether you convert the stock to cash or hold it, it’s still worth
only $2,800.
Even though you didn’t sell, you took your loss when the stock dropped
in price. You’d be better off selling and going back to a cash position where
you can think far more objectively.

241

242 BE SMART FROM THE START
When you’re holding on to a big loss, you’re rarely able to think straight.
You get emotional. You rationalize and say, “It can’t go any lower.” However,
keep in mind that there are many other stocks to choose from where your
chance of recouping your loss could be greater.
Here’s another suggestion that may help you decide whether to sell: pretend that you don’t own the stock and you have $2,800 in the bank. Then ask
yourself, “Do I really want to buy this stock now?” If your answer is no, then
why are you holding onto it?

Always, without Exception, Limit Losses
to 7% or 8% of Your Cost
Individual investors should definitely set firm rules limiting the loss on the
initial capital they have invested in each stock to an absolute maximum of
7% or 8%. Institutional investors who lessen their overall risk by taking large
positions and diversifying broadly are unable to move into and out of stocks
quickly enough to follow such a loss-cutting plan. This is a terrific advantage
that you, the nimble and decisive individual investor, have over the institutions. So use it.
When the late Gerald M. Loeb of E. F. Hutton was writing his last book
on the stock market, he came down to visit me, and I had the pleasure of discussing this idea with him. In his first work, The Battle for Investment Survival, Loeb advocated cutting all losses at 10%. I was curious and asked him
if he always followed the 10% loss policy himself. “I would hope,” he
replied, “to be out long before they ever reach 10%.” Loeb made millions in
the market.
Bill Astrop, president of Astrop Advisory Corp. in Atlanta, Georgia, suggests a minor revision of the 10% loss-cutting plan. He thinks that individual investors should sell half of their position in a stock if it is down 5% from
their cost and the other half once it’s down 10%. This is sound advice.
To preserve your hard-earned money, I think a 7% or 8% loss should be
the limit. The average of all your losses should be less, perhaps 5% or 6%, if
you’re strictly disciplined and fast on your feet. If you can keep the average
of all your mistakes and losses to 5% or 6%, you’ll be like the football team
on which opponents can never move the ball. If you don’t give up many first
downs, how can anyone ever beat you?
Now here’s a valuable secret: if you use charts to time your buys precisely
off sound bases (price consolidation areas), your stocks will rarely drop 8%
from a correct buy point. So when they do, either you’ve made a mistake in
your selection or a general market decline may be starting. This is a big key
to your future success.

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

Barbara James, an IBD subscriber who has attended several of our workshops, didn’t know anything about stocks when she started investing after 20
years in the real estate business. She first traded on paper using the IBD
rules. This worked so well that she finally had the confidence to try it with
real money. That was in the late 1990s, when the market seemed to have
only one direction—up. The first stock she bought using the IBD rules was
EMC. When she sold it in 2000, she had a 1,300% gain. She also had a gain
of over 200% in Gap. Ten years after her start, with the profits she made
using IBD, she was able to pay off her house and her car.
And thanks to the 7% rule, Barbara can take advantage of the market
once it improves. Before the market started to correct in the fall of 2007, she
had bought three CAN SLIM stocks—Monolithic Power, China Medical,
and St. Jude Medical. “I bought them all at exactly the right pivot point, and
I got forced out of all three as the market started to correct in July and
August,” she says. “I am happy to lose money when it’s only 7% or 8%. If it
hadn’t been for the sell rules, I would have lost my shirt. And I wouldn’t
have resources for the next bull market.”
Here’s what another IBD subscriber, Herb Mitchell, told us in February
2009: “Over and over again, the buy and sell rules—especially the sell
rules—have been proven to work. It took me a couple of years to finally get
it through my head, but then the results started to show. I spent most of
2008 on the sidelines, and I now get compliments from friends who say that
they lost thousands—50% or more—in their IRA accounts while I had a 5%
gain for the year. I think I should have done better, but you live and learn.”
Also, there’s no rule that says you have to wait until every single loss
reaches 7% to 8% before you take it. On occasion, you’ll sense the general
market index is under distribution (selling) or your stock isn’t acting right
and you are starting off amiss. In such cases, you can cut your loss sooner,
when the stock may be down only one or two points.
Before the market broke wide open in October 1987, for example, there
was ample time to sell and cut losses short. That correction actually began
on August 26. If you’re foolish enough to try bucking the market by buying
stocks in bearish conditions, at least move your absolute loss-cutting point
up to 3% or 4%.
After years of experience with this technique, your average losses should
become less as your stock selection and timing improve and you learn to
make small “follow-up buys” in your best stocks. It takes a lot of time to
learn to make follow-up buys safely when a stock is up, but this method of
money management forces you to move your money from slower-performing stocks into your stronger ones. I call this force-feeding. (See “My
Revised Profit-and-Loss Plan” in Chapter 11.) You’ll end up selling stocks

243

244 BE SMART FROM THE START
that are not yet down 7% or 8% because you are raising money to add to
your best winners during clearly strong bull markets.
Remember: 7% to 8% is your absolute loss limit. You must sell without hesitation—no waiting a few days to see what might happen; no hoping that the
stock will rally back; no need to wait for the day’s market close. Nothing but
the fact that you’re down 7% or 8% below your cost should have a bearing
on the situation at this point.
Once you’re significantly ahead and have a good profit, you can afford to
give the stock a good bit more room for normal fluctuations off its price
peak. Do not sell a stock just because it’s off 7% to 8% from its peak price.
It’s important that you definitely understand the difference.
In one case, you probably started off wrong. The stock is not acting the
way you expected it to, and it is down below your purchase price. You’re
starting to lose your hard-earned money, and you may be about to lose a lot
more. In the other case, you have begun correctly. The stock has acted better, and you have a significant gain. Now you’re working on a profit, so in a
bull market, you can afford to give the stock more room to fluctuate so that
you don’t get shaken out on a normal 10% to 15% correction.
Don’t chase your stock up too far when you’re buying it, however. The
key is timing your stock purchases exactly at breakout points to minimize
the chance that a stock will drop 8%. (See Chapter 2 for more on using
charts to select stocks.)
