
28 %
7%
14 %
5%
4%
4%

Pairings with the US dollar are known as “majors” and non-US dollar pairings
are known as “crosses”. For example, a popular cross is the GBP/EUR or the
EUR/JPY. Cross pairs can be derived from the majors; for example, the EUR/JPY
is the EUR/USD divided by the USD/JPY. Exchange rates must be consistent across
all currencies, or else it will be possible to make riskless profits by arbitrage trading
cross against major pairs.
The main trading systems used in forex are those that follow trends (a popular
maxim in the market is “the trend is your friend”), or systems that buy or sell on
breakouts. This is because economic indicators often cause large price movements
that tend to last for prolonged periods of time.

Forex Trading Using Intermarket Analysis

263

Advantages in Forex Trading
Apart from the superior market liquidity, which helps ensure price stability, forex
trading has the following advantages over equity trading:
• No commissions: There are no commissions in forex trading, only the point spread.
The spread is not fixed but can vary according to the broker, the currency pair,
liquidity and volatility and it is usually 1–4 points or pips (see also about hidden
commissions below).
• Increased leverage: The margin required by most forex brokers is only 1–2 %,
compared to a 50 % margin required for equity markets and 5–15 % for futures.
• Leveraged carry interest: When you’re long a currency pair, your account is
credited with the interest of the first currency and debited with the interest of the
second currency. For example, if you’re long the USD/JPY, you earn $9.17 interest
per day on each contract of 100 000 units, even if you’ve only put in $2000 as your
2 % margin.
• Continuous trading makes it possible to respond to breaking news immediately,
day or night.
• Liquidity and 24-hour trading contributes to less slippage and more efficient execution of stop loss or limit orders.
• There is less random noise (that is, volatility) in the forex markets, and trends are
generally of a long-term nature.
• You can diversify your portfolio with foreign currencies. This is particularly effective in declining stock markets, just where it is needed most.
• Currencies tend to follow fairly strict rules, and are therefore more predictable
using technical indicators than equity markets.
Of course nothing is perfect, especially in the financial markets, and forex trading
can have some major problems:
• Commissions: When choosing a broker, it is essential to do your homework. Most
brokers advertise “commission free” but is it really? How do brokers make money
to cover their platform costs? In practice, brokers conceal points to the price spread
in lieu of commissions. The interbank spreads are usually 1–2 pips but brokers
usually widen them by 1 or more pips. For example, assuming that the interbank or
real quote in the yen (USD/JPY) is 104.89/104.90 (bid/ask), the broker’s platform
will show 104.87/104.92. If a trader buys $1 000 000 at 104.92, the broker will
debit his client’s account with 104 920 000 yen whereas he would have to pay only
104 900 000 to his bank in order to cover the trade. The 20 000 yen ($190) is the
hidden commission that the trader has to pay twice (once for opening and once for
closing his position).
• Leverage, as long as it is used properly, is a great tool. There are many brokers
today that offer 100 to 1 (1 % margin) and even 200 to 1 leverage. That means

264

Intermarket Trading Strategies

that you could open an account with $10 000 and control $2 000 000. This can be
disastrous, especially when the market moves against you. For example, if you are
long the USD/JPY and the yen goes up by more than 0.5 % then your entire equity
will be wiped out. This is not something that happens only rarely, as there is a
20 % chance that the yen will go up by more than half a percent in a day and a 6 %
chance that it will go up by more than one percent based on 15 years of historical
data.
• Data: Developing a mechanical trading system to trade forex requires back-testing.
And back-testing requires high quality historical price data. There are serious problems with the consistency and accuracy of data obtained from different providers
which is surprising considering the size and liquidity of the foreign exchange market. In the forex market, unlike the future and stock markets, there is no central
exchange to speak of and consequently no “official” historical data exist as such.
Various forex data vendors combine data collected from a number of banks. Some
of them filter the data in order to remove outliers and low volume trades. As a
result historical data can vary according to the number of banks being used to
compile the data and the filtering method used. Another issue affecting mainly the
consistency of the opening and closing prices is the time zone in which the data
provider is located, as every source reports the open or close at different times,
which of course would give different prices. Yet another issue causing disparities
in the daily extreme prices is the way that banks determine the high and low. A
bank will call a high or low depending on how much volume went through at that
rate. For example, let’s suppose that the USD/JPY fell to a 103.55 intraday low
but only $2 million went through at that rate. Some banks will call that the official
low whereas other banks will ignore it and report a higher low of 103.60 that was
traded on higher volume. This is not a problem if large amounts are traded, but can
be confusing to small traders who can sometimes find that their trade went through
at a price below the official low or above the official high of the day. Depending
upon the time frame and trading frequency, this disparity can be highly significant
and can create serious problems in back-testing mechanical systems if the trading
model is developed and tested on a different data set from the one upon which it
will actually be traded. For a realistic mechanical system you will need to use the
same data provider as your broker, otherwise you may find that your actual trading
performance differs considerably from the system’s predicted results.
• Carry trades are popular in the FX market as they guarantee traders extra return
on their medium or longer term positions. If you are a long-term trader, however,
it is essential to choose the right broker, because you may find you are paying
instead of receiving the carry interest as some FX brokers pay less than market
rates on long balances and charge considerably more on short cash balances. In
addition, they apply a tier method when calculating interest to long cash balances
(similar to the insurance deductibles). Let’s consider the following example which
simulates a real trade using a popular broker. You entered a long position to buy
$100 000 and sell 10 400 000 yen on 23 May 2008 intending to take advantage

Forex Trading Using Intermarket Analysis

265

of the near zero interest rates in the yen. This particular broker credits long US
dollar balances over $10 000 with the Fed Funds overnight rate less 0.5 % (which
comes to 2.05 − 0.50 = 1.55 %) and debits short yen balances with JPY Libor
minus 1.5 % (which is 0.56 − 1.5 = −2.06 %). Supposing that you reversed the
trade in a year and assuming, for the sake of simplicity, that the USD/JPY rate has
not changed then your carry trade interest would consist of the interest received on
the long USD position (which would be ($100 000 − $10 000)* 1.55 % = $1395)
minus the interest that your broker would have charged you on the short yen
position (10 400 000* 2.06 %/104 = $2060). When you close the trade you would
be surprised to find out that instead of receiving the interest spread of $1490
(100 000* 1.49 %) you had to pay $665. Your broker pocketed the whole amount
of the carry interest from his bank plus $665 from you which comes to a total of
$2155 without even taking any currency risks at all! This is on top of the point
spread that he made on each trade.

17.2

FOREX FUNDAMENTALS

When it comes to trading, like anything else, you have to have a very good handle
not only on technicals but also fundamentals. Luckily, unlike with stocks, in forex
there are only few economies to look at.
Currency prices are affected by a variety of economic and political conditions,
the most important of which are interest rates and, to a lesser degree, inflation and
political stability.
One of the main driving forces behind foreign exchange trends is the interest rate
spread between the currencies in the pair to be traded. Although such interest rate
differentials may not appear very large, they are of great significance in a highly
leveraged position. Generally, economic strength and political stability during the
business cycle can lead to higher interest rates and thus a higher currency.
However, it is by no means a certainty that the currency with the higher interest
rate will be stronger. If the reason for the high interest rate is runaway inflation or
excessive government budget deficits, it may undermine confidence in the currency
and override the benefits perceived from the high interest rate. Moreover, high interest
rates can be a disadvantage to a nation in the long term, because they make it more
difficult to compete with countries enjoying lower rates.
On the other hand economic weakness can lead to lower interest rates as central
banks attempt to improve conditions. Because this process often involves increasing
the money supply, a country’s currency usually falls in value as a response.
In addition, the following economic reports, statistics or news can also affect
currency exchange rates:
• Trade balance: This is a measure of the difference between imports and exports of
tangible goods and services. Typically, a nation that runs a substantial trade deficit

266

Intermarket Trading Strategies

has a weak currency due to the continued commercial selling of the currency.
However, this can be offset by financial investment flows for extended periods of
time. The United States has been running a substantial trade deficit in recent years
and changes in this figure can affect the US dollar significantly. US trade figures
are released monthly.
• FOMC meetings: The Federal Open Market Committee holds eight regularly
scheduled meetings per year. At these meetings, the Committee reviews economic and financial conditions and determines the appropriate stance of monetary
policy by adjusting the overnight discount rate (which is the interest rate charged to
borrow directly from the Federal Reserve Bank to meet regulator reserve requirements). The Fed may also attempt to change the federal funds rate (the interest
rate that banks charge other banks to lend their surplus balances at the Federal
Reserve) through the use of open market operations like purchasing and selling
government securities. With this mechanism, the FOMC attempts to affect price
levels in order to keep inflation within the target range while maintaining stable
economic growth and employment. Changes in rates affect interest rates for consumer loans, mortgages, bonds, and the exchange rate of the US dollar. Increases in
rates or even expectations of increases tend to cause the dollar to appreciate, while
rate decreases cause the currency to depreciate. Almost as important as what the
Fed does with interest rates is the statement that they release which can sometimes
reveal what they might do in the future.
• ECB rate announcements: The European Central Bank rate announcements are
usually well anticipated and the actual decision does not tend to impact the market
a lot. The ECB President’s press conference, however, is more important because
it can provide a clue on the likelihood of further rate changes. Often, the language
used in the press conference holds important signals on how the ECB feels about
inflation and the economy.
• BOE rate decision: The main task of the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee is to set the monetary stance by fixing the overnight borrowing rate,
which is crucial in determining short-term rates. The Bank of England Monetary
Policy Committee also issues a statement with every rate decision. When it comes
to interest rates, the future direction of rates is generally far more important than
its current rate and because the decision itself is normally highly anticipated, the
wording of the BOE statement is usually even more important than the actual
interest rate level.
• Consumer Price Index (CPI): This is a measure of the average level of prices of a
fixed basket of goods and services purchased by consumers. The monthly reported
changes in CPI are widely followed as an inflation indicator. Rising consumer
price inflation is normally associated with the expectation of higher short-term
interest rates and may therefore be supportive for a currency, although significant
inflationary pressure will often lead to an undermining of the long-term confidence
in the currency involved.
• Producer Price Index (PPI): This is a measure of the average level of prices of
a fixed basket of goods received in primary markets by producers. The monthly

Forex Trading Using Intermarket Analysis

267

PPI figures exclude food and energy and can therefore obscure the more important
consumer inflation trend.
• Quarterly GDP figures: This is the broadest measure of aggregate economic activity
available. A high GDP figure is often associated with the expectations of higher
interest rates, which is frequently positive, at least in the short term, for the currency
involved.
• Housing starts: High construction activity is usually associated with increased economic activity and can therefore be supportive of the involved currency. Housing
starts are one of the earliest indicators of the housing market, only trailing building
permits in timeliness.
• Building permits: This figure is used as the earliest indicator for developments in
the housing market as issuing a building permit is the first step in the construction
process. An increase in building permits implies an increase in investment and
general optimism about the economy.
• US non-farm payrolls: Monthly changes in payroll employment reflect the net
number of new jobs created or lost during the month. Large increases in payroll
employment are seen as signs of strong economic activity that could eventually lead
to higher interest rates that are supportive of the currency, at least in the short term.
This report is released on the first Friday of each month and tends to move markets.
• Durable goods orders: This is a measure of the new orders placed with domestic
manufacturers for immediate and future delivery of factory hard goods. Monthly
percent changes reflect the rate of change of such orders. Durable goods orders
are measured in nominal terms and can therefore be misleading as they include
the effects of inflation. The PPI growth rate must be subtracted in order to obtain
the inflation-adjusted durable goods orders. Rising durable goods orders are again
associated with stronger economic activity.
• Michigan sentiment figures in the US, the German business climate or IFO index,
and the Tankan quarterly survey in Japan: The University of Michigan Confidence
Survey is considered one of the foremost indicators of US consumer sentiment. It
assesses consumer confidence regarding personal finances, business conditions and
purchasing power based on hundreds of telephone surveys. This number is released
monthly and tends to move markets as it is a leading indicator of an economic
downturn. The IFO index is equally important as Germany is responsible for
approximately a quarter of the total Euro-zone GDP and it is therefore viewed
as a significant economic health indicator for the Euro-zone as a whole. The
Tankan Survey is released quarterly by Japan’s central bank, and measures business
confidence in Japan. The report is based on a survey sent out to corporations and
it covers business conditions, supply and demand conditions, sales and profits,
capital expenditure, employment, etc. The results can provide some insight into
upcoming monetary policy and interest rates and are used to formulate monetary
policy.
• Political events such as G7 meetings.
• News: National elections and the war in Iraq are examples of events that have
affected currency values.

268

Intermarket Trading Strategies

In simple terminology, news drives the market; whether that news is economic or
political makes no difference. However, you should keep in mind that it is easy to
blame an obvious news event because the market tends to build up a vulnerability
and then wait for any reasonably appropriate event as a catalyst to extenuate the built
up tension.

17.3

THE CARRY TRADE

Few people can resist the lure of free money and hence the popularity of crosscurrency carry trades. In a currency carry trade, the speculator borrows money in
a low-interest rate currency and buys higher-yielding assets in a different currency.
Today, the low-rate currency is usually the Japanese yen; higher yielding assets are
bonds, currencies like the Australian dollar, the New Zealand dollar or the British
pound but sometimes more volatile assets such as emerging market equities. The
biggest risk is generally that the exchange rate moves against you – the higherinterest rate currency rapidly devalues, reducing the value of your assets relative to
your borrowing. Also, these transactions are generally done with a lot of leverage,
so a small movement in exchange rates can result in huge losses unless hedged
appropriately. A popular hedging method is buying a three-month forward option on
the yen at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
While the yen-carry trade can be profitable, there’s no such thing as a free lunch.
Playing the wide spread between the cost of money in Japan and other higher-interest
rate markets in the end may turn out to be a fool’s game.
The following is an example of a scenario for disaster: As we head into the
economic slowdown, speculators who borrow in yen to invest in risky cyclical assets
will cut their losses, bail out and buy yen to repay debt. A rising yen would put
interest rate carry trades positions under water, causing them to sell off and head back
into the yen, and so on in a vicious circle.

17.4

TRADING THE JAPANESE YEN

The yen is the third most widely traded currency in the world, after the US dollar and
the euro, and is traded worldwide by banks, corporations, institutions, hedge funds,
speculators and commercial hedgers. Because of the big interest rate differential with
the other currencies, the yen is also very popular among the “big boys” because of
the “leveraged carry interest” mentioned above.
The yen is traded 24 hours a day in the forex interbank markets but yen futures
can also be traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the New York Board
of Trade (NYBOT) or the CME GLOBEX system electronically. Yen futures trade
on the CME from 9:30 to 14:00 under the symbol JY, and from 8:30 to 16:00 on
the GLOBEX under the symbol 6J. The lowest increment (pip) is 0.000001 and

Forex Trading Using Intermarket Analysis

269

the contract size is 12 500 000. For the benefit of small traders, the GLOBEX has
recently introduced the e-mini (symbol J7) which is half (6 250 000) the full-sized
contract. On the NYBOT the symbols are YY and SN for the full sized and e-mini
contracts respectively.
Since 1999 (except for a brief weakness in 2002) the yen has been moving in a
sideways range, between 102 and 125, with the natural equilibrium at around 115.
However, it broke out in March with the dollar sinking to as low as 96 yen to the
dollar as liquidity was withdrawn by carry traders, despite interventions by the Bank
of Japan.
The Japanese government would love a weak yen, perhaps as low as 125 yen to the
dollar, to help promote exports, making them more competitive with cheaper exports
from China. On the other hand, if the US deficit continues to expand, the dollar/yen
will get weaker, not because the Japanese economy is doing better but because the
US deficit is getting fatter.
Speculators and commercial hedgers who trade currency futures often use technical
analysis to determine trading signals. Most of these indicators (for example moving
averages) exploit price trends, while others exploit price volatility.
I’ll have to admit that trying to trade classic moving average crossover entries in
the traditional sense has never worked for me. Such a simple approach works great
in trending markets but will slaughter your account in sideways markets. Admittedly,
the methods I use to trade with today have a few more components than two moving
averages on a chart, and almost always include intermarket indicators.
The yen, like the dollar and the euro, correlates better with interest rates and
recently (because of the “carry trade”) with equity indices rather than commodity
prices (as is the case with the Australian or Canadian dollar).
In Table 17.1 you can see the correlation between 1–20 day percent changes of the
yen and the S&P 500, the Nikkei 225, the euro, the dollar index, the 10-year Treasury
yield (TNX) and Japanese Government Bond futures (JGB) using up to 11 years of
variable time spans.
It is clear from Table 17.1 that, mainly because of the “carry trade” the absolute correlation with all related markets (except perhaps the dollar index), has been
increasing at a steady pace when using more recent data for the correlation calculations and this is more pronounced in the case of equity indices. For example,
the correlation of daily changes between the yen and the S&P 500 has increased
from nearly zero to a negative correlation of −0.373 during the last two years. Similarly, the correlation of daily changes between the yen and the 10-year Treasury
yield (TNX) also increased significantly from nearly zero to a moderately strong
value of −0.49. The strengthening in the trend of the negative correlation between
the yen and the Nikkei 225 is more evident when using 10 or more days of price
differences.
The highest and diachronically persistent correlation was with the dollar index and
the TNX and they were both used to develop a trading system using the regression
divergence indicator and the disparity indicator.

270

Intermarket Trading Strategies

Table 17.1 Pearson’s correlation of daily and 1–20 day (4 week) percentage changes
between the yen (YEN/USD) and related forex, interest rates and equity indices using
2–11 year of data from 1 January 1997 to 31 December 2007. In the first column is the
number of years of data used. The TNX is the 10-year Treasury yield, and the JP Bond is the
10-year Japanese Government bond futures (JGB). Unfortunately, data for the Japanese Bond
has been available only since 14 March 2005. Notice the increasing trend of negative
correlations between the yen and equity indices as the older data are discarded. The yen is
expressed in dollars per yen (for example 0.0096154) and not in the usual yen per USD (for
example 104).
Years
