When we analyze markets, we deal with only a few numbers—the opening, high,
low, and closing prices for each bar, plus volume, and also open interest for derivatives, such as futures and options. A typical beginner error is “shopping for indicators.” â†œA trader may feel bullish about the stock market, but then he notices that the
moving averages of the Dow and the S&P are still declining. Their bearish message
doesn’t sit well with him; he starts scrolling through his software menu and finds several oscillators, such as Stochastic or RSI. Sure enough, they look oversold, which is
normal in a downtrend. The eager beginner takes those oversold readings as a signal
to buy. The downtrend continues, he loses money—and then complains that technical analysis didn’t work.
It is much better to use only a small number of indicators with a strict hierarchy
for their analysis, including multiple timeframes. We’ll return to this essential topic
in the chapter on the Triple Screen trading system.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 5

Volume and Time

M

any traders focus exclusively on price quotes, but while those are extremely
important, there’s more to the market than price. Volume of transactions provides a valuable additional dimension. Joseph Granville, a pioneer of volume studies,
was fond of saying “Volume is the steam that makes the choo-choo go.”
Another hugely important factor of market analysis is time. Markets live and move
in different timeframes at the same time. No matter how carefully you analyze the
daily chart, its trend can be upended by a move that erupts from another timeframe.
In this section we’ll focus on volume and volume-based indicators.We’ll also look
into tying all market decisions to their timeframes.

■■28. Volume
Volume reflects the activity of traders and investors. Each unit of volume represents
actions of two individuals: one sells a share or a contract and another buys that share
or a contract. Daily volume is the number of shares or contracts traded in one day
(Figure 28.1).
Traders usually plot volume as a histogram—vertical bars whose height reflects
each day’s volume. They usually draw it underneath prices. Changes in volume show
how bulls and bears react to price swings and provide clues to whether trends are
likely to continue or to reverse.
Some traders ignore volume. They think that prices already reflect all information known to the market. They say, “You get paid on price and not on volume.”
103

104

VOLUME AND TIME

A

B

C

E
D

FIGURE 28.1â•… BID daily, 22-day EMA, volume. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Volume
Sotheby’s Holdings Inc. (BID) is the world’s biggest publicly traded auction house. It provides a window into what the world’s big money is doing in terms of their conspicuous
consumption. This company’s business was buoyed in 2013 by the influx of new money
from Asia, but the stock hit its head on the ceiling during that year’s last quarter.
In areas A and B, volume increased during the rally, confirming the uptrend and calling
for higher prices ahead. In areas C and D, volume flashed warning signs for the bulls—it
shrank during each rally attempt. Notice false upside breakouts in those areas and an
atypical form of a kangaroo tail in area C. Rising volume near the right edge confirms the
power of bears.

Professionals, on the other hand, know that analyzing volume can help them understand markets deeper and trade better.
Volume depends on the size of the trading crowd and the activity levels of buyers
and sellers. If you compare volumes of two markets, you’ll see which is more active
or liquid.You are likely to receive better fills and suffer less slippage in liquid markets
than in thin, low-volume markets.
There are three ways to measure volume:
1. The actual number of shares or contracts traded. For example, the New York
Stock Exchange reports volume this way. This is the most objective way of measuring volume.
2. The number of trades that took place. Some international exchanges report volume this way. This method is less objective because it doesn’t distinguish between a 100-share trade and a 5000-share trade.
3. Tick volume is the number of price changes during a selected period of time,
such as 10 minutes or an hour. It is called tick volume because most changes
equal 1 tick. Some exchanges don’t report intraday volume, forcing day traders
to use tick volume as a proxy for real volume.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

28. VOLUME

105

A note to forex traders: since that market is decentralized and reports no volume,
you can use the volume of currency futures as its proxy. Futures of all major currencies, measured against the U.S. dollar, are traded in Chicago and on the electronic
exchanges. We can assume that their volume trends are reasonably similar to those in
the forex markets, since both respond to the same market forces.

Crowd Psychology
Volume reflects the degree of financial and emotional involvement, as well as pain,
among market participants. A trade begins with a financial commitment by two persons. The decision to buy or sell may be rational, but the act of buying or selling creates an emotional commitment in most people. Buyers and sellers crave to be right.
They scream at the market, pray, or use lucky talismans. The level of volume reflects
the degree of emotional involvement among traders.
Each tick takes money away from losers and gives it to winners. When prices
rise, longs make money and shorts lose. When prices fall, shorts gain and longs
lose. Winners feel happy and elated, while losers feel depressed and angry. Whenever prices move, about half of the traders are hurting. When prices rise, bears are
in pain, and when prices fall, bulls suffer. The greater the volume, the more pain in
the market.
Traders react to losses like frogs to hot water. If you throw a frog into a hot pail,
it’ll jump in response to sudden pain, but if you put a frog into cool water and heat
it slowly, you can boil it alive. If a sudden price change hits traders, they jump from
pain and liquidate losing positions. On the other hand, losers can be very patient if
their losses increase gradually.
You can lose a great deal of money in a sleepy stock or a future, such as corn,
where a one-cent move costs only $50 per contract. If corn goes against you just a
few cents a day, that pain is easy to tolerate. If you hang on, those pennies can add
up to thousands of dollars in losses. Sharp moves, on the other hand, make losing
traders cut their losses in a panic. Once weak hands get shaken out, leaving behind
a volume spike, the market is ready to reverse. Trends can persist for a long time on
moderate volume but can expire after a burst of volume.
Who buys from a trader who is selling his losing long position? It may be a short
seller who wants to cover and take profits. It may be a bargain hunter who steps in
because prices are “too low.” A bottom-picker takes over the position of a loser who
washed out—he either catches the bottom or becomes the next loser.
Who sells to a trader who buys to cover his losing short position? It may be a
savvy investor who takes profits on his long position. It also may be a top-picker
who sells short because he thinks that prices are “too high.” He assumes the position
of a loser who covered his shorts, and only the future will tell whether he is right
or wrong.
When shorts give up during a rally, they buy to cover and push the market higher.
Prices rise, flush out even more shorts, and the rally feeds on itself. When longs give
up during a decline, they sell, pushing the market lower. Falling prices flush out even
more longs, and the decline feeds on itself. Losers who give up on their trades propel

106

VOLUME AND TIME

trends. A trend that moves on steady volume is likely to persist. It shows that new
losers are replacing those who washed out.
When volume falls, it shows that the supply of losers is running low and a trend is
ready to reverse. It happens after enough losers catch on to how wrong they are. Old
losers keep bailing out, but fewer new ones come in. Falling volume is a sign that the
trend is about to reverse.
A burst of extremely high volume also gives a signal that a trend is nearing its
end. It shows that masses of losers are bailing out.You can probably recall holding a
losing trade longer than you should have. Once the pain became intolerable and you
got out, the trend reversed and the market went the way you expected, only without
you. This happens time and again because most humans react to stress similarly and
bail out at roughly the same time. Professionals don’t hang on while the market beats
them up. They quickly close out losing trades and reverse or wait on the sidelines,
ready to re-enter.
Volume spikes are more likely to signal an imminent reversal of a downtrend than
an uptrend. Volume spikes in downtrends reflect explosions of fear. Fear is a powerful but short-term emotion—people run fast, dump shares, and then the trend is
likely to reverse. Volume spikes in uptrends are driven by greed, which is a slowermoving, happy emotion. There may be a slight pause in an uptrend after a volume
spike, but then the trend is quite likely to resume.
Volume usually stays relatively low in trading ranges because there is relatively little
pain. People feel comfortable with small price changes, and flat markets can drag on a
long time. A breakout is often marked by a dramatic increase in volume because losers
run for the exits. A breakout on low volume shows little emotional commitment to a
new trend. It indicates that prices are likely to return into their trading range.
Rising volume during a rally shows that more buyers and short sellers are pouring
in. Buyers are eager to buy even if they have to pay up, and shorts are eager to sell to
them. Rising volume shows that losers who leave are being replaced by a new crop
of losers.
When volume shrinks during a rally, it shows that bulls are becoming less eager,
while bears are no longer running for cover. The intelligent bears have left long ago,
followed by weak bears who could not take the pain. Falling volume shows that fuel
is being removed from the uptrend and it’s ready to reverse.
When volume dries up during a decline, it shows that bears are less eager to
sell short, while bulls are no longer running for the exits. The intelligent bulls have
sold long ago, and the weak bulls have been shaken out. Falling volume shows that
the remaining bulls have greater pain tolerance. Perhaps they have deeper pockets
or bought later in the decline, or both. Falling volume identifies an area in which a
downtrend is likely to reverse.
This reasoning applies to all timeframes. As a rule of thumb, if today’s volume is
higher than yesterday’s, then today’s trend is likely to continue.

Trading Pointers
The terms “high volume” and “low volume” are relative. What’s low for Amazon may
be very high for a less popular stock, while what’s low for gold is high for platinum,
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

29. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS

107

and so on. We compare volumes of different stocks, futures, or options only when
selecting higher-volume trading vehicles. Most of the time, we compare current
trading volume of a stock to its average volume. As a rule of thumb, “high volume”
for any given market is at least 25 percent above its average for the past two weeks,
while “low volume” is at least 25 percent below average.
1. High volume confirms trends. If prices rise to a new peak and volume reaches a
new high, then prices are likely to retest or exceed that peak.
2. If the market falls to a new low and the volume reaches a new high, that bottom
is likely to be retested or exceeded. A very high volume “climax bottom” is almost always retested on low volume, offering an excellent buying opportunity.
3. If volume shrinks while a trend continues, that trend is ripe for a reversal. When
a market rises to a new peak on lower volume than its previous peak, look to
take profits on a long position and/or for a shorting opportunity. This technique
does not work as well in downtrends because a decline can persist on low volume. There is a saying on Wall Street: “It takes buying to put prices up, but they
can fall of their own weight.”
4. Watch volume during reactions against the trend. When an uptrend is punctuated by a decline, volume often picks up in a flurry of profit taking. When that
dip continues but volume shrinks, it shows that bulls are no longer running or
that selling pressure is spent. When volume dries up, it shows that the reaction
is nearing its end and the uptrend is ready to resume. This identifies a good buying opportunity. Major downtrends are often punctuated by rallies that begin on
heavy volume. Once weak bears have been flushed out, volume shrinks and gives
a signal to sell short.

■■29. Volume-Based Indicators
Several indicators help clarify volume’s trading signals. For example, a 5-day EMA
of volume can identify volume’s trends. A rising EMA of volume affirms the current
price trend, while a declining one points to the price trend’s weakness.
This and other volume-based indicators provide more precise timing signals than
volume bars. They include On-Balance Volume and Accumulation/Distribution, described below. Force Index combines price and volume data to help identify areas
where prices are likely to reverse.

On-Balance Volume
On-Balance Volume (OBV) is an indicator designed by Joseph Granville and described in his book, New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing. Granville used OBV as a
leading indicator of the stock market, but other analysts applied it to futures.
OBV is a running total of volume. Each day’s volume is added or subtracted, depending on whether prices close higher or lower than on the previous day. When a

108

VOLUME AND TIME

stock closes higher, it shows that bulls won the day’s battle; that day’s volume is added to OBV. When a stock closes lower, it shows that bears won the day, and that day’s
volume is subtracted from OBV. If prices close unchanged, OBV stays unchanged.
On-Balance Volume often rises or falls before prices, acting as a leading indicator.

Crowd Psychology
Prices represent the consensus of value, but volume represents the emotions of market participants. It reflects the intensity of traders’ financial and emotional commitments, as well as pain among losers, which is what OBV helps to track.
A new high of OBV shows that bulls are powerful, bears are hurting, and prices
are likely to rise. A new low of OBV shows that bears are powerful, bulls are hurting,
and prices are likely to fall. When the pattern of OBV deviates from the pattern of
prices, it shows that mass emotions aren’t in gear with mass consensus. A crowd is
more likely to follow its gut than its mind, and that’s why changes in volume often
precede price changes.

Trading Signals
The patterns of OBV tops and bottoms are much more important than the absolute
levels, which depend on the starting date of your calculations. It is safer to trade in
the direction of a trend that is confirmed by OBV (Figure 29.1).
1. When OBV reaches a new high, it confirms the power of bulls, indicates that
prices are likely to continue to rise, and gives a buy signal. When OBV falls below its previous low, it confirms the power of bears, calls for lower prices ahead,
and gives a signal to sell short.
2. OBV gives its strongest buy and sell signals when it diverges from prices. If
prices rally, sell off, and then rise to a new high, but OBV rallies to a lower high,
it creates a bearish divergence and gives a sell signal. If prices decline, rebound,
and then fall to a new low, but OBV falls to a more shallow bottom, it traces a
bullish divergence and gives a buy signal. Long-term divergences are more important than the short-term ones. Divergences that develop over the course of
several weeks give stronger signals than those created over a few days.
3. When prices are in a trading range and OBV breaks out to a new high, it gives a
buy signal. When prices are in a trading range and OBV breaks down and falls to
a new low, it gives a signal to sell short.

More on OBV
One of the reasons for Granville’s success in stock market timing was that he combined OBV with two other indicators—the Net Field Trend indicator and the
Climax indicator. Granville calculated OBV for each stock in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average and rated its OBV pattern as rising, falling, or neutral. He called
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

109

29. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS
B

D

Close
Extreme
A

C

E

FIGURE 29.1â•… MCD daily, 22-day EMA, On-Balance volume (OBV). (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

On-Balance Volume
McDonald’s Corp. (MCD) is a stable, slow-moving stock. You can see a fairly tight trading
range, marked with dashed lines (two lines at the lows, one tight and the other loose). Notice
the tendency of MCD towards false breakouts (bottoms A and C and tops B and D).
Notice a kangaroo tail in area A.
At the right edge of the chart, the stock market is in a free-fall, but while MCD trades
near its recent lows, its OBV indicator is trading near the highs. It points to strength and
suggests buying rather than selling.

that a Net Field Trend of a stock: It could be +1, −1, or 0. Climax indicator was a
sum of the Net Field Trends of all 30 Dow stocks.
When the stock market rallied and the Climax indicator reached a new high, it
confirmed strength and gave a buy signal. If the stock market rallied but the Climax
indicator made a lower top, it gave a sell signal.
You can look at the Dow Jones Industrial Average as a team of 30 horses pulling
the market wagon. The Climax indicator shows how many horses are pulling uphill,
downhill, or standing still. If 24 out of 30 horses pull up, 1 down and 5 are resting,
then the market wagon is likely to move up. If 9 horses pull up, 7 pull down, and 14
are resting, that wagon may soon roll downhill.
Remarkably, Granville did his calculations by hand1. Now, of course, OBV, the Net
Field Trend indicator, and the Climax indicator can be easily programmed. It would be
1

I visited Granville in 2005 in Kansas City. Not only did he do all his calculations by hand, he
avoided going online, as he was suspicious of pervasive snooping—and that was years before the
disclosures of government spying. He disconnected his computer from the Internet until it was time
to send out his newsletter. Granville monitored intraday prices by tuning his TV into CNBC with
the sound turned off and a towel draped over the upper portion of the screen, so that all he could
see was the tape, running along the bottom of his screen.

110

VOLUME AND TIME

worthwhile to apply them to a database that includes all stocks of the S&P 500 index.
This method may produce good signals for trading the S&P 500 futures and options.

Accumulation/Distribution
This indicator was developed by Larry Williams and described in his 1973 book,
How I Made One Million Dollars. It was designed as a leading indicator for stocks, but
several analysts applied it to futures. The unique feature of Accumulation/Distribution (A/D) is that it tracks the relationship between opening and closing prices, in
addition to volume. Its concept is similar to that of Japanese candlesticks, which at
the time Williams wrote his book weren’t known to Western traders.
Accumulation/Distribution is more finely calibrated than OBV because it credits
bulls or bears with only a fraction of each day’s volume, proportionate to the degree
of their win for the day.
Close − Open
A/D = High − Low • Volume
If prices close higher than they opened, then bulls won the day, and A/D is positive. If prices close lower than they opened, then the bears won, and A/D is negative.
If prices close where they opened, then nobody won, and A/D is zero. A running
total of each day’s A/D creates a cumulative A/D indicator.
For example, if today’s high-low spread was five points but the distance from the
open to the close was two points, then only 2/5 of today’s volume is credited to the
winning camp. Just as with OBV, the pattern of A/D highs and lows is important,
while its absolute level simply depends on the starting date.
When the market rises, most people focus on new highs, but if prices open higher
and close lower, then A/D, which tracks their relationship, turns down. It warns
that the uptrend is weaker than it appears. If, on the other hand, A/D ticks up while
prices are down, it shows that bulls are gaining strength.

Crowd Behavior
Opening prices reflect pressures that have built up while the market was closed.
Openings tend to be dominated by amateurs who read their news in the evening and
trade in the morning.
Professional traders are active throughout the day. They often trade against the
amateurs. As the day goes on, waves of buying and selling by amateurs as well as
slow-moving institutions gradually subside. Professionals tend to dominate the markets at closing time. Closing prices are especially important because the settlement
of trading accounts depends on them.
A/D tracks the outcomes of daily battles between amateurs and professionals. It
ticks up when prices close higher than they opened—when professionals are more
bullish than amateurs. It ticks down when prices close lower than they opened—
when professionals are more bearish than amateurs. It pays to bet with the professionals and against the amateurs.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

111

29. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS

Trading Rules
When the market opens low and closes high, it moves from weakness to strength.
That’s when A/D rises and signals that market professionals are more bullish than
amateurs, and the upmove is likely to continue. When A/D falls, it shows that market professionals are more bearish than amateurs. When the market weakens during
the day, it’s likely to reach a lower low in the days to come.
The best trading signals are given by divergences between A/D and prices.
1. If prices rally to a new high but A/D reaches a lower peak, it gives a signal to sell
short. This bearish divergence shows that market professionals are selling into
the rally.
2. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low but A/D bottoms out
