
As we can see in Exhibit 3.18, three white soldiers appear as three long
white candles exhibiting consecutively higher prices. This is a continuation
pattern, and optimally, each candle should close at or near its high. The lines
form an orderly, ongoing rise, with each candle opening within or close to the
prior candle’s real body. For this pattern, trend is not critical. The soldiers
may begin an upward climb out of a downtrend reversal or may emerge dur-
ing arally. In these instances, the pattern suggests positive momentum ahead.

Pundits are fond of saying, “Trading is war." The patterns in this see-
tion—tweezers tops and bottoms, three black crows, and three white sol-
diers—provide you with extra ammunition to carry into battle. In the market
combat zone, the more knowledge you have, the more likely you are to suc-
ceed. That’s true now, more than ever, with volatility occurring as an every-

day event.

Three white soldiers

i

EXGEBIT 3.18 Three White Soldiers


The Power of Candle Patterns 5

A caveat regarding the three white soldiers pattem: Although the candles display a
healthy rise in the market, they do not necessarily give you a buy signal. When the

KEY POINT

candles move to an extended price range, be careful of entering long positions. Over-
bought markets usually consolidate or retrace after prolonged price rises. The proper
long entry may appear after a pullback to price support.

In the next section, we will discuss the powerful candlestick continua-
tion pattern known as windows. The window represents the Japanese ver-
sion of the Western gap, and it provides us with a host of compelling signals.

Before you go on to that section, though, answer the questions that fol-
low. Take your time to assess how much knowledge you absorbed from the
material discussed in this section. That’s the best way to obtain the most
from this course book.

CHECK VOUR UNDERSTANDING

Questions for Chapter Three, Section Three: Tweezers,
Crows, and Soldiers

1. One condition that a tweezers top must display is
a. matching highs.
b. matching real bodies.
¢. matching mid-points.
d. matching lows.
2. Ideally, in a mature advance, a tweezers top consists of
a. along black candle followed by a doji.
b. along white candle followed by an evening star dojl.

¢. along white candle followed by a smaller real body that has the same
high.
a. along black candle followed by an island reversal.


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

. A tweezers bottom that forms at the potential culmination of a decline
could form as

a. asmall-bodied black candle followed by a bearish belt-hold.
b. amorning doji star.

¢. aharam) pattern with equal lows on both candle lines.

d. a plereing pattern followed by a harami.

. Ona weekly chart, a tweezers top shows that

a. this week's high 1s the same as last week's high.

b. the top of the real bodies have the same lows.

¢. the top of the real bodies have the same highs.

d. None of the above.

. One condition for a three black crows pattern is

a. three black candles.

b. three black spinning tops.

¢. three bullish belt-holds.

d. three dark cloud covers in a row.

. Three black crows signify a bearish market environment when they
appear in

a. abox range.

b. an uptrend.

¢. adowntrend.

d. directly after a bullish piercing pattern.

. The signal generated by three black crows 1s best utilized by
a. day traders.

b. market makers.

c. New York Stock Exchange specialists.

4d. longterm traders and investors.

. A condition for the three white soldiers pattern is

a. they appear in a sharp downtrend.

b. they emerge in a box range.

c. they develop in an uptrend.

d. None of the above.


92 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

The candle pattern known as tweezers consists of two or more candle lines
with matching highs or lows. The name is derived from the appearance of
their formation. The tweezers top occurs in a rising market when two or
more consecutive highs match each other, thus giving the Image of the two
prongs of a tweezers (Exhibit 3.16). (Since tweezers pinch, the connotation
is that the trend is getting pinched.) A tweezers bottom takes place in a de-
clining market, when two successive lows are equal.

Ideally, the tweezers pattern should develop with the first session incor-
porating a long real body. In a declining market, this would probably be a
long black candlestick; in a rising market, it would finalize as a long white
candlestick.

The second session is interesting because it has many variations. It’s
best—but not absolutely necessary—when this session forms with a small
real body. You are already familiar with the candle lines that may provide this
eomponent. For example, a tweezers top might finish with a hanging man, a

Tweezers top Tweezers top Tweezers top
and hanging man and harami cross and dark cloud cover

MLL

Tweezers bottom Tweezers bottom Tweezers bottom
and hammer and harami and piercing pattern

|
ra 1 ll

EXBIBIT 3.16 Tweezers Tops and Tweezers Bottoms



The Power of Candle Patterns 7

9.

10.

Ideally, the real bodies that make up the three white soldiers pattern
should move in

a. an orderly rise with consecutively higher closes.
b. a sideways pattern.

¢. an uptrend that includes a 50% retracement.

4. an uptrend that includes a doji.

Why could you eall three white soldiers the “good news, bad news"
pattern?

a. Because the candles look strong, but they are really weak.

b. Although the candles are moving up, short selling is responsible for
the uptrend.

¢. The eandle’s rise 1s only a rebound in a bear market.

d. Because a market that rises for three consecutive days may be In dan-
ger of becoming overbought.
Match the patterns shown In Exhibit 3.19 with their candlestick term.

AN | Alt} Ney

1 2

/

Ny ‘| M

5

MM

At

9 10

EXBIBIT 3.19 Question 11


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Candlestick Name Figure Number

a. Bearish engulfing pattern
b. Bullish engulfing pattern
c. Harami

d. Harami cross

e. Tweezers top

f. Tweezers bottom

g. Dark cloud cover

h. Piercing pattem

1. Bullish counterattack

J. Bearish counterattack
12. In Exhibit 3.20, which of these is(are) advancing three soldiers?

acl

b.2

«3

d. Both 2 and 4

EXGIBIT 3.20 © Question 12

Answers for Chapter Three, Section Three: Tweezers,
Crows, and Soldiers

1. a. The criterion for a tweezers top 1s that it must be formed of two con-
secutive candle lines that share equal highs.

2. ¢. The ideal tweezers top consists of a long white candle followed by a
smaller real body that has the same high.

3. ¢. A tweezers bottom that forms at the potential culmination of a decline
could form as a harami pattern with equal lows on both candle lines. The
first candle in a bullish harami 1s a long white real body that appears In a
decline. The second 1s a smaller real body that resides within the opening


The Power of Candle Patterns oo

10.

and closing price range of the first candle. As long as both candles have
the same low—whether formed by shadows or real bodies—the pattern
can be designated a tweezers bottom.

a. On a weekly chart showing a tweezers top, this week's high would be
the same as last week's high. The tweezers may be compased of real bod-
jes, shadows, and/or doji. Tweezers occurs on consecutive sessions, yet
are not a vital reversal signal on an intraday or daily chart. They take on
extra importance when they contain other bearish (for a top reversal), or
bullish (for a bottom reversal) candlestick signals. For those who utilize
longer time perspectives, tweezers tops and bottoms on weekly and
monthly candlestick charts may represent significant reversal patterns. A
low made last week, or month, that successfully tested, could be a base
for a rally. A low made yesterday, that 1s successfully tested today, how-
ever, 1s less likely to hold as a base, as the time frame 1s shorter.

a. The three black crows pattern consists of three falling candles, all with
black real bodies.

b. Three black crows appear as a top reversal. Consequently, this pattern
must come during an uptrend.

4d. With all candle patterns, the signal is only valid when the final candle
is complete. With this pattern it means the third black candle. As such, it
may be best used by longer-term traders and investors. This ominous sig-
nal gives a hint of trouble with the first black crow, which may form as a
dark cloud cover, or other top reversal candle line. By the time the third
black crow develops completely, it is apparent that the bears are In con-
trol. But by then the market may have moved well off its highs, therefore,
if you sell on this pattern, you should have a longer-term perspective.

d. The trend ts not important with the three soliders. The major condition
for the three white soldiers pattern 1s that there are three white candles
each with a higher close and that each session closes at or near its highs.
a. The real bodies that make up the three white soldiers pattern should
move In an uptrend, and each white candle should close with a higher
price than the previous candle.

d. The good news: Three strong white candles forecast a market moving
in healthy rise. Not-so-good news: By the completion of the third candle,
the market may be overextended or nearing a resistance area. In those
eases, it's best to wait for a buying setup after the market consolidates, or
retraces. When it bounces off support and shows signs of resuming the

uptrend, a buying setup may emerge.


12.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

a.l
b.5
c.2
4.3
0.8
L6
g.4
h.7
1.9
j. 10

b. Three white or three advancing soldiers 1s a group of three white can-
dlesticks with consecutively higher closes, with each of the closes near
the highs of the session. These three white candlesticks presage more
strength if they appear after a period of stable prices or at a low price
area.


SECTION FOUR

Disjointed Candles: Rising and
Falling Windows

suggested we take action, whether to open a new position or apply
money-management rules to close a position. Now we are going to ex-
plore a Japanese continuation pattern that implies the prior trend will con-
tinue. This pattern, called a window, is synonymous with the Western pattern
known as a gap. We'll discuss the fundamental concepts of windows and
how they apply in different patterns. We'll also talk about some general con-

eepts as they apply to trends.

l n previous sections, we've studied reversal patterns. These patterns have

In this section you will learn... .

The definition of window

How a rising window differs from a falling window

How windows act as support and resistance areas

Why closing prices are so important when closing windows
Why size doesn't matter with windows

Where key support areas are located in large windows
Why it's important to trade with the trend

hey terms to watch for:

Window

Rising window
Falling window
Price vacuum

1o1


102 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

In technical analysis, we generally talk about two kinds of patterns: reversal
patterns and continuation patterns. By now you are familiar with the action
that takes place in a reversal pattern, meaning a change in direction. If you
are a trader, you spend the majority of your time assessing charts and look-
ing for potential trend reversals; that is where you typically enter and exit po-
sitions. Continuation patterns suggest that the trend before the pattern will
continue, whether up or down.

A window 1s the same as a Western gap, but the Japanese have unique
uses for windows (details follow in this section). A window means there is a
price zone in which no trades take place, or a price vacuum. For example,
stock XYZ has a high at $50. If the low of the next session 1s $52, there 1s a $2
rising window. If, however, stock XYZ has a low at $50, with the next ses-
sion's high at $48, we would say it has gapped down #2 and therefore a $2
Jalling window exists.

Arising window ts a bullish signal. The price vacuum between the prior
eandle’s high and the current session's low means the bulls are in control and
willing to pay up. A falling window 1s a bearish signal. The absence of price
activity between the prior candle’s low and the current session's high shows
the bears are driving the market down, with no competition from the bulls.

The Japanese advise, “Go in the direction of the window.” This makes
sense, as windows are continuation signals. If the bulls are willing to skip
several price levels and pay higher prices for a security, then they are Indeed
in control. Conversely, if prices are so weak that bears can force them to
plunge below a certain range, then the selling pressure is not to be doubted.

fat SIDE LIGHT

For a quick demonstration of how gaps can be filled on an intraday basis, watch a
stock that gaps up a point or more at the open. Since some market professionals
make a living from fading the gap, or trading in the opposite direction from the gap
move: If a stock gaps higher a substantial amount at the open, the pro will sell it short
for a quick trade. If enough selling pressure occurs, the stock will drop enough to fill
a portion, or all, of the price vacuum. (Please don't try this technique yourself, unless
you are a very experienced trader. It involves extremely high risk.)



The Power of Candle Patterns ioe

One of the most common misunderstandings about rising and falling win-
dows 1s identifying the part of the candle session that constitutes a price
limit. Some think that if real bodies do not touch, the space between ts a win-
dow. This is incorrect. With rising and falling windows, there must be a
space—whether narrow or wide—where candle highs and lows do not inter-
sect. If shadows intersect, there is no window. There must be a price vac-
uum, or space between price levels, for a window to be valid.

One of the most useful signals offered to us by rising and falling windows
is summed up by another Japanese saying: “Corrections stop at the window.”
That means windows often become support and resistance areas. You can
see how this works in Exhibit 3.21, with windows acting as springboards of
support and resistance.

When arising window occurs, the entire space of that window 1s consid-
ered a support area. Therefore, if you have a long pasition that just developed
arising window, you can expect that window to act as support if the market
pulls back. If the price retraces to the bottom of the window, but does not
close below it, then support has not been broken. If, however, the market
eloses below the window's bottom, then support has been broken. Con-
sequently, the most Important area of a rising window ts the bottom of that
window.

The same ts true for a falling window. When a falling window forms, the
entire price vacuum establishes a resistance area. If you are considering a

Rising window Falling window

ur

AA a

Falling

| | t

EXGIBIT 3.20 Rising and Falling Windows

Rising
window


104 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

short sale, you can regard the window as price resistance when (if) the se-
curity rallies. If the price rallies to the top of the window, but does not close
above it, that resistance stays intact. However, if the price rallies through the
falling window and closes above it, the resistance area is broken; no short
sale should be entered. Thus, the top of a falling window 1s tts critical resis-
tance area.

In the next unit, you will find many different examples of rising and
falling windows to study. Just as a picture is worth a thousand words, these
diagrams and real-world charts will help you understand more thoroughly
how windows act as strong components of price patterns.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Questions for Chapter Three, Section Four: Disjotnted
Candles: Rising and Falling Windows
1. Arising window on a daily chart takes place when
a. two consecutive real bodies do not touch.
b. today’s lower shadow Is the same as yesterday's lower shadow.

¢. today’s lower shadow is exactly the same as yesterday's upper
shadow.

d. None of the above.
2. A falling window tsa
a. bullish continuation signal.
b. bearish continuation signal.
¢. bullish reversal signal.
d. bearish reversal signal.
3. The minimum distance for a valid window 1s
a. 50 cents.
b. 1 dollar.
¢. any amount—even 1 cent.
d. 10 cents.
4. The larger the rising window, the
a. more significant the subsequent move should be.
b. larger the support zone.


The Power of Candle Patterns 105

¢. smaller the support zone.

d. more likely the market will reverse from up to down.
5. Which part of the rising window should be support?

a. The top of the window only

b. The bottom of the window only

c. The entire window

d. The 50% retracement level within the window only
6. In a major downtrend, a bullish candle signal could be used to

a. go short.

b. go long.

c. step aside.

4d. wait for the bounce to consider selling.

7. When a bearish candle signal emerges in an uptrending market, the more
overbought the market, the vulnerable it is.

a. less

b. more

¢. equally

d. One has no bearing on the other.

8. The more candlestick or Western indicators that merge together at the
same support or resistance area,

a. the more significant the move away from support or resistance.
b. the more likely a reversal.
c. the less likely a reversal.
d. None of the above.
®. In Exhibit 3.22, which of the choices below is(are) windows?

0 || 4
La} [a] EM

1 2 3 4
EXGIBIT 3.22 Question 9



106

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

a. Both 2 and3
b. All

¢. Both 1 and 4
4.2

Use Exhibit 3.23 to answer questions 10 to 13.

14
13
12
W
10

9

x y

EXBIBIT 3.23 Questions 10 to 13

12.

Define support shown by the rising window at X.

a. Zone from 10 to 9

b. Zone from 11 to 10

¢. Zone from 12 to 11

a. 11

What ts the most important support area of this rising window at X?
a.12

b. 11

c. 10

4.9

Define resistance as shown by the falling window at Y.
a. 12to13

b. 10to 11


The Power of Candie Patterns 107

c. 11 to 12
d. 10 to 12
13. What is the most important resistance area of this falling window?
a. 12
b. 14
«il
a. 12
Answer the next two questions based on Exhibit 3.24.

EXBIBIT 3.24 Questions 14 and 15

14. What pattern is shown at 1?
a. Dark cloud eover
b. Tower top
c. Bullish engulfing pattern
d. Bearish engulfing pattern

15. What is bearish confirmation of this pattern? (Hint: There is a small ris-
ing window.)

a. Candle line 3
b. Candle line 4
c. Candle line 2
4d. On the black session that completes the bearish engulfing pattern


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Answers for Chapter Three, Section Four: Disjointed
Candles: Rising and Falling Windows

1. d. Arising window takes place on a daily chart when today’s low ts above
yesterday's high. In other words, today’s lower shadow should reside
above yesterday's upper shadow, with no price overlap.

2. b. A falling window ts a bearish continuation signal and should act as re-
sistance on rallies. A bearish continuation signal means that the down-
trend in foree before the signal remains intact after the signal. A rising
window 1s a bullish continuation signal, which means the rally preceding
the rising window remains in effect after the rising window emerges.
Therefore, corrections that fall to that rising window should use it for po-
tential support.

3. ¢. With a window, size does not matter. Even if the window ts only 1 cent
wide, it 1s still valid. The window should act as support or resistance, de-
pending on whether it’s a rising or falling window.

4. b.A large rising window means there ts a big zone of support. Remember,
the entire window represents potential support, and we don't know be-
forehand how far—or if—the market will pull into the window before
bouncing. Choice (a) is not correct, since candle charting techniques do
not project moves. Therefore, even if a market has a large rising window,
it does not necessarily mean the rally will be substantially more powerful.

5. ¢. In both rising and falling windows, the entire window ts important. It
becomes potential support for a rising window, and resistance for a
falling window.

6. 4. No matter what technical tools you are using, you should consider al-
ways trading in the direction of the major trend. If the major (long-term)
trend ts down, and a bullish candlestick signal appears, you would be
more prudent to use a potential bounce from this signal to sell on a rally.
Although the candlestick pattern described in the question was bullish,
selling rallies is in line with the bearish nature of the prevailing trend.
This also means that tf a major bull trend 1s in force and we see a bullish
candlestick signal in a down move, we could consider initiating a long
position. That action would keep us trading in the direction of the major
trend.

7. b. One of the most important criteria for using candle charts is to re-
member that these patterns mainly offer reversal signals. If the market is
overextended, either to the upside or the downside, the odds of a rever-


The Power of Candle Patterns 109

10.

12.

13.

14.

15.

sal with a candlestick signal are greatly enhanced. Therefore, if a bearish
candle signal emerges and the market is greatly overbought, the market
is more likely to reverse.

. b. Although we are focusing mainly on candle charts in this book, it

should be remembered that the power of candles 1s enhanced by com-
bining them with Western charting techniques. Specifically, if there 1s a
strong Western technical signal, such as a moving average that has
worked well as support, and a candle signal appears at that moving aver-
age's support level, the chanees of a turnaround increase. Remember,
though, that even if a combination of candlestick signals and Western in-
dicators converge at the same support or resistance area and greatly in-
erease the likelihood of a reversal, the indicators do not project the
extent of the move.

a. Windows are synonymous with gaps In Western technicals. This means
that there should be no price overlap between one session and the prior
session. Examples 2 and 3 display falling and rising windows, respec-
tively. In examples 1 and 4, although the real bodies are not touching,
these are not windows since the shadows overlap. With windows, no part
of the candle line, including the shadows, can overlap.

b. The zone of support for the rising window 1s the whole window. In this
exhibit the window runs from 11 to 10 and as such becomes a potential
support zone.
