
W

WATCH LIST BASICS
At the top of ProphetCharts are the various menus, one of which is named
Watch Lists. Within it are all the controls you need to manage your watch
lists. A watch list is a compilation of financial instruments that you collectively name and manage. You control what is inside the list, and you can
move things to and from various lists to keep them well organized.
You might not necessarily own the stocks in your watch lists. Some
watch lists you create might be along the following lines:
Candidates Long—Stocks you are considering buying.
Candidates Short—Stocks you are considering selling short.
70

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

71

FIGURE 4.1 The Watch Lists menu provides all the basic controls needed for
Watch List management and viewing.

Current Long—Stocks you currently own.
Current Short—Stocks you currently are short.
Core List—The main list of stocks you track regularly.
High Fliers—Volatile stocks.
Steady Performers—Stable, steadily rising stocks.
The lists and their contents are really up to you. But the watch lists
should be given names that suggest their content, and they should be
unique enough to be useful.
The Watch Lists menu (Figure 4.1) includes six choices:
1. Add to Watch List: Add the stock displayed in the chart to a watch list

of your choice.
2. Create New Watch List: Create and name a new watch list.
3. Delete Watch List: Delete the watch list of your choice and its contents.
4. Apply Label Filters: This topic will be covered thoroughly in Chapter

16, but this function bases the contents of the watch lists on the filters
you apply.
5. Delete Label: This topic also will be covered in Chapter 16, but this
function lets you delete a label you previously defined.
6. View by Symbol: View all of the securities in the watch lists by their
ticker symbol.

72

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 4.2 When adding a symbol to a watch list, you can choose from any of
the watch lists in the dropdown menu.

7. View by Company Name: View all of the securities in the watch lists

by their company name (this is the default choice).
8. Import: You can import a text file of symbols into a watch list with this

function, which can be a big time-saver. For instance, let’s say you find
a list of all the symbols in the S&P 100 on the Internet. You could save
that list of symbols to your hard drive and then import that text file via
ProphetCharts’ import command, saving you the time and trouble of
entering all those symbols individually.
When you choose Add to Watch List, ProphetCharts will take whatever
symbol is displayed currently and add it to whatever watch list you select.
Figure 4.2 shows the Add Favorite dialog box, which contains a dropdown
menu of all your watch lists, sorted alphabetically. Choose the list to which
you want the symbol added and click OK to finish the task.
To create a new watch list, choose Create New Watch List, and enter
the name you would like it to have (Figure 4.3). Remember to give it a name
that helps identify its contents, because once you have a large collection
of these lists, you will want them to be easy to organize. Also keep in mind
that your new watch list will be empty at first.

FIGURE 4.3 Type in whatever name you would like to give the watch list, but try
to make it something that describes the contents you intend for that list.

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

73

FIGURE 4.4 Deleting a watch list permanently removes all the symbols and the
watch list name. ProphetCharts will conﬁrm you want to delete a list before actually
doing so.

If you decide to completely eliminate a watch list from your account,
choose Delete Watch List from the menu. A dropdown menu of all the
watch lists available (Figure 4.4) will be shown. Choose the one you want
to delete and click OK. Because the deletion is permanent, ProphetCharts
will double-check with you to make sure you want to go ahead with the
deletion. If you confirm it, the watch list will be gone.

MY WATCH LISTS
Although the Watch Lists menu is useful, you will probably find that the
My Watch Lists module is a more efficient place to manage your lists. From
the module you can move items from one list to another, perform drag-anddrop operations, copy items from place to place, rename lists, and perform
many other functions.
When you expand My Watch Lists, all of your watch lists will be shown
in the state you last left them. The lists are shown in alphabetical order,
and you can either expand them (which means the contents are shown, and
there will be a minus sign next to the list name) or collapse them (meaning
only the list name will be shown, and a plus sign will be next to it).
Figure 4.5 shows a portion of a hypothetical My Watch Lists. The list
called Candidates Long is expanded, and some of the company names in
that list are boldfaced, meaning they have been tagged. The list above it
(Candidate Options) is empty, so there is no plus or minus next to the list
name. The list beneath it (Candidates Short) is collapsed, so there is a plus
sign next to it.
If you were to choose View by Symbol from the Watch Lists menu, the
same list would resemble Figure 4.6. Note that although symbols are shown
instead of company names, tagged items still appear in boldface. Note also
that alphabetically sorted symbols may not necessarily appear in the same

74

FIGURE 4.5 This expanded watch
list shows the stocks expressed as their
company name. Some of the securities
have been tagged, and they are displayed in boldface.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 4.6 This is the same list of
securities shown in Figure 4.5, except
they are displayed by symbol instead of
name.

order as alphabetically sorted names, since company names and symbols
do not always correspond (an example being symbol T, which corresponds
to the company name AT&T).

DRAGGING-AND-DROPPING
One of the most useful features in ProphetCharts is the ability to drag an
item from one watch list to another. This makes it quick, easy, and convenient to keep your watch lists organized as you move things from place
to place.
For instance, assume you had five watch lists—Candidates Long, Candidates Short, Current Long, Current Short, and Favorite Stocks. Further
assume you were an active trader and were often examining stocks and

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

75

FIGURE 4.7 This shows three tagged symbols in the Candidates Short module.

opening and closing positions. You can imagine how dynamic these lists
would become. By being able to drag symbols from one list to another as
their status changes, you would be able to keep your trading world organized. So a stock you regularly follow (in the Favorite Stocks list) might be
moved to the Candidates Short list if you were considering selling it short.
And when you actually sold the stock short, you would move it to Current
Short. Finally, when you covered the short (hopefully at a lower price) you
would return it to its regular home, Favorite Stocks.
Dragging and dropping is as easy and direct as it sounds. Figure 4.7
shows a list of three tagged stocks in Candidates Short. Assume you
wanted to drag Harrah’s Entertainment to the Candidate Options list.
All you need do is point to Harrah’s Entertainment, hold down the
mouse button, and drag it to the Candidate Options list, as shown in
Figure 4.8. ProphetCharts shows a light ghost of the company name as you
are dragging it so it’s easy to aim at your target (that is, the name of the
watch list to which you want to drag the symbol).

FIGURE 4.8 In this case, the stock Harrah’s Entertainment is being dragged from
the Candidates Short watch list to the Candidate Options watch list. A light ghost
image can be seen during the drag-and-drop operation.

76

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 4.9 Once the drag-and-drop is complete, the stock has been moved from
Candidates Short to Candidate Options. The quantity of stocks is still the same, but
their arrangement is diﬀerent.

After you release the mouse button, the symbol has been moved from
one place to another, as shown in Figure 4.9. You can also drag-and-drop
into the chart area if you want to simply chart a symbol. It’s accomplished
in exactly the same way: just click on the symbol you want to chart and
drag it into the chart area. Unlike moving a symbol from one list to another,
dragging-and-dropping for charting will not remove the symbol from its list.

RIGHT-CLICKING ON SYMBOLS
Besides the menu and the module, there is a third way of modifying watch
lists: right-clicking on a symbol within a list. If you do so, a variety of actions for that symbol will appear (Figure 4.10):
Copy to List—Lets you choose another watch list to which you would
like to copy this symbol. Unlike drag-and-drop, the symbol will remain in both the original list and the destination list once the action
is complete.
Move to List—Similar to the drag-and-drop operation, this lets you
choose a destination watch list and will remove the symbol from
the original list and insert it into the destination list.
Delete—Deletes the symbol from the watch list.
Tag—Makes the symbol appear in bold so that you can highlight it as
a symbol to which you want to pay special attention.
Labels Editor: The three labels-oriented items on this menu will be
discussed in Chapter 16; choosing this item brings up the labels
editor dialog box.

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

77

FIGURE 4.10 Right-clicking a stock name in a watch list brings up a menu with
a variety of possible actions.

Apply Label Filters: Modifies which items in the watch lists are displayed by applying the label filters you choose.
Apply Label: Lets you apply a specific label to the symbol being rightclicked.
The Tag menu item is unique since it renames itself if the symbol is
already tagged (Figure 4.11). In this case, the menu item is Remove Tag,
and clicking it will make the boldfaced stock change back to its normal
plain appearance.
The right-click menu is most convenient for deleting and tagging symbols. Unless you want to make copies of symbols from one list to another,
using drag-and-drop between lists is much faster and more efficient.
Besides right-clicking on an individual symbol, you can also right-click
on a watch list and take any of the following actions, based on the menu
that pops up:
Rename Watch List—Lets you type in a new name for the selected
list. You can also double-click the list name and make the change
directly, without the menu’s help.

78

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 4.11 If a symbol is already tagged, then the menu item Tag is instead
called Remove Tag.

Create Watch List—Creates a new, empty watch list.
Delete Watch List—Yields a dialog box showing you the existing watch
lists, any one of which you can delete.
Export Watch List—Lets you take the contents of the selected list and
save it into a text file on your hard drive.
Add Current Symbol to Watch List—Adds the charted symbol into the
selected list.
View in Grid—Grid charts are covered later in the book; this displays
the first four charts in the list in a two-by-two grid format.
Tag All—Tags all the symbols in the list.
Untag All—Untags all the symbols in the list.
Copy All—Lets you copy all of the symbols in the list to another list.
Move All—Lets you move all the symbols from the current list to another list, leaving the original list empty.
Labels Editor—Again, labels functions will be covered in Chapter 16;
this brings up the labels editor.
Apply Label Filters—Lets you apply the label filters to all the lists.
Apply Label—Lets you apply a label to every symbol in the selected
list.

CHART STYLES
Chapter 2 explained the basics of chart creation. There are a great many
ways in ProphetCharts to adjust a chart’s appearance to your liking. Over

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

79

time, you will probably find certain kinds of charts that work well for you.
You might like a six-month daily candlestick chart, a 10-day minute-byminute streaming chart, or a 10-year weekly chart.
Changing the parameters that control a chart to get a different view of
a security is tedious and time-consuming. That’s why ProphetCharts allows
you to preserve a wide variety of settings into a chart style. When you create a style, you give yourself instant access to whatever properties a given
chart has, without having to spend time adjusting menus, checkboxes, and
other settings.
A chart style will preserve just about every aspect of a chart. Some of
the key parameters that make up a chart style are:
Graph Type—There are seven different kinds of graphs: OHLC, HLC,
HL, Candle, Line, Area, and Percent. Your chart style will remember which of these you selected.
Quick Toggles—Are color bars in the chart? Is volume displayed? Are
drawn items shown? Are studies shown?
Streaming—Is the chart streaming?
Log—Is the scale type logarithmic or arithmetic?
Duration—What is the duration of the chart?
Frequency—What is the frequency of the chart?
Technical Studies—What technical studies, if any, are used?
You don’t have to do anything special to create a chart style except
create the chart you want and then save it as a style. The Styles menu (Figure 4.12) is where this happens; the top two choices let you save a style or
delete a style, and beneath that are all the styles you have created (if any).
Besides the Styles menu, the chart styles you’ve made are also listed in
the My Chart Styles module (Figure 4.13). You can apply a style from the
menu by selecting it, and you can apply a style from the module by either
double-clicking it or dragging and dropping it into the chart area.

CREATING AND SAVING A STYLE
Once you create a chart whose properties you want to preserve, choose
Save Settings as a Chart Style from the Styles menu. A dialog box (Figure
4.14) will appear, asking you what name to give the style.
You can either type in a name and click OK, or if you want to replace
an existing style with the present one, you can click the Update an existing
Chart Style radio button and choose the style you want to replace from the
dropdown menu (Figure 4.15).

80

FIGURE 4.12 All of the styles you
have created are in the Styles menu,
along with the ability to save or delete
a style.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 4.13 The chart styles are
also listed in the My Chart Styles module,
and any one style can be invoked with a
double-click or a drag-and-drop into the
chart area.

It’s important to remember to give your style a meaningful name. Don’t
use names like Style 1, Style 2, My Style, Stock Chart, and other meaningless terms. Instead, use descriptive language such as Candlestick 6-Month,
Streaming 10-Day, or Daily 5-Year.
Another suggestion: because the style names appear in alphabetical
order, you should use consistent names to group similar styles. For instance, if you have a few minute graphs (that is, intraday graphs), a few
daily graphs (longer term), and a few streaming graphs, you might choose

Watch Lists and Chart Styles

FIGURE 4.14 The Save Chart Style
dialog box lets you save a new style or
replace an existing style.

81

FIGURE 4.15 To replace a chart
style, choose the style from the dropdown menu.

style names such as Minute 5-Day, Minute 10-Day, Daily 2-Year, Daily
5-Year, Daily 10-Year, Streaming 2-Day, Streaming 5-Day, and Streaming
20-Day. That way, when the style names are shown in alphabetical order, it
will be easier to find the style you want.

TRADING STYLE
A different kind of style has nothing to do with a software feature, but
instead this style is about developing yourself as a trader. My belief is that
learning how to trade is one of the richest processes of self-discovery a
person can undertake, provided that person is highly dedicated to learning
the art of trading and has enough introspection and flexibility to learn and
grow. For myself, the process has been long—measured in decades—and
difficult, but I can say with confidence that I am a little bit better at what I
do with each passing year.
But in the course of trying to learn to be a good trader, you are going
to need to adopt your own personal style. By style, I don’t mean a bromide
like “a trader who makes a lot of money” or, less glibly, “one who trades
what he sees.” I think those are empty characterizations, no better than
saying your philosophy of life is to try to be a good person and do the right
thing.

82

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

My point of view is that trading style encompasses several areas:

r Quantity: How many markets and/or positions do you plan to trade?
One? A handful? Dozens? Hundreds?

r Basis: What will the basis of your decision be with respect to what
positions you will undertake?

r Frequency: How often do you plan to enter and exit positions? In
other words, are you a day trader, a swing trader, or an investor?

r Bias: Do you have a bullish or bearish bias? I believe the vast majority
of people have a bullish bias, in spite of their declarations of neutrality.
(The old saw “I trade what I see” is the safe route, similar to a political
stance of “socially liberal and fiscally conservative”—meaningless.)
r Security: What kind of securities do you like to trade? E-minis? Penny
stocks? Blue chips?
I’m sure there are other elements, but that’s not a bad start. My own
personal style is along these lines:

r Quantity: I like a lot of small positions in order to spread my risk.
There are times when I have a couple of hundred positions.

r Basis: I’m a chartist, pure and simple. I use my experience of having
viewed hundreds of thousands of charts as the rationale for my decision making.
r Frequency: My preference is holding periods measured in weeks or
months, although volatile markets can make that unrealistic.
r Bias: I tend to be somewhat bearishly biased, although I am always
striving to be as balanced and open-minded about charts as possible.
r Security: I gravitate toward stocks that trade at least half a million
shares a day—hopefully much more—and are typically priced between
$20 and $90.
You may not have adopted a style of your own yet, but these parameters are worthy of some thought. As you trade in the coming months and
years, return to this topic, since learning to be a successful trader requires
being in a constant state of self-evaluation and, hopefully, improvement.

ON TO TECHNICAL STUDIES
You have learned about two vital features of ProphetCharts: the management of watch lists and the creation of chart styles. Now it’s time to begin
exploring the powerful library of technical studies at your disposal.

CHAPTER 5

Market and
Data Types

here are tens of thousands of financial instruments that
ProphetCharts can display, and it will help you as a trader to
understand what these instruments are and how they differ in a
chart. Although just about any kind of time series data can be charted,
there are some subtle but important differences between these data types
that we discuss in this chapter.

T

INDEXES
An index is typically an amalgamation of various instruments that are subject to some kind of mathematical process to yield a meaningful number
(typically in the form of an average). Well-known examples include the
Dow Jones Industrial Average (also known as the Dow 30), the Standard &
Poor’s 500 (also known as the S&P 500 or simply the SPX), and the Gold
and Silver Index.
Another similar chartable item is an indicator, which—instead of being computed using individual instruments—is more typically an independent summary of a fact, such as the number of stocks on an exchange
that rose on a particular day or the total number of shares that traded
on a particular exchange. For simplicity’s sake, we will refer to both indexes and indicators as “indexes” since they are treated the same way in
ProphetCharts.
In ProphetCharts, index symbols are preceded by the dollar sign:
$INDU represents the Dow 30, $UTIL represents the Dow 15 Utility Index,
83

84

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.1 The index module provides easy access to popular index data.

$NDX represents the NASDAQ 100 Index, $HUI is the Gold Bugs Index, and
so forth.
There is an Index module built into ProphetCharts to make the task
of accessing indexes simpler than memorizing a bunch of arcane symbols.
If you choose to display the Index module, you will see the list shown in
Figure 5.1. Double-clicking any of these items will make that index appear,
using the time duration and frequency you have selected. Some indexes go
back for a long time; the Dow Jones Industrial Index goes back the farthest,
with data back to the beginning of 1900. (As an aside, we actually had data
from the nineteenth century, but Java cannot comprehend time prior to
1900, so we had to forgo using it).
As of this writing, the vast majority of indexes in ProphetCharts lack
volume data. There are a handful of exceptions, but on the whole, the
volume pane will be blank for any indexes (and all indicators). There are
some instances where ProphetCharts has volume data, but they begin only
later in the time series. Figure 5.2, for instance, shows the Dow Utility
Index with volume data commencing early in 2007. Before that, the volume
is all zeros.
Looking at indexes in ProphetCharts should probably be a daily routine for active traders, since the movement of major indexes is a major
influence on the direction of individual equities. You will probably want to
create a watch list to store the indexes you most frequently examine.

EQUITIES
Equities are most typically shares of common stock in public companies,
although for the purposes of our discussion, they include any instrument

Market and Data Types

85

FIGURE 5.2 Most of the index data in ProphetCharts have no volume data or only
partial data.

that is traded on a stock exchange (including, for instance, ExchangeTraded Funds, commonly known as ETFs).
When people speak of equities, they are usually talking about stocks
such as Google (GOOG), Apple Inc (AAPL), Kelloggs (K), and Johnson &
Johnson (JNJ). They are also talking about funds such as the NASDAQ
100 ETF (QQQQ), the gold trust (GLD), the silver trust (SLV), the S&P 500
“spyders” (SPY), and other popular trading vehicles.

86

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Symbols for equities range in length from one alphabetic character
(such as C, which stands for CitiCorp) to five characters. They typically
only have alphabetic characters (examples: HD, IBM, F, SHLD), although
for preferred stocks and other special issues, there may be other symbols
(for instance, BRK.A for Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway). You can
use the search item in the symbols menu to find the symbol of any security.
The data fields for equities are:
Open—The opening price (that is, the first traded price) for the given
time period (usually one day, but in the case of intraday graphs or
other frequencies, it will be longer or shorter)
High—The highest price for that time period
Low—The lowest price for that time period
Close—The last price for that time period
Volume—The total number of shares traded during that time period
Something unique to equity symbols in ProphetCharts are event icons,
which are automatically displayed on the price chart. Figure 5.3 shows an
example of a stock with many event icons. Mousing over any of these
will provide more information about the meaning of the event for that
stock.
Because active ProphetCharts users tend to be technical traders, the
event icons aren’t something that you will probably be using a lot. By
pressing Ctrl-E, you can toggle between showing and hiding the event
icons. However, there are times when it is helpful to have an awareness
of events—particularly market-moving events such as earnings announcements. The four different kinds of event icons displayed are:
Dividends—This looks like an up-arrow and denotes when a dividend
is paid and its value.
Stock Splits—This looks like two overlapping squares and indicates
when a stock has split and by what amount.
Conference Calls—This looks like a telephone and indicates a conference call between a company’s management and stock analysts.
Earnings Announcement—This looks like a dollar sign and shows
when a company’s quarterly earnings were (or will be)
announced.
An example of a dividend event is shown in Figure 5.4. Mousing over
this arrow icon shows that a 22-cent dividend was paid on September 22,
2005. As you can see, there are five dividend icons in this particular example, so the span of time displayed is about five quarters (since dividends
