
110

Currency Strategy

exchange rate regimes tried to defend themselves, tried to delay the inevitable. However, capital
mobility, coupled with pegged exchange rate regimes and in some cases a degree of monetary
independence were a poor policy mix, forgetting the principles of Mundell–Fleming, and one
by one they were forced off their pegs, to “ﬂoat” (devalue) their currencies. Among those
emerging market currencies forced to devalue during this time were:

r 1994/95 — Mexico
r 1996 — Czech Republic
r 1997/98 — Asian region (Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, Philippines)
r 1998 — Russia
r 1999 — Brazil
r 1999 — Ecuador
r 2000 — Colombia
r 2001 — Turkey

The year 2002 has brought with it so far the devaluation of the Argentine peso, the ﬁrst
“currency board” in history to be defeated, and also that of the Venezuelan bolivar. There have
also been cases where emerging market countries have either had some success in ﬁghting back
or alternatively have de-pegged voluntarily during periods of exchange rate stability, rightly
anticipating that a freely-ﬂoating exchange rate would provide a far more effective buffer for
the economy during subsequent periods of market turbulence than the alternative, which would
require defending an overvalued exchange rate. In the ﬁrst camp, we have had countries such as
Malaysia and also Hong Kong, which have tried various strategies to ﬁght the market. Malaysia,
for its part, in September 1998 banned offshore trading of the Malaysian ringgit and pegged it
to the US dollar at 3.8 — where it has stayed ever since. Hong Kong, long the self-proclaimed
bastion of the free market, intervened in the stock market, ostensibly to rid it of “manipulative,
speculative elements”. In the second camp, countries like Chile, Poland and Hungary have
de-pegged their exchange rates voluntarily, under calm and stable market conditions. As a
result, when market conditions became more volatile, the freely ﬂoating exchange rate was
able to buffer or insulate the real economy from damaging imbalances or instability.
As the emerging markets became integrated into the global economy and particularly within
the global ﬁnancial system rather than just commercial trade, so the pressure became irresistible
for them to move from a ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate system to more ﬂexible exchange
rate arrangements, such as the free ﬂoat — the reed that bends in the wind, rather than the
pane of glass that shatters. Two major trends in terms of the liberalization of capital markets
have played a major part in the development and history of exchange rate systems within
the emerging markets — the rise of capital ﬂows and the opening of the emerging markets to
international trade.
5.2.1 The Rise of Capital Flows
A key reason for the move by emerging markets from pegged exchange rates to ﬂoating
exchange rates has been the rise in the importance of global capital ﬂows and the extent to
which emerging markets have participated in and been integrated within those capital ﬂows.
As stated, the rise in the importance of capital ﬂows since the early 1980s reﬂects the wave
of capital account liberalization and capital market integration that has taken place since that
time. As a proportion of GDP, capital inﬂows to the emerging markets rose six-fold in the
1990s relative to the 1970s and 1980s, only to fall back in 1998 in the wake of the Asian and
@Team-FLY

Exchange Rate Regimes

111

Russian crises. A similar trend has been seen in bank lending, which also fell back in the wake
of these crises. The vulnerability of emerging markets to capital outﬂow and reversal has been
a key focus for the emerging markets, and is likely to remain the case for some time to come.
A key differentiation between the emerging markets and the industrial countries is the depth of
their asset markets and their ability to absorb capital inﬂows and outﬂows without signiﬁcant
policy and economic distortion.
5.2.2 Openness to Trade
The degree of openness to commercial trade of goods and services is also an important consideration with regard to the exchange rate system, both how it has developed and where it is
going. As with capital ﬂows, emerging market participation in global trade has risen exponentially in the last two decades. The average share of external trade (measured by exports plus
imports, divided by two) in GDP for emerging market countries rose from about 30% in the
late 1960s to 40% in the late 1990s. Within this, the trend towards opening up to trade has been
particularly marked in Asia. As trade makes up an increasingly large share of emerging market
GDP, so changes in the exchange rate and in output and prices are increasingly interrelated. At
the same time, the type of trade has changed signiﬁcantly, moving away from a dependence on
commodities towards manufacturing. This change appears to have helped stabilize the terms
of trade of emerging market economies, as manufacturing prices change considerably more
slowly than do commodities. However, it has also made the economy as a whole more sensitive to exchange rate ﬂuctuations. Commodities are priced in US dollars and ﬂuctuate for the
most part independently of ﬂuctuations in exchange rates. Conversely, supply and demand of
manufactured trade is very sensitive to exchange rate ﬂuctuations.

5.3 FIXED AND PEGGED EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES
These four periods have been characterized by a general — although not universal — move from
ﬁxed exchange rate systems to convertible pegs and ﬁnally to freely ﬂoating exchange rates.
In the mid-1970s, almost 90% of emerging market countries had some form of ﬁxed/pegged
exchange rate. As of the end of 2001, this had fallen to 30%. It should be noted of course that
this is still a high number and thus it remains important to examine the dynamics of ﬁxed and
pegged exchange rate systems, why they came about and their relevance in the modern world.
Fixed or pegged exchange rate systems made sense for emerging markets during the 1970s
and 1980s. For the most part, their involvement in the global economy was still relatively
limited, for both political and economic reasons. Their ﬁnancial systems were still for the most
part in their infancy and certainly not able to cope, at least early on, with the harsh disciplines
imposed by global ﬁnancial markets. A credible anchor was needed for monetary policy and it
was found in the form of the US dollar. The pegged exchange rate value between the US dollar
and the emerging market currency became the anchor of monetary credibility. Sometimes
these were hard pegs to the US dollar, sometimes they were “crawling pegs”, meaning that
the peg value changed to reﬂect a gradual depreciation of the emerging market currency in
line with its higher inﬂation rate. Others were pegged not to a single currency, but instead to a
basket of currencies. In all cases, however, the exchange rate peg was the anchor of monetary
credibility. What does this mean? A pegged exchange rate system implies a commitment by
the ﬁnancial authorities of a country to limit exchange rate ﬂuctuation within the limits of the
peg. At the macroeconomic level, the aim of this is to provide both stability and credibility. At

112

Currency Strategy

the microeconomic level, it is to provide an implicit guarantee to the private sector of exchange
rate stability.
5.3.1 The Currency Board
Aside from the complete adoption of another and more credible currency, such as the US dollar,
the hardest form of currency peg is the currency board. Here, the central bank relinquishes theoretically all discretion over monetary policy. Capital inﬂows lead automatically to a proportional
reduction in money supply by the “monetary authority”, which replaces the job of the central
bank, and vice versa. The monetary authority pledges to exchange the domestic currency for the
peg currency, usually the US dollar, at the peg rate in any size. Needless to say, this means it has
to have the foreign exchange reserves in order to be able to do so. This in turn has real impact
on the economy. For a start, there has to be a strong degree of domestic price ﬂexibility in order
to ensure that domestic prices are able to adjust to changes in the economy since the external
price — the exchange rate — cannot adjust because of its peg/currency board constraint.
Currency boards are no panacea. They imply and impose a very harsh policy discipline.
A country has to be willing — and be seen to be willing — whatever economic pain is required
in order to maintain the currency board. On the positive side, they should provide transparency
and monetary credibility in addition to stability, which in turn should provide a mediumterm foundation for growth, albeit at a cost. As the example of Argentina suggests, currency
boards do not imply a guarantee of stability. They have tended however to be considerably
more resistant to speculative attack than has been the case with the crawling peg, in large part
because they have provided a greater degree of monetary credibility. Note that a currency board
requires that the monetary authority’s foreign exchange reserves more than cover the monetary
base. They do not and are not able to cover the broad money deﬁnition, which means that they
remain vulnerable in theory, particularly if locals abandon their own currency.
5.3.2 Fear and Floating
Many emerging market countries have chosen to ﬂoat their currencies only as a last resort and
only when they have been forced so to do. Even those who have eventually ﬂoated have still
sought to manage or interfere in otherwise ﬂoating currency markets in some way. From this,
we have the idea of “fear of ﬂoating”, which Calvo and Reinhart set out in a major research
paper.1 While it is understandable that emerging economies fear — or at least are nervous
about — the risks of allowing the market free rein, in my view this is like democracy — the
worst option apart from all the rest. Government intervention in the economy inevitably creates
economic distortions, which can have signiﬁcant costs. Similarly, if intervention is anything
other than occasional in order to smooth price action and correct market overshooting, it can
create pricing distortions, which in any case will eventually be reversed.
This notwithstanding, the move from pegged to ﬂoating exchange rate regimes has frequently
been done with considerable reluctance within the emerging markets, that is to say in many
instances it has been forced by the market. Countries such as Mexico, much of Asia, the Czech
Republic, Brazil and Turkey did not adopt ﬂoating exchange rates willingly. These were forced
on them as a result of the breaking of currency pegs and maxi-devaluations that in many cases
1
Guillermo A. Calvo and Carmen Reinhart, Fear of Floating, NBER Working Paper 7993, National Bureau of Economic Research,
September 25, 2000.

Exchange Rate Regimes

113

resulted in catastrophic economic contractions. It should be no surprise therefore that the
relationship between the emerging markets and the idea of freely ﬂoating exchange rates is an
uneasy one. However, barring a major reversal in terms of trade or capital market deregulation
and liberalization, there is no going back on this trend towards freely ﬂoating exchange rates.
The question now is no longer whether emerging markets will choose freely ﬂoating exchange
rates as one type of exchange rate regime, but when and how they will move to that.
5.3.3 The Monetary Anchor of Credibility
The discipline of ﬂoating exchange rates is quite different to that of a pegged exchange rate
system. No longer is the exchange rate itself the anchor of monetary credibility. Instead, the
conventional wisdom has moved towards inﬂation targeting through interest rate policy as the
anchor of monetary credibility. As a result, the emphasis has shifted importantly away from
the exchange rate regime and in favour of central banks in seeking to maintain both internal
and external price stability. This move from the certainty of an exchange rate as the monetary
anchor of credibility to the uncertainty of a central bank’s monetary discipline is very much
a leap of faith, and it can take a considerable period of time for a central bank to gain the
respect needed of the global ﬁnancial markets to pursue that discipline with the minimum of
market instability. This is as true for the developed economies as it is for the emerging markets.
For instance, it took the German central bank, the Bundesbank, over 30 years to achieve the
revered status it had during the 1990s when German bond yields ﬁnally fell below those of the
US for a sustained period of time. Further, a central bank’s monetary credibility is hard won
but easily lost.
In the emerging markets also, as with the broader trend, there has been a general move away
from targeting the exchange rate towards targeting inﬂation. This is of course particularly
evident within the EU accession candidates such as the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary,
which in any case have to adopt some form of inﬂation targeting to ensure that their inﬂation
rates do not exceed EU/Euro entry rules. However, inﬂation targeting is also now present in
Latin America and Asia.
The presumed premise behind this is that as the emerging markets continue to participate to
an increasing degree in the global economy and in the global ﬁnancial markets, so they will be
increasingly judged by the most efﬁcient economy of that global economy, the United States,
and have to adopt its economic policies, such as inﬂation targeting. This is richly ironic since in
fact the US has no formal inﬂation target. Indeed, it is not too much to suggest that the ofﬁcial
community in Washington, led by the IMF, is in many cases demanding economic policies
(as quid pro quos for new loans) that would simply not be acceptable in the industrial countries.
Granted, this picture is not entirely negative. Inﬂation targeting frameworks are usually characterized also by a greater degree of policy transparency and accountability. Inﬂation targeting
also allows some degree of discretion in the setting of the inﬂation target, but thereafter little
latitude in missing it. Broadly put, ﬁnancial markets “reward” administrations — through lower
bond yields — that meet their inﬂation targets and punish those that do not. Any student of
international economics knows the classical argument by Milton Friedman for price ﬂexibility:
if there is a change in economic conditions, the fastest and most efﬁcient way of expressing this
necessary adjustment is through the external price — the exchange rate — rather than through
a large number of domestic prices. The analogy that Friedman used in 1953 to explain this was
daylight saving time; that is, it is easier to move to daylight saving time than to coordinate a
large number of people and move all activities one hour.

114

Currency Strategy

The basic argument in favour of ﬂexible exchange rates is that it makes it easier for an
economy to adjust to external shocks, such as a dramatic change in commodity prices which in
turn triggers a change in the trade balance. A ﬂexible exchange rate also allows the central bank
to devote its energies to seeking to maintain domestic monetary stability rather than focusing on
the external price. Of course, this is the theory. In practice, many central banks still try to focus
on the exchange rate and not just to the extent that it affects domestic inﬂation. In principle,
however, the central bank’s focus on internal price stability frees it from the obligation of
targeting the exchange rate.
Freely ﬂoating exchange rates also have a downside, most notably in that they can be volatile
and also on occasion can signiﬁcantly overshoot anything approximating fundamental value.
This in turn can hurt the real economy. To return to Churchill’s description of democracy,
freely ﬂoating exchange rates are far from perfect, but they have so far proved better and more
resilient than anything else on offer. That said, although a freely ﬂoating exchange rate system
is probably the best and most ﬂexible system on offer over the long term, there are speciﬁc
economic factors that can determine which type of exchange rate system may be appropriate
in the short to medium term:

r Size/openness of the economy — If an economy is very open to external trade, the economic
costs of currency instability are likely to be a lot higher than if this is not the case. For instance,
in the wake of the Asian crisis, the structural damage to the likes of India was far less than to
Korea or Thailand, not least because trade is a far smaller proportion of the Indian economy.
In turn, this may suggest that it may be appropriate over the short to medium term for small
open economies, such as Hong Kong or Singapore, to have either ﬁxed or managed exchange
rate regimes.
r Inﬂation — If a country has a higher inﬂation rate than its trading partners, its exchange rate
needs to be ﬂexible (i.e. ﬂoating) in order to maintain trade competitiveness. Indeed, the law
of PPP requires that its exchange rate depreciates to offset this higher inﬂation rate.
r Labour market ﬂexibility — The more rigid the wage structure within the economy, the
greater the need for exchange rate ﬂexibility to act as a buffer against real economic shocks.
r Capital mobility — The general rule is that the more open an economy is to capital ﬂow,
the harder it is to sustain a ﬁxed exchange rate system. The only exception to this is if a
country adopts a currency board and relinquishes monetary independence.
r Monetary credibility — The stronger the credibility of a central bank, the less the need
to peg or ﬁx the exchange rate, and vice versa. The relationship between the monetary
credibility of a central bank and the trust of the ﬁnancial markets is very much a conﬁdence
game. As we saw earlier, it usually takes a considerable period of time for central banks to
build that relationship and that trust with ﬁnancial markets.
r Financial development — The degree of ﬁnancial development, particularly with regard to
the domestic ﬁnancial system, may be a consideration when choosing a type of exchange rate
regime. For instance, immature ﬁnancial systems may not be able to withstand the volatility
inherent in freely ﬂoating exchange rates.

5.4 EXCHANGE RATE REGIME SUSTAINABILITY — A
BI-POLAR WORLD?
Within the emerging markets, there has been a gradual realization, particularly as barriers to
trade and capital have come down, that ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regimes may no longer

Exchange Rate Regimes

115

be appropriate in an economic world dominated by high capital mobility. Furthermore, there
has been an equal realization that exchange rate pegs of one type or another inevitably increase
“moral hazard”, in that they are seen as an ofﬁcial guarantee of exchange rate stability and
therefore serve to encourage the taking on of unnecessary and dangerous exchange rate risk.
Pegging to an international currency such as the US dollar can provide substantial monetary
credibility on the one hand, but on the other the fact that US dollar interest rates are likely to
be substantially lower than those in the domestic market can encourage domestic corporations
and ﬁnance companies to borrow in the pegged currency without hedging out the currency risk
embedded in those liabilities. The Asian crisis was greatly exacerbated by the fact that Thai,
Korean and Indonesian corporations borrowed heavily in US dollars, swapped back to domestic
currency and lent that out at much higher rates or used it for investment purposes. Yet, the US
dollar liability remained unhedged from a currency perspective. Consequently, when domestic
currencies such as the Thai baht, Indonesian rupiah and Korean won devalued, the cost of paying
those US dollar loans was multiplied proportionally in terms of the domestic currency. In practice, many corporations were bankrupted as a direct result, while others defaulted in such debts.
Gradually, emerging market countries have abandoned pegged exchange rates in favour of
freely ﬂoating exchange rates, either willingly or otherwise, with this process being greatly
accelerated in the wake of the emerging market crises of 1994–1999. With this process has
come the realization that “soft” or “crawling” currency pegs are no longer sustainable in a world
of high capital mobility. Either exchange rates should ﬂoat freely or they should be constrained
by the hardest of currency pegs. The middle ground of “intermediate” exchange rate regimes
is no longer seen as tenable. This view of a “bi-polar” world of exchange rates was put most
clearly and eloquently by the former IMF First Deputy Managing Director Stanley Fischer,
reﬂecting a general move in favour of this view by the Washington ofﬁcial community. In
several research pieces and speeches, Fischer noted that the currency pegs have been involved
in just about every emerging market crisis during the 1990s, from Mexico in 1994 through
to Turkey in 2001. Whether coincidence or not, emerging market countries that have not had
pegged exchange rates have generally been able to avoid experiencing currency crises. Of the
33 leading countries classiﬁed as emerging market economies, the proportion with intermediate
exchange rate regimes fell from 64% at the start of the 1990s to 42% at the end. By 1999, 16
of these countries had freely ﬂoating exchange rates, while three had hard currency pegs in the
form of a currency board or dollarization. The remainder still had intermediate exchange rate
regimes. Since then, the hollowing out of intermediate exchange rate regimes has continued,
with Greece moving out of both emerging market status and a horizontal currency band into
the Euro, while Turkey was forced off its crawling peg, ﬂoating its currency in the process.
This hollowing out process of intermediate exchange rate regimes has also happened with the
so-called developed economies, a process dominated by the drive towards EMU and the creation
of the Euro. The ERM crises of 1992 and 1993 were initially thought to have endangered if
not ended the dream of EMU. Conversely, it appears they actually served to accelerate the
momentum away from such an intermediate exchange rate regime to the hardest of pegs, the
single currency. By the end of 1999, all but one developed economy had either hard pegs or
freely ﬂoating exchange rates, with that one exception being Denmark.
As countries move from targeting the exchange rate, through intermediate exchange rate
regimes, towards freely ﬂoating exchange rates, the monetary emphasis shifts towards targeting
inﬂation as the monetary anchor of credibility. Whether a country chooses a hard currency peg
or allows its currency to ﬂoat freely may depend at least in part on its inﬂationary history. In
theory, a hard currency peg makes sense for countries with long histories of high inﬂation and
@Team-FLY
