
you must thoroughly analyze a company, and the soundness of its
underlying businesses, before you buy its stock;
you must deliberately protect yourself against serious losses;
you must aspire to “adequate,” not extraordinary, performance.

1

Graham goes even further, fleshing out each of the key terms in his definition: “thorough analysis” means “the study of the facts in the light of established standards of safety and value” while “safety of principal” signifies
“protection against loss under all normal or reasonably likely conditions or
variations” and “adequate” (or “satisfactory”) return refers to “any rate or
amount of return, however low, which the investor is willing to accept, provided he acts with reasonable intelligence.” (Security Analysis, 1934 ed.,
pp. 55–56).
35

36

Commentary on Chapter 1

An investor calculates what a stock is worth, based on the value of
its businesses. A speculator gambles that a stock will go up in price
because somebody else will pay even more for it. As Graham once
put it, investors judge “the market price by established standards of
value,” while speculators “base [their] standards of value upon the
market price.” 2 For a speculator, the incessant stream of stock quotes
is like oxygen; cut it off and he dies. For an investor, what Graham
called “quotational” values matter much less. Graham urges you to
invest only if you would be comfortable owning a stock even if you had
no way of knowing its daily share price.3
Like casino gambling or betting on the horses, speculating in the
market can be exciting or even rewarding (if you happen to get lucky).
But it’s the worst imaginable way to build your wealth. That’s because
Wall Street, like Las Vegas or the racetrack, has calibrated the odds
so that the house always prevails, in the end, against everyone who
tries to beat the house at its own speculative game.
On the other hand, investing is a unique kind of casino—one where
you cannot lose in the end, so long as you play only by the rules that
put the odds squarely in your favor. People who invest make money for
themselves; people who speculate make money for their brokers. And
that, in turn, is why Wall Street perennially downplays the durable
virtues of investing and hypes the gaudy appeal of speculation.
U N S A F E AT H I G H S P E E D
Confusing speculation with investment, Graham warns, is always a
mistake. In the 1990s, that confusion led to mass destruction. Almost
everyone, it seems, ran out of patience at once, and America became
the Speculation Nation, populated with traders who went shooting
from stock to stock like grasshoppers whizzing around in an August
hay field.
People began believing that the test of an investment technique
was simply whether it “worked.” If they beat the market over any

2

Security Analysis, 1934 ed., p. 310.
As Graham advised in an interview, “Ask yourself: If there was no market
for these shares, would I be willing to have an investment in this company on
these terms?” (Forbes, January 1, 1972, p. 90.)
3

Commentary on Chapter 1

37

period, no matter how dangerous or dumb their tactics, people
boasted that they were “right.” But the intelligent investor has no interest in being temporarily right. To reach your long-term financial goals,
you must be sustainably and reliably right. The techniques that
became so trendy in the 1990s—day trading, ignoring diversification,
flipping hot mutual funds, following stock-picking “systems”—seemed
to work. But they had no chance of prevailing in the long run, because
they failed to meet all three of Graham’s criteria for investing.
To see why temporarily high returns don’t prove anything, imagine
that two places are 130 miles apart. If I observe the 65-mph speed
limit, I can drive that distance in two hours. But if I drive 130 mph, I
can get there in one hour. If I try this and survive, am I “right”? Should
you be tempted to try it, too, because you hear me bragging that it
“worked”? Flashy gimmicks for beating the market are much the
same: In short streaks, so long as your luck holds out, they work. Over
time, they will get you killed.
In 1973, when Graham last revised The Intelligent Investor, the
annual turnover rate on the New York Stock Exchange was 20%,
meaning that the typical shareholder held a stock for five years before
selling it. By 2002, the turnover rate had hit 105%—a holding period of
only 11.4 months. Back in 1973, the average mutual fund held on to a
stock for nearly three years; by 2002, that ownership period had
shrunk to just 10.9 months. It’s as if mutual-fund managers were
studying their stocks just long enough to learn they shouldn’t have
bought them in the first place, then promptly dumping them and starting all over.
Even the most respected money-management firms got antsy. In
early 1995, Jeffrey Vinik, manager of Fidelity Magellan (then the
world’s largest mutual fund), had 42.5% of its assets in technology
stocks. Vinik proclaimed that most of his shareholders “have invested
in the fund for goals that are years away. . . . I think their objectives are
the same as mine, and that they believe, as I do, that a long-term
approach is best.” But six months after he wrote those high-minded
words, Vinik sold off almost all his technology shares, unloading nearly
$19 billion worth in eight frenzied weeks. So much for the “long term”!
And by 1999, Fidelity’s discount brokerage division was egging on its
clients to trade anywhere, anytime, using a Palm handheld computer—
which was perfectly in tune with the firm’s new slogan, “Every second
counts.”

38

Commentary on Chapter 1

FIGURE 1-1

Stocks on Speed

20

15

10

5

ol
og
y

ig
n

ch
n

riS

Te
Pu

m

a

Br

oa

Ve

dV

om
Q

ua

lc

w
et
N
al
Re

is
io
n

m

s
or
k

i
om
kt
In

Tr
e*

.c
on
az

ad
e

om

I
CM

G
Am

ou

bl

eC

lic
k

0

D

Average length of ownership (in days)

25

And on the NASDAQ exchange, turnover hit warp speed, as Figure 1-1 shows.4
In 1999, shares in Puma Technology, for instance, changed hands
an average of once every 5.7 days. Despite NASDAQ’s grandiose
motto—“The Stock Market for the Next Hundred Years”—many of its
customers could barely hold on to a stock for a hundred hours.
THE FINANCIAL VIDEO GAME
Wall Street made online trading sound like an instant way to mint
money: Discover Brokerage, the online arm of the venerable firm of

4

Source: Steve Galbraith, Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. research report, January 10, 2000. The stocks in this table had an average return of 1196.4% in
1999. They lost an average of 79.1% in 2000, 35.5% in 2001, and 44.5%
in 2002—destroying all the gains of 1999, and then some.

Commentary on Chapter 1

39

Morgan Stanley, ran a TV commercial in which a scruffy tow-truck
driver picks up a prosperous-looking executive. Spotting a photo of a
tropical beachfront posted on the dashboard, the executive asks,
“Vacation?” “Actually,” replies the driver, “that’s my home.” Taken
aback, the suit says, “Looks like an island.” With quiet triumph, the
driver answers, “Technically, it’s a country.”
The propaganda went further. Online trading would take no work
and require no thought. A television ad from Ameritrade, the online
broker, showed two housewives just back from jogging; one logs on
to her computer, clicks the mouse a few times, and exults, “I think I just
made about $1,700!” In a TV commercial for the Waterhouse brokerage firm, someone asked basketball coach Phil Jackson, “You know
anything about the trade?” His answer: “I’m going to make it right
now.” (How many games would Jackson’s NBA teams have won if he
had brought that philosophy to courtside? Somehow, knowing nothing about the other team, but saying, “I’m ready to play them right
now,” doesn’t sound like a championship formula.)
By 1999 at least six million people were trading online—and roughly
a tenth of them were “day trading,” using the Internet to buy and sell
stocks at lightning speed. Everyone from showbiz diva Barbra
Streisand to Nicholas Birbas, a 25-year-old former waiter in Queens,
New York, was flinging stocks around like live coals. “Before,” scoffed
Birbas, “I was investing for the long term and I found out that it was not
smart.” Now, Birbas traded stocks up to 10 times a day and expected
to earn $100,000 in a year. “I can’t stand to see red in my profit-or-loss
column,” Streisand shuddered in an interview with Fortune. “I’m Taurus
the bull, so I react to red. If I see red, I sell my stocks quickly.” 5
By pouring continuous data about stocks into bars and barbershops, kitchens and cafés, taxicabs and truck stops, financial websites and financial TV turned the stock market into a nonstop national
video game. The public felt more knowledgeable about the markets
than ever before. Unfortunately, while people were drowning in data,
knowledge was nowhere to be found. Stocks became entirely decou-

5

Instead of stargazing, Streisand should have been channeling Graham.
The intelligent investor never dumps a stock purely because its share price
has fallen; she always asks first whether the value of the company’s underlying businesses has changed.

40

Commentary on Chapter 1

pled from the companies that had issued them—pure abstractions, just
blips moving across a TV or computer screen. If the blips were moving
up, nothing else mattered.
On December 20, 1999, Juno Online Services unveiled a trailblazing business plan: to lose as much money as possible, on purpose.
Juno announced that it would henceforth offer all its retail services for
free—no charge for e-mail, no charge for Internet access—and that it
would spend millions of dollars more on advertising over the next year.
On this declaration of corporate hara-kiri, Juno’s stock roared up from
$16.375 to $66.75 in two days.6
Why bother learning whether a business was profitable, or what
goods or services a company produced, or who its management was,
or even what the company’s name was? All you needed to know
about stocks was the catchy code of their ticker symbols: CBLT, INKT,
PCLN, TGLO, VRSN, WBVN.7 That way you could buy them even
faster, without the pesky two-second delay of looking them up on an
Internet search engine. In late 1998, the stock of a tiny, rarely traded
building-maintenance company, Temco Services, nearly tripled in a
matter of minutes on record-high volume. Why? In a bizarre form of
financial dyslexia, thousands of traders bought Temco after mistaking
its ticker symbol, TMCO, for that of Ticketmaster Online (TMCS), an
Internet darling whose stock began trading publicly for the first time
that day.8
Oscar Wilde joked that a cynic “knows the price of everything, and
the value of nothing.” Under that definition, the stock market is always
cynical, but by the late 1990s it would have shocked Oscar himself. A
single half-baked opinion on price could double a company’s stock
even as its value went entirely unexamined. In late 1998, Henry Blodget, an analyst at CIBC Oppenheimer, warned that “as with all Internet stocks, a valuation is clearly more art than science.” Then, citing
only the possibility of future growth, he jacked up his “price target” on

6

Just 12 months later, Juno’s shares had shriveled to $1.093.
A ticker symbol is an abbreviation, usually one to four letters long, of a
company’s name used as shorthand to identify a stock for trading purposes.
8
This was not an isolated incident; on at least three other occasions in the
late 1990s, day traders sent the wrong stock soaring when they mistook its
ticker symbol for that of a newly minted Internet company.
7

Commentary on Chapter 1

41

Amazon.com from $150 to $400 in one fell swoop. Amazon.com shot
up 19% that day and—despite Blodget’s protest that his price target
was a one-year forecast—soared past $400 in just three weeks. A year
later, PaineWebber analyst Walter Piecyk predicted that Qualcomm
stock would hit $1,000 a share over the next 12 months. The stock—
already up 1,842% that year—soared another 31% that day, hitting
$659 a share.9
FROM FOR M U LA TO FIASCO
But trading as if your underpants are on fire is not the only form of
speculation. Throughout the past decade or so, one speculative formula after another was promoted, popularized, and then thrown aside.
All of them shared a few traits—This is quick! This is easy! And it won’t
hurt a bit!—and all of them violated at least one of Graham’s distinctions between investing and speculating. Here are a few of the trendy
formulas that fell flat:
•

9

Cash in on the calendar. The “January effect”—the tendency of
small stocks to produce big gains around the turn of the year—
was widely promoted in scholarly articles and popular books published in the 1980s. These studies showed that if you piled into
small stocks in the second half of December and held them into
January, you would beat the market by five to 10 percentage
points. That amazed many experts. After all, if it were this easy,
surely everyone would hear about it, lots of people would do it,
and the opportunity would wither away.
What caused the January jolt? First of all, many investors sell
their crummiest stocks late in the year to lock in losses that can
cut their tax bills. Second, professional money managers grow
more cautious as the year draws to a close, seeking to preserve
their outperformance (or minimize their underperformance). That
makes them reluctant to buy (or even hang on to) a falling stock.
And if an underperforming stock is also small and obscure, a
money manager will be even less eager to show it in his year-end

In 2000 and 2001, Amazon.com and Qualcomm lost a cumulative total of
85.8% and 71.3% of their value, respectively.

42

•

10

Commentary on Chapter 1

list of holdings. All these factors turn small stocks into momentary
bargains; when the tax-driven selling ceases in January, they typically bounce back, producing a robust and rapid gain.
The January effect has not withered away, but it has weakened.
According to finance professor William Schwert of the University of
Rochester, if you had bought small stocks in late December and
sold them in early January, you would have beaten the market by 8.5
percentage points from 1962 through 1979, by 4.4 points from
1980 through 1989, and by 5.8 points from 1990 through 2001.10
As more people learned about the January effect, more traders
bought small stocks in December, making them less of a bargain
and thus reducing their returns. Also, the January effect is biggest
among the smallest stocks—but according to Plexus Group, the
leading authority on brokerage expenses, the total cost of buying
and selling such tiny stocks can run up to 8% of your investment.11 Sadly, by the time you’re done paying your broker, all your
gains on the January effect will melt away.
Just do “what works.” In 1996, an obscure money manager
named James O’Shaughnessy published a book called What
Works on Wall Street. In it, he argued that “investors can do
much better than the market.” O’Shaughnessy made a stunning
claim: From 1954 through 1994, you could have turned $10,000
into $8,074,504, beating the market by more than 10-fold—a towering 18.2% average annual return. How? By buying a basket of
50 stocks with the highest one-year returns, five straight years of
rising earnings, and share prices less than 1.5 times their corporate revenues.12 As if he were the Edison of Wall Street,
O’Shaughnessy obtained U.S. Patent No. 5,978,778 for his “automated strategies” and launched a group of four mutual funds
based on his findings. By late 1999 the funds had sucked in more
than $175 million from the public—and, in his annual letter to
shareholders, O’Shaughnessy stated grandly: “As always, I hope

Schwert discusses these findings in a brilliant research paper, “Anomalies and
Market Efficiency,” available at http://schwert.ssb.rochester.edu/papers.htm.
11
See Plexus Group Commentary 54, “The Official Icebergs of Transaction
Costs,” January, 1998, at www.plexusgroup.com/fs_research.html.
12
James O’Shaughnessy, What Works on Wall Street (McGraw-Hill, 1996),
pp. xvi, 273–295.

Commentary on Chapter 1

43

that together, we can reach our long-term goals by staying the
course and sticking with our time-tested investment strategies.”
But “what works on Wall Street” stopped working right after
O’Shaughnessy publicized it. As Figure 1-2 shows, two of his
funds stank so badly that they shut down in early 2000, and the

FIGURE 1-2

What Used to Work on Wall Street . . .
Value of $100 invested on November 1, 1996

$250

$200

$150

$100

$50

N

ov

-9
Fe 6
bM 97
ay
Au 97
gN 97
ov
-9
Fe 7
bM 98
ay
Au 98
gN 98
ov
-9
Fe 8
bM 99
ay
Au 99
gN 99
ov
-9
Fe 9
bM 00
ay
Au 00
g00

$0

O’Shaughnessy Cornerstone Growth
O’Shaughnessy Cornerstone Value
O’Shaughnessy Aggressive Growth
O’Shaughnessy Dogs of the Market
Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index

Source: Morningstar, Inc.

44

•

Commentary on Chapter 1

overall stock market (as measured by the S & P 500 index) walloped every O’Shaughnessy fund almost nonstop for nearly four
years running.
In June 2000, O’Shaughnessy moved closer to his own “longterm goals” by turning the funds over to a new manager, leaving
his customers to fend for themselves with those “time-tested
investment strategies.” 13 O’Shaughnessy’s shareholders might
have been less upset if he had given his book a more precise
title—for instance, What Used to Work on Wall Street . . . Until I
Wrote This Book.
Follow “The Foolish Four.” In the mid-1990s, the Motley Fool
website (and several books) hyped the daylights out of a technique called “The Foolish Four.” According to the Motley Fool, you
would have “trashed the market averages over the last 25 years”
and could “crush your mutual funds” by spending “only 15 minutes a year” on planning your investments. Best of all, this technique had “minimal risk.” All you needed to do was this:
1. Take the five stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average with
the lowest stock prices and highest dividend yields.
2. Discard the one with the lowest price.
3. Put 40% of your money in the stock with the second-lowest
price.
4. Put 20% in each of the three remaining stocks.
5. One year later, sort the Dow the same way and reset the
portfolio according to steps 1 through 4.
6. Repeat until wealthy.
Over a 25-year period, the Motley Fool claimed, this technique
would have beaten the market by a remarkable 10.1 percentage

13

In a remarkable irony, the surviving two O’Shaughnessy funds (now
known as the Hennessy funds) began performing quite well just as
O’Shaughnessy announced that he was turning over the management to
another company. The funds’ shareholders were furious. In a chat room at
www.morningstar.com, one fumed: “I guess ‘long term’ for O’S is 3 years.
. . . I feel your pain. I, too, had faith in O’S’s method. . . . I had told several
friends and relatives about this fund, and now am glad they didn’t act on my
advice.”

Commentary on Chapter 1

45

points annually. Over the next two decades, they suggested,
$20,000 invested in The Foolish Four should flower into
$1,791,000. (And, they claimed, you could do still better by picking the five Dow stocks with the highest ratio of dividend yield to
the square root of stock price, dropping the one that scored the
highest, and buying the next four.)
Let’s consider whether this “strategy” could meet Graham’s
definitions of an investment:
• What kind of “thorough analysis” could justify discarding the
stock with the single most attractive price and dividend—but
keeping the four that score lower for those desirable qualities?
• How could putting 40% of your money into only one stock be a
“minimal risk”?
• And how could a portfolio of only four stocks be diversified
enough to provide “safety of principal”?
The Foolish Four, in short, was one of the most cockamamie
stock-picking formulas ever concocted. The Fools made the same
mistake as O’Shaughnessy: If you look at a large quantity of data
long enough, a huge number of patterns will emerge—if only by
chance. By random luck alone, the companies that produce
above-average stock returns will have plenty of things in common.
But unless those factors cause the stocks to outperform, they
can’t be used to predict future returns.
None of the factors that the Motley Fools “discovered” with
such fanfare—dropping the stock with the best score, doubling up
on the one with the second-highest score, dividing the dividend
yield by the square root of stock price—could possibly cause or
explain the future performance of a stock. Money Magazine found
that a portfolio made up of stocks whose names contained no
repeating letters would have performed nearly as well as The
Foolish Four—and for the same reason: luck alone.14 As Graham
never stops reminding us, stocks do well or poorly in the future
because the businesses behind them do well or poorly—nothing
more, and nothing less.
14
See Jason Zweig, “False Profits,” Money, August, 1999, pp. 55–57. A
thorough discussion of The Foolish Four can also be found at www.investor
home.com/fool.htm.

46

Commentary on Chapter 1

Sure enough, instead of crushing the market, The Foolish Four
crushed the thousands of people who were fooled into believing
that it was a form of investing. In 2000 alone, the four Foolish
stocks—Caterpillar, Eastman Kodak, SBC, and General Motors—
lost 14% while the Dow dropped by just 4.7%.
As these examples show, there’s only one thing that never suffers a
bear market on Wall Street: dopey ideas. Each of these so-called
investing approaches fell prey to Graham’s Law. All mechanical formulas for earning higher stock performance are “a kind of self-destructive
process—akin to the law of diminishing returns.” There are two reasons
the returns fade away. If the formula was just based on random statistical flukes (like The Foolish Four), the mere passage of time will
expose that it made no sense in the first place. On the other hand, if
the formula actually did work in the past (like the January effect), then
by publicizing it, market pundits always erode—and usually eliminate—
its ability to do so in the future.
All this reinforces Graham’s warning that you must treat speculation as veteran gamblers treat their trips to the casino:
•
•
•
