
Trade and Investment Flows
According to the Continuous Linked Settlement Bank, forex trades can be
netted daily with 98% efficiency. In other words, the vast majority of forex
market activity is offsetting, and for only 2% of trades does cash need to
exchange hands. This is because most forex trading is short-term and also
because brokers generally dislike holding overnight positions. That’s not to
say that this 98% of trading has no bearing on exchange rates. Rather, it
means that 2% or so of foreign exchange is long-term (or at least longer than

69

70

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
1 day). These trades are driven more by international trade and cross-border
investment than they are by speculation and should reflect fundamental
(rather than technical) factors.
The rise in globalization and outsourcing has spawned record imbalances in
the global economy. As a result, the United States (as well as certain other
advanced economies) has experienced a trade deficit for most of the last
three decades—which is to say that its imports have consistently exceeded its
exports. This is depicted in Figure 3-10.

Figure 3-10. US balance of trade, 5 net investment inflows6
5

However, there is another way of looking at the balance of trade that may
explain why the US trade balance has remained negative for so many years.
Consider first that a trade deficit is also known as a current account deficit,
which implies that the difference between exports (X) and imports (M) is
basically equal to the difference between domestic savings (S) and
investment (I).
5 FRED, U.S. Department of Commerce: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Census Bureau,
“Trade Balance: Goods and Services, Balance of Payments Basis,” updated April 12,
2012, http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/BOPGSTB?cid=125.
6 FRED, U.S. Department of Commerce: Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Foreign-Owned

Assets in the United States, Excluding Financial Derivatives,” updated March 14, 2012,
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/BOPI?cid=127.

Forex for Beginners
X–M=S–I
It follows, then, that in the case of the United States, the long-term
disequilibrium between exports and imports can also be seen as a
disequilibrium between savings and investment. In fact, Benjamin Bernanke,
Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank, has vehemently advanced the idea
that the US economy should not be faulted for importing much more than it
has exported. Instead, or so Bernanke argues, countries with limited domestic
opportunities for investment and propensities toward saving are at fault for
enabling these imbalances.
Yet another model holds that a country’s current account balance must equal
its capital account balance. The difference between exports and imports (or
savings and investment) will equal the net change in ownership in domestic
assets. A trade/current account deficit, then, implies a capital account
surplus. For every dollar flowing out of the United States because of trade,
another dollar is flowing in for purposes of investment. Sure enough, you can
see from Figure 3-10 that the US trade deficit has corresponded with a
proportionately large inflow of foreign investment capital.
The fact that the US trade deficit has not abated can thus be seen in terms of
the willingness of private investors and central banks abroad to keep buying
US assets. At a certain point, they will inevitably demand a higher risk
premium (in the form of a more favorable exchange rate), at which point the
dollar should decline, and both the current and capital accounts should finally
return to equilibrium. Until then, the United States will likely continue to
import more than it exports in the aggregate, and invest more than it saves.

Gross Domestic Product
The most basic measure of economic performance is gross domestic product
(GDP), which is the sum of all goods and services produced (read: bought
and sold) within a given country’s borders. There are various approaches to
calculating GDP, all of which use different inputs to arrive at what should be
the same number.
The income approach is exactly as it sounds—a sum of all income earned
within a country’s borders by individuals and businesses/corporations. The
theory is that the existence of income implies the production of goods and
services. While generally accurate, the income approach is not very useful
for analytical purposes, and it has been superseded by the expenditure

71

72

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
approach, which divides GDP into four component parts: consumption,
investment, government spending, and the balance of trade.
For most advanced economies, consumption accounts for the largest share of
GDP (over 70% in the case of the United States) and has come to be seen as
a barometer of overall economic health. (That much of this consumption is
fuelled by debt is not a factor in GDP calculations.) Consumption is further
broken into goods (durable and nondurable) and services, the latter of which
is the largest subcomponent of US GDP, as shown in Figure 3-11.

Figure 3-11. US GDP component parts and change over time

Investment refers to business investment in plant and equipment, and
inventory (goods and services that have been produced but not yet sold to
end users), as well as purchases of homes for residential use. You can see
from Figure 3-11 that residential investment has fallen by more than half in
the US as a result of the recent collapse in home prices.
As an aside, investment does not include the purchase and sale of financial
assets, of which a staggering $1 quadrillion in notional value changes hands
every year in the United States. Instead, the common gripe that the financial
sector occupies a disproportionately large share of the US economy refers to
“rents” (i.e., commissions, fees) that financial companies earn for their role
in packaging and facilitating the exchange of financial instruments. For

Forex for Beginners
instance, a $300,000 mortgage might only contribute $10,000 to GDP
(equivalent to the underwriting cost), while a single share of Google stock
that trades hands one hundred times over the course of a year might
contribute $500 to GDP in the form of broker commissions. In short, the
equity in Google and the mortgage on a home do not contribute to GDP in
and of themselves, and all economic value is derived from creating them and
facilitating their exchange.
Government spending, meanwhile, can be broken down among different
government levels and into different types of spending. Interest payments on
government debt, transfer payments (such as Medicare and Social Security),
and subsidies are not included, as they represent the movement of money
rather than the production of a good or service. It is only when the Medicaid
recipient visits a doctor, for example, that real economic activity is said to
have taken place.
The balance of trade—exports minus imports—represents the final
component of GDP. In accordance with the expenditure approach, at first
glance it would appear that a country that experiences a trade deficit would
incur a curtailment of its economic growth. A better way to conceptualize
this, however, would be to say that imports need to be subtracted from
consumption (or from the production of exports) in order to accurately
calculate GDP. In other words, the expenditure approach accounts for all
production and consumption before subtracting out the portion that was
sourced from outside the country.
On a related note, a country that runs a consistent trade deficit, such as the
United States, can still derive a net economic benefit from trade. That’s
because US companies earn tremendous profits on goods that are imported.
In fact, it’s common knowledge that only a small portion of the profit from
selling an imported good is earned by the manufacturer. The rest of the
markup is captured by the (US) companies that own the intellectual property,
handle marketing, sales and distribution, and so forth. Returning to the
example of the iPhone, one analysis concluded that it provides a tremendous
boon to the US economy, its contribution to the trade deficit notwithstanding.
There are a few additional facets of GDP of which you should be aware.
First, there is a distinction between GDP (gross domestic product) and GNP
(gross national product). The former refers only to economic activity that
takes place within a country’s borders, while the latter figure is used to
calculate all production by the citizens of a given country, regardless of

73

74

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
where they reside. For whatever reason, GDP is most commonly cited by the
media and is most likely to be used for comparative and analytical purposes.
Second, it is difficult to compare economies based on nominal GDP figures.
Due to differences in wage/price levels as well as distortions in exchange
rates, it might appear as though one economy is radically bigger than a
neighboring economy. For example, imagine if the price of a computer was
$500 in the United States and only $300 in Mexico. In this case, the sale of
one thousand computers would seem to make a bigger contribution to GDP
in the United States than it would in Mexico. Economists correct for such
price differentials by quoting GDP on the basis of purchasing power parity.
China, for instance, has a nominal GDP of approximately $5.9 trillion,
compared to $414 million for Norway. After adjusting for differences in PPP,
however, China’s nominal GDP rises to $10 trillion, while Norway’s GDP is
reduced to $277 million.
In practice, the financial markets usually don’t pay attention to nominal GDP
figures. They are more interested in relative changes, such as the percentage
by which a country’s GDP changes from quarter to quarter and from year to
year. Moreover, the percentage is always quoted in real terms, which is to
say that it is adjusted for inflation. If US GDP expanded 5% in 2010 and
price inflation was 2%, the resulting change in output was actually only 3%,
which needs to be taken into account when quoting GDP.
Keep in mind that while GDP does not directly bear on exchange rates, it
does exert a strong indirect influence on currencies. For example, a
strengthening economy will most likely create more opportunities for
portfolio and foreign direct investment and spur capital inflows. More output
should also lead to increased government tax revenues and a lower risk
associated with buying government bonds. Finally, that the persistent gap in
GDP growth between emerging economies and advanced economies (Figure
3-12) has corresponded with a similar gap in currency performance is not
purely coincidental.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 3-12. Comparison of GDP growth over time

Theory Meets Reality
A theoretical framework is useful for understanding exchange rates, but it
can only take you so far. That’s because exchange rates don’t adjust
automatically to changes in underlying economic conditions. Rather, they
must be adjusted by the market, which is really only an obtuse way of saying
that they must be adjusted by the participants of the forex market. In other
words, theory can explain where exchange rates should stand—but not
necessarily where they actually do stand.
Investors act immediately to price changes in certain economic fundamentals
into their exchange rate models. If the Federal Reserve Bank were to raise
interest rates, for example, US dollar forward exchange rates would
instantaneously decline in order for covered interest rate parity to be
maintained. The increase in interest rates would also trigger a decline in spot
exchange rates, as short-term investors lower expectations for future
exchange rates. This is what should happen. Of course, it’s also possible that
there would be no change in the spot rate if investors had already priced in
the rate hike. Or there could be an increase in the spot rate if short-term
speculators respond to the rate hike by transferring capital into higheryielding US securities.

75

76

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
Changes in other fundamentals will be reflected in exchange rates after a lag.
For example, when a trend in high inflation begins to take form, forwardlooking corporations will start to mull over changes in sourcing/production,
but it will take years before these changes are reflected in changing patterns
of trade, changes in money supply, etc. Shrewd individuals, however, might
respond to such future changes by purchasing currency today. As a result, the
spot exchange rate will also change today, even though the fundamentals
underlying such a change might not emerge for years!

Market Microstructure Analysis
In contrast to macroeconomic models, which only offer an explanation of
how economic variables should influence exchange rates without taking into
account how this process actually takes place, market microstructure analysis
looks at how real-life buy and sell orders actually drive prices. As such,
market microstructure analysis examines completed transactions only and
ignores the forces that may be driving the supply and demand behind them.
(This is a subtle distinction between macroeconomic models and market
microstructure analysis, but an important one.)
Market microstructure analyses have found that order flow is an important
variable in exchange rate determination in that it is unique from the
information that underlies it. In other words, the order flow is itself
informative. In fact, empirical studies have found that broker-dealers exert
some of the strongest short-term pull on prices. This finding is not altogether
surprising, since a broker almost always wants to offset all long and short
positions, especially at the end of every trading day. In order to achieve this,
he may have to adjust the bid/ask spread that he is offering in order to attract
more buyers or sellers. If a broker wants to neutralize a long EUR/USD
position, for example, he may raise the bid price in order to encourage more
EUR/USD sellers. If enough brokers find themselves in the same position, it
could create a shortage of euros and a sudden, seemingly inexplicable rise in
the EUR/USD rate. This is known as the inventory control effect.
Sometimes an unwanted position will be passed from broker to broker to
broker, around the entire forex market, until it reaches a counterparty that is
willing to hold it indefinitely. This phenomenon has been nicknamed the “hot
potato effect.” Along the way, its price may be bid up (or down) repeatedly.
This is a result of market inefficiency—the failure to find a perfectly
compatible buyer for every seller.

Forex for Beginners
Likewise, the asymmetric information effect occurs when a broker-dealer
receives a large directional order from a client (rather than from another
broker-dealer) and automatically assumes that the client is placing that order
because he has certain information that supports such a directional
movement. As a result, the broker-dealer will raise his prices in order to
discourage other clients from making the same directional bet. You could
also say that, in this way, the broker-dealer is hedging against the possibility
that he will be forced into taking an undesirably large one-sided position.

Technical Factors
The role of technical factors in exchange rates has long been disputed. The
Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) argues that asset prices necessarily
reflect all available public information and adjust instantaneously to changes
in such information. As a result, adherents to this theory hold that asset prices
move randomly and that past prices provide no indication of future prices.
Technical analysts, on the other hand, counter that prices move in trends, that
the present mimics the past, and that (as a direct consequence of efficient
markets theory) fundamental analysis must necessarily also be of dubious
value. (In Chapter 4, I will explore the plausibility of technical analysis in
greater detail, but for now, let’s accept that there is indeed evidence of
detectable patterns in prices. Whether it is possible to profit from them is
certainly a different story, but suffice it to say that these patterns really do
exist.)
In fact, prices certainly appear to trade in trends, which seem to unify
otherwise random, back-and-forth spikes. Sometimes these trends are upward
or downward, while other times they are flat. Of course, a currency rate will
rarely move linearly; instead, it will move in a direction that is generally
identifiable, but then deviate from that direction frequently. In order for the
trend to be maintained, the price must revert back toward the mean from
time to time in order to eliminate opportunities for arbitrage. It often appears
that that every time there is a strong deviation in the price of a given
currency, traders quickly jump in and nudge that currency back toward the
trend line. For example, the Japanese yen appeared to move in a very clear,
upward trend against the dollar in the months leading up to the 2011
earthquake. Every time the yen deviated substantially from this trend line, it
appeared to run into support or resistance (indicated by the upper and lower
bounding lines in Figure 3-13) and quickly resumed its original path. This

77

78

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
trend was so strong that it remained perfectly intact following the twin
disruptions of an earthquake and a massive central bank intervention!

Figure 3-13. USD/JPY: Establishment of trend, disruption, and post-earthquake resumption

Economists have conjectured that these trends are caused by confirmation
bias, which refers to traders’ tendency to both overestimate the accuracy of
their models and to actively seek information from the market that justifies
their continued use of these models. In this way, trends can become selffulfilling, as they are spotted by technical analysts and then traded to
exhaustion. It is only when the actual rate becomes severely out of kilter with
the rate justified by economic fundamentals that a major price correction will
take place. In fact, economists have shown that this phenomenon can spur
both momentum in trend continuation and equally strong reversals. The fact
that central banks and their billion-dollar intervention chests are powerless to
break such trends is a testament to the strength of confirmation bias.
Market microstructure analysis might be able to shed additional light on
patterned fluctuations in forex prices, which appear to take place irrespective
of changes in underlying fundamentals. Trends, for example, might be a
result of feedback loops between broker-dealers and their customers. A
customer may initiate buying, to which a broker-dealer might respond by
raising his ask price, which in turn might generate more buying in
anticipation of even higher prices, and so on. A large deviation from the
underlying trend signifies that broker-dealers have aggregately developed a
large one-sided position. Consequently, broker-dealers may adjust their
prices to encourage orders in the opposite direction, and the deviation should
correct itself.
Returning to support and resistance, it is not difficult to understand why such
levels would exist and why they can be predicted with some degree of

Forex for Beginners
accuracy. Perhaps it’s because such levels tend to take place at round
numbers—the rounder the better! In the case of the USD/JPY, 78.5 might be
a major price point, 79 would be more important, and 80 would be the most
important! That’s because humans tend to think in terms of round numbers
and develop their forecasts accordingly. After all, who would bother
predicting that the yen will hit a wall at the precise level of USD/JPY
79.4387? Just like trend lines, these support and resistance levels can become
self-fulfilling and explain some of the short-term fluctuations in (forex)
markets.

Politics and Government
History has shown a positive correlation between political stability and
currency stability, but since most major currencies tend to have stable
governments, this relationship is usually taken for granted. When it comes to
emerging economies, however, don’t forget that every sudden regime
change, violent protest, and period of political instability can result in an
exodus of investors and capital flight. For example, when massive protests
erupted in Egypt in early 2011, the Egyptian pound spiked downward on
multiple occasions, as did the Egyptian asset markets (Figure 3-14).

Figure 3-14. Impact of political instability on USD/EGP rate

Of course, most political developments tend to be mundane. Elections may
bring changes in economic, fiscal, and tax policy. A newly elected politician
might be more of a protectionist than his predecessor. A conservative might
promise to cut spending. When the US Congress temporarily refused to raise
the federal debt ceiling in July 2011—a development that could have
potentially caused the United States to default on its sovereign debt

79

80

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
obligations—the currency markets preemptively sold the dollar. As soon as
the ceiling was raised, however, the dollar quickly recovered (Figure 3-15).

Figure 3-15. Impact of “US Debt Standoff” on (trade-weighted) US dollar

On a related note, the currency markets take fiscal policy very seriously.
Shifting political winds can bring deficit spending and an increase in debt. In
accordance with portfolio balancing theory, this increase in supply will result
in a depreciating currency, all else being equal. The ongoing Eurozone fiscal
crisis has illustrated this phenomenon perfectly, as reflected in the EUR/USD
chart shown in Figure 3-16.

Figure 3-16. Reflection of Eurozone fiscal crisis in EUR/USD

At the end of 2009, for example, as financial markets were moving past the
credit crisis, Ireland’s sovereign credit rating was downgraded. All of a
sudden, attention shifted to the burgeoning debt in Greece. Due to economic
decline and continuing budget deficits, it looked as if a full-blown Eurozone
crisis had arrived. Bailouts were hastily assembled, the Greek government
promised “austerity” in spending, and the euro stabilized. Before long,
however, investors began scrutinizing Spain and Portugal—which were

4

Forex for Beginners
suffering from similar problems—and credit downgrades and rising credit
default swap rates followed. The European Central Bank moved in to
stabilize the situation, providing liquidity and conducting stress tests on
banks, and the euro once again recovered. The very fact that these stress tests
were needed, however, unnerved investors as it signaled that the fiscal crisis
was erupting into a full-blown financial crisis. After all, a default on the
PIGS’ sovereign debt obligations would cripple the European banks that had
lent heavily to them during the boom years. More bailouts followed, and the
European Central Bank announced a surprise hike in interest rates, which
reassured investors and precipitated a rally behind the euro.
The crisis again took a turn for the worse at the end of 2011, as Greek
austerity plans had started to backfire and plans to further expand the bailout
fund were met with resistance. Going forward, it’s difficult to predict what
will happen, but at the very least, you can be sure that any and all economic
developments will be reflected in the currency markets.
