
(Continued )

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

362

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

This paper is one of many that conﬁrm the reality of intuition, but these results are
particularly interesting because they suggest a fairly mundane explanation for the phenomenon. Intuition is not some mystical skill that only supertraders have; it is a retooling
and reapplication of normal human abilities built from our social interactions. However,
the most important point is that intuition is not special. Even inexperienced, uninformed
traders quickly begin to develop intuition about market patterns (a fact that has been
conﬁrmed in many other experiments.) If everyone has it, intuition cannot, in itself, be a
source of a trading edge.

Using Intuition
A discretionary trader is someone who trades based on a strong understanding of the
fundamental principles of price behavior. Many outsiders and developing traders assume
that discretionary traders rely on a nearly supernatural sense of what will happen next.
In general, this is not true, as most discretionary trades are placed according to more or
less clearly defined rules. Good discretionary traders have a passion for understanding
how the market really works and for what drives unfolding price movements, and they
are also willing to let go of preconceptions and theories immediately if they are disproven
by the market. All good discretionary traders are statistics junkies, whether they know
it or not. Some are attracted to hard-core statistical methods, but many others spend
hours studying charts and keeping records and journals of market behavior. What are
they doing if not internalizing the patterns of the market? I would suggest that a rigid
analytical framework has the advantage of objectivity and scope, but dedicated traders
can accomplish many of the same goals with charts, records of their own trades, and
pencil and paper.
Even though much can be quantified, most traders will experience periods of knowing that go beyond the statistics. Sometimes there is a strong gut feeling or emotional
reaction associated with a pattern; maybe, for instance, you are considering a trade in
three markets and one objectively is less attractive on the chart, but you keep coming
back to it for some reason you cannot define. It is also common to experience intuition
on a longer time frame. Maybe you have a trade that is working well, but you find yourself thinking about it when the market is closed and you are unduly concerned. In each
of these cases, this could well be a message from some part of your mind beyond your
conscious grasp. It takes an enormous amount of emotional balance and experience to
separate the real messages from the noise; this is one reason why the learning curve for
traders is measured in years and not months. New traders simply have too much emotion
and too many conflicts to be responsive to the still small voice of intuition or to separate
it from their rampant fear and greed.

Trusting Intuition
In general, the most important questions about intuition concern how to balance intuition
against reason. There is no simple answer to this; the answer will be different for a trader

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

The Trader’s Mind

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

363

at different points in her development, for different markets and market environments,
and perhaps even for different kinds of trades. In addition, many traders find it constructive to weight intuition more heavily when considering exits from existing trades rather
than entries into new trades. The reason is that most discretionary traders find it easier
to read a market when there is a position and fluctuating P&L involved. These factors
tend to be powerful cues for intuition, but it is also important to guard against emotional
distortions due to fear and greed.
The interplay of emotion and intuition is poorly understood. Intuition often communicates its message through sensations in the body, which is why it is often described
as a gut feeling. It is ineffable and ephemeral, and it operates on the margin between
thought and feeling. The problem is that emotions essentially communicate on this same
channel, and emotions can cloud and distort the message of intuition. It is difficult or
impossible for an emotional trader to respond to intuition, which is one reason why new
traders should actively ignore any intuitive sense and should instead focus on building a
rational analytical framework based on the inherent statistical properties of the market.
Once the emotional charge is gone from the trading process, intuition will become more
trustworthy, and this will probably also come at a time when the trader has finally been
exposed to enough market patterns to have begun to develop some valid intuition.
For most developing traders, the most important points to remember are as follows:
Intuition is real, but it is not special. Everyone who has interactions with the market
quickly develops some degree of intuition, so the presence of intuition is not a trading
edge. There are far more people who have intuitions about the market’s movements than
there are profitable traders. Also, realize that intuition relies heavily on heuristics, so
it is absolutely critical that it be trained correctly. Last, realize that it will often not be
possible to walk through logical steps that fully explain your intuitive conclusions. In
fact, intuition will be at odds with logic and reason at times, creating a dissonance that
the trader will have to resolve. Intuition is fallible and will sometimes be wrong, so it is
critical that all intuitive impressions are subject to rational review and evaluation.

Numbers to Leave Numbers
Josh Waitzkin (2008) uses the phrase “numbers to leave numbers” or “form to leave form”
to describe his experiences building mastery in both chess and the Chinese martial art
taijiquan. In both disciplines, students typically spend many years studying fundamentals and basics, focusing on the building blocks of mastery. The chess student may begin
by studying endgames where there are only three pieces on the board, and eventually
progress to memorizing full games of grandmasters. The novice martial artist spends a
lot of time learning to do basic things like standing and shifting weight from one foot to
the other.
The journey from fundamentals to mastery is a long one—true mastery does not
come until many hours of work have been put in for many years and until fundamentals
have been assimilated on an unconscious level. Students may show aptitude early on,
but it takes a long time and a lot of hard work in the right environment for even the most
talented students to reach their full potential. At the end of this work, intuition grows as a

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

364

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

natural result of everything the trader has done to understand the market. All statistical
and quantitative studies, every experience in every trade, and every contemplation of
market action are folded into a holistic understanding that is true market intuition.

FLOW
Have you ever been so completely engrossed in an activity that you become lost in it?
Maybe you had no sense of time and hours seemed like minutes—you forgot what you
were doing, and even the normal, scattered wandering of your mind stopped and you
were completely focused on the task at hand. Chances are, whatever you were doing,
you did well, even though you might not have been able to explain exactly how you did
it. This state of flow is a common thread in elite performance, regardless of the context
or the field: the professional athlete who sees the whole field at a glance and effortlessly
seems to be at the right place at the right time, the professional musician playing an hourlong concerto from memory with effortless perfection, the line cook in a busy kitchen
balancing completion of a dozen dishes at a time for hours on end, the video gamer sitting
in front of his screen, or the religious mystic sitting on a wooden floor praying for days on
end—these experiences are united by a common state of mind. Mihály Csı́kszentmihályi
(1997) was the first psychologist to seriously investigate this state, though it has certainly
been a part of the human experience for millennia. He has identified a few commonalities
to the flow experience:

r We are completely focused and completely absorbed in what we are doing.
r There is a sense of great inner clarity.
r The task must have clearly defined goals, so we know what must be done and how
much progress we are making toward accomplishing those goals. Feedback is immediate and direct, so that our activity can be readily adjusted to match the task.
r Though the flow experience is connected to complex tasks, we know that our skills
are adequate—we are up to the task. There is a sense of easy self-confidence, sufficiency, and no worries.
r There is a loss of our sense of self. We may perceive ourselves becoming one with
the task, or even lose sense of the boundaries where our consciousness ends.
r We lose sense of time, and, in some cases, have a feeling of standing outside of time.
This, together with the loss of self, sometimes is described as an expansion of consciousness.
r It feels great. Actually, that is a dramatic understatement. Many people report the
flow experience as being one of sheer ecstasy. There is an ineffability to the state;
many times we are simply unable to find words to convey the experience and it defies
all explanation.
r Because of this, activities that produce flow become their own intrinsic motivation.
We are driven to excel in these activities simply to achieve the state of flow—flow
becomes its own reward.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Mind

365

How to Get There
In the flow state, we are supremely competent. Someone observing our performance
would remark that we make a complex task appear effortless and easy; this, in fact, is
one of the attributes of true mastery in many disciplines. Elite performers do their best
work in the flow state, so it is worth our time to consider the nature of this state, how
to get there, and how to guard against events that could jeopardize the flow experience.
To this end, Csı́kszentmihályi, Abuhamdeh, and Nakamura (2005) identified three key
conditions that must exist before flow is possible. (I have added a fourth condition based
on my own experience.) The presence of these conditions does not guarantee that flow
will be achieved, but, without them, it is not possible.
1. The activity must have clearly defined objectives and goals.
2. The task must offer clear and immediate feedback.
3. The performer must have confidence that his or her skills are matched to the task.
4. The experience rests on a set of foundational skills that are assimilated below the

level of conscious thought.
Performance in any complex task contains a great degree of variation, even though
this may not be apparent to an outside observer. For the athlete, changing humidity,
lighting, or other environmental conditions will play a part in performance. An artist may
encounter materials that have slightly different properties due to temperature or composition. Peak performance does not proceed in an unerringly straight line; there is no
perfection, even though it may appear so to the outside observer. Constant and subtle
adjustments have to be made. Good performers in the flow state make these adjustments
easily and naturally—this is possible only because the task offers a constant stream
of feedback.
Outside stress can jeopardize the flow experience. Performers in the flow state must
be confident that they can handle whatever challenges the experience will throw their
way. Figure 11.1 shows a chart adapted from Csı́kszentmihályi’s Finding Flow (1997)
that considers performers’ state of mind at the intersection of their skills and the challenges of the task. In the lower left quadrant, skills and demands are low, and the performer simply does not care about the task. This is the plight of an office worker who
might describe the job as trivial and meaningless. If challenges increase without a commensurate increase in skills and abilities (moving along the vertical axis of the chart), the
performers’ stress increases as they realize that they are facing a task for which they are
ill-suited, and that, at some point, they will be unable to accomplish it. If skills increase
far beyond the challenges present, results may suffer as the performer could actually
be too relaxed and comfortable. Interesting things start to happen when extremely high
challenges are met with correspondingly high skills; it is here that the performer starts
to have the potential to slip into the flow experience.
In my experience, peak performance, the kind of performance that facilitates flow,
rests on a strong foundation of completely assimilated skills. The artist has held a brush

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

366

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

High
FLOW

Boredom

Relaxation

CHALLENGES

Anxiety

Low

SKILLS

High

FIGURE 11.1 Csı́kszentmihályi’s Performer State as a Function of Challenges and Skills
Source: Adapted from Mihály Csı́kszentmihályi, Finding Flow (New York: HarperCollins, 1997).

tens of thousands of times and understands the complexities of paper, paint, and moisture; he has mastered brushstrokes and color to the point where they are tools that he can
draw upon without conscious thought. The master musician has assimilated the technical requirements of her instrument through tens of thousands of practice sessions spread
over many years. The expert rock climber seems to have a sixth sense, drawing on a deep
understanding of torque, kinesthetics, and the properties of different types of rock that
comes only from long experience. The trader has seen enough market action and has
done enough statistical studies to know what usually happens when a market closes very
strongly three days in a row, with a wider range the third day. There is nothing remarkable about any of these skills taken individually, but their deep assimilation into a whole
that seems to be greater than the sum of the parts is one of the hallmarks of mastery.
Figure 11.1 also shows why the flow experience can act as a powerful guide for learning and skill development. Being in the flow state is highly desirable; it feels good and we
perform well in this state. Being in that space becomes its own intrinsic motivation and
we will naturally do whatever is necessary to return to the flow state when we are pushed
out of it. Imagine that you are in the area of the graph where your high skills are meeting
moderately high challenges, but not sufficient challenges to fully absorb your attention.
In this case, the performer can get back to the flow state by adding challenges and increasing the complexity of the task. Similarly, if the performer is in the space where high
challenges are met by skills that might not quite be up to the task, increasing the level of
those skills will move the performer back into the potential flow zone. It takes energy,
attention, and focus to achieve this flow state, but its presence can be a powerful clue
that the performer is in an optimal state to learn, to grow, and to develop new skills.

The Role of Attention and Focus
In the normal world, our minds are usually scattered. It is not unusual to be doing a task
and to be thinking about several other things; in fact, multitasking is considered an asset

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

The Trader’s Mind

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

367

in many professions. The problem is that we have only so much mental bandwidth, and
it is hard to draw a line between multitasking and being distracted. There is the risk that
when we focus on many things at the same time we will do many things, but do nothing
well. Part of the beauty of flow is that we are completely focused when in this state. In
fact, one of the mechanisms that have been proposed to explain the flow state is that
it occurs when all available cognitive capacity is focused on one single point, a most
unusual state of mind in our daily lives.
This state is not unfamiliar to meditators and religious aspirants. Many of the world’s
religions include a practice of repeating a mantra, a short phrase or prayer, over and over
until it completely fills the field of awareness and much of the conscious mind shuts off.
Mystics have reported that this is one route to achieving enlightenment and that a sense
of religious ecstasy often accompanies this practice after many hours or days of this kind
of focus. In the East, elaborate mandalas were created as aids to meditation. By focusing
visual attention on one part of the image, the meditator was again able to enter into
a state of higher consciousness. In yet another example, many meditative techniques
revolve around ideas like focusing attention on a part of the body or on the breath as
it goes in and out of the body; again, this is designed to achieve a single-point focus
of attention.
One of the prerequisites for achieving flow is absence of distraction and complete
focus on the task at hand. Whether this is evening chart review or screen time during the
day, structure your environment to minimize distractions. Turn off the television, avoid
Internet chats, do not check e-mail, and sequester yourself physically. It is important to
do all of this with the right mind-set. Flow cannot be forced. You cannot try harder and
work competitively to achieve the flow state. In fact, it flourishes in an almost playful
environment of open-minded wonder, so it is not by chance that this is also the environment that is most conducive to learning and skill development. When we are in the state
of flow, we are at our best, and our trading becomes something greater than the sum of
the individual skills and parts.

PRACTICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Much has been written, here and elsewhere, about the psychological issues traders face
and the right mind-set with which to approach trading problems. This is a complex subject because traders at different stages in their development will have significantly different challenges and needs. Different personalities will deal with the stresses of trading in
significantly different ways, so solutions that might have relevance for one trader might
fall well short for another—it is dangerous to make sweeping generalizations.
Psychological work is no substitute for actually having an edge, and proper psychology is not an edge in itself. No matter how hard you try, how much you focus, or how
much you practice, you are not going to be able to flip a fair coin and make it come up
heads more than about half the time, which is essentially what many new traders do.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

368

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

Many new traders are trading methods and ideas in the market that do not have an edge
and, rather than rectifying the real problem, they focus on the performance insights of
trading psychology. Much of the time new traders spend on psychology would be better
spent understanding the true nature of the market’s movements.
For developing traders though, the situation is different. Once you have a method
that has an edge in the market, it is impossible to apply that edge without having the
proper mind-set and attitude. Traders find themselves making many strange mistakes
that compromise their results, and these are often due to psychological issues. Dealing
with the psychological stresses of trading is one of the core skills of competent discretionary trading, and it is something that requires ongoing maintenance throughout a career. No one is ever immune to psychologically driven errors. For more experienced and
developing traders, it does make sense to focus on this area, perhaps even seeking the
help of a qualified professional in the field.
Most of the suggestions that follow are for the self-directed trader working alone or
in a team and, ideally, with a mentor. For institutional traders, portfolio managers, and
quantitative system designers, your situation may be different. You will still be inclined
to make these same errors, but the constraints of your job or the institutional framework
may define your role well enough that your behavior is restricted. You may still find
insight in understanding the issues self-directed traders face, because these reflect the
psychology of the market and price movements at important inflection points.

Develop an Approach That Fits Your Personality
Who are you? It has been said that if you don’t know the answer to this question, the
markets are an expensive place to find out. This is true, and many millions of dollars
and years of people’s lives have been wasted because they were trying to trade methods
or markets that were a poor fit for their psychological makeup. One of the secrets to
managing yourself psychologically is to pick a trading style that plays to your strengths.
So, once again, who are you? Some people make decisions intuitively and quickly, while
others tend to prefer long debate and a careful weighing of all relevant factors. Some
traders are naturally inclined to be more aggressive and active, while others prefer a
more sedate pace. Some developing traders have serious constraints on their time and
are not able to monitor markets intraday, whereas others can sit at the screen every
minute the market is open. Some traders may have backgrounds and experiences that
make certain markets more interesting or attractive to them. For instance, a trader who
grew up on a farm will probably have natural inclinations toward agricultural markets
that might be alien to a trader with a strong background in accounting and corporate
finance. Every piece of their trading methodology and trading plan must be shaped by
who the trader is.
Choose a Market The choice of which markets to study and trade is an important
one. Many retail traders are drawn to foreign exchange, but this is probably because
of the extremely low account balances required to open a forex account. This is also
