
- 197 -

John Grisham

The Broker

on assassination prohibited the killing of family members unless said
members were also involved in threats to Israeli security.
But the idea was still debated, with Amos being its most vocal proponent.
They wanted Backman dead, but they also wanted him to live a few hours
before passing on. They needed to chat with him, to ask some questions, and
if the answers weren't forthcoming they knew how to make him talk.
Everyone talked when the Mossad really wanted answers.
"We have found six agents who speak Italian," Efraim said. "Two will be
here this afternoon at three, for a meeting." None of the four spoke Italian,
but all spoke perfect English, as well as Arabic. Among them there were
eight other languages.
Each of the four had combat experience, extensive computer training, and
were skilled at crossing borders (with and without paperwork), interrogation,
disguises, and forgery. And they had the ability to kill in cold blood with no
regrets. The average age was thirty-four, and each had been involved with at
least five successful kidon assassinations.
When fully operational, their kidon would have twelve members. Four
would carry out the actual killing, and the other eight would provide cover,
surveillance, and tactical support, and would clean up after the hit.
"Do we have an address?" Amos asked from the computer.
"No, not yet," said Efraim. "And I'm not sure we'll get one. This is coming
through counterintelligence."
"There are half a million people in Bologna," Amos said almost to himself.
"Four hundred thousand," said Shaul. "And a hundred thousand of those are
students."
"We're supposed to get a picture of him," Efraim said, and the other three
stopped what they were doing and looked up. "There's a photo of Backman
somewhere, one taken recently, after prison. Getting a copy is a possibility."
"That would certainly be helpful," Rafi said.
They had a hundred old photos of Joel Backman. They had studied every
square centimeter of his face, every wrinkle, every vein in his eyes, every
strand of hair on his head. They had counted his teeth,

- 198 -

John Grisham

The Broker

and they had copies of his dental records. Their specialists across town at the
headquarters of Israel's Central Institute for Intelligence and Special Duties,
better known as Mossad, had prepared excellent computer images of what
Backman would look like now, six years after the world last saw him. There
was a series of digital projections of Backman's face at a hefty 240 pounds,
his weight when he pled guilty. And another series of Backman at 180, his
rumored weight now. They had worked with his hair, leaving it natural, and
predicting its color for a fifty-two-year-old man. They colored it black and
red and brown. They cut it and left it longer. They put a dozen different pairs
of glasses on his face, then added a beard, first a dark one, then a gray one.
It all came back to the eyes. Study the eyes.
Though Efraim was the leader of the unit, Amos had seniority. He had been
assigned to Backman in 1998 when the Mossad first heard rumors of the
JAM software that was being shopped around by a powerful Washington
lobbyist. Working through their ambassador in Washington, the Israelis
pursued the purchase of JAM, thought they had a deal, but were stiff-armed
when Backman and Jacy Hubbard took their goods elsewhere.
The selling price was never made known. The deal was never consummated.
Some money changed hands, but Backman, for some reason, did not deliver
the product.
Where was it now? Had it ever existed in the first place?
Only Backman knew.
The six-year hiatus in the hunt for Joel Backman had given Amos ample
time to fill in some gaps. He believed, as did his superiors, that the so-called
Neptune satellite system was a Red Chinese creation; that the Chinese had
spent a hefty chunk of their national treasury in building it; that they had
stolen valuable technology from the Americans to do so; that they had
brilliantly disguised the launching of the system and fooled US., Russian,
and Israeli satellites; and that they had been unable to reprogram the system
to override the software JAM had uploaded. Neptune was useless without
JAM, and the Chinese would give up their Great Wall to get their hands on it
and Backman.
Amos, and Mossad, also believed that Farooq Khan, the last surviving
member of the trio and the principal author of the software, had

- 199 -

John Grisham

The Broker

been tracked down by the Chinese and murdered eight months ago. Mossad
was on his trail when he disappeared.
They also believed the Americans were still not sure who built Neptune, and
this intelligence failure was an ongoing, almost permanent embarrassment.
American satellites had dominated the skies for forty years and were so
effective they could see through clouds, spot a machine gun under a tent,
intercept a wire transfer from a drug dealer, eavesdrop on a conversation in a
building, and find oil under the desert with infrared imagery. They were
vastly superior to anything the Russians had put up. For another system of
equal or better technology to be designed, built, launched, and to become
operational without the knowledge of the CIA and the Pentagon had been
unthinkable.
Israeli satellites were very good, but not as good as the Americans'. Now it
appeared to the intelligence world that Neptune was more advanced than
anything the United States had ever launched.
These were only assumptions; little had been confirmed. The only copy of
JAM had been hidden. Its creators were dead.
Amos had lived the case for almost seven years, and he was thrilled to have
a new kidon in place and was urgently making plans. Time was very short.
The Chinese would blow up half of Italy if they thought Backman would end
up in the rubble. The Americans might try and get him too. On their soil he
was protected by their Constitution, with its layers of safeguards. The laws
required that he be treated fairly then tucked away in prison and protected
around the clock. But on the other side of the world he was fair game.
Kidon had been used to neutralize a few wayward Israelis, but never at
home. The Americans would do the same.
Neal Backman kept his new, very thin laptop in the same old battered
briefcase he hauled home every night. Lisa had not noticed it because he
never took it out. He kept it close, always within a step or two.
He changed his morning routine slightly. He'd bought a card from Jerry his
Java, a fledgling coffee and doughnut chain that was trying to lure customers
with fancy coffee and free newspapers, magazines, and wireless Internet
access. The franchise had converted an abandoned drive-through taco hut at
the edge of town, jazzed it up

- 200 -

John Grisham

The Broker

with funky decor, and in its first two months was doing a booming business.
There were three cars in front of him at the drive-through window. His
laptop was on his knees, just under the steering wheel. At the curb, he
ordered a double mocha, no whipped cream, and waited for the cars in front
to inch forward. He pecked away with both hands as he waited. Once online,
he quickly went to KwyteMail. He typed in his user name-Grinchl23-then
his pass phrase-post hoc ergo propter hoc. Seconds later there it was-the first
message from his father.
Neal held his breath as he read, then exhaled mightily and eased forward in
line. It worked! The old man had figured it out!
Quickly, he typed:
Marco: Our messages cannot be traced. You can say anything you want, but
it's always best to say as little as possible. Delighted you're there and out
ofRudley. I'll go online each day at this time-at precisely 7:50 a.m. EST.
Gotta run. Grinch
He placed the laptop in the passenger seat, lowered his window, and paid
almost four bucks for a cup of coffee. As he pulled away, he kept glancing at
the computer to see how long the access signal would last. He turned onto
the street, drove no more than two hundred feet, and the signal was gone.
Last November, after Arthur Morgan's astounding defeat, Teddy Maynard
began devising his Backman pardon strategy. With his customary
meticulous planning, he prepared for the day when moles would leak the
word of Backmans whereabouts.To tip the Chinese, and do so in a manner
that would not arouse suspicion, Teddy began looking for the perfect snitch.
Her name was Helen Wang, a fifth-generation Chinese American who'd
worked for eight years at Langley as an analyst on Asian issues. She was
very smart, very attractive, and spoke passable Mandarin Chinese. Teddy got
her a temporary assignment at the State Department, and there she began
cultivating contacts with diplomats from

- 201 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Red China, some of whom were spies themselves and most of whom were
constantly on the prowl for new agents.
The Chinese were notorious for their aggressive tactics in recruiting spies.
Each year 25,000 of their students were enrolled in American universities,
and the secret police tracked them all. Chinese businessmen were expected
to cooperate with central intelligence when they returned home. The
thousands of American companies doing business on the mainland were
constantly monitored. Their executives were researched and watched. The
good prospects were sometimes approached.
When Helen Wang 'accidentally" let it slip that her background included a
few years at the CIA, and that she hoped to return soon, she quickly had the
attention of intelligence chiefs in Beijing. She accepted an invitation from a
new friend to have lunch at a swanky D.C. restaurant, then dinner. She
played her role beautifully, always reticent about their overtures but always
reluctantly saying yes. Her detailed memos were hand delivered to Teddy
after every encounter.
When Backman was suddenly freed from prison, and it became apparent
he'd been stashed away and would not surface, the Chinese put tremendous
pressure on Helen Wang. They offered her $100,000 for information about
his location. She appeared to be frightened by the offer, and for a few days
broke off contact. With perfect timing, Teddy got her assignment at State
canceled and called her back to Langley For two weeks she had nothing to
do with her old friends undercover at the Chinese embassy.
Then she called them and the payoff soon climbed to $500,000. Helen
turned nasty and demanded II million, claiming that she was risking her
career and her freedom and it was certainly worth more money than that.
The Chinese agreed.
The day after Teddy was fired, she called her handler and requested a secret
meeting. She gave him a sheet of paper with wiring instructions to a bank
account in Panama, one that was secretly owned by the CIA. When the
money was received, she said, they would meet again and she would have
the location of Joel Backman. She would also give them a recent photo of
Joel Backman.
The drop was a "brush by," an actual physical meeting between mole and
handler, done in such a way that no one would notice anything unusual.
After work, Helen Wang stopped at a Kroger store in

- 202 -

John Grisham

The Broker

John u^u
Bethesda. She walked to the end of aisle twelve, where the magazines and
paperbacks were displayed. Her handler was loitering at the rack with a copy
of Lacrosse Magazine. Helen picked up another copy of the same magazine
and quickly slid an envelope into it. She flipped pages with passable
boredom, then put the magazine back on the rack. Her handler was shuffling
through the sports weeklies. Helen wandered away, but only after she saw
him take her copy of Lacrosse Magazine.
For a change, the cloak-and-dagger routine wasn't needed. Helens friends at
the CIA weren't watching because they had arranged the drop. They'd known
her handler for many years.
The envelope contained one sheet of paper-an eight-by-ten color xerox
photo of Joel Backman as he was apparently walking down the street. He
was much thinner, had the beginnings of a grayish goatee, European-style
eyeglasses, and was dressed like a local. Handwritten at the bottom of the
page was: Joel Backman, Via Fondazza, Bologna, Italy. The handler gawked
at it as he sat in his car, then he sped away to the embassy of the People his
Republic of China on Wisconsin Avenue NW in Washington.
At first the Russians seemed to have no interest in the whereabouts of Joel
Backman. Their signals were read a variety of ways at Langley. No early
conclusions were made, none were possible. For years the Russians had
secretly maintained that the so-called Neptune system was one of their own,
and this had contributed mightily to the
confusion at the CIA.
Much to the surprise of the intelligence world, Russia was managing to keep
aloft about 160 reconnaissance satellites a year, roughly the same number as
the former Soviet Union. Its robust presence in space had not diminished,
contrary to what the Pentagon and the CIA
had predicted.
In 1999, a defector from the GRU, the Russian military's intelligence arm
and successor to the KGB, informed the CIA that Neptune was not the
property of the Russians. They had been caught off guard as badly as the
Americans. Suspicion was focused on the Red Chinese, who were far behind
in the satellite game.
Or were they?
The Russians wanted to know about Neptune, but they were not

- 203 -

John Grisham

The Broker

willing to pay for information about Backman. When the overtures from
Langley were largely ignored, the same color photo sold to the Chinese was
anonymously e-mailed to four Russian intelligence chiefs operating under
diplomatic cover in Europe.
The leak to the Saudis was handled through an executive of an American oil
company stationed in Riyadh. His name was Taggett and he'd lived there for
more than twenty years. He was fluent in Arabic and moved in the social
circles as easily as any foreigner. He was especially close to a mid-level
bureaucrat in the Saudi Foreign Ministry office, and over late-afternoon tea
he told him that his company had once been represented by Joel Backman.
Further, and much more important, Taggett claimed to know where
Backman was hiding.
Five hours later, Taggett was awakened by a buzzing doorbell. Three young
gentlemen in business suits pushed their way into his apartment and
demanded a few moments of his time. They apologized, explained that they
were with some branch of the Saudi police, and really needed to talk. When
pressed, Taggett reluctantly passed on the information he had been coached
to disclose.
Joel Backman was hiding in Bologna, Italy, under a different name. That
was all he knew.
Could he find out more? they asked.
Perhaps.
They asked him if he would leave the next morning, return to his company's
headquarters in New York, and dig for more information about Backman. It
was very important to the Saudi government and the royal family.
Taggett agreed to do so. Anything for the king.

- 204 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Every year in May, just before Ascension Day, the people of
Bologna march up the Colle della Guardia from the Saragozza gate, along
the longest continuous arcade in the world, through all 666 arches and past
all fifteen chapels, to the summit, to the Santuario di San Luca. In the
sanctuary they remove their Madonna and proceed back down to the city,
where they parade her through the crowded streets and finally place her in
the Cathedral of San Pietro, where she stays for eight days until another
parade takes her home. It's a festival unique to Bologna, and has gone on
uninterrupted since 1476.
As Francesca and Joel sat in the Santuario di San Luca, Francesca was
describing the ritual and how much it meant to the people of Bologna.
Pretty, but just another empty church as far as Marco was concerned.
They had taken the bus this time, thus avoiding the 666 arches and the 3.6kilometer hike up the hill. His calves still hurt from the last visit to San
Luca, three days ago.
She was so distracted by weightier matters that she was lapsing into English
and didn't seem to realize it. He did not complain. When she finished with
the festival, she began pointing to the interesting elements in the cathedralthe architecture and construction of the

- 205 -

John Grisham

The Broker

dome, the painting of the frescoes. Marco was fighting desperately to pay
attention. The domes and faded frescoes and marble crypts and dead saints
were all running together now in Bologna, and he caught himself thinking of
warmer weather. Then they could stay outdoors and talk. They could visit
the city's lovely parks and if she so much as mentioned a cathedral he would
revolt.
She wasn't thinking of warmer weather. Her thoughts were elsewhere.
"You've already done that one," he interrupted when she pointed at a
painting above the baptistery.
"I'm sorry. Am I boring you?"
He started to blurt out the truth, but instead said, "No, but I've seen enough."
They left the sanctuary and sneaked around behind the church, to her secret
pathway that led down a few steps to the best view of the city. The last snow
was melting quickly on the red tiled roofs. It was the eighteenth of March.
She lit a cigarette and seemed content to loiter in silence and admire
Bologna. "Do you like my city?" she asked, finally.
"Yes, very much.1'
"What do you like about it?"
After six years in prison, any city would do. He thought for a moment, then
said, "It's a real city, with people living where they work. It's safe and clean,
timeless. Things haven't changed much over the centuries. The people enjoy
their history and they're proud of their accomplishments."
She nodded slightly, approving of his analysis. "I'm baffled by Americans,"
she said. "When I guide them through Bologna they're always in a hurry,
always anxious to see one sight so they can cross it off the list and move on
to the next. They're always asking about tomorrow, and the next day. Why is
this?"
"I'm the wrong person to ask."
"Why?"
"I'm Canadian, remember?"
"You're not Canadian."
"No, I'm not. I'm from Washington."
"I've been there. I've never seen so many people racing around,

- 206 -

John Grisham

The Broker

going nowhere. I don't understand the desire for such a hectic life.
Everything has to be so fast-work, food, sex."
"I haven't had sex in six years."
She gave him a look that conveyed many questions. "I really don't want to
talk about that."
"You brought it up."
She puffed on the cigarette as the air cleared. "Why haven't you had sex in
six years?"
"Because I was in prison, in solitary confinement."
She flinched slightly and her spine seemed to straighten. "Did you kill
someone?"
"No, nothing like that. I'm pretty harmless."
Another pause, another puff. "Why are you here?"
"I really don't know."
"How long will you stay?"
"Maybe Luigi can answer that."
"Luigi," she said as if she wanted to spit. She turned and began walking. He
followed along because he was supposed to. "What are you hiding from?"
she asked.
"It's a very, very long story', and you really don't want to know."
"Are you in danger?"
"I think so. I'm not sure how much, but let's just say that I'm afraid to use my
real name and I'm afraid to go home."
"Sounds like danger to me. Where does Luigi fit in?"
"He's protecting me, I think."
"For how long?"
"I really don't know."
"Why don't you simply disappear?"
"That's what I'm doing now. I'm in the middle of my disappearance. And
from here, where would I go? I have no money, no passport, no
identification. I don't officially exist."
"This is very confusing."
"Yes. Why don't we drop it."
He glanced away for a second and did not see her fall. She was wearing
black leather boots with low heels, and the left one twisted violently on a
rock in the narrow pathway. She gasped and fell hard onto the walkway,
bracing herself at the last second with both hands. Her

- 207 -

John Grisham

The Broker

purse flew forward. She shrieked something in Italian. Marco quickly knelt
down to grab her.
"It's my ankle," she said, grimacing. Her eyes were already moist, her pretty
face twisted in pain.
He gently lifted her from the wet pathway and carried her to a nearby bench,
then retrieved her purse. "I must've tripped," she kept saying. "I'm sorry."
She fought the tears but soon gave up.
"It's okay, it's okay," Marco said, kneeling in front of her. "Can I touch it?"
She slowly lifted her left leg, but the pain was too great.
"Let's leave the boot on," Marco said, touching it with great care.
"I think it's broken," she said. She pulled a tissue from her purse and wiped
her eyes. She was breathing heavy and gritting her teeth. "I'm sorry."
"It his okay." Marco looked around; they were very much alone. The bus up
to San Luca had been virtually empty, and they had seen no one in the past
ten minutes. "I'll, uh, go inside and find help."
"Yes, please."
"Don't move. I'll be right back." He patted her knee and she managed a
smile. Then he hustled away, almost falling himself. He ran to the rear of the
church and saw no one. Where, exactly, does one find an office in a
cathedral? Where is the curator, administrator, head priest? Who's in charge
of this place? Outside, he circled San Luca twice before he saw a custodian
emerge from a partially hidden door by the gardens.
"Mi pud aiutare?" he called out. Can you help me?
The custodian stared and said nothing. Marco was certain he had spoken
clearly. He walked closer and said, "La mia arnica si e fatta male." My lady
friend is hurt.
"Dov'e?" the man grunted. Where?
Marco pointed and said, "Li, dietro alia chiesa." Over there, behind the
church.
"Aspetti." Wait. He turned and walked back to the door and opened it.
"Si sbrighi, per favora." Please hurry.
A minute or two dragged by, with Marco waiting nervously, wanting to dash
back and check on Francesca. If she'd broken a bone, then shock might set in
quickly. A larger door below the baptistery

- 208 -

John Grisham

The Broker

opened, and a gentleman in a suit came rushing out with the custodian
behind him.
"La mia arnica e caduta," Marco said. My friend fell.
"Where is she?" asked the gentleman in excellent English. They were cutting
across a small brick patio, dodging unmelted snow.
"Around back, by the lower ledge. It's her ankle; she thinks she broke it. We
might need an ambulance."
Over his shoulder the gentleman snapped something at the custodian, who
disappeared.
Francesca was sitting on the edge of the bench with as much dignity as
possible. She held the tissue at her mouth; the crying had stopped. The
gentleman didn't know her name, but he had obviously seen her before at
San Luca. They chatted in Italian, and Marco missed most of it.
Her left boot was still on, and it was agreed that it should remain so, to
prevent swelling. The gentleman, Mr. Coletta, seemed to know his first aid.
He examined her knees and hands. They were scratched and sore, but there
was no bleeding. "It's just a bad sprain," she said. "I really don't think it's
broken."
"An ambulance will take forever," the gentleman said. "I'll drive you to the
hospital."
A horn honked nearby. The custodian had fetched a car and pulled up as
close as possible.
"I think I can walk," Francesca said gamely, trying to stand.
"No, we'll help you," Marco said. Each grabbed an elbow and slowly raised
her to her feet. She grimaced when she put pressure on the foot, but said, "Its
not broken. Just a sprain." She insisted on walking. They half carried her
toward the car.
Mr. Coletta took charge and arranged them in the backseat so that her feet
were in Marco's lap, elevated, and her back was resting against the left rear
door. When his passengers were properly in place, he jumped behind the
wheel and shifted gears. They crawled in reverse along a shrub-lined alley,
then onto a narrow paved road. Soon, they were moving down the hill,
headed for Bologna.
Francesca put on her sunglasses to cover her eyes. Marco noticed a trickle of
blood on her left knee. He took the tissue from her hand and began to dab it.
"Thank you," she whispered. "I'm sorry I've ruined your day."
