
From the standpoint of technical analysis, the high leverage
factor makes timing in the futures markets much more critical than
it is in stocks. The correct timing of entry and exit points is crucial
in futures trading and much more difficult and frustrating than
market analysis. Largely for this reason, technical trading skills
become indispensable to a successful futures trading program.


14 Chapter 1

Time Frame Is Much Shorter

Because of the high leverage factor and the need for close moni-
toring of market positions, the time horizon of the commodity
trader is much shorter of necessity. Stock market technicians tend
to look more at the longer range picture and talk in time frames
that are beyond the concern of the average commodity trader.
Stock technicians may talk about where the market will be in
three or six months. Futures traders want to know where prices
will be next week, tomorrow, or maybe even later this afternoon.
This has necessitated the refinement of very short term timing
tools. One example is the moving average. The most commonly
watched averages in stocks are 50 and 200 days. In commodities,
most moving averages are under 40 days. A popular moving aver-
age combination in futures, for example, is 4, 9, and 18 days.

Greater Reliance on Timing

Timing is everything in futures trading. Determining the correct
direction of the market only solves a portion of the trading prob-
lem. If the timing of the entry point is off by a day, or sometimes
even minutes, it can mean the difference between a winner or a
loser. It’s bad enough to be on the wrong side of the market and
lose money. Being on the right side of the market and still losing
money is one of the most frustrating and unnerving aspects of
futures trading. It goes without saying that timing is almost pure-
ly technical in nature, because the fundamentals rarely change on
a day-to-day basis.

LESS RELIANCE ON MARKET
AVERAGES AND INDICATORS

Stock market analysis is based heavily on the movement of broad
market averages—such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average or the
S&P 500. In addition, technical indicators that measure the
strength or weakness of the broader market—like the NYSE
advance-decline line or the new highs-new lows list—are heavily
employed. While commodity markets can be tracked using mea-


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 15

sures like the Commodity Research Bureau Futures Price Index,
less emphasis is placed on the broader market approach.
Commodity market analysis concentrates more on individual
market action. That being the case, technical indicators that mea-
sure broader. commodity trends aren’t used much. With only
about 20 or so active commodity markets, there isn’t much need.

Specific Technical Tools

While most of the technical tools originally developed in the
stock market have some application in commodity markets, they
are not used in the exact same way. For example, chart patterns in
futures often tend not to form as fully as they do in stocks.

Futures traders rely more heavily on shorter term indica-
tors that emphasize more precise trading signals. These points of
difference and many others are discussed later in this book.

Finally, there is another area of major difference between
stocks and futures. Technical analysis in stocks relies much more
heavily on the use of sentiment indicators and flow of funds analy-
sis. Sentiment indicators monitor the performance of different
groups such as odd lotters, mutual funds, and floor specialists.
Enormous importance is placed on sentiment indicators that
measure the overall market bullishness and bearishness on the
theory that the majority opinion is usually wrong. Flow of funds
analysis refers to the cash position of different groups, such as
mutual funds or large institutional accounts. The thinking here is
that the larger the cash position, the more funds that are available
for stock purchases.

Technical analysis in the futures markets is a much purer form
of price analysis. While contrary opinion theory is also used to
some extent, much more emphasis is placed on basic trend analy-
sis and the application of traditional technical indicators.

SOME CRITICISMS OF THE
TECHNICAL APPROACH

A few questions generally crop up in any discussion of the tech-
nical approach. One of these concerns is the self-fulfilling prophe-


16 Chapter 7

cy. Another is the question of whether or not past price data can
really be used to forecast future price direction. The critic usually
Says something like: “Charts tell us where the market has been,
but can’t tell us where it is going.” For the moment, we'll put
aside the obvious answer that a chart won’t tell you anything if
you don’t know how to read it. The Random Walk Theory ques-
tions whether prices trend at all and doubts that any forecasting
technique can beat a simple buy and hold strategy. These questions
deserve a response.

The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy

The question of whether there is a self-fulfilling prophecy at work
seems to bother most people because it is raised so often. It is cer-
tainly a valid concern, but of much less importance than most
people realize. Perhaps the best way to address this question is to
quote from a text that discusses some of the disadvantages of
using chart patterns:

a. The use of most chart patterns has been widely publicized in
the last several years. Many traders are quite familiar with
these patterns and often act on them in concert. This creates
a “self-fulfilling prophecy,” as waves of buying or selling are
created in response to “bullish” or “bearish” patterns. . .

b. Chart patterns are almost completely subjective. No study
has yet succeeded in mathematically quantifying any of
them. They are literally in the mind of the beholder...
(Teweles et al.)

These two criticisms contradict one another and the sec-
ond point actually cancels out the first. If chart patterns are “com-
pletely subjective” and “in the mind of the beholder,” then it is
hard to imagine how everyone could see the same thing at the
same time, which is the basis of the self-fulfilling prophecy.
Critics of charting can’t have it both ways. They can’t, on the one
hand, criticize charting for being so objective and obvious that
everyone will act in the same way at the same time (thereby caus-
ing the price pattern to be fulfilled), and then also criticize chart-
ing for being too subjective.


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 17

The truth of the matter is that charting is very subjective.
Chart reading is an art. (Possibly the word “skill” would be more
to the point.) Chart patterns are seldom so clear that even experi-
enced chartists always agree on their interpretation. There is
always an element of doubt and disagreement. As this book
demonstrates, there are many different approaches to technical
analysis that often disagree with one another.

Even if most technicians did agree on a market forecast,
they would not all necessarily enter the market at the same time
and in the same way. Some would try to anticipate the chart sig-
nal and enter the market early. Others would buy the “breakout”
from a given pattern or indicator. Still others would wait for the
pullback after the breakout before taking action. Some traders are
aggressive; others are conservative. Some use stops to enter the
market, while others like to use market orders or resting limit
orders. Some are trading for the long pull, while others are day
trading. Therefore, the possibility of all technicians acting at the
same time and in the same way is actually quite remote.

Even if the self-fulfilling prophecy were of major concern,
it would probably be “self-correcting” in nature. In other words,
traders would rely heavily on charts until their concerted actions
started to affect or distort the markets. Once traders realized this
was happening, they would either stop using the charts or adjust
their trading tactics. For example, they would either try to act
before the crowd or wait longer for greater confirmation. So, even
if the self-fulfilling prophecy did become a problem over the near
term, it would tend to correct itself.

It must be kept in mind that bull and bear markets only
occur and are maintained when they are justified by the law of
supply and demand. Technicians could not possibly cause a major
market move just by the sheer power of their buying and selling.
If this were the case, technicians would all become wealthy very
quickly.

Of much more concern than the chartists is the tremen-
dous growth in the use of computerized technical trading systems
in the futures market. These systems are mainly trend-following
in nature, which means that they are all programmed to identify
and trade major trends. With the growth in professionally man-


18 Chapter 7

aged money in the futures industry, and the proliferation of mul-
timillion-dollar public and private funds, most of which
are using these technical systems, tremendous concentrations of
money are chasing only a handful of existing trends. Because the
universe of futures markets is still quite small, the potential for
these systems distorting short term price action is growing.
However, even in cases where distortions do occur, they are gen-
erally short term in nature and do not cause major moves.

Here again, even the problem of concentrated sums of
money using technical systems is probably self-correcting. If all of
the systems started doing the same thing at the same time, traders
would make adjustments by making their systems either more or
less sensitive.

The self-fulfilling prophecy is generally listed as a criticism
of charting. It might be more appropriate to label it as a compli-
ment. After all, for any forecasting technique to become so popu-
lar that it begins to influence events, it would have to be pretty
good. We can only speculate as to why this concern is seldom
raised regarding the use of fundamental analysis.

Can the Past Be Used to Predict the Future?

Another question often raised concerns the validity of using past
price data to predict the future. It is surprising how often critics of
the technical approach bring up this point because every known
method of forecasting, from weather predicting to fundamental
analysis, is based completely on the study of past data. What
other kind of data is there to work with?

The field of statistics makes a distinction between descrip-
tive statistics and inductive statistics. Descriptive statistics refers to
the graphical presentation of data, such as the price data on a
standard bar chart. Inductive statistics refers to generalizations, pre-
dictions, or extrapolations that are inferred from that data.
Therefore, the price chart itself comes under the heading of the
descriptive, while the analysis technicians perform on that price
data falls into the realm of the inductive.

As one statistical text puts it, “The first step in forecasting
the business or economic future consists, thus, of gathering obser-


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 19

vations from the past.” (Freund and Williams) Chart analysis is
just another form of time series analysis, based on a study of the
past, which is exactly what is done in all forms of time series
analysis. The only type of data anyone has to go on is past data.
We can only estimate the future by projecting past experiences
into that future.

So it seems that the use of past price data to predict the
future in technical analysis is grounded in sound statistical con-
cepts. If anyone were to seriously question this aspect of techni-
cal forecasting, he or she would have to also question the validi-
ty of every other form of forecasting based on historical data,
which includes all economic and fundamental analysis.

RANDOM WALK THEORY

The Random Walk Theory, developed and nurtured in the academ-
ic community, claims that price changes are “serially indepen-
dent” and that price history is not a reliable indicator of future
price direction. In a nutshell, price movement is random and
unpredictable. The theory is based on the efficient market hypothe-
sis, which holds that prices fluctuate randomly about their intrin-
sic value. It also holds that the best market strategy to follow
would be a simple “buy and hold” strategy as opposed to any
attempt to “beat the market.”

While there seems little doubt that a certain amount of
randomness or “noise” does exist in all markets, it’s just unrealis-
tic to believe that all price movement is random. This may be one
of those areas where empirical observation and practical experi-
ence prove more useful than sophisticated statistical techniques,
which seem capable of proving anything the user has in mind or
incapable of disproving anything. It might be useful to keep in
mind that randomness can only be defined in the negative sense
of an inability to uncover systematic patterns in price action. The
fact that many academics have not been able to discover the pres-
ence of these patterns does not prove that they do not exist.

The academic debate as to whether markets trend is of lit-
tle interest to the average market analyst or trader who is forced


20 Chapter 7

to deal in the real world where market trends are clearly visible. If
the reader has any doubts on this point, a casual glance through
any chart book (randomly selected) will demonstrate the presence
of trends in a very graphic way. How do the “random walkers”
explain the persistence of these trends if prices are serially inde-
pendent, meaning that what happened yesterday, or last week,
has no bearing on what may happen today or tomorrow? How do
they explain the profitable “real life” track records of many trend-
following systems?

How, for example, would a buy and hold strategy fare in
the commodity futures markets where timing is so crucial? Would
those long positions be held during bear markets? How would
traders even know the difference between bull and bear markets if
prices are unpredictable and don’t trend? In fact, how could a bear
market even exist in the first place because that would imply a
trend? (See Figure 1.3.)

b2i17/94 (GC1599) Gold,New York Cash 02/26/98

Daily Line Chart

280
ASR AA SS
fe SEs pr Pad TaD Oa SSO

Figure 1.3 A “random walker” would have a tough time convincing a
holder of gold bullion that there’s no real trend on this chart.



Philosophy of Technical Analysis 21

It seems doubtful that statistical evidence will ever totally
prove or disprove the Random Walk Theory. However, the idea
that markets are random is totally rejected by the technical com-
munity. If the markets were truly random, no forecasting tech-
nique would work. Far from disproving the validity of the techni-
cal approach, the efficient market hypothesis is very close to the
technical premise that markets discount everything. The academics,
however, feel that because markets quickly discount all informa-
tion, there’s no way to take advantage of that information. The
basis of technical forecasting, already touched upon, is that
important market information is discounted in the market price
long before it becomes known. Without meaning to, the acade-
mics have very eloquently stated the need for closely monitoring
price action and the futility of trying to profit from fundamental
information, at least over the short term.

Finally, it seems only fair to observe that any process
appears random and unpredictable to those who do not under-
stand the rules under which that process operates. An electrocar-
diogram printout, for example, might appear like a lot of random
noise to a layperson. But to a trained medical person, all those lit-
tle blips make a lot of sense and are certainly not random. The
working of the markets may appear random to those who have
not taken the time to study the rules of market behavior. The illu-
sion of randomness gradually disappears as the skill in chart reading
improves. Hopefully, that is exactly what will happen as the read-
er progresses through the various sections of this book.

There may even be hope for the academic world. A num-
ber of leading American universities have begun to explore
Behavioral Finance which maintains that human psychology and
securities pricing are intertwined. That, of course, is the primary
basis of technica] analysis.

UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLES

When an earlier version of this book was published twelve years
ago, many of the technical timing tools that were explained were
used mainly in the futures markets. Over the past decade, howev-


22 Chapter 1

er, these tools have been widely employed in analyzing stock mar-
ket trends. The technical principles that are discussed in this book
can be applied universally to all markets—even mutual funds.
One additional feature of stock market trading that has gained
wide popularity in the past decade has been sector investing, pri-
marily through index options and mutual funds. Later in the
book we'll show how to determine which sectors are hot and
which are not by applying technical timing tools.


INTRODUCTION

Charles Dow and his partner Edward Jones founded Dow Jones &
Company in 1882. Most technicians and students of the markets
concur that much of what we call technical analysis today has its
origins in theories first proposed by Dow around the turn of the
century. Dow published his ideas in a series of editorials he wrote
for the Wall Street Journal. Most technicians today recognize and
assimilate Dow’s basic ideas, whether or not they recognize the
source. Dow Theory still forms the cornerstone of the study of
technical analysis, even in the face of today’s sophisticated com-
puter technology, and the proliferation of newer and supposedly
better technical indicators.

On July 3, 1884, Dow published the first stock market aver-
age composed of the closing prices of eleven stocks: nine railroad
companies and two manufacturing firms. Dow felt that these
eleven stocks provided a good indication of the economic health
of the country. In 1897, Dow determined that two separate
indices would better represent that health, and created a 12 stock
industrial index and a 20 stock rail index. By 1928 the industrial

23


24 Chapter 2

index had grown to include 30 stocks, the number at which it
stands today. The editors of The Wall Street Journal have updated
the list numerous times in the ensuing years, adding a utility
index in 1929. In 1984, the year that marked the one hundredth
anniversary of Dow’s first publication, the Market Technicians
Association presented a Gorham-silver bowl to Dow Jones & Co.
According to the MTA, the award recognized “the lasting contri-
bution that Charles Dow made to the field of investment analy-
sis. His index, the forerunner of what today is regarded as the
leading barometer of stock market activity, remains a vital tool for
market technicians 80 years after his death.”

Unfortunately for us, Dow never wrote a book on his the-
ory. Instead, he set down his ideas of stock market behavior in a
series of editorials that The Wall Street Journal published around
the turn of the century. In 1903, the year after Dow’s death, S.A.
Nelson compiled these essays into a book entitled The ABC of
Stock Speculation. In that work, Nelson first coined the term
“Dow's Theory.” Richard Russell, who wrote the introduction to a
1978 reprint, compared Dow’s contribution to stock market theo-
ty with Freud’s contribution to psychiatry. In 1922, William Peter
Hamilton (Dow’s associate and successor at the Journal) catego-
rized and published Dow’s tenets in a book entitled The Stock
Market Barometer. Robert Rhea developed the theory even further
in the Dow Theory (New York: Barron’s), published in 1932.

Dow applied his theoretical work to the stock market aver-
ages that he created; namely the Industrials and the Rails.
However, most of his analytical ideas apply equally well to all
market averages. This chapter will describe the six basic tenets of
Dow Theory and will discuss how these ideas fit into a modern
study of technical analysis. We will discuss the ramifications of
these ideas in the chapters that follow.

BASIC TENETS
1. The Averages Discount Everything.

The sum and tendency of the transactions of the Stock
Exchange represent the sum of all Wall Street’s knowl-


Dow Theory 25

edge of the past, immediate and remote, applied to the
discounting of the future. There is no need to add to the
averages, as some statisticians do, elaborate compilations
of commodity price index numbers, bank clearings, fluc-
tuations in exchange, volume of domestic and foreign
trades or anything else. Wall Street considers all these
things (Hamilton, pp. 40-41).

Sound familiar? The idea that the markets reflect every
possible knowable factor that affects overall supply and demand
is one of the basic premises of technical theory, as was mentioned
in Chapter 1. The theory applies to market averages, as well as it
does to individual markets, and even makes allowances for “acts
of God.” While the markets cannot anticipate events such as
earthquakes and various other natural calamities, they quickly
discount such occurrences, and almost instantaneously assimilate
their affects into the price action.

2. The Market Has Three Trends.

Before discussing how trends behave, we must clarify what Dow
considered a trend. Dow defined an uptrend as a situation in which
each successive rally closes higher than the previous rally high, and
each successive rally low also closes higher than the previous rally
low. In other words, an uptrend has a pattern of rising peaks and
troughs. The opposite situation, with successively lower peaks and
troughs, defines a downtrend. Dow’s definition has withstood the
test of time and still forms the cornerstone of trend analysis.

Dow believed that the laws of action and reaction apply to
the markets just as they do to the physical universe. He wrote,
“Records of trading show that in many cases when a stock reach-
es top it will have a moderate decline and then go back again to
near the highest figures. If after such a move, the price again
recedes, it is liable to decline some distance” (Nelson, page 43).

Dow considered a trend to have three parts, primary, sec-
ondary, and minor, which he compared to the tide, waves, and rip-
ples of the sea. The primary trend represents the tide, the sec-
ondary or intermediate trend represents the waves that make up
the tide, and the minor trends behave like ripples on the waves.


26 Chapter 2

An observer can determine the direction of the tide by not-
ing the highest point on the beach reached by successive waves.
If each successive wave reaches further inland than the preceding
one, the tide is flowing in. When the high point of each succes-
sive wave recedes, the tide has turned out and is ebbing. Unlike
actual ocean tides, which last a matter of hours, Dow conceived
of market tides as lasting for more than a year, and possibly for
several years.
