
Afterword

201

Granted, I had spent the entire day in class analyzing stocks, which
I knew were partial ownership interests in businesses, but I had not
made this most important analytical connection. When I studied Value
Line reports I saw accounting numbers and financial ratios. When I
read the Berkshire Hathaway report I saw businesses, with products and
customers. I saw economics and cash earnings. I saw competitors and
capital expenditures. Perhaps I should have seen all that when I analyzed
the Value Line reports, but for whatever reason, it did not resonate in
the same way. As I continued to read the Berkshire report, the entire
world of investing, which was still somewhat mysterious to me, began
to open. That night, in one epiphanic moment, Warren Buffett revealed
the inner nature of investing.
The next morning, I was bursting with a newly discovered passion
for investing, and when the training class was completed, I quickly returned to Philadelphia with a single-minded purpose: I was going to invest my clients’ money in the same fashion as did Warren Buffett.
I knew I needed to know more, so I started building a file of
background information. First I obtained all the back copies of Berkshire Hathaway annual reports. Then I ordered the annual reports of
all the publicly traded companies Buffett had invested with. Then I
collected all the magazine and newspaper articles on Warren Buffett I
could find.
When the file was as complete as I could get it, I dove in. My goal
was to first become an expert on Warren Buffett and then share those
insights with my clients.
Over the ensuing years, I built a respectable investment business. By
following Buffett’s teachings and stock picks, I achieved for my clients
more investment success than failure. Most of my clients intellectually
bought into the approach of thinking about stocks as businesses and trying to buy the best businesses at a discount. The few clients who did not
stick around left not because the Buffett approach was unsound, but because being contrarian was too much of an emotional challenge. And
a few left simply because they did not have enough patience to see the
process succeed. They were impatient for activity, and the constant itch
to do something—anything—drove them off the track. Looking back,
I don’t believe I dealt with anyone who openly disagreed with the logic
of Buffett’s investment approach, yet there were several who could not
get the psychology right.

202

AFTERWORD

All the while, I continued to collect Buffett data. Annual reports,
magazine articles, interviews—anything having to do with Warren
Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway, I read, analyzed, and filed. I was like a
kid following a ballplayer. He was my hero, and each day I tried to
swing the bat like Warren.
As the years passed, I had a growing and powerful urge to become a
full-time portfolio manager. At the time, investment brokers were compensated on their purchases and sales; it was largely a commission-based
system. As a broker, I was getting the “buy” part of the equation right,
but Buffett’s emphasis on holding stocks for the long-term made the
“sell” part of the equation more difficult. Today, most financial service
businesses allow investment brokers and financial advisors to manage
money for their clients for a fee instead of a commission—if they choose.
Eventually I met several portfolio managers who were compensated for
performance regardless of whether they did a lot of buying or selling.
This arrangement appeared to me to be the perfect environment in
which to apply Buffett’s teachings.
Initially, I gained some portfolio management experience at a local
bank trust department in Philadelphia, and along the way obtained the
obligatory Chartered Financial Analyst designation. Later, I joined a
small investment counseling firm where I managed client portfolios for a
fee. Our objective was to help our clients achieve a reasonable rate of return within an acceptable level of risk. Most had already achieved their
financial goals, and now they wanted to preserve their wealth. Because of
this, many of the portfolios in our firm were balanced between stocks
and bonds.
It was here that I began to put my thoughts about Buffett down
on paper, to share with our clients the wisdom of his investment approach. After all, Buffett, who had been investing for forty years, had
built up a pretty nice nest egg; learning more about how he did it certainly couldn’t hurt. These collected writings ultimately became the
basis for The Warren Buf fett Way.
The decision to start an equity mutual fund based on the principles
described in The Warren Buf fett Way came from two directions.
First, our investment counseling firm needed an instrument to manage
those accounts that were not large enough to warrant a separately managed portfolio. Second, I wanted to establish a discretionary performance record that was based on the teachings of the book. I wanted to

Afterword

203

demonstrate that what Buffett had taught and what I had written, if
followed, would allow an investor to generate market-beating returns.
The proof would be in the performance.
The new fund was established on April 17, 1995. Armed with the
knowledge gained by having studied Warren Buffett for over ten years,
coupled with the experience of managing portfolios for seven of those
years, I felt we were in a great position to help our clients achieve
above-average results. Instead, what we got was two very mediocre
years of investment performance.
What happened?
As I analyzed the portfolio and the stock market during this period, I discovered two important but separate explanations. First, when
I started the fund, I populated the portfolio mostly with Berkshire
Hathaway-type stocks: newspapers, beverage companies, other consumer nondurable businesses, and selected financial service companies.
I even bought shares of Berkshire Hathaway.
Because my fund was a laboratory example of Buffett’s teachings,
perhaps it was not surprising that many of the stocks in the portfolio
were stocks Buffett himself had purchased. But the difference between
Buffett’s stocks in the 1980s and those same stocks in 1997 was
striking. Many of the companies that had consistently grown owner
earnings at a double-digit rate in the 1980s were slowing to a high singledigit rate in the late 1990s. In addition, the stock prices of these companies had steadily risen over the decade and so the discount to intrinsic
value was smaller compared with the earlier period. When the economics of your business slow and the discount to intrinsic value narrows, the
future opportunity for outsized investment returns diminishes.
If the first factor was lack of high growth level inside the portfolio,
the second factor was what happening outside the portfolio. At the
same time that the economics of the businesses in the fund were
slowing, the economics of certain technology companies—telecommunications, software, and Internet service providers—were sharply accelerating. Because these new industries were taking a larger share of
the market capitalization of the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, the stock
market itself was rising at a faster clip. What I soon discovered was that
the economics of what I owned in the fund were no match for the
newer, more powerful technology-based companies then revving up in
the stock market.

204

AFTERWORD

In 1997, my fund was at the crossroads. If I continued to invest in
the traditional Buffett-like stocks, it was likely I would continue to generate just average results. Even Buffett was telling Berkshire Hathaway
shareholders they could no longer expect to earn the above-average investment gains the company had achieved in the past. I knew if I continued to own the same stocks Buffett owned in his portfolio at these
elevated prices, coupled with moderating economics, I was unlikely to
generate above-average investment results for my shareholders. And in
that case, what was the purpose? If a mutual fund cannot generate, over
time, investment results better than the broad market index, then its
shareholders would be better off in an index mutual fund.
Standing at the investment crossroads during this period was dramatic. There were questions about whether the fund should continue.
There were questions about whether Buffett could compete against the
newer industries and still provide above-average results. And there was
the meta-question of whether the whole philosophy of thinking about
stocks as businesses was a relevant approach when analyzing the newer
technology-oriented industries.
I knew in my heart that the Buffett approach to investing was still
valid. I knew without question that this business-analytical approach
would still provide the opportunity for investors to spot mispricing and
thus profit from the market’s narrower view. I knew all these things
and more, yet I momentarily hesitated at the shoreline, unable to cross
into the new economic landscape.
I was fortunate to become friends with Bill Miller when I first
began my career at Legg Mason. At the time, Bill was comanaging a
value fund with Ernie Kiehne. Bill periodically spent time with the
newer investment brokers sharing his thoughts about the stock market,
about companies, and ideas from the countless books he had read. After
I left Legg Mason to become a portfolio manager, Bill and I remained
friends. After The Warren Buf fett Way was published, we circled back
for more intense discussions about investing and the challenges of navigating the economic landscape.
In the book, I pointed out that Buffett did not rely solely on low
P/E ratios to select stocks. The driving force in value creation was
owner earnings and a company’s ability to generate above-average
returns on capital. Sometimes a stock with a low P/E ratio did generate
cash and achieve high returns on capital and subsequently became a great
investment. Other times, a stock with a low P/E ratio consumed cash

206

AFTERWORD

Back then Microsoft was a $22 billion business that most value investors thought was significantly overvalued. By the end of 2003, Microsoft had grown to a $295 billion business. The company went up in price
over 1,000 percent, while the S&P 500 Index advanced 138 percent during the same time period.
Was Microsoft a value stock in 1993? It certainly looks like it was,
yet no value investor would touch it. Is eBay a value stock today? We
obviously believe it is, but we will not know for certain for some years
to come. But one thing is clear to us: You cannot determine whether
eBay is a value stock by looking at its P/E any more than you could determine Microsoft’s valuation by looking at its P/E.
At the heart of all Bill’s investment decisions is the requirement of
understanding a company’s business model. What are the value creators?
How does the company generate cash? What level of cash can a company
produce and what rate of growth can it expect to achieve? What is the
company’s return on capital? If it achieves a return above the cost of capital, the company is creating value. If it achieves a rate of return below
the cost of capital, the company is destroying value.
In the end, Bill’s analysis gives him a sense of what the business is
worth, based largely on the discounted present value of the company’s
future cash earnings. Although Bill’s fund owns companies that are different from those in Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway portfolio, no one can
deny that they are approaching the investment process in the same way.
The only difference is that Bill has decided to take the investment philosophy and apply it to the New Economy franchises that are rapidly
dominating the global economic landscape.
When Bill asked me to join Legg Mason Capital Management and
bring my fund along, it was clear to me our philosophical approach was
identical. The more important advantage of joining Bill’s team was that
now I was part of an organization that was dedicated to applying a
business-valuation approach to investing wherever value-creation opportunities appeared. I was no longer limited to looking at just the
stocks Buffett had purchased. The entire stock market was now open
for analysis. I guess you could say it forced me to expand my circle of
competence.
One of my earliest thinking errors in managing my fund was the
mistaken belief that because Buffett did not own high-tech companies, these businesses must have been inherently unanalyzable. Yes,

Afterword

207

these newly created businesses possessed more economic risk than
many of the companies Buffett owned. The economics of soda pop,
razor blades, carpets, paint, candy, and furniture are much easier to
predict than the economics of computer software, telecommunications, and the Internet.
But “difficult to predict” is not the same as “impossible to analyze.” Certainly the economics of a technology company are more
variant than those of consumer nondurable businesses. But a thoughtful study of how any business operates should still allow us to determine a range of valuation possibilities. And keeping with the Buffett
philosophy, it is not critical that we determine precisely what the
value of the company is, only that we are buying the company at a significant price discount (margin of safety) from the range of valuation
possibilities.
What some Buffettologists miss in their thinking is that the payoff
of being right in the analysis of technology companies more than
compensates for the risk. All we must do is analyze each stock as a
business, determine the value of the business and, to protect against
higher economic risk, demand a greater margin of safety in the purchase price.
We should not forget that over the years many devotees of Warren
Buffett’s investment approach have taken his philosophy and applied it to
different parts of the stock market. Several prominent investors have
bought stocks not found anywhere in Berkshire’s portfolio. Others have
bought smaller-capitalization stocks. A few have taken Buffett’s approach
into the international market and purchased foreign securities. The important takeaway is this: Buffett’s investment approach is applicable to all
types of businesses, regardless of industry, regardless of market capitalization, regardless of where the business is domiciled.
Since becoming part of Legg Mason Capital Management in 1998,
my growth fund has enjoyed a remarkable period of superior investment performance. The reason for this much better performance is not
that the philosophy or process changed, but that the philosophy and
process were applied to a larger universe of stocks. When portfolio
managers and analysts are willing to study all types of business models,
regardless of industry classification, the opportunity to exploit the market’s periodic mispricing greatly expands, and this translates into better
returns for our shareholders.

208

AFTERWORD

This does not mean we do not have an occasional bad year, bad
quarter, or bad month. It simply means when you add up all the times
we lost money relative to the market, using any time period, the amount
of money we lost was smaller than the amount of money we made when
we outperformed the market.
In this respect, the record of this fund is not far different from other
focused portfolios. Think back to the performance of Charlie Munger,
Bill Ruane, and Lou Simpson. Each one achieved outstanding longterm performance but endured periods of short-term underperformance. Each one employed a business valuation process to determine
whether stocks were mispriced. Each one ran concentrated, lowturnover portfolios. The process they used enabled them to achieve superior long-term results at the expense of a higher standard deviation.
Michael Mauboussin, the chief investment strategist at Legg Mason
Capital Management, conducted a study of the best-performing mutual
funds between 1992 and 2002.1 He screened for funds that had one
manager during the period, had assets of at least $1 billion, and beat the
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index over the ten-year period. Thirty-one mutual funds made the cut.
Then he looked at the process each manager used to beat the market, and isolated four attributes that set this group apart from the majority of fund managers.
1. Portfolio turnover. As a whole, the market-beating mutual funds
had an average turnover ratio of about 30 percent. This stands in
stark contrast to the turnover for all equity funds—110 percent.
2. Portfolio concentration. The long-term outperformers tend to
have higher portfolio concentration than the index or other general equity funds. On average, the outperforming mutual funds
placed 37 percent of their assets in their top ten names.
3. Investment style. The vast majority of the above-market performers espoused an intrinsic-value approach to selecting stocks.
4. Geographic location. Only a small fraction of the outperformers
hail from the East Coast financial centers, New York or
Boston. Most of the high-alpha generators set up shop in cities
like Chicago, Salt Lake City, Memphis, Omaha, and Baltimore.
Michael suggests that perhaps being away from the frenetic pace
of New York and Boston lessens the hyperactivity that permeates so many mutual fund portfolios.

Afterword

209

A common thread for outperformance, whether it be for the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville, the Superinvestors of Buffettville,
or those who lead the funds that Michael’s research identified, is a portfolio strategy that emphasizes concentrated bets and low turnover and a
stock-selection process that emphasizes the discovery of a stock’s intrinsic value.
Still, with all the evidence on how to generate above-average long
results, a vast majority of money managers continue to underperform
the stock market. Some believe this is evidence of market efficiency.
Perhaps with the intense competition among money managers, stocks
are more accurately priced. This may be partly true. We believe the
market has become more efficient, and there are fewer opportunities to
extract profits from the stock market using simple-minded techniques
to determine value. Surely no one still believes the market is going to
allow you to pick its pocket simply by calculating a P/E ratio.
Analysts who understand the deep-rooted changes unfolding in a
business model will likely discover valuation anomalies that appear in the
market. Those analysts will have a different view of the duration and
magnitude of the company’s cash-generating ability compared with the
market’s view. “That the S&P 500 has also beaten other active money
managers is not an argument against active money management,” said
Bill Miller; “it is an argument against the methods employed by most
active money managers.”2


It has been twenty years since I read my first Berkshire Hathaway annual report. Even now, when I think about Warren Buffett and his philosophy, it fills me with excitement and passion for the world of
investing. There is no doubt in my mind that the process is sound and,
if consistently applied, will generate above-average long-term results.
We have only to observe today’s best-in-class money managers to see
that they are all using varied forms of Buffett’s investment approach.
Although companies, industries, markets, and economies will always evolve over time, the value of Buffett’s investment philosophy lies
in its timelessness. No matter what the condition, investors can apply
Buffett’s approach to selecting stocks and managing portfolios.
When Buffett first started managing money in the 1950s and
1960s, he was thinking about stocks as businesses and managing focused

210

AFTERWORD

portfolios. When he added the new economic franchises to Berkshire’s
portfolio in the 1970s and 1980s, he was still thinking about stocks as
businesses and managing a focused portfolio. When Bill Miller bought
technology and Internet companies for his value fund in the 1990s and
into the first half of this decade, he was thinking about stocks as businesses and managing a focused portfolio.
Were the companies purchased in the 1950s different from the companies in the 1980s? Yes. Were the companies purchased in the 1960s different from those purchased in 1990s? Of course they were. Businesses
change, industries unfold, and the competitiveness of markets allows new
economic franchises to be born while others slowly wither. Throughout
the constant evolution of markets and companies, it should be comforting
for investors to realize there is an investment process that remains robust
even against the inevitable forces of change.
At Berskhire’s 2004 annual meeting, a shareholder asked Warren
whether, looking back, he would change anything about his approach.
“If we were to do it over again, we’d do it pretty much the same way,”
he answered. “We’d read everything in sight about businesses and industries. Working with far less capital, our investment universe would be far
broader than it is currently. I would continually learn the basic principles
of sound investing which are Ben Graham’s, affected in a significant way
by Charlie and Phil Fisher in terms of looking at better businesses.” He
paused for a moment, then added, “There’s nothing different, in my
view, about analyzing securities today versus fifty years ago.”
Nor will there be anything different five, ten, or twenty years from
now. Markets change, prices change, economic environments change,
industries come and go. And smart investors change their day-to-day
behavior to adapt to the changing context. What does not change, however, are the fundamentals.
Those who follow Buffett’s way will still analyze stocks (and companies) according to the same tenets; will maintain a focus portfolio;
and will ignore bumps, dips, and bruises. They believe, as I do, that the
principles that have guided Warren Buffett’s investment decisions for
some sixty years are indeed timeless, and provide a foundation of solid
investment wisdom on which all of us may build.

Appendix
Table A.1 Berkshire Hathaway 1977 Common Stock Portfolio
Number
of Shares

Company

Cost

Market
Value

934,300
1,969,953
592,650
220,000
1,294,308
324,580
226,900
170,800
1,305,800

The Washington Post Company
GEICO Convertible Preferred
Interpublic Group of Companies
Capital Cities Communications, Inc.
GEICO Common Stock
Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corp.
Knight-Ridder Newspapers
Ogilvy & Mather International
Kaiser Industries, Inc.

$ 10,628
19,417
4,531
10,909
4,116
11,218
7,534
2,762
778

$ 33,401
33,033
17,187
13,228
10,516
9,981
8,736
6,960
6,039

Total
All other common stocks
