
MIWBH L A U E R

tell him. But in the process, I would certainly be wasting my time,
because I would be talking to this investor instead of researching new
ideas. Moreover if a stock that we were known as owning dropped,

then I would get a lot of these queries.
But the most irritating calls were the ones questioning why I was
buying stocks that appeared to have lousy fundamentals. Remember,
I'm seeking pricing inefficiencies, not high-quality companies. In
fact, as a direct consequence of my methodology, my typical long
position will be a company that has had some difficulty, while my typical short will be a universally admired entity. This concept is counterintuitive to many. My research involves not only knowing the
fundamentals intricately, but also being aware of the investment community's perception of the company. If a stock has just gotten
slammed from $50 to $15, and the major funds have just finished
dumping their last shares of the company, I submit that they may
have created a terrific pricing inefficiency.
If, however, an investor brings up the stock on his screen, he will
see that the company lost money, or that the revenues are soft, or that
there have been some negative commentaries and analyst recommendation downgrades. Well, that's why the stock is down from $50 to
$15 and why it is probably close to a bottom, with much of the risk
expunged. What am I going to do? Constantly repeat the rationale for
our decision process every time I get one of these calls? And, frankly,
I was losing my patience, because I'm Lancer's largest investor, with
nearly all of my net worth tied to its fortunes.
Although we no longer disclose our positions, I keep our investors
intimately familiar with our strategy and present investment themes
by writing a monthly update letter and hosting a quarterly conference call.
Any final words?
Any investment approach that is dependent on stock market direction
for profitability is doomed to mediocrity. Any investment approach
that is heavily reliant on accurate forecasting or involves the purchase
of high-expectation stocks is inherently risky. Market supply and
demand forces create spectacular pricing inefficiencies. All that is

required for successful investing is the commonsense analysis of
today's facts and the courage to act on your convictions.

Michael Lauer's market philosophy is perhaps best summarized
by his comment that "this business is not about investing in great
companies, it's about profiting from inefficiently priced stocks." The
crucial point is that fundamentals are not bullish or bearish in a vacuum; they are bullish or bearish only relative to price. The greatest
company in the world could be a terrible investment if its price rise
has already more than discounted the bullish fundamentals. Conversely, a company that has been bombarded with negative news
could be a great buy if its price decline has more than discounted the
bearish information.
Lauer believes in concentrating his portfolio into a small number
of holdings (fifteen stocks typically account for 75 percent or more
of assets). He believes broad diversification is a recipe for mediocrity:
"The greater the number of stocks you hold, the more marketlike
your performance becomes."
To winnow down the universe of U.S. stocks to a mere fifteen
core positions requires a very restrictive selection process. To end up
on Lauer's short list, a stock must pass six screens:
1. It must be a company and sector that Lauer fully understands.
(Obviously, this same principle would yield entirely different
results for different investors.)
2. The stock must have experienced a mammoth price decline relative to the market averages (50 percent or more). This rule will
cause Lauer to focus only on stocks that have been experiencing
wholesale liquidation, often by institutions. In effect, the only
stocks potentially good enough for Lauer are those that other
managers can't stand to hold.
3. The company must have a strong balance sheet and reasonable
cash flow.
4. There must be either insider buying or a company repurchase
program or both.

MICHAEL LAUER

5. The stock must represent compelling value (e.g., large revenues
relative to total capitalization, price near book value).
6. There must be a catalyst that will make the stock move in the
near future. Otherwise, although the preceding four conditions
will limit declines, the stock could just sit where it is for years,
tying up valuable capital.
Lauer will typically liquidate a stock when he still believes it will
move higher. The crucial point is that once a stock has risen sufficiently, other available opportunities may offer a better return/risk
profile. Thus, the key question is not "Will the stock move higher?"
but rather "Is this stock still a better investment than any other
equity I can hold with the same capital?"
Short positions differ from long positions in two critical ways:
First, the intended holding period is much shorter than for long positions (a week or so versus three to eighteen months). Second, since
the potential loss on short positions is unlimited, stops are employed
to limit losses. The one similarity between short and long positions is
that they both require a catalyst. In fact, for short positions, this may
be the single overriding issue, as the timing is typically motivated by
an expected event (e.g., a disappointing earnings report).
Lauer offers two other important concepts. First, superior performance requires not only picking the right stock but also having
the conviction to implement major potential trades in meaningful
size. As Lauer explains, a small position in a great stock pick is tantamount to a mistake. Second, the size and direction of major fund
holdings provide important information. For example, if major funds
are large holders of a given stock and then begin to reduce their position, then the stock is likely to be under relative pressure for months.
What about Lauer's warnings that the S&P 500 index funds and
what he terms the "enhanced" or "closet" index funds are filled with
overvalued stocks? Clearly, this is advice that has a limited shelf life.
If by the time you read this book, the same general condition still
prevails (lopsidedly high price/earnings ratios for the highest capitalization stocks), then for better or worse, you will still have the opportunity to act on Lauer's advice.

However, what if, by the time you read this book, a decline in the
index and "closet" index funds relative to the broader stock market is
history?—in other words, Lauer was right, but it is too late as far as
you are concerned. Even though in this case it may be too late to
take the literal advice, several very important, timeless lessons are
still embedded in this section of the interview. First, a strategy that
may make perfect sense for a small minority of investors (for example, index funds) can break down if too large a segment of the market
follows the same approach. Second, the most popular positions can
often be among the riskiest. Third, it is important to understand why
an investment (stock or fund) outperformed in the past. Continued
superior performance in the future can be assumed only if the same
conditions still prevail.

When it comes to trading, however, Watson is willing to accept risk
but not to take risks. "You have to be willing to accept a certain level of

STEVE WATSON

Dialing for Dollars

Steve Watson has never had a problem taking risks. He fondly recalls the
childhood summer ritual of catching snakes with his cousin in the Ozark
Mountains. When he was eleven, he and his cousin thought it would be
"fun" to move up from capturing nonpoisonous snakes to the poisonous
variety. They found two large water moccasins. After pinning each snake
down with a long branch and grabbing it tightly just below the head,
they decided it would be a good idea to carry their quarry back to the
family cabin, approximately a mile downriver, to proudly show their
fathers what they had caught. After sloshing through the shallow river for
about half a mile, with the snakes wrapped around their arms and their
hands tiring from the tight grip needed to keep the snakes' heads immobile, they had some second thoughts. "Maybe this wasn't such a good
idea," they agreed. Finally, unable to maintain their grips for much
longer, they hurled the snakes into the water and darted in the opposite
direction. In comparison, buying and shorting stocks must seem pretty
tame.
Watson has also been willing to take risks in his career. Two years
after becoming a broker, he faced the growing realization that he had
chosen the wrong path toward fulfilling his goal to trade stocks, so he
quit and set off for New York. He did so without the comfort of any
business contacts, job leads, or supportive resume. In fact, there was
absolutely no logical reason for Steve Watson to succeed in his quest—
other than his determination. Several years later, he quit a secure job
with a major fund to start his own hedge fund. He launched his new
business without even enough money to rent office space.
54

risk," Watson says, "or else you will never pull the trigger." But he
believes in keeping the risk under firm control. His net long position is
typically less than 50 percent of assets, often significantly less. Since
starting his fund four and a half years ago his worst drawdown from an
equity peak to a subsequent low has been just under 4 percent—the
same level as his average monthly return after deducting fees. In terms of
return to risk, this performance places him at the very top tier of fund
managers.
One of the major lessons that I have learned by conducting the interviews for the Market Wizard books is that, invariably, successful traders
end up using a methodology that fits their personality. Watson has chosen an approach that is heavily dependent on communicating with and
getting information from other people, a style that is a good match for his
easygoing manner. Asked whether he found it difficult to get people who
were often complete strangers to take the time to speak with him, Watson said, "My father is one of the nicest people you could ever hope to
meet. One thing he taught me was, 'Don't treat anyone differently than
you would your best friends.' I find if you approach people with that attitude, most of the time they will try to help you out."
I met with Watson in a conference room at his firm's Manhattan
office. He was relaxed and friendly, and spoke with an accent that
reflected his Arkansas origins.

When did you first get interested in the stock market?
I came from a family that never read The Wall Street Journal, never
bought a share of stock, and never invested in mutual funds. I didn't
know anything about the stock market until I was in college. When I
attended the University of Arkansas, I took an investment course that
sparked my interest.
What about the course intrigued you?
Doing research on a stock. As a main project for the course, we were
required to pick a stock and write a report on it. My group picked a
local utility company that was experiencing some trouble. We did our

WATSON
analysis and came to the conclusion that it was a terrible company.

We were all prepared to trash the stock in our presentation.
The day before the presentation, someone in our group came up
with the bright idea of going to the local brokerage office and seeing
what they said about the stock. The brokerage firm had this beautiful
glossy report on the company, which was filled with all sorts of positive commentary and concluded with a recommendation to buy the
stock. Here we were, a group of undergraduate students taking an
elementary investment course, and we thought that since these guys
get paid to do this for a living, we must be wrong. We completely
transformed our report so that it reached a positive conclusion, even
though it was the exact opposite of what we believed.
The next day, we gave our presentation, and the professor just tore
it apart. "This is a terrible company!" he exclaimed, citing a list of reasons to support his conclusion—all of which had been in our original
report. Of course, we couldn't say anything [he laughs].
What ultimately happened to the stock?
It went down. That's when I learned my first and most important lesson about the stock market: Stick to your own beliefs.
Did that course clinch your decision to pursue a career in the

stock market?
Yes. After I graduated, I moved to Dallas, which was the only big city I
had ever visited, to look for a job as a stockbroker. I thought being a
stockbroker meant that you got to manage other people's money and
play the stock market all day long. I quickly found out that it was more
of a sales job, and quite frankly, I'm a terrible salesperson. I picked up
my largest client because his own broker wouldn't answer the phone on
the day of the October 1987 stock market crash—he couldn't face talking to his customers—and 1 was the only one his client could reach.
After I was there for about two years, I remember calling up my
dad and saying, "I don't like being a stockbroker. All 1 do is cold-call
people all day, trying to sell them stuff they probably don't need in the
first place." Verbalizing my feelings helped me decide to quit. I knew
I really wanted to be a money manager. I moved to New York City to
find a job more closely aligned with my goal.

Had you been successful picking stocks as a broker?
No, I had been very unsuccessful.
What then gave you the confidence that you could manage
money successfully?
I didn't expect to get a job managing money on day one. I just wanted
to break into the business. Once I decide I am going to do something,
I become determined to succeed, regardless of the obstacles. If I
didn't have that attitude, I never would have made it.
When I arrived in New York, I didn't have any contacts, and my
resume—a 2.7 GPA from Arkansas University—and two years' experience as a stockbroker were certainly not going to impress anyone. I
couldn't compete against people who had gone to Harvard and
interned at Goldman Sachs. Therefore, I had to do it the hard way. I
went to work for an insurance company, doing credit analysis, essentially to pay the bills, but also to gain some analytical experience. I
also applied to business school at NYU but couldn't get in. I enrolled
at Fordham University for a semester, received good grades, and then
transferred.
After I graduated, I interviewed with about forty different hedge
fund managers, which was very helpful, because it gave me a feeling
for what other people were doing. I landed a job at Bankers Trust
working in the small cap department [group that invested in stocks
with small capitalization]. Even though 1 was new to the game, the
reason I was hired was that I knew small cap stocks better than anyone else. I can't tell you how many nights I stayed up until 3 A.M.,
flipping through stocks on the Bloomberg. At that point, I probably
knew something about every exchange-listed stock under the $300
million market cap level.
Why had you decided to focus on small cap stocks?
Small caps have always been a love for me because I can't get an edge
on stocks like Microsoft or Intel. I can't call up the CFOs of those
companies. In college, even though 1 didn't have a job, I would call
up CFOs, tell them that I was doing a project on their company, and
ask them questions. I had stacks of company reports filling up my
apartment.

STEWiSWATSON

What were your responsibilities at Bankers Trust?
I worked as Bill Newman's right-hand person for one of the firm's two
small cap funds. He gave me tremendous leeway. If I liked an idea, he
let me go with it. It was almost as if I were a portfolio manager
because he rarely turned down one of my stock picks. Unfortunately,
he left the firm three months after I joined. I didn't get along with his
replacement—our investment philosophies clashed.
In what way?
My new boss—who, incidentally, was one of the worst stock pickers I
have ever seen—was a momentum player who believed in buying
high P/E stocks [stocks trading at large multiples of their earnings]
that were moving up rapidly, whereas I believed in buying value
stocks and doing a lot of detailed research on a company. I left about
a half year later, and after another extensive Wall Street job search
found a job with Friess Associates, which ran the Brandywine Fund.
What job were you hired for?
Officially, 1 was hired as a consultant because I worked in a satellite
office. At the time, the firm's main branch was located in Wilmington,
Delaware, and I worked in Manhattan. The way Friess operated was
that everyone was both a research analyst and portfolio manager.
They used what they called "a-pig-at-the-trough" approach. If you
found a stock that you liked and wanted to buy you had to convince
one of the other people to liquidate one of their holdings to make
room in the portfolio, just like one pig has to push another pig out of
the way if he wants to get a spot at the trough.
How long were you there?
About two years.
Why did you leave?
The assets of the fund were growing rapidly. I love small cap stocks.
But the assets of the fund were getting too large to bother with small
cap stocks, and the fund's focus shifted almost exclusively to mid cap
and large cap stocks, which made it harder to get a hold of the CFOs
and ask questions. Also, as the assets grew, the number of analysts
increased. When there are fifteen analysts, your performance doesn't
have too much impact on the fund. I wanted to be in a situation

where I had control over the performance. I decided to leave to start
my own fund.
Where did you get the money to start your fund?
At the time, I only had about $20,000 to my name. I went to a few
CFOs to whom I had given stock tips for their own personal
accounts—recommendations that had worked out very well for them.
I only raised $700,000 in assets; I'm the worst salesman in the world.
But that was enough to start the fund.
How did you cover your operating expenses?
I was extremely lucky. Ed McGuinn, the man from whom I was renting office space at the time, wanted to help me get started. He knew I
couldn't afford to rent space on .my own, so he let me have the use of
a small office for free. It was the smallest office I had ever seen—
about 12 feet by 5—but I was extremely grateful. He even paid the
monthly fee for my Bloomberg.
I noticed that in your first year as a fund manager, your net exposure was considerably higher, probably double what it has been
since then. Why is that?
I had a different risk/reward perspective the first year because I was
managing less than $ 1 million. I allowed my net exposure to get up to
70 to 80 percent and individual positions to get as high as 5 or 6 percent of assets. As a result, we had triple-digit returns that year.
How do you select the stocks you buy?
We have two funds: the microfund, which invests in companies with a
market capitalization of under $350 million, and a small cap fund that
invests in companies with a capitalization of $350 million to $1.5 billion. In both funds, we begin by looking for companies that are relatively cheap—trading between eight to twelve times earnings. Within
this group, we try to identify those companies for which investors'
perceptions are about to change. Typically, these may be companies
that are having some trouble now, but their business is about to turn
around. We try to find out that information before everyone else does.
How do you do that?
We make a lot of phone calls. The difference between our firm and
most other hedge funds is that talking to companies is our primary

STEVE WATSON;

focus. I have two people who spend three-quarters of their time booking calls with company management and five research people who
spend virtually their entire day calling companies and talking to

CFOs.
In this business, you can't wait for a new product to come out and
be successful. By that time, you will have to pay three times as much
for the stock. We are trying to add value by doing our own research. If
you are buying stocks that are washed out—stocks that are trading at
only eight to twelve times earnings—any significant change can dramatically impact the stock price.
Won't CFOs tend to paint a rosy picture of their company?
Of course. You can't go strictly by what they say. CFOs are only
human, and they will tend to exaggerate how well their company is
doing. But we also speak to distributors, customers, and competitors. If we are going to own something, we're going to talk not only
to the company, but also to the people selling and using their products.
What did you teach your research people about doing phone

interviews?
You want the other person to be on your side. Don't ever tell a CFO
he is wrong or try to tell him how to run his business. If you do, he
probably won't take your phone call the next time. You also have to
ask questions the right way. You don't want to ask a CFO a direct
question such as, "What are earnings going to be this quarter?"
because, obviously, he can't tell you. But if instead you ask him about
how his company will be affected by a product his competitor is putting out, you may well get some useful information. We are detectives. We are trying to find out information that is not widely
dispersed and then put all the pieces together to get an edge.
What else do you look for when you buy a stock?
A low price and the prospect for imminent change are the two key
components. Beyond that, it also helps if there is insider buying by
management, which confirms prospects for an improvement in the
company outlook.
Is insider buying something that you look at regularly?
Yeah, but I'd rather not put that in print.

Why not?
Because I don't want to give away secrets.
But insider buying is not exactly a secret. In fact, it came up in a
number of other interviews I did for this book.
Over the course of the two times in my career that I looked for a job
on Wall Street, I must have interviewed with as many as eighty firms.
I was amazed by how many hedge fund managers used charts and
sell-side information [brokerage research] but didn't use insider buying. In fact, I had a lot of managers tell me that using insider buying
was stupid [he laughs].
Stock investing is not an exact science. The greater the number of
useful things you can look at, the greater you increase your odds. The
odds are better that we will make correct investment decisions if we
talk to a company than if we don't talk to them. Similarly, if we focus
on companies with insider buying, it doesn't mean that these stocks
will go up, but it certainly improves our odds.
Do you also mean to imply that you don't use charts or Wall
Street research?
I never looked at a chart for 99 percent of the stocks I bought for our
funds.
Is the reason you don't use charts because you tried using them
but couldn't find any value or because you never explored this
avenue of research?
Too many people use charts. If too many people are using an
approach, I feel that I can't get a competitive edge.
