
290 Part V: The Part of Tens
 Cost: Starting with $5,000 and trading securities in $500 increments
proves very costly. A round-trip commission charge of $20, for example,
is equal to 4 percent of your trade size, meaning your position must
actually rise by 4 percent before you break even!
 Realistic target return: Good professional swing traders can reasonably
expect to make an average of 10 to 20 percent per year on their trades.
The best swing traders can do even better. If you have a small account
size, you may be unhappy with that target return. So you try to magnify
the return by employing leverage or trading options. Whatever the case,
you’re setting yourself up for certain ruin.
So how much capital do you need to get started in swing trading? I’ve tried to
provide some guidelines to fit the different types of swing traders out there.
Of course, the following are just my recommendations, not hard-and-fast rules:
 Trading for fun: If you enjoy swing trading as a hobby, then you can
swing trade a portion of your existing assets. The restrictions outlined
earlier don’t apply if the majority of your assets are being invested
wisely (that is, they’re diversified and professionally managed). In this
case, you can trade 10 to 20 percent of your total assets as long as your
swing trading portfolio is greater than or equal to $10,000 (to cover
costs like commissions or research services).
 Trading for retirement: If you’re swing trading your retirement account,
you’re not depending on the trades to provide you with current income. So
you can probably begin with $10,000 to $20,000 and hold 8 to 12 positions.
 Trading for a living: If swing trading is your full-time job, then you need
to start with a reasonable size nest egg to live off of. A professional swing
trader can reasonably expect to make 10 to 20 percent per year, so if
you need to spend $5,000 per month on living expenses, your account
value needs to be between $300,000 and $600,000. (Achieving 10 percent
on $600,000 equals $60,000 per year, or $5,000 per month. But if you’re
really good, you may achieve a return of 20 percent per year on $300,000 —
equal to $60,000 per year, or $5,000 per month.)
All things considered, I find it difficult to believe that you can swing trade well
on less than $10,000. The costs of commissions, taxes, slippage, and other
factors work against you so much that you can’t generate reasonable returns.
(Slippage is the difference between what you expect to pay or receive from
a buy or sell and what you actually pay or receive from a buy or sell. Fastmoving markets often result in increased slippage costs.)

Chapter 15: Ten Deadly Sins of Swing Trading

Gambling on Earnings Dates
It’s funny how chance can excite people. Gambling for the chance to win a
new car, beat state lottery odds, or become the next millionaire minted by
the Publishers Clearing House seems to have broad appeal.
I believe swing trading a stock one or two weeks before its earnings date is a
form of gambling. My old mentor, Ian Woodward, likens trading before earnings to driving a car without your hands on the steering wheel. I’ve never
tried driving that way, but I believe it can be dangerous.
Earnings dates are, for the most part, unknown events. Unless you have some
predictive ability I lack, you can’t know with certainty whether a company will
miss its earnings mark or profit handsomely. No doubt, you can make educated
guesses by calling a company’s suppliers and customers or analyzing how its
competitors are doing. But as a swing trader, your time horizons are too short
to make a serious study of such practical issues. You’re better off avoiding
trading stocks before their earnings dates, even in the case of large cap stocks.
When you put on a new swing trade, double-check the earnings date to make
sure you aren’t getting in right before a major announcement that may cause
a significant change in price. If you’re wrong, such a loss can seriously impair
your account’s value. Of course, a company’s stock price can gap in between
earnings dates due to other issues. But you can limit your exposure to many
gaps in companies’ stock prices by avoiding trading before earnings dates.
If you want to discover when a company will report earnings, find out
when the company’s last earnings report was and add three months to that
date. Alternatively, many Web sites show upcoming earnings dates for
most any company on the market. I like Marketwatch’s Earnings page (www.
marketwatch.com/tools/calendars/earnings.asp).
After a company has reported earnings, you can generally swing trade the
stock, because the bad or good news about earnings is out.

Speculating on Penny Stocks
When I first started trading, I immediately gravitated toward penny stocks,
which I define as all U.S. stocks that trade below $5, even though other market
commentators classify them as stocks trading at $1 or less. Back in 1994, I
said to myself, “Holy crap! I can make 20 or 30 percent if the stock moves by 5
cents!” I used to print out reams of data on penny stocks to analyze and study,
feeling if I could get a few right that I’d make untold profits.

291

292 Part V: The Part of Tens
Unfortunately, penny stocks are the fool’s gold in the market. They look tempting but don’t lead to riches because they exhibit low liquidity and are volatile.
They’re more susceptible to rumors or message board antics, which can spike
shares up or down. (Note: An exception to this rule is international securities
that may routinely trade for a small amount of money. For example, many
Australian shares trade for less than 5 Australian dollars without the negative
stigma that accompanies U.S. securities trading below $5.)
When the Internet was just getting started, a posting on a message board for a
penny stock company could send the stock’s value shooting up or down 5 or 10
percent in a matter of seconds. Hyping or pumping stocks became common.
If you try to hype shares of Apple Inc., you’re going to find that your posting
won’t make a dent in the stock’s price, because the company trades millions
of shares per day that are worth hundreds of millions of dollars. But a penny
stock may trade only $50,000 worth of stock per day, so hyping or pumping
such a stock can send shares roaring or falling — even if you were right on
the trend and position sizing.
The additional risk factors associated with trading penny stocks, like the fact
that penny stocks don’t even trade on some days, make it more difficult for
you to profit. Also, the volume on penny stocks may be light, which increases
trading costs, making it that much more difficult to earn a good return on
your money. You don’t need exposure to these junk companies to be a successful swing trader.
Penny stocks represent companies in poor financial health. Perhaps the company in question is hemorrhaging losses. Or maybe it has a mountain of debt
on its balance sheet that it can’t pay off. Whatever the ailment, a security’s
price communicates important information about the general market’s
expectations for it.
Penny stocks aren’t necessarily companies you’ve never heard of, so don’t be
lulled into a false sense of security about a security just because you recognize
its name. Otherwise you’re setting yourself up for failure. Don’t believe me?
In late 2007, penny stocks included such well-known companies as Vonage
Holdings, E*Trade Financial Corporation, Circuit City, and Blockbuster Inc.

Changing Your Trading
Destination Midflight
Imagine the problems that may arise if pilots routinely changed their minds
on their intended destination midflight. Airports wouldn’t be able to anticipate which planes may be landing today, passengers would likely get upset,
and the Federal Aviation Administration wouldn’t know where to begin a
rescue operation if an emergency arose.

Chapter 15: Ten Deadly Sins of Swing Trading
Swing traders sometimes commit the sin of changing trading destinations
midflight, which means changing the reason you trade a security after you’ve
initiated the trade. More often than not, a midflight change occurs because
the trade hasn’t gone your way. And rather than take a loss, you prefer to
sock that puppy into a stocking, because you know the market’s totally off in
its assessment of the company’s prospects. The problem with this approach
is that it keeps a poor-performing security in a portfolio when it should be
sold. That security’s poor performance can become worse and lead to even
larger losses.
For example, imagine you trade shares of XYZ Corporation on the long side
(that is, you buy shares for a short-term profit). Shortly after buying shares, XYZ
suffers some indigestion, and its stock price falls by 10 percent. “Hmm . . .” you
think to yourself, “XYZ is an awfully good company. Why on earth should
this stock not trade for 20 percent more than its current price?” After giving
it some thought, you decide that your swing trade of XYZ should really be a
long-term investment. No need to take that loss right now. You know it’ll turn
up in a few weeks or months — maybe years.
Swing traders fall prey to this sin often because it’s difficult to take losses.
Taking a loss means admitting loudly and clearly that you made a mistake.
And no matter how many losses you take in trading, it doesn’t get easier to
do. Taking losses when others are looking over your shoulder is that much
more difficult.
Try to mitigate the impact of this sin by framing the way you look at losses.
Like me, you may not be a gardener, but try viewing your portfolio of securities
as a growing shrub. When you wake up each morning, make sure your shrub
is looking fine and dandy with healthy, successful trades. Be aware that occasionally a branch will grow the wrong way whenever a trade turns sour and
will begin to affect your shrub’s aesthetic quality. When that happens, take out
your clippers and cut that branch off for the health of your overall portfolio.
Your swing trading portfolio will have branches that need to be cut; if you let
them grow, you’re effectively changing your trade midflight. Stay focused on
growing your portfolio over time and don’t change the reasoning behind a
trade just because it doesn’t go your way. Instead, correct the problem and
move on.

Doubling Down
By doubling down, I don’t mean trying to win big at blackjack. In the swing
trading world, doubling down means doubling your investment in a trade
when the trade goes against you. This strategy may sound appealing, but it’s
fraught with danger. So why even consider doubling down? Because if you

293

294 Part V: The Part of Tens
trade that security again and put even more money into it, a slight move in
your direction could lead to untold profits!
For instance, if you buy $10,000 worth of Apple Inc. for $100 per share, and
the stock immediately falls to $90, you’re facing a $1,000 loss. That’s not
pretty. But if you double down and buy another $10,000 worth of shares of
Apple at $90, you can gain back that $1,000 loss to break even when shares
rise to $95. By increasing your investment to the losing trade, you lower the
price the stock must rise to in order for you to gain back your prior losses.
But doing so isn’t worth the risk.
Doubling down is a double-edged sword — if shares march down more, your
losses compound because you’ve now exposed yourself to double your initial
investment. Never send good money after bad. If you have a loss on a trade, then
your original trade idea was wrong. Adding more money to the trade doesn’t
make you right (remember, though, that your trading strategy isn’t necessarily
to blame, because losses are a natural part of doing business). The emotional
reaction to get even exists at some level in everyone. If you lose money on IBM,
for example, you want to show IBM who’s boss and trade that stock the right
way. But odds are good that you’re only shooting yourself in the foot.
My friends in the investment community may pipe up right about now to
exclaim that doubling down can be an effective investment strategy for some
people. In fact, retirement professionals often advocate a version of doubling
down. Investors who have long-term time horizons don’t care about shortterm losses the way swing traders do, though. As a swing trader, you must
follow the beat of a different drummer, because you’re principally concerned
with short-term gains. Consequently, you care about short-term losses. You
don’t have the luxury of waiting three years to find out whether you’re right.
If you aren’t right in the first three days, then you probably need to exit and
move on to another trade.
On the other side, doubling up on a winning position is acceptable as long as
the new position size fits within your risk requirements. If you’re reasoning
was correct on entering a trade (and that was validated by price action when
the position became profitable), then you may wish to add to the position to
increase your profits on that trade. The opposite holds true for losing positions.
Loss is a sign that something has gone awry. Adding to a swing trade that isn’t
working is usually an act of desperation to break even.

Swing Trading Option Securities
Options give traders the right — not the obligation — to buy or sell some
security at a future date at a certain price. Options aren’t for the new trader;
most pros don’t handle them correctly either. They miscalculate how much

Chapter 15: Ten Deadly Sins of Swing Trading
risk they’re exposed to by using those pretty little financial models that
assume the future will resemble the past.
Swing trading stocks and commodities can be profitable, but short-term trading
in options is next to impossible. Options aren’t meant to be swing traded —
they’re meant to hedge risk and provide an outlet for speculators to feel alive by
leveraging their small positions. As a general rule, don’t swing trade options — I
recommend not touching them at all — for these reasons:
 Options don’t trade often and can be expensive to purchase or sell.
The spread between the bid and the offer of option prices is wide. So if
you buy an option at the asking price, you may already be down 5 or 10
percent on your investment relative to the bid side where you could sell
your option immediately.
 Options pose significant risk. A stock or commodity contract may fall
some percentage points but rarely hit zero. Option prices, however,
commonly end at zero when their expiration date arrives. Options
require you to be right about three different factors regarding a price
move: direction, magnitude, and timing. If you’re wrong about any of
these three factors, you’ll end up losing money — possibly all of it.

Thinking You’re Hot Stuff
If you string together several winning trades, you may start to build confidence in your strategy and skills as a swing trader. Good for you! But if your
confidence turns into arrogance, you’re going to cut corners and take greater
risks. Regardless of how good you think you are, plenty of other traders are
out there who may be better informed or better prepared. A humble trader
isn’t afraid to admit mistakes. An arrogant trader thinks the market’s wrong
and he or she’s right.
One area where I’ve seen the hot-stuff factor exhibited is in a trader’s education. Some traders falsely believe that after you know the tools of the trade,
you don’t need to figure out anything else. Yet the markets are a living organism. You need to keep up to speed on the news surrounding them and the
books pertaining to trading.
Try setting a goal for yourself to read at least one trading-related book a
month, like I do. If you’re constantly taking in new information, you’re less
prone to thinking that you’re the be-all, end-all when it comes to trading, and
you can avoid the fate of smart traders who are brilliant on an IQ level but not
in practice. These folks generate impressive returns for several years only to
quit swing trading because they can’t control risk or admit their mistakes.

295

296 Part V: The Part of Tens
Concentrating on a Single Sector
According to behavioral scientists, traders and investors sometimes exhibit
a familiarity bias, an investor’s tendency to invest in companies he or she
knows or feels familiar with. Often employees of publicly traded companies have a significant portion of their retirement assets invested in their
employer’s stock. Although they may feel comfortable investing in a company
they know a lot about, this bias can be dangerous because it increases the
chances that their portfolio won’t be well diversified and that their account
will experience more volatility.
Many Enron employees in the 1990s had either the majority or the entirety
of their retirement assets invested in the energy company’s stock. Had they
diversified their holdings to less-familiar parts of the market, the payoff
may’ve meant having a nest egg versus having nothing after Enron went bust.
In swing trading, familiarity bias rears its ugly head when you focus on a
sector of the market you know a lot about. A swing trader who enjoys information technology, for example, may trade shares of Microsoft, Apple Inc.,
Hewlett-Packard, Cisco Systems, and so on. Such swing traders may in fact
build a portfolio of 10 or 12 different stocks, but they don’t have diversified
investments.
Following a top-down approach to swing trading (which I explain in Chapter
8) can also lead to overinvestment in a single sector if you’re not careful. For
instance, if energy stocks are doing well, then you may be tempted to hold a
whole basket of different energy stocks, thinking your portfolio is diversified.
If you buy one stock from each of the top ten industry groups and are 70 percent invested in the energy sector, your risks are high. If energy turns down
violently, those positions will all fall together.
You must diversify your portfolio across sectors and, more broadly, across
asset classes. If commodities are outperforming stocks, swing trade companies that benefit from a commodity boom while shorting other, unrelated
companies. Having both long and short positions helps insulate you from
market volatility to some extent. But you should also be careful to avoid
investing in too few sectors.

Overtrading
You may find it curious that I list overtrading as a sin in a swing trading book.
How can a swing trader possibly overtrade? Isn’t that the whole name of the
game in swing trading? Well, yes and no.

Chapter 15: Ten Deadly Sins of Swing Trading
Swing trading is principally defined by the short-term nature of the price
swings it attempts to capture. Obviously, those price swings require more
trading than the buy-and-hold investment strategy, but you should still trade
as few times as possible in order to achieve your objective. Why?
 The more often you trade, the more work you need to do.
 Trading entails costs, and costs hurt returns.
 This extra work increases administrative costs (both money- and timebased) involved with keeping track of the trades, entering them into a
journal, and reviewing them at a future date.
Swing trading is supposed to fit in the happy medium between the day trader
who slaves away over miniscule price movements and the buy-and-hold
investor who sits on his or her hands until they become numb. The more
often you trade, the more likely you’re simply trading market noise (moves
driven by nonfundamental reasons).
Buying and selling often or intraday makes your success as a swing trader
that much more difficult — so get in before a major price move and get out
after you capture it.
I can’t give you a set number of trades to place per week or per month, but on
average, your trade length should last several days to several weeks. If you’re
holding positions for shorter amounts of time, you need to examine that part
of your trading system. Are losses that force liquidation causing you to trade
this way? Or are you becoming impatient and trading in and out because
you’re looking for the elusive stock that’ll make a major move the day after
you buy it? “Keep it simple” is a saying my tenth-grade math teacher wrote on
my notebook in class one day. The same advice applies to swing trading.

