form penetrate into her dungeon. The woman, in the darkness of her cell, could not detect
the imposture, aided as it was by her own superstitious fears. She thought she was
actually in the presence of the prince of hell; and when she was told to keep up her
courage, and that she should be relieved from the power of her enemies, she fell on her
knees before the supposed devil, and swore to dedicate herself hereafter body and soul to
his service. Germany is, perhaps, the only country in Europe where the delusion was so
great as to have made such detestable verses as these the favourites of the people:-"Man shickt ein Henkersknecht Zu ihr in Gefangniss n'unter,
Den man hat kleidet recht, Mir einer Barnhaute,
Als wenns der Teufel war; Als ihm die Drut anschaute
Meints ihr Buhl kam daher.
"Sie sprach zu ihm behende,
Wie lasst du mich so lang In der Obrigkeit Hande?
Hilf mir aus ihren Zwang, Wie du mir hast verheissen,
Ich bin ja eben dein, Thu mich aus der Angst entreissen
O liebster Buhle mein?
[They sent a hangman's assistant down to her in her prison; they clothed him properly in
a bear's skin, as if he were the devil. Him, when the witch saw, she thought he was her
familiar. She said to him quickly, "Why hast thou left me so long in the magistrate's
hands? Help me out of their power, as thou hast promised, and I will be thine alone. Help
me from this anguish, O thou dearest devil (or lover), mine?]
This rare poet adds, that in making such an appeal to the hangman, the witch never
imagined the roast that was to be made of her, and puts in, by way of parenthesis, "was
not that fine fun!" "Was das war fur ein Spiel!" As feathers thrown into the air show how
the wind blows, so this trumpery ballad serves to show the current of popular feeling at
the time of its composition.
All readers of history are familiar with the celebrated trial of the Marechale d'Ancre, who
was executed in Paris in the year 1617. Although witchcraft was one of the accusations
brought against her, the real crime for which she suffered was her ascendency over the
mind of Mary of Medicis, and the consequent influence she exercised indirectly over the
unworthy King, Louis XIII. Her coachman gave evidence that she had sacrificed a cock
at midnight, in one of the churches, and others swore they had seen her go secretly into
the house of a noted witch, named Isabella. When asked by what means she had acquired
so extraordinary an influence over the mind of the Queen Mother, she replied boldly, that
she exercised no other power over her, than that which a strong mind can always exercise
over the weak. She died with great firmness.
In two years afterwards scenes far more horrible than any that had yet taken place in
France were enacted at Labourt, at the foot of the Pyrenees. The Parliament of
Bourdeaux, scandalised at the number of witches who were said to infest Labourt and its
neighbourhood, deputed one of its own members, the noted Pierre de l'Ancre, and its
President, Espaignel, to inquire into the matter, with full powers to punish the offenders.
They arrived at Labourt in May 1619. De l'Ancre wrote a book, setting forth all his great

deeds, in this battle against the powers of evil. It is full of obscenity and absurdity; but
the facts may be relied on as far as they relate to the number of trials and executions, and
the strange confessions which torture forced from the unhappy criminals.
De l'Ancre states as a reason why so many witches were to be found at Labourt, that the
country was mountainous and sterile! He discovered many of them from their partiality to
smoking tobacco. It may be inferred from this, that he was of the opinion of King James,
that tobacco was the "devil's weed." When the commission first sat, the number of
persons brought to trial was about forty a day. The acquittals did not average so many as
five per cent. All the witches confessed that they had been present at the great
Domdaniel, or Sabbath. At these saturnalia the devil sat upon a large gilded throne,
sometimes in the form of a goat; sometimes as a gentleman, dressed all in black, with
boots, spurs, and sword; and very often as a shapeless mass, resembling the trunk of a
blasted tree, seen indistinctly amid the darkness. They generally proceeded to the
Domdaniel, riding on spits, pitchforks, or broomsticks, and, on their arrival, indulged
with the fiends in every species of debauchery. Upon one occasion they had had the
audacity to celebrate this festival in the very heart of the city of Bourdeaux. The throne of
the arch fiend was placed in the middle of the Place de Gallienne, and the whole space
was covered with the multitude of witches and wizards, who flocked to it from far and
near; some arriving even from distant Scotland.
After two hundred poor wretches had been hanged and burned, there seemed no
diminution in the number of criminals to be tried. Many of the latter were asked upon the
rack what Satan had said, when he found that the commissioners were proceeding with
such severity? The general reply was, that he did not seem to care much about it. Some of
them asserted, that they had boldly reproached him for suffering the execution of their
friends, saying, "Out upon thee, false ,fiend! thy promise was, that they should not die!
Look! how thou hast kept thy word! They have been burned, and are a heap of ashes!"
Upon these occasions he was never offended. He would give orders that the sports of the
Domdaniel should cease, and producing illusory fires that did not burn, he encouraged
them to walk through, assuring them that the fires lighted by the executioner gave no
more pain than those. They would then ask him, where their friends were, since they had
not suffered; to which the "Father of Lies" invariably replied, that they were happy in a
far country, and could see and hear all that was then passing; and that, if they called by
name those they wished to converse with, they might hear their voices in reply. Satan
then imitated the voices of the defunct witches so successfully, that they were all
deceived. Having answered all objections, the orgies recommenced, and lasted till the
cock crew.
De l'Ancre was also very zealous in the trial of unhappy monomaniacs for the crime of
lycanthropy. Several who were arrested confessed, without being tortured, that they were
weir-wolves, and that, at night, they rushed out among the flocks and herds, killing and
devouring. One young man at Besancon, with the full consciousness of the awful fate that
awaited him, voluntarily gave himself up to the commissioner Espaignel, and confessed
that he was the servant of a strong fiend, who was known by the name of "Lord of the
Forests." By his power, he was transformed into the likeness of a wolf. The "Lord of the

Forests" assumed the same shape, but was much larger, fiercer, and stronger. They
prowled about the pastures together at midnight, strangling the watch-dogs that defended
the folds, and killing more sheep than they could devour. He felt, he said, a fierce
pleasure in these excursions, and howled in excess of joy as he tore with his fangs the
warm flesh of the sheep asunder. This youth was not alone in this horrid confession;
many others voluntarily owned that they were weir-wolves, and many more were forced
by torture to make the same avowal. Such criminals were thought to be too atrocious to
be hanged first, and then burned: they were generally sentenced to be burned alive, and
their ashes to be scattered to the winds. Grave and learned doctors of divinity openly
sustained the possibility of these transformations, relying mainly upon the history of
Nebuchadnezzar. They could not imagine why, if he had been an ox, modern men could
not become wolves, by Divine permission and the power of the devil. They also
contended that, if men should confess, it was evidence enough, if there had been no other.
Delrio mentions that one gentleman accused of lycanthropy was put to the torture no less
than twenty times, but still he would not confess. An intoxicating draught was then given
him, and under its influence he confessed that he was a weir-wolf. Delrio cites this to
show the extreme equity of the commissioners. They never burned anybody till he
confessed; and if one course of torture would not suffice, their patience was not
exhausted, and they tried him again and again, even to the twentieth time! Well may we
exclaim, when such atrocities have been committed in the name of religion,
"Quel lion, quel tigre egale en cruaute, Une injuste fureur qu'arme la piete?"
The trial of the unhappy Urbain Grandier, the curate of Loudun, for bewitching a number
of girls in the convent of the Ursulines in that town, was, like that of the Marechale
d'Ancre, an accusation resorted to by his enemies to ruin one against whom no other
charge could be brought so readily. This noted affair, which kept France in commotion
for months, and the true character of which was known even at that time, merits no more
than a passing notice in this place. It did not spring from the epidemic dread of sorcery
then so prevalent, but was carried on by wretched intriguers, who had sworn to have the
life of their foe. Such a charge could not be refuted in 1634: the accused could not, as
Bodinus expresses it, "make the malice of the prosecutors more clear than the sun;" and
his own denial, however intelligible, honest, and straightforward, was held as nothing in
refutation of the testimony of the crazy women who imagined themselves bewitched. The
more absurd and contradictory their assertions, the stronger the argument employed by
his enemies that the devil was in them. He was burned alive, under circumstances of great
cruelty. [A very graphic account of the execution of this unfortunate gentleman is to be
found in the excellent romance of M. Alfred de Vigny, entitled "Cinq Mars ;" but if the
reader wishes for a full and accurate detail of all the circumstances of one of the most
extraordinary trials upon record, he is referred to a work published anonymously, at
Amsterdam, in 1693, entitled "Histoire des Diables de Loudun, ou de la Possession des
Religieuses Ursulines, et de la Condemnation et du Supplice d'Urbain Grandier."]
A singular instance of the epidemic fear of witchcraft occurred at Lille, in 1639. A pious,
but not very sane lady, named Antoinette Bourignon, founded a school, or hospice, in that
city. One day, on entering the school-room, she imagined that she saw a great number of

little black angels flying about the heads of the children. In great alarm, she told her
pupils of what she had seen, warning them to beware of the devil, whose imps were
hovering about them. The foolish woman continued daily to repeat the same story, and
Satan and his power became the only subject of conversation, not only between the girls
themselves, but between them and their instructors. One of them at this time ran away
from the school. On being brought back and interrogated, she said she had not run away,
but had been carried away by the devil -- she was a witch, and had been one since the age
of seven. Some other little girls in the school went into fits at this announcement, and, on
their recovery, confessed that they also were witches. At last, the whole of them, to the
number of fifty, worked upon each other's imaginations to such a degree that they also
confessed that they were witches -- that they attended the Domdaniel, or meeting of the
fiends -- that they could ride through the air on broom-sticks, feast on infants' flesh, or
creep through a key-hole.
The citizens of Lille were astounded at these disclosures. The clergy hastened to
investigate the matter; many of them, to their credit, openly expressed their opinion that
the whole affair was an imposture: not so the majority -- they strenuously insisted that the
confessions of the children were valid, and that it was necessary to make an example by
burning them all for witches. The poor parents, alarmed for their offspring, implored the
examining Capuchins with tears in their eyes to save their young lives, insisting that they
were bewitched, and not bewitching. This opinion also gained ground in the town.
Antoinette Bourignon, who had put these absurd notions into the heads of the children,
was accused of witchcraft, and examined before the council. The circumstances of the
case seemed so unfavourable towards her that she would not stay for a second
examination. Disguising herself as she best could, she hastened out of Lille and escaped
pursuit. If she had remained four hours longer, she would have been burned by judicial
sentence, as a witch and a heretic. It is to be hoped that, wherever she went, she learned
the danger of tampering with youthful minds, and was never again entrusted with the
management of children.
The Duke of Brunswick and the Elector of Menz were struck with the great cruelty
exercised in the torture of suspected persons, and convinced at the same time that no
righteous judge would consider a confession extorted by pain, and contradictory in itself,
as sufficient evidence to justify the execution of any accused person. It is related of the
Duke of Brunswick that he invited two learned Jesuits to his house, who were known to
entertain strong opinions upon the subject of witchcraft, with a view of showing them the
cruelty and absurdity of such practises. A woman lay in the dungeon of the city accused
of witchcraft, and the Duke, having given previous instructions to the officiating
torturers, went with the two Jesuits to hear her confession. By a series of artful leading
questions, the poor creature, in the extremity of her anguish, was induced to confess that
she had often attended the sabbath of the fiends upon the Brocken -- that she had seen
two Jesuits there, who had made themselves notorious, even among witches, for their
abominations -- that she had seen them assume the form of goats, wolves, and other
animals; and that many noted witches had borne them five, six, and seven children at a
birth, who had heads like toads and legs like spiders. Being asked if the Jesuits were far
from her, she replied that they were in the room beside her. The Duke of Brunswick led

his astounded friends away, and explained the stratagem. This was convincing proof to
both of them that thousands of persons had suffered unjustly; they knew their own
innocence, and shuddered to think what their fate might have been, if an enemy, instead
of a friend, had put such a confession into the mouth of a criminal. One of these Jesuits
was Frederick Spee, the author of the "Cautio Criminalis," published in 1631. This work,
exposing the horrors of the witch trials, had a most salutary effect in Germany:
Schonbrunn, Archbishop and Elector of Menz, abolished the torture entirely within his
dominions, and his example was imitated by the Duke of Brunswick and other potentates.
The number of supposed witches immediately diminished, and the violence of the mania
began to subside. The Elector of Brandenburg issued a rescript, in 1654, with respect to
the case of Anna of Ellerbrock, a supposed witch, forbidding the use of torture, and
stigmatizing the swimming of witches as an unjust, cruel, and deceitful test.
This was the beginning of the dawn after the long-protracted darkness. The tribunals no
longer condemned witches to execution by hundreds in a year. Wurzburg, the grand
theatre of the burnings, burned but one, where, forty years previously, it had burned three
score. From 1660 to 1670, the electoral chambers in all parts of Germany constantly
commuted the sentence of death passed by the provincial tribunals into imprisonment for
life, or burning on the cheek.
A truer philosophy had gradually disabused the public mind. Learned men freed
themselves from the trammels of a debasing superstition, and governments, both civil and
ecclesiastical, repressed the popular delusion they had so long encouraged. The
Parliament of Normandy condemned a number of women to death, in the year 1670, on
the old charge of riding on broomsticks to the Domdaniel; but Louis XIV. commuted the
sentence into banishment for life. The Parliament remonstrated, and sent the King the
following remarkable request. The reader will, perhaps, be glad to see this document at
length. It is of importance, as the last effort of a legislative assembly to uphold this great
error; and the arguments they used, and the instances they quoted, are in the highest
degree curious. It reflects honour upon the memory of Louis XIV. that he was not swayed
by it.
"REQUEST OF THE PARLIAMENT OF ROUEN TO THE KING, IN 1670.
"SIRE,
"EMBOLDENED by the authority which your Majesty has committed into our hands in
the province of Normandy, to try and punish offences, and more particularly those
offences of the nature of witchcraft, which tend to the destruction of religion and the ruin
of nations, we, your Parliament, remonstrate humbly with your Majesty upon certain
cases of this kind which have been lately brought before us. We cannot permit the letter
addressed by your Majesty's command to the Attorney-General of this district, for the
reprieve of certain persons condemned to death for witchcraft, and for the staying of
proceedings in several other cases, to remain unnoticed, and without remarking upon the
consequences which may ensue. There is also a letter from your Secretary of State,
declaring your Majesty's intention to commute the punishment of these criminals into one

of perpetual banishment, and to submit to the opinion of the Procureur-General, and of
the most learned members of the Parliament of Paris, whether, in the matter of witchcraft,
the jurisprudence of the Parliament of Rouen is to be followed in preference to that of the
Parliament of Paris, and of the other parliaments of the kingdom which judge differently.
"Although by the ordinances of the Kings your predecessors, Parliaments have been
forbidden to pay any attention to lettres de cachet; we, nevertheless, from the knowledge
which we have, in common with the whole kingdom, of the care bestowed by your
Majesty for the good of your subjects, and from the submission and obedience to your
commandments which we have always manifested, have stayed all proceedings, in
conformity to your orders; hoping that your Majesty, considering the importance of the
crime of witchcraft, and the consequences likely to ensue from its impunity, will be
graciously pleased to grant us once more your permission to continue the trials, and
execute judgment upon those found guilty. And as, since we received the letter of your
Secretary of State, we have also been made acquainted with the determination of your
Majesty, not only to commute the sentence of death passed upon these witches into one
of perpetual banishment from the province, but to re-establish them in the possession of
their goods and chattels, and of their good fame and character, your Parliament have
thought it their duty, on occasion of these crimes, the greatest which men can commit, to
make you acquainted with the general and uniform feelings of the people of this province
with regard to them; it being, moreover, a question in which are concerned the glory of
God and the relief of your suffering subjects, who groan under their fears from the threats
and menaces of this sort of persons, and who feel the effects of them every day in the
mortal and extraordinary maladies which attack them, and the surprising damage and loss
of their possessions.
"Your Majesty knows well that there is no crime so opposed to the commands of God as
witchcraft, which destroys the very foundation of religion, and draws strange
abominations after it. It is for this reason, Sire, that the Scriptures pronounce the
punishment of death against offenders, and that the church and the holy fathers have
fulminated their anathemas, and that canonical decisions have one and all decreed the
most severe punishments, to deter from this crime; and that the Church of France,
animated by the piety of the Kings your predecessors, has expressed so great a horror at
it, that, not judging the punishment of perpetual imprisonment, the highest it has the
power to inflict, sufficiently severe, it has left such criminals to be dealt with by the
secular power.
"It has been the general feeling of all nations that such criminals ought to be condemned
to death, and all the ancients were of the same opinion. The law of the "Twelve Tables,"
which was the principal of the Roman laws, ordains the same punishment. All
jurisconsults agreed in it, as well as the constitutions of the Emperors, and more
especially those of Constantine and Theodosius, who, enlightened by the Gospel, not
only renewed the same punishment, but also deprived, expressly, all persons found guilty
of witchcraft of the right of appeal, and declared them to be unworthy of a prince's mercy.
And Charles VIII, Sire, inspired by the same sentiments, passed that beautiful and severe
ordinance (cette belle et severe ordonnance), which enjoined the judges to punish witches

according to the exigencies of the case, under a penalty of being themselves fined or
imprisoned, or dismissed from their office; and decreed, at the same time, that all persons
who refused to denounce a witch, should be punished as accomplices; and that all, on the
contrary, who gave evidence against one, should be rewarded.
"From these considerations, Sire, and in the execution of so holy an ordinance, your
parliaments, by their decrees, proportion their punishments to the guilt of the offenders:
and your Parliament of Normandy has never, until the present time, found that its practice
was different from that of other courts; for all the books which treat upon this matter cite
an infinite number of decrees condemning witches to be burnt, or broken on the wheel, or
to other punishments. The following are examples: -- In the time of Chilperic, as may be
seen in Gregory of Tours, b. vi, c. 35 of his History of France: all the decrees of the
Parliament of Paris passed according to, and in conformity with, this ancient
jurisprudence of the kingdom, cited by Imbert, in his "Judicial Practice;" all those cited
by Monstrelet, in 1459, against the witches of Artois; the decrees of the same Parliament,
of the l3th of October 1573, against Mary Le Fief, native of Saumur; of the 21st of
October 1596, against the Sieur de Beaumont, who pleaded, in his defence, that he had
only sought the aid of the devil for the purpose of unbewitching the afflicted and of
curing diseases; of the 4th of July 1606, against Francis du Bose; of the 20th of July
1582, against Abel de la Rue, native of Coulommiers; of the 2nd of October 1593, against
Rousseau and his daughter; of 1608, against another Rousseau and one Peley, for
witchcraft and adoration of the devil at the Sabbath, under the figure of a he-goat, as
confessed by them; the decree of 4th of February 1615, against Leclerc, who appealed
from the sentence of the Parliament of Orleans, and who was condemned for having
attended the Sabbath, and confessed, as well as two of his accomplices, who died in
prison, that he had adored the devil, renounced his baptism and his faith in God, danced
the witches' dance, and offered up unholy sacrifices; the decrees of the 6th of May 1616,
against a man named Leger, on a similar accusation; the pardon granted by Charles IX to
Trois Echelles, upon condition of revealing his accomplices, but afterwards revoked for
renewed sorcery on his part; the decree of the Parliament of Paris, cited by Mornac in
1595; the judgments passed in consequence of the commission given by Henry IV to the
Sieur de Lancre, councillor of the Parliament of Bourdeaux; of the 20th of March 1619,
against Etienne Audibert; those passed by the Chamber of Nerac, on the 26th of June
1620, against several witches; those passed by the Parliament of Toulouse in 1577, as
cited by Gregory Tolosanus, against four hundred persons accused of this crime, and who
were all marked with the sign of the devil. Besides all these, we might recall to your
Majesty's recollection the various decrees of the Parliament of Provence, especially in the
case of Gaufredy in 1611; the decrees of the Parliament of Dijon, and those of the
Parliament of Rennes, following the example of the condemnation of the Marshal de
Rays, who was burned in 1441, for the crime of witchcraft, in presence of the Duke of
Brittany; -- all these examples, Sire, prove that the accusation of witchcraft has always
been punished with death by the Parliaments of your kingdom, and justify the uniformity
of their practice.
"These, Sire, are the motives upon which your Parliament of Normandy has acted in
decreeing the punishment of death against the persons lately brought before it for this
