
AU3772_book.fm Page 593 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-one:

Application of Capital in Practice

593

factors, quite as much as the amount of actual dollars, affect your status,
and are factors in answering the question, “Am I out on a limb and, if so,
how far out?”
To make this perfectly clear, we could take 80% of our capital, say $8000
out of $10,000, and put this amount into the market by purchasing a conservative preferred stock, outright. A great rise in the general market might
bring us an increase in value of a few points, perhaps 4% or 5%. And
conversely, a great decline might depress the issue by about the same
amount. An example of going to the other extreme might be to purchase
$8000 worth of options on a low-priced, extremely speculative stock, in
which the probable result within 90 days would be either a profit of several
hundred percent, or a total loss of $8000.
Obviously, we could vary our status during the progress of the market
either by increasing or decreasing the amount of the total commitment, or
by changing the nature of the account, switching part of the total into more
or less speculative stocks, higher- or lower-priced stocks, and also by varying
the amount of margin used.
In Appendix A we will show how the principal factors affecting a given
sum of capital used (namely: sensitivity, price, and margin) can be combined
into one figure, which we are going to call the Composite Leverage Index.
EN: Once again Magee demonstrates a practical vision and intuitive understanding
both of the markets and of the basic character of investing far ahead of investment
theory and understanding of his time. What we have in this concept is nothing less
than the original glimmerings of VAR, or Value at Risk. The concepts and practices
of VAR are succinctly summarized in Chapter 42.
It is perfectly true that you must vary your Composite Leverage (EN: risk
exposure) so as to take advantage of the fast-moving central portions of
important moves, using a lower Composite Leverage at the beginning of
such moves, and during the tapering-off or turning periods near the end.
However, it is one thing to express the Composite Leverage accurately,
and another thing to write a formula for applying specific degrees of leverage
at particular times. The method suggested at the very beginning of this
chapter has some value, but owing to the Secondary Reactions and the
difficulty of determining Major Trends in individual stocks, it is not possible
to make this into the neat, pat rule we are looking for.
It must be a matter of experience, or intuition based on experience. You
will not permit your Composite Leverage factor to run out to a dangerous
point on the limb. Neither will you allow it to become so low during times
of good market opportunity that you are not getting full benefits from the
move.
We can keep the general shape of a Major Swing in our minds as we
consider this. Bull Markets normally rise through a series of irregular
advances and declines, starting with a moderate upward trend, and gradually accelerating as the market approaches its ultimate top. Bear Markets are
likely to move fastest at the start, and taper off gradually toward the end.
Bear Markets are steeper than Bull Markets. These considerations will help

AU3772_book.fm Page 594 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

594

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

us to judge the times when the market will offer the best opportunities, the
times when our Composite Leverage should be increased.
There are other factors, even harder to pin down in simple figures. We
would, at times, make switches of our holdings for reasons that had no direct
relation to the factors making up the Composite Leverage Index of the stocks.
We know, for example, that high-grade issues, the active market leaders, and
perhaps some stocks of a more conservative nature will tend to start their
moves in a Bull Market fairly early, and to continue their advance at a fairly
steady pace. Eventually, they will reach their tops and make a Reversal
Pattern. They will decline from this point, probably at a steeper average
angle than the ascent. Low-priced and low-grade issues, on the other hand,
tend to be slow in getting started, will remain dormant during the early
phases of a Bull Market, and will then suddenly and spectacularly skyrocket
in a series of moves that brings them to their ultimate Top. However, this
Top is likely to be reached at a later point (perhaps months later) than the
point at which many of the more conservative stocks topped out. The speculative group will then drop very fast and will return to the dead levels of
inaction before the conservative group has finished its more leisurely Major
Decline.
This means that you will do well to concentrate your Bull Market trading
in the early stages, in the higher-grade stocks, and in the later stages, in the
lower-grade stocks. In a Bear Market, you would perhaps be able to make
short sales unsuccessfully in high-grade stocks even while some of the “cats
and dogs” were still completing their final run-up; but you would be watching for the opportunity to cover those shorts and go short the low-grade
stocks as soon as their Reversal was signaled.
Appendix A will go into the Composite Leverage Index. It should be a
useful gauge for you in your market operations, and a protection against
overtrading. But do not expect that you can use it mechanically as an index
against the market to answer all your questions involving the nature and
size of your commitments. For in gauging the condition of the Major Trend
at any time, your own experience and judgment must be the final arbiters.

Put and Call Options
Options of various sorts have a long history in commercial markets. Nearly
2000 years ago, the merchants who operated in the Mediterranean region
used “to arrive” agreements which amounted to option contracts, as insurance to reduce the risks of storm and piracy. Modern commodity futures
contracts resemble stock options in their dual nature of serving either as
trading media or as insurance devices. Options are also widely used in real
estate transactions and in various other applications.
For many years, stock options were traded only on the basis of individual
agreement between a buyer or a writer, and an opposite number, directly or
through a broker or dealer. The customer and the writer were free to decide

AU3772_book.fm Page 595 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-one:

Application of Capital in Practice

595

what stock (any stock) would be optioned, at what exercise or striking price,
for what period of time, and at what premium.
In 1973, a new method of handling option contracts was inaugurated by
the Chicago Board Options Exchange and later the American Stock
Exchange, and then to other Exchanges around the country in which call
options on a selected list of actively traded stocks are offered with standard
expiration dates (like commodity contracts) and at definite exercise prices,
the premium depending on the bids and offers of buyers and writers. An
excellent guide to this rapidly expanding market is (EN) Options as a Strategic
Investment by Lawrence G. McMillan.
EN: In the Internet Age options and derivatives markets have attained an
astounding economic importance. One amusing way of measuring this importance
is by listing some of the great debacles which have occurred to major traders of
derivatives. Bank Negara, Malaysia’s central bank, lost $5B (billion) in 1992–93
through bad bets on exchange rates. Showa Shell Seikiyu, Japan, lost $1.58B in
1993. Metallgesellschaft, Germany, lost $1.34B in the same period. Barings Bank
lost $1.33B on stock index futures. From 1987–1995 known losses like this totaled
$16.7B. And, as Magee would say, etc., etc. Of course, compared to the estimated
total market in 1995 of $25T (trillion), this is a mere bagatelle. Perhaps this is
sufficient to warn the general investor that the field is strewn with financial mines
for even the sophisticated.
EN9: If the investor considers stocks a complex or difficult area (though it is
hoped this book will make it less so for him) options are exponentially more difficult.
Professionals beat amateurs at that game so thoroughly and so often as to consider
it easy money. So the general investor should be sternly warned that much training
and study should be undertaken before becoming fodder for the pros.
EN9: Tradestation, the superlatively fine trading system and brokerage operation, distributed with Tradestation 2000i, its standalone software package, an intelligent little book by Charlie Wright, Trading for a Living which among its other
fine points offered a plan for the ongoing allocation of capital to trading.

AU3772_book.fm Page 596 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 597 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter forty-two

Portfolio Risk Management*
As we suggested in the preceding chapter, there is some relation between
the state or stage of a Major Market and its potentialities for profit. There
are many mechanical plans and systems for coping with the problem, but
we do not believe it can be fully solved by mechanical means alone. We
mentioned one plan by which the commitments were governed according
to the consensus of trends in an entire portfolio of charts. EN: The Magee
Evaluative Index, or MEI. There are other plans which depend on pyramiding
the commitment as the trend proceeds; and still others which are based on
averaging costs by increasing the commitment working against the trend,
that is, by buying on a scale-down at progressively lower levels in a Bear
Market, and selling on a scale-up in Bull Markets. (EN9: Invitations to disaster,
both techniques. Avoid such methods.)
None of the plans, taken by themselves, are adequate to answer the
questions of when to buy and when to sell. The primary purpose of this
book is to study the technical phenomena of individual stocks. If we can
learn from the charts at what points to buy and under what conditions to
sell, we have acquired the basic machinery for successful trading. On the
other hand, obviously, if your buying and selling are at points which more
often than not result in net losses, then it makes no difference how you divide
up your capital or apply it in the market, for it will be bound to shrink until,
eventually, it has all disappeared. EN: An investor who finds himself in this
situation should set a benchmark. He should decide that if he loses 50% of his capital
he will quit trading and put his money in mutual funds or in the hands of an advisor.
Generally speaking, an advisor is preferable to a mutual fund. And both are preferable
to an investor with two left feet. They can certainly do no worse than a consistently
losing performer.
The first problem, then, is to learn to use the technical tools, patterns,
trends, Supports, Resistances, etc. Then we can consider how much money
we will risk and in what way.
We have already seen that it makes a difference, sometimes a great
difference, how we apply our capital. The various factors of price level,
sensitivity, and margin enter into the concept we are going to call the Composite Leverage Index. In Appendix A, we will give a definition of this.

* “A Discussion of Composite Leverage” in the seventh edition has been moved to Appendix A.

597

AU3772_book.fm Page 598 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

598

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Meanwhile, we have said enough so you will understand what we are
driving at if we use the term in connection with your market commitments.
You realize, of course, that you do not want to be so conservative that
you will rule out practically all opportunities for making gains. If you decide
never to oppose the Primary Trend, you will have to be inactive during long
Secondary Trends, and may be left waiting, sometimes for weeks on end,
for a continuation of the Primary Move. Naturally, you will pass up all weak
signals and convergent trends, and shun new commitments after very active
blow-offs or Panic Climaxes. You could, no doubt, carry your refinement of
caution so far that your percentage of success, instead of being a mere 60,
70, or 80%, might approach 90%; you might actually be right 95% of the time
in your decisions. But this extreme conservatism would also mean that you
would trade only in the very finest possible situations, when every factor
was clean-cut and favorable. You would not have such opportunities very
often. The result might be a profit, but too small a profit to justify all the
work and study you would be putting into your charts, for you can obtain
nominally respectable returns on your capital without very much study and
without much risk, and you must expect a much higher rate of return if your
efforts are to be worthwhile.
EN: These “nominally respectable returns” are obtained by investing in T Bonds
and similar instruments. Bond traders and investors traditionally consider these
investments “risk free,” which is, of course, another form of the denial of reality. In
reality as David Dreman has demonstrated (Contrarian Investment Strategy,
Simon & Schuster) bonds are a kind of deteriorating asset due to the unarrestable
depreciation in the commodity-denominated value of currency.
In order to put your charts to work, you have to avail yourself of the
higher-leveraged stocks, stocks which carry more opportunity for gain and,
hence, more risk of loss. You have to accept, deliberately, a greater risk than
the man who is content to buy a “safe” security, put it in the box, and forget it.
By maintaining your Composite Leverage (EN: Portfolio Risk) at or near
some constant level which your experience and judgment tells you is safe
for the particular state of the market, you will be protected against overcaution. More important, if you maintain this Composite Leverage in your
operations, you will be protected against unconsciously overtrading. This is
a fault more common than extreme caution, and can be a dangerous enemy
even when your percentage of theoretical trading gains is high. When you
select a definite Composite Leverage (EN: i.e., Portfolio Risk Strategy) and
adhere to it in your trading commitments, changing it as necessary to meet
changed conditions, you will be forced to restrain your enthusiasm within
safe limits, and you will be continually aware of the risks you are taking.

Overtrading — and a Paradox
This leads to another point. A series of identical percentage gains and losses
on your capital does not give you a series of equal gains and losses in dollars
and cents. This is a serious problem, worth understanding, for a trader who

AU3772_book.fm Page 599 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two:

Portfolio Risk Management

599

