shorter-term EMAs in September 2011.
Our conclusion is that as of September 2011, for our long-term portfolio, we should seek strategies
that will benefit from a bear market. In other words, it should involve shorting risk assets and being
long safe haven assets.
So when selecting an auto-trading system, professional manager, or social network trade expert to

manage a long-term portfolio (or a trade strategy), you'd want one with a track record that suggests
success when risk assets are in a long-term downtrend.
In theory, the same thinking could be applied to even short-term time frames, though as we've noted
repeatedly, shorter-term trends are less stable, and those that occur over a matter of hours or days are
even less so. Short-term trading works only for those good at RAMM and technical analysis. Until
you're proven with short-term trading, stick to proven systems or traders for that.
How low could the S&P 500 (and by implication other risk assets) fall given the Head and
Shoulders reversal pattern? As we learned in Chapter 4, the general rule of thumb is that the potential
pullback is double the distance from the tops to the neckline. The tops were at about 1,500 and the
neckline was at about 800—a 700-point or 46 percent drop! Another 700-point drop would bring the
S&P 500 to 100, a 93 percent drop!
Obviously you wouldn't base your long-term portfolio strategy on this one indicator, though. Also,
you'd refer to fundamental analysis for confirmation or refutation of that bearish analysis. There is
significant fundamental evidence that as of this writing, markets are in a multiyear downtrend. See
some of the most important financial books in recent years on the topic:
This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly , by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth
S. Rogoff (Princeton University Press, 2009).
Endgame: The End of the Debt Supercycle and How It Changes Everything, by John Mauldin
and Jonathan Tepper (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
Planet Ponzi: How Politicians and Bankers Stole Your Future , by Mitch Feierstein (Bantam
Press, 2012).
Both suggest the fundamental outlook for the coming years could be very bleak. Both are also
considered to be among the most important books in recent years on financial markets, and very
worthwhile for framing your longer-term perspective.

BINARY OPTIONS: TRADING MADE EASIER
The other big innovation in forex trading that has shown dramatic growth in recent years is the binary
option (BO; aka digital or fixed-return options). Like forex social trading and social networks, it's so
new that there's little objective information out about it. So for the second time in one chapter, and for
the first time in any forex book, I'll introduce a new approach to forex that, when done intelligently,
can provide exceptional gains without exceptional risk.
The following is a summary of my full study, Binary Options: Pros and Cons, which is available
on the website, thesensibleguidetoforex.com. It is one of the more valuable parts of this book, because
the information is both very worthwhile and currently unavailable elsewhere. Binary options are an
incredibly useful tool. While their popularity has grown enormously since they became available to
retail traders just a few years ago (they were formerly reserved for the big boys), they remain an
underutilized tool, particularly for traders seeking a simplified way to ride a multiday or multiweek
trend with very controlled (though not insignificant) risk.
Make 70 percent in under an hour! Limited risk! Just forecast the trend and rake in the dough!
No experience necessary!
Try to research binary options, and that's the typical way they're presented. The material is more

focused on attracting reckless speculators than on reaching and teaching prudent, serious traders and
investors how and when to use binary options.
Like most rational adults, I gave up believing in get-rich-quick schemes shortly after I abandoned
belief in Santa Claus and that Mom was still a virgin. Too bad (not for Mom) but reality beckons.
The popularity of binary options for forex and other assets has literally exploded since 201012
because their combination of simplicity, high profit potential, and controlled risk makes them an ideal
introductory trading vehicle.
Unfortunately, that same simplicity has attracted gamblers and thus gambler-oriented websites,
hence the unfortunate casino feel of many brokers as they aim their marketing at the ignorant and
reckless, undermining the credibility of binary options among the more serious traders and investors.
However, it would be a big mistake to ignore binary options. Like a junkyard, it isn't the most posh
venue, but there's very serious money to be made without exceptional talent or effort if you're willing
to put in the requisite work.
As compelling an option as social trading is, most of us should aspire to do at least some part-time
trading in order to improve our skills and market awareness; and if you're going to trade, you will
want to use binary options at least some of the time, perhaps regularly. There are just too many
situations in which they can't be beat for quickly exploiting a trend, exceptional potential returns, low
entry cost, and clearly predefined maximum loss.
Ignore the suspicious-sounding claims of many binary options brokers and the gambling mentality
that pervades some of their websites. When used intelligently, mostly via binary options with weekly
or monthly expirations, binary options in fact can be an extremely useful complement or substitute to
traditional spot market instruments. Their simplicity, availability at very small and low-cost position
sizes, and more controlled risk make them at times an ideal vehicle for:
Beginning traders or anyone else seeking a simpler way to trade that allows for faster decision
making.
Those with limited capital.
More advanced and well-funded serious traders seeking a way to jump on a short-term trend
quickly (because binary options require less trade planning) with strictly controlled downside
risk.
When first learning about binary options, I couldn't find any decent objective review of their
advantages and disadvantages that made clear when and for whom they are appropriate. The
following is the product of my own research and analysis to answer that need. I believe you'll find it
very helpful and objective despite my affiliation with the industry.
Full disclosure: As of this writing I provide analysis for one broker, Anyoption.com, the only
broker I'd consider using (were I not a related party and thus prohibited) because as of the time of this
writing:
It is the only broker I know that provides weekly and monthly expirations. That is a critical
advantage for the trader. These are time frames in which individual traders with some analytical
skills have a very realistic chance of being profitable, if they're selective about which trades they
enter and follow the principles we've discussed.
The support, resistance, and other indicators are old enough to be meaningful. There's enough
time for the publicly available fundamental data (interest rate trends, growth rates, jobs and

spending trends, etc.) to have some predictable impact on the trend, and binary options are all
about being right about the direction of that trend.
Whereas options that expire within an hour or a day are usually suitable only for the reckless
gamblers or skilled day traders. As we've noted earlier, intraday (never mind intrahour) price
movements are mostly based on unpredictable short-term money flows from big players.
Admittedly, these short-term options can be useful for news traders.
It offers one of the widest selections of instruments found among binary options brokers.
It offers a wider range of ways to trade binary options than most other brokers.
Anyoption.com has its faults, but they aren't disadvantages relative to other brokers because these
same faults are shared by the entire binary brokerage industry (like limited charting tools,
inability to place limit orders for entries and exits, etc).
It typically ranks at or near the top of every binary options broker survey I've seen, so I'm not the
only one it has impressed.
Most binary option brokers offer only very short-term daily or hourly expirations—too short a
period for most traders to make any reliable forecast about the trend.
The industry is growing very rapidly, and new brokers and offerings appear regularly, so by all
means do your own online research to find the most updated information on which brokers are
offering what features.
To cover binary options properly requires almost 50 pages, because binary options are so new to
most people and I can't be sure you'll find other trustworthy materials elsewhere on whether binary
options are right for you. Thus more coverage is needed.
In order to avoid interfering with the continuity of the book, this full review is in the appendix on
binary options found on the website. The following is a brief summary of the key points you should
know to give you an overview of what's covered.

Background
The five most common types of binary options are the asset-or-nothing, cash-or-nothing, no-touch,
one-touch, and double-no-touch/double-one-touch. The most popular of these is the cash-or-nothing
binary option, which is typically what's referenced when describing binary options and what is most
commonly offered by most brokers. The other varieties are not always available, with most brokers at
best offering a few but not all of them and not for all instruments. Unless stated otherwise, we'll be
covering the cash-or-nothing type.

How They Work
With regular plain-vanilla options:
When you buy an option, you're buying a right, but not an obligation, to buy or sell the underlying
asset (a stock, commodity, currency pair, etc.) at a certain price called the strike price, at any
time until the expiration date, after which time the option contract expires and is worthless.
If you think the price will go higher than the strike price, you buy a call option, which is the right
to buy at the lower strike price. You buy calls when you think the trend will rise over the given
expiration period.

If you think the price will go lower than the strike price, you buy a put option, which is the right
to sell at the higher strike price. You buy puts when you believe the trend will fall during the
expiration period.
You can place orders in advance to buy or sell an option as you would in forex or other kinds of
spot market trading.
If you were right, your profit is roughly proportional to how far the price of the underlying asset
moved in your favor (in the money) at the time you sell the option. For example, if you bought a
call on the GBPUSD and the pair was up 3 percent when you sold, you made about 3 percent. If
you bought a put, you lose the full amount, but no more, of what you paid for the option. The
opposite would apply if the pair fell by 3 percent at the time you sold the option: the put would
be worth about 3 percent more and the call would be worthless if price remained below the
strike price when the option expired. Your profit varies with how far price moves in your favor.
If there's enough time left before the expiration date, you may still be able to sell a losing option
position (out of the money) to cut your loss, because your buyer thinks that price could still turn
around.
Yes, this is an oversimplification for the sake of illustration. In many cases option prices do not
move in the same proportion as the price of the underlying asset.
The main differences with binary options include these four points:
1. Fixed holding period: Generally, binary options can't be sold before expiration, so there is no
chance of taking profits or cutting losses before the expiration date.
2. Fixed payout: If the option expires in the money, it generally yields about 70 percent profit
regardless of how little the underlying asset moved in your favor. Some brokers credit you 5
percent to 15 percent of the option's cost if it expires out of the money.
3. Shorter expiration periods: Binary option expiration periods range from about one hour
(sometimes less) to one month at most. Plain-vanilla options can be held for much longer periods.
4. No advance order placement: Generally you can't place entry limit orders. If you want to be
long via a call or to be short via a put at a certain price, you have to wait to place your order until
that price is hit.

Pros and Cons
There is much more on these and others in the Appendix (Binary Options: Pros and Cons) on the
book's companion website (thesensibleguidetoforex.com), but here are the key points in brief.
Pros
High potential profit: The fixed payouts are high, especially considering:
The short expiration times: You can earn about 70 percent1 in as little as an hour or at most up
to a month. While it's not realistic to expect most traders to be consistently profitable on very
short time frames like one hour or one day, the odds are much better when trading binary
options with weekly and monthly expiration dates.
Strictly defined maximum loss: You can't lose more than the cost of the option. With standard
trading, even stop loss orders are no guarantee against unplanned higher losses if the market
suddenly gaps past your stop loss price.

