
44

Inside the Currency Market

Along came Hermann Paasche in 1874 and identiﬁed this formula:

p i,tq i,t

∑p q
i

i,o i,t

For individual item i, price at the base period to be pi/o, at observation
period to be pi/t and quantity at the base period to be qi/t.
The denominator and numerator are total expenditures for all items
at the base and observation period. Quantities are ﬁxed at the observation
period. Earlier ﬁxed-weight formulas were identiﬁed in 1823 by Joseph Lowe,
considered the father of the CPI Index.
The formula is:
Plo(Po, Pt, Q b)
This formula compares prices in a base month O, Po, with those in month
t, Pt using a quantity vector O, Q o as weights.
IMF Price Indexes and History

Others came along in the 1920s such as Irving Fisher and Correa MoylanWalsh
to further build on Lowe, Laspeyres, Paasche, and others to form more
advanced models. The difference between older and newer indices is the older
indexes ﬁx weight using an arithmetic mean while the newer indices use a
chain link or ﬁx weight with a geometric mean.
The Hermann Paasche Index in a longer form:
n

∑p Q
Pp(Po, P1, Q o, Q 1) 
∑p Q
i=1
n

l,i

l,i

o,i

l,i

Irving Fisher Ideal-Pf (Po, P1, Q o, Q 1)  (PL(Po, P1, Q o, Q 1)
Pp (Po,P1, Q o,Q 1))1/2
The Fisher Quantity Index is a chain link of the Fisher Ideal index and
identiﬁed by this formula:
Fq,t  (Lq,t )1/2  (Pq,t )1/2
This formula is employed by governments to factor gross domestic
product (GDP). Many employ the Fisher Ideal and quantify it with the Fisher
Quantity Index.

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

45

Nominal effective exchange rates are then utilized and factored against
each nation’s currency. Think of this as Cassel’s Absolute PPP. Why nominal
effective exchange rates? So the index isn’t jolted by one nation that may have,
for example, a high inﬂation rate against other index members’ currency or
a one-nation calamity won’t shake the index price. Further, the nominal rate
is used because whatever scale is utilized to measure the index against other
nominal exchange rates can be deﬂated. Nations have various scale factors.
New Zealand scales its index based on the nation’s GDP, while some
nations scale their index based on the CPI to measure prices and inﬂation at
the same time. Some use producer prices. Australia utilizes a price deﬂater.
The reason for deﬂating the scale against nominal exchange rates is to capture
the REER accurately. And this is our intention, to capture the true rate to
understand further the spot rate.
REERs can only be factored on a monthly basis as nations release their
economic reports. Economic reports are then scaled against the respective
index to form a REER. In many instances, this occurs at month end and a
time to really watch exchange rates as refunding and refactoring efforts occur.
Central banks must replenish their supply of foreign and domestic currencies
in the spot market, termed reserve diversiﬁcation. Month end is important
in the spot market because it may experience volatility due to rebalancing.
All nations have various methods and reasons for managing their economies,
and that reason is measured within their index.
Following is a list of the major trading nations and their index construction and formulas. One will notice that variations exist from central
bank to central bank. The determination is to consider a REER based on
the given data methodology in order to proﬁt. It also helps to know that all
central banks report their TWI factored numbers directly on their web site
every day while some emerging market nations, if they have a TWI, do not.
While all nations report single-index numbers, it is important that each individual nation within the index is also reported along with their historic rates. This
is not only where a trend can be found, but in which pair, what direction, and how
far can also be determined. Following is a list of each major nation, major trading
partners, percentages for each partner within the index, trade strategies, and major
exports. This is all the necessary information to evaluate a spot-trade decision.
Further, the indices listed are the foundation for all modern-day indices
in terms of factoring consumer price indices for many nations: Paasche in
particular is employed by Japan and New Zealand, for example. The United
States employs a Laspeyres Index with a geometric mean to factor the 8,018
CPI items in their index.
Some nations factor stock market indices based on Laspeyres while
others factor balance of payments using one of the previously discussed

46

Inside the Currency Market

indexes. Slight variations may exist from nation to nation, but the basic formulas haven’t changed since inception. The measure for all indices is the relationship between quantity and price and the means to handle an exorbitant
amount of items. No limits exist with the proper index.
Finally, a spot trade against a TWI must always be factored as home
currency/foreign currency. Both can be conﬁrmed as foreign currency/
home currency. As one pair bottoms, the other tops.

Australia
Australia adopted a free-ﬂoat currency in December 1983. The Australian
dollar was pegged against the British pound from 1971 to 1974, then against
the U.S. dollar for many years. At one point, the Australian dollar was
employed as a crawling peg to their TWI. A peg to the United Kingdom
meant that Australia’s dollar would almost mimic the moves of the British
pound while a crawling peg meant that any exchange-rate movement in the
Australian dollar would be adjusted with their TWI due to the ﬁxed nature of
that index. This however caused volatility swings so Australia adopted their
trade weight index in 1974 and revised it in 1988 to reﬂect their free-ﬂoat
status.
Based on 2008 and 2009 trade weight data, Australia’s TWI was comprised of 22 currencies that reﬂected 93.2 percent of imports and exports
with 22 nations.
Country (Currency)

Initial Trade Weight

Updated Trade Weight

China (renminbi)

18.5

22.5371

Japan (yen)

17.1

14.9356

Euro zone (euro)

10.4

9.9174

United States (dollar)

8.9

8.5423

South Korea (won)

6.2

6.4074

Singapore (dollar)

4.6

4.3425

Great Britain (pound)

4.99

3.5337

New Zealand (dollar)

4.7

4.0894

India (rupee)

4.2

4.9052

Thailand (baht)

3.8

4.6668

Malaysia (ringgit)

2.9284

3.1598

47

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

Taiwan (dollar)

2.9

2.7943

Indonesia (rupiah)

2.2

2.4527

Vietnam (dong)

1.3

1.2292

United Arab Emirates (dirham)

1.3

1.1617

Papua New Guinea (kina)

1.1

1.3340

Hong Kong (dollar)

1.1

1.0461

Canada (dollar)

0.9

0.8213

South Africa (rand)

0.8

0.7530

Saudi Arabia (riyal)

0.7743

Switzerland (franc)

0.7

0.6820

Sweden (krona)

0.7

0.6885

Not enough trade ﬂow
for consideration

Notice the 4 percent increase in the Chinese weight, the Japanese decrease
of 2 percent, and the U.S. dollar and euro each decreased by one half of a
percent.
Exports include coal, iron ore, crude, aluminum, copper, zinc, gold,
nickel, wheat, sugar, wool, beef, and milk powder to name the vast majority of commodities listed in Australia’s Index of Commodity Prices. Crude
accounts for 5 percent of total export commodity receipts. This constitutes
Australia in the category of a commodity currency based on IMF standards
of 50 percent exports of commodities.
From 1970 to 1988, Australia calculated its index based on an arithmetic mean. Since 1988, a geometric mean has been used. Australia’s TWI
is based on trade shares of the 22 nations with which it trades. If Australia
conducts 20 percent of its trade with the United States, the United States
would receive a factor that represents 20 percent trade in its TWI. Each
trading partner receives a percentage of trade shares to eventually normalize
the index to equal 100 although that may not always occur because of an
occasional import or export from a nation outside the index. The goal is to
reach proximity to 100.
Formulas are calculated using REER based on a ratio of the implicit price
deﬂator for exports and imports of goods and services. Australia factors price
deﬂators two different ways to ensure integrity of the ﬁnal index number.
For the ﬁrst method, divide current price estimates by constant price estimates for imports and exports. The base period is 1989 to 1990 and is equal
to 100. For the second method, divide imports by exports. Finally, Australia

48

Inside the Currency Market

calculates consumer prices, unit labor costs, and the GDP deﬂator as a ratio
of Australia’s “cost measure against the weighted geometric average of the
exchange rate adjusted cost measures”. The base period is 1989 to 1990 and
is equal to 100. An increase in the index says cost measures are too high and
must be adjusted. What is most important in Australia’s calculation is the
factor of exchange rates.
Please note the following formula:
TWIt  (A$t/A$o )a1  (E2t/ E2o  A$t/A$o )a2  . . . 
(E23t/E23o  A$t/A$o )a23  TWIo
 (E2t/E2o )a2  . . . 
(E23t/E23o )a23  A$t/A$o  TWIo
A$  Units of U.S. dollars per Australian dollar
Ei  Units of foreign currency i per U.S. dollar. (i  2, . . . , 23)
a1  Weight of U.S. dollar
Ai  Weight of foreign currency i (i  2, . . . , 23)
o  Base period 1970  100
t  current period
Another view works like this. The index is a ratio of the Australian cost
or price weighted to the geometric average of the exchange-rate adjusted price
or cost measure of Australia’s trade partners with an Index equal to 100. An
easier way to look at the above equation may be:
TWIt  100  TT (Ej,t/Ej,o)w,j
j-1
where
TT  Product operator,
Ej,t  Number of Australian dollars per unit of foreign currency at
time t,
Ej,o  Number of Australian dollars per unit of foreign currency for
nation j in the base period, and
w,j  Weight of nation j.
It should be noted the prevailing market rates will be factored and released
10:00 a.m. Australia time, 7:00 p.m. New York time.
In 2010, Australia introduced another trade weight index termed ATWI
that incorporates sub weights and includes services, commodities, and manufacturing. The trade partner weights are:

49

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

Country (Currency)

Weight

Japan (yen)

11.56

Euro zone (euro)

17.41

China (renminbi)

10.26

United States (dollar)

16.48

Korea (won)

3.87

New Zealand (dollar)

4.10

United Kingdom (pound)

7.27

Singapore (dollar)

4.28

Malaysia (ringgit)

2.49

Taiwan (dollar)

2.11

Thailand (baht)

2.35

India (rupee)

1.99

Hong Kong (dollar)

2.31

Indonesia (rupiah)

1.95

Canada (dollar)

2.63

South Africa (rand)

1.23

Sweden (krona)

1.21

Switzerland (franc)

1.42

Denmark (krone)

1.00

Brazil (real)

1.00

Mexico (peso)

0.94

Russia (ruble)

1.25

What was found is divergence of Australian dollar/U.S. dollar in the
index will see cross-rate divergence.
The most important currency pairs to Australian trade are Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar, Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar, Australian dollar/
Japanese yen and Australian dollar/euro, Australian dollar/British pound,
Australian dollar /South Korean won, and Australian dollar/Singapore
dollar. Most would note that the euro/Australian dollar is a widely traded
pair with most brokers, especially in the United States. Australia would
like to see that pair move down as Australian dollar/euro rises to reﬂect

50

Inside the Currency Market

proﬁts in exports through favorable exchange rates. When Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar spot traded at .9100 on May 5, 2010, Australia’s TWI
was 71. 5. When Australian dollar/U.S. dollar traded at 8524 on May 28,
2010, the TWI was ﬁxed at 67.8. Does a correlation exist? Absolutely.
The TWI ﬁx occurs at 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Australia time, 7:00 p.m.
EDT and 1:00 a.m. EDT.

New Zealand
One of the most advanced central bankers among the family of nations is by far
New Zealand. With passage of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act in 1989
and the Markets Act in 1988, New Zealand was one of the ﬁrst nations to target
inﬂation within a range, leading other nations to follow suit. New Zealand is
also known for its high quality and always-reliable cutting-edge research.
New Zealand’s dollar, called the Kiwi, free ﬂoated in March 1985. Yet New
Zealand ﬁrst introduced its ﬁve-nation TWI in 1979. That TWI accounted
for its ﬁve major trading partners, the United States, Great Britain, Japan,
Germany, and Australia. With the introduction of the euro, the deutsche
mark was replaced to hold the index at ﬁve nations.
With increased import and export trade from a whole host of nations
and the introduction of cross pairs, New Zealand expanded the size of its
TWI in 1997 to cover 14 nations’ currency cross rates. But this index remains
separate from the original and ofﬁcial ﬁve-nation index. This method allows
New Zealand to capture market highs and lows more accurately and ensure
integrity of the ofﬁcial reported ﬁgure (Kite 2004).
Before 1997, New Zealand targeted inﬂation as a measure of its exchange
rate, but the weight of the TWI was based strictly on trade shares, the same
method Australia currently employs. When TWI prediction errors occurred
by an under- or overforecast of exchange rates, New Zealand changed the
index-construction methodology (Kite 2004).
New Zealand now employs a 50-50 methodology: 50 percent of the
index comprises trade shares based on a nation’s share of imports and exports
with New Zealand, while the other 50 percent is based on each currency
area’s share of the combined nominal GDP of the ﬁve-currency area. New
Zealand uses this methodology because of a belief that trade shares alone
didn’t capture inﬂation in New Zealand and in the larger economies of their
trade partners (Kite 2004). GDP allows New Zealand to measure prices and
inﬂation, especially inﬂation in the medium term, a direct and indirect effect
on exchange rates. Further, GDP methodology allows New Zealand to capture third-nation competition by a chain link. This method was derived from

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

51

the IMF’s methodology. GDP shares are calculated using GDP in the local
currency then converted into U.S. dollars.
New Zealand employs export weights based on GDP volumes and converts to index form with a base period set to 1995 Q1 to equal 100. Export
weights are expressed as a portion of the partners in the index. A Fisher Ideal
Index is then employed because it captures the geometric mean of Laspeyres
and Paasche. The formula is:
Q f  (Q l  Q p)½
the geometric mean.
Laspeyres export shares of the base period: Q l  Q 1 Wo/Q o Wo
Paasche: Q 1 W1/Q o W1  export shares of the current period
Q  GDP index at time t  0 and 1. W  export weight in time t  0 and 1.
The formula TWIy,t  ∏ I (Ei,t/Ei,o)wy  TWIy
Ei,t  Bilateral exchange rate with region I on date t,
suppose weights wiy are used in year y.
Australia accounts for 21 percent of trade with New Zealand and is the
largest trade partner followed by euro zone 15 percent, U.S. 14 percent, Japan
10.5 percent, and China 5 percent. 71 percent of New Zealand’s exports
are shipped to APEC nations such as Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada,
Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Taipei, Thailand, the
United States, and Vietnam. New Zealand’s major exports include milk powder, salted butter, cheese, logs, wood, and crude.
The most important pairs to New Zealand are New Zealand dollar/U.S.
dollar, New Zealand dollar/euro, New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen, New
Zealand dollar/British pound and New Zealand dollar/Australian dollar.
Notice the relationship with New Zealand dollar/Australian dollar for New
Zealand and Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar for Australia. Both are
major trade partners to each other and both want to reap the beneﬁts of
their respective trade. Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar is the normal
pair offered by brokers in the United States. Either way these pairs are offered,
always expect volatility. Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar is an especially volatile pair due to push and pulls by each nation who vie for a certain

52

Inside the Currency Market

price. New Zealand’s TWI is reported as an indicative rate at 11:10 a.m. New
Zealand time, 7:00 p.m. New York time.
TWI weights: U.S. dollar 0.3023, euro 0.2797, yen 0.1425, AUD
0.2126 and GBP 0.0629.
Notice the wide differentiation of time and the disconnection to the
American markets. To connect to American markets and especially money
markets, New Zealand introduced its BKBM 14:00 ﬁx on July 1, 2008.
The BKBM is New Zealand’s Bank Bill and represents the shortest interest
rate in New Zealand that encompasses Certiﬁcates of Deposit and Bills of
Exchange.
The BKBM rate is connected to the New Zealand dollar/ U.S. dollar
and the various rates between the two nations. The formal name is the
World Markets Company WM/Reuters New Zealand Fix and reported as
B1 rates on the New Zealand Central Bank site, one of the easiest and
most user-friendly central bank sites. The 14:00 ﬁx refers to 2:00 a.m. New
Zealand time, 10:00 a.m. New York time to reﬂect a 16-hour difference in
time. The purpose of the new ﬁx was to secure a benchmark rate for currencies used in contracts and to connect with the forward market in other
time zones.
Nine currencies are factored as mid rates, U.S. dollar, British pound,
Hong Kong dollar, Singapore dollar, Australian dollar, Swiss franc, Canadian
dollar, euro, and Japanese yen. Approved banks offer buy and sell rates on
one- to six-month maturities that are representative rates for New Zealand’s
Prime Bank Bill, the top interest rate.
A January 2010 development is the ﬁx during New Zealand market-trading hours for the following currency pairs: New Zealand dollar/
Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar/Canadian dollar, New Zealand
dollar/Swiss franc, New Zealand dollar/euro, New Zealand dollar/British
pound, New Zealand dollar/Hong Kong dollar, New Zealand dollar/
Japanese yen and New Zealand dollar/Singapore dollar. The purpose of
the ﬁx is to set a price for contracts settled between New Zealand and the
respective nations. It allows for the TWI to be more accurate. See Exhibit
3.1 for an historic view of New Zealand’s TWI as it tracks New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar.

Japan
Japan is a nation that must rely on its exports because it lacks natural resources.
Commodities such as oil are crucial elements that must be imported to fuel
the machinery of Japan’s productive processes.

53

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices
EXHIBIT 3.1 Historic Chart of NZ TWI and New Zealand Dollar/U.S. Dollar

NZ Dollar exchange rate & trade-weighted index
(monthly average)

80

0.9
TWI (RHS)

0.8

75

0.7

70
65

0.6

60
0.5

55

0.4
0.3

Index

NZD/USD

NZD/USD Exchange Rate (LHS)

50
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10
Source RBN2

45

Source: New Zealand Central Bank.

What held Japan together as a nation through the centuries was its focus
on education, which became a boon for their manufacturers. Because exports
are so vital to the Japanese economy, the records and statistics to evaluate their
exports and ensure a proper level of exchange rates are phenomenally detailed.
Today, Japan’s largest export trading partner is China followed by the
United States. The Japanese yen began a free ﬂoat in 1973 under the Nixon
administration that forced currencies off the gold standard. In order to earn a
place on Japan’s TWI list, at least 1 percent of Japan’s exports must go to that
particular nation. Currently, 15 nations are on the list that covers 87.3 percent
of Japan’s exports: the United States, China, euro zone, Korea, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Great Britain, Malaysia, Australia, Indonesia,
Philippines, Canada, and Mexico. Each nation earns a percentage share of the
TWI based on the average export share of each trading partner. This calculation
is factored against Japan’s Domestic Corporate Goods Price Index (DCGPI).
The DCGPI is an index comprised of many indices such as the Import Price
Index, Export Price Index, Commodity Index, and Index by Stage of Demand
and Use. The purpose of this index is to determine supply and demand in the
production process within Japan. The index as a whole is a determination of
domestic produced goods. The DCGPI is calculated based on a chain weight so
it is a continuous calculation. Further, it is calculated minus Japan’s consumption tax. The DCGPI is a regular economic release at the end of every month.
To calculate exchange rates, Japan ﬁrst calculates a nominal effective
exchange rate. The weighted average calculated as a geometric mean of the
yen’s exchange rate against other nations currencies are calculated using

54

Inside the Currency Market

the annual value of Japan’s trade with other nation’s as weights, then converted into an index. The base period index has equaled 100 since 2005, as
this index is updated every ﬁve years.
A real effective exchange rate is then calculated by deﬂating the nominal
exchange rate by the DCGPI and the correspondent nation’s indices. For the
United States and most trading partners, producer prices are utilized. China
is factored by the Price Index of Industrial Products with an estimated yearover-year change. For Australia, manufacturing output is used. The weighted
average is then factored as a geometric mean and calculated using annual
values of Japan’s trade with respective nations as weights, then converted into
an index with a base period 100 since 1973.
Nominal effective exchange rates in month m of year t (Citm ) , year 
I 1973/19741,  I 1974/19751,  1975/1976, 1,  …,  I t  1 t, i  I  t  1.
T1  Change rate of the effective exchange rate from January year t  1 to January
Year t calculated with the year t  1’s weighted value of trade and Itt, m is the
change rate from January year t to month m of year t with year t’s weighted
value of trade. The formula for Itt, m follows using a geometric mean.
It,t, m  Cartesian j (ej,t, m/ej,t, 1) wj,t. Ej,tm  Nominal exchange rate of
the yen in relation to foreign currency j at time t month m of year t and wj,t
is the weight of exports to nation j in year t. The base period is March 1973.
Most signiﬁcant currency pairs to Japan are Japanese yen/U.S. dollar,
Japanese yen/euro, Japanese yen/British pound, Japanese yen/Australian
dollar, Japanese yen/Canadian dollar, Japanese yen/Hong Kong dollar and
Japanese yen/Singapore dollar. Normally pairs are classiﬁed for trade and positive exchange-rate purposes as Japanese yen/Trading Partner to reap the beneﬁts of trade and exchange rates. But this is the Japanese, who not only must
export but they must reap the beneﬁts of those exports to ensure a healthy
economy. So it is important to watch the Japanese because they calculate to the
nth degree all factors of calculations.
Secondly, the Japanese are probably the world’s best and smartest traders.
For these reasons, the key pairs for any trader to watch are the U.S. dollar/
Japanese yen, euro/Japanese yen, Australian dollar/Japanese yen, Canadian
dollar/Japanese yen, Hong Kong dollar/Japanese yen and Singapore dollar/
Japanese yen. Evaluation of the reverse pairs should always be the ﬁrst essential element in any trade evaluation.
