
On the End of a Limb and Sawing It Off
The problem with an optimal F approach or fixed fraction of your account is 'that, once you get on a
roll, you roll too fast. Let me prove my point; if your average win/loss trade is $200 and you have 10 trades
per month and you will increase on contract at every $10,000 of profits, it will take you 50 trades or 5
months to add that first additional contract. Then it will take only 2.5 months to go from 2 to 3; about 7
weeks to boost it up to 4 contracts; 5 weeks to jump to 5; one month to reach 6; 25 days, to 7; 21 days, to 8
contracts. Eighteen days later, you are at 9, and at 16.5 days, you trade a 10 lot.
Then disaster strikes, as it surely must. You have now scooted out on the end of a limb and are sitting
there with lots of contracts on. Although the limb snaps when you have a large losing trade (3 times the
average of $200 or $600 per contract times the 10 lot so you just dropped $6,000), you have not given back
$10,000 yet. So you trade a 10 lot on the next trade and lose another $6,000. Now in two trades, you are
down $12,000 from your equity high at $100,000.
The next trade is also a loser, three in a row, for the average of $200 times the 9 lot you are now
trading and you get tagged for another $1,800 (let's call it $2,000). You are now down $14,000.
Meanwhile, a "smarter" trader decreases faster than you, cutting back two contracts for every $5,000
lost, so on the first hit he or she is back to 8 contracts, losing only $2,400, sidestepping another $6,000 hit,
and on it goes.
And It Can Get Worse by Far...

178
Let's take a winning system. It wins 55 percent of the time, and you decide to trade 25 percent of your
bank roll, starting at $25,000 on each trade. Wins are equal to losses at $1,000 each. Table 13.1 shows the
way the trades played out.
You made $1,000 yet had a 65 percent drawdown while a single contract trader would have dipped
$16,000 with a 20 percent drawdown!
Let's look at another scenario where we hit it right from the get-go winning 5 of 8 trades (Table 13.2),
a great deal, right?
Table 13.1
Winning 55 Percent of the Time

Table 13.2
A Winning Combination

Look at this ... 5 winners, 3 losers, and you are down. How can this be? Well, it is a combination of two
things, one the money management that got you to the

$58,000 also brought you down. Plus, I threw in a

kicker, the last trade was just like trades the market gives us all the time, a loss 2 times greater than the
average loss. Had it been the traditional loss, your account would be at $26,000. The smart trader who cut
back twice the amount after the first loss would have lost $5,000 on trade 7, taking him to $29,000 and
-$8,000 on the double hit on trade 8 to show a net of $31,000!

179

Looking In New Directions, Drawdown as an Asset
My trading stumbled along with spectacular up-and-down swing, while we continued looking for an
improvement, something, anything that would tame the beast. From this search came the basic idea that we
needed a formula that would tell us how many contracts to take on the next trade.
One such thought was to divide our account balance by margin+ the largest drawdown the system had
seen in the past. This sure makes a lot of sense. You are sure to get hit by a similar, if not larger, drawdown
in the future, so you had better have enough money for that plus margin. Matter of fact it struck me that one
would need an amount equal to margin + drawdown *1.5 just to be on the safe side.
Thus, if margin was $3,000 and the system's largest drawdown in the past had been $5,000, you would
need $10,500 to trade one contract ($3,000 + $5,000*1.5). This is not a bad formula, but it does have some
problems.
I am now going to show several money management schemes applied to the same system. The system
is one of the best I have, so the results will look a little too good. You should also notice the almost
unbelievable gains the system produces, millions of dollars of profits. Now the reality is this system may
not hold up in the future exactly like this. Most of you will not want to trade up to 5,000 bonds, as this test
allowed, which means one tick, the smallest price change bonds can have, will cost you $162,500 if that
one tick is against you. Let me add, it is not unusual for bonds to open 10 ticks against you, on any given
morning, that is $1,625,000! So, don't get carried away with the profits, focus on the impact money
management can have on the results.
What you should focus on is the differences in performance produced by different approaches to
managing your money. The system trades bonds, which have a $3,000 margin. Figure 13.1 shows no
money management; it simply reflects the complete results of the system from January 1990 through July
1998, starting with a $20,000 account balance.
Now we will take this same system and apply a variety of money management strategies so you can
see which one might best work for you. To arrive at the inputs, I ran the system for just the first 7 years,
then traded forward with money management for the remaining time period so the drawdown, percent
accuracy, risk/reward ratios, and the like were developed on sample data and run on out-of-sample data. I
allowed the system to trade up to 5,000 bonds, which is a heck of a lot.

180

Ryan Jones and Fixed Ratio Trading
Another friend, Ryan Jones, went at trying to solve money management like a man possessed. I met
him when he was a student at one of my seminars; I later went to his seminar on my favorite subject,
money management. Ryan has thought about the problem a great deal and spent thousands of dollars and
research formulating his solution called Fixed Fractional Trading.
Like Ralph and me, Ryan wanted to avoid the blowup phenomenon inherent in the Kelly formula. His
solution is to wander away from a fixed ratio approach of trading X contracts for every Y dollars in your
account.
His reasoning is based largely on his dislike of increasing the number of contracts too rapidly. Consider
an account with $100,000 that will trade one contract for every $10,000 in the account, meaning it will start
trading 10 contracts or units. Let's assume the average profit per trade is $250, meaning we will make $2,500
(10 contracts times $2 50) and need 5 trades to increase to trading 11 contracts. All goes well, and we keep
making money until we are up $50,000 with a net balance of $150,000 meaning we are now trading 15
contracts, which times $250 nets us $3,750 per win. Thus we increase an additional contract after only three
trades. At $200,000 of profits, we make $5,000 per trade, thus needing only two winners to step up another
contract.
Ryan's approach is to require a fixed ratio of money to be made to bump up one contract. If it takes
$5,000 in profits to jump from one to two contracts, it will take $50,000 in profits on a $100,000 account to
go from 10 to 11 units. The fixed ratio is that if it took 15 trades, on average, to go from one to two contracts
it will always take 15 trades, on average, to bump on to that next level, unlike Ralph's fixed ratio that
requires fewer trades to go to higher levels.
Ryan accomplishes this by using a variable input (one you can alter to suit your personality) as a ratio
to drawdown. He seems to prefer using the largest drawdown times 2. We will now look at the same trading
system for the bond market with the Ryan Jones formula.
As you can see, this approach also "creates wealth" in that it brings about an exponential growth of
your account, in this case $18,107,546! However to achieve the same growth as with the other formulas you
need to pony up a larger percent of your bankroll on each bet. This can result in a wipeout scenario as well,
unless you use a very low percentage of your money, which in return guarantees a less rapid growth in your
account.

181

And Now My Solution to the Problem
In talks with Ralph and Ryan, I became aware that what was causing the wild gyrations was not the
percent accuracy of the system, nor was it the win/loss ratio or drawdown. The hitch and glitch came from
the largest losing trade and represents a critical concept.
In system development, it is easy to fool ourselves by creating a system that is 90 percent accurate,
making scads of money, but will eventually kill us. Doesn't sound possible does it? Well it is, and here's
how. Our 90 percent system makes $1,000 on each winning trade and has 9 winners in a row leaving us
ahead by a cool 9 G's. Then comes a losing trade of $2,000, netting us $7,000, not bad. We get nine more
winners and are sitting pretty with $16,000 of profits when we get another loss, but this one is a big one, a
loss of $10,000, the largest allowed by the system, setting us back on our fannies with only $6,000 in our
pocket.
But, since we had been playing the game by increasing contracts after making money, we had two
contracts on and thus lost $20,000! We were actually in the hole $4,000 despite 90 percent accuracy! I told
you this money management stuff was important.
What ate us alive was that large losing trade. That is the demon we need to protect against and
incorporate into our money management scheme.
The way I do this is to first determine how much of my money I want to risk on any one trade. I am a
risk seeker so, for sake of argument and illustration, let's say I am willing to risk 40 percent of my account
balance on one trade.
If my balance is $100,000 that means I have got $40,000 to risk and since I know the most I can lose
is, say, $5,000 per contract, I divide $5,000 into $40,000 and discover I can trade 8 contracts. The problem
is if I get two large losers in a row I am down 80 percent, so we know 40 percent is too much risk. Way too
much.
Generally speaking, you will want to take 10 percent to 15 percent of your account balance, divide
that by the largest loss in the system, or loss you are willing to take, to arrive at the number of contracts
you will trade. A very risk-oriented trader might trade close to 20 percent of his or her account on one
trade, but keep in mind, three max losers in a row and you have lost 60 percent of your money!
The final product of such a money management approach is shown in Figure 13.3. The $582,930,624
of "profits" came from determining a risk factor of 15 percent, taking that percentage of the account to
arrive at a dollar amount which was then divided by the largest loss in the system.

182
As your account increases in value, you trade more contracts; as it declines, you trade fewer. This is
what I do and this is the general area of risk I am willing to assume. It does not matter too much; a lower,
and thus safer risk of 10 percent still makes millions of dollars.
What I find fascinating is that the Ryan Jones approach, which did very well, "made" only
$18,107,546 while a one-contract trader would have made a mere $251,813, and my approach, at least on
paper, makes a staggering $582,930,624. clearly, how you play the game does matter, it matters
immensely.
Figure 13.4 shows the system with various risk percentages being used. The graph in Figure 13.5 depicts
the increase in the account equity with the increase in percent risk drawdown directly next to it. As you can
see, there is a point where the amount you make rises faster than the drawdown, then as the risk percent
increases, drawdown increases faster than the increase on profits in your account. This usually takes place
between 14 percent and 21 percent; in most systems, any risk percent value greater than 25 percent will
make more money but at a sharp increase in the drawdown.
System Report
System Number: 387
System Rules:
Market:

9/11/98 3:00:45 PM
Description: bonds 7/98 no bail
Test Period: 1/1/90 to 7/16/98

Base Unit Calculation Rules
BASE UNITS = account balance*. 1 5/largest loss

Figure 13.3 Varied results based on risk % of account.

183
System Begin Balance $0.00

Figure 13.4 Top 10 optimization results.

So there it is, my money management formula: (account balance *risk percent) /largest loss = contracts or
shares to trade.
There are probably better and more sophisticated approaches, but for run-of-the-mill traders like us, not
blessed with a deep understanding of math, this is the best I know of. The beauty of it is that you can tailor it
to your risk/reward personality. If you are Tommy Timid, use 5 percent of your bank; should you think you
are Normal Norma, use 10 percent to 12 percent; if you are Leveraged Larry, use from 15 percent to 18
percent; and if you are Swashbuckling Sam or Dangerous Danielle, use in excess of 20 per cent of your
account ... and go to church regularly.
I have made millions of dollars with this approach. What more can I tell you-you have just been handed
the keys to the kingdom of speculative wealth.

184

Back to Ryan and Ralph
All equity runs and money management printouts in this chapter are from ULTIMANAGER a
remarkable piece of software that allows you to test money management and trade selection techniques for
any system. The software will teach you about your system or approach. For examples, it will tell you if you
should add more contracts after "X" number of winning or losing trades, inform you to add or subtract
contracts following a big winning or losing trade, tell you what to do if you have a 70 percent accurate
system that is running 30 percent on the last "X" number of trades, and on and on. If this software doesn't
improve your systems' performance, it can't be done. Developed by Mark Thorn, it can be purchased from
Genesis Data at 800-808-3282 or by writing them at 425 East Woodmen Road, Colorado Springs, CO
80919.
In any formula, even the fixed fractional approach, it is the largest loss that can kill you. Consider the
results from my system with Ryan's money management shown earlier. To achieve a return even close to my
formula, you would have to use a percentage of your account so high that when the large losing trade
comes-and it will-you may be done in. What we need is a balance of risking but not so much that one or two
very predictable events will cause too much damage. Longest losses are predictable.

Chapter 14

Thoughts from the Past

Success in trading comes from knowIng the markets well and knowing yourself better.

Successful trading is based on a combination of using systems and the like tempered by thinking and
controlling our emotions. To be successful. you need to know as much about yourself and market
psychology as you do the markets. Until you get a handle on both these elements, Your trading will not be
at its best.
For that reason, I have selected what I think are some of my most useful writings from back issues of
my newsletter, Commodity Timing I hope they can help you, as they have helped me, become more
balanced and controlled in trading.

185

186

October 1995

Volume 32, Issue 10
Lock-Up Time

More comments on why traders "choke," freeze, or lock up, thus not trading, or worse yet,
bypassing winning trades in favor of taking guaranteed losers.
At least once a week someone calls, telling me they know what to do in the markets but just can't
pull the trigger. They are afraid to do anything. Strangely, this is truer for traders with less to lose. The
$10,000-and-under traders have more of this fear than the heavy capitalized traders.
Let's Take a Good Look at Fear Itself
We fear only two things. They are things we don't understand, hence there is no way to rationally
deal with the situation, or similar things that have hurt us in the past.
It's no wonder then the markets stir up so much fear. No one really fully understands the markets ...
and are continually bitten by market alligators. So what's one to do for this self-inflicted catatonia?
Since fear is largely emotional, you need to reframe yourself with valid data to offset the fear. Here is
some of that data.
First, if you use stops, you really can't get clobbered too badly. Ever. Sure, you will have losing trades.
But wiped out, killed? That's not going to happen.. Next, if you only trade with 30 percent of your bankroll
at any one time, you can never get blown out. Again, never. Ever. The quickest way to bring sanity to
trading is to use stops and only a fixed fraction of your bankroll.
By so doing, you have full understanding that you are trading with a huge safety net. You will survive,
because you have controlled the seemingly uncontrollable game.
At a more cosmic level, you need to check out if your deck of cards in life is one of blowouts, crashes,
cycles of major success leading only to cycles of failure. For most, it isn't. You can trade (with stops and
percentage of bankroll) knowing blowouts are just not your thing, not your spiritual calling. Speaking of
spirituality, I'm a firm believer that God will not let us down. Knowing that gives me ample courage ...
sometimes too much, in fact ... to trade, to pull the trigger.

187
June 7995

Volume 32, Issue 6
Enough on Greed ... Now Let's Deal with Fear

I've written at length about Greed being the dominant and most difficult emotion to deal with. Now
it's time to walk through Fear.
There are several things that distinguish winning traders from losers. Perhaps the least discussed is what I
refer to as “locking up." I've seen it in countless traders, and experienced it myself many a time.
The repercussions of locking up are numerous, and all bad. A locked up trader doesn't get out of
winners or losers ... he/she is too frozen to act. Or, the lock up prevents you from pulling the trigger on
getting into positions. This is the worst of all problems ... a trader who can't trade! When this happens,
know that fear is motivating you. The good news is that there are several things you can do to release the
grasp old man fear has on your mind.
There Is a lot More to Fear Than Fear Itself
Roosevelt was as poor at understanding emotions as he was at being a President. Have you ever
noticed that sometimes it seems impossible to do something, maybe even something physical, like take
action, step on the brakes, get out of harm's way, etc? You can be so locked up with fear that your attention
is on the fear, not on taking the correct action. Yes, fear is the great immobilizer.
Proof? Okay, remember the last time you looked at a truly frightening person, some one either so
ugly, so big, so dangerous, or of a different race that you "just knew" the guy was a killer? Okay, good,
recall that. Then recall what you did ... you turned away. You would not look into the object of fear. You
froze, and not because you were hurt or because you were about to be harmed!
When you see fear, you MUST look directly into its ugly face before your fear will diminish. The vile
villain we traders look at (the market), is that of being hurt. Hurt in our case means losing money and ego.
There is no other harm that can become you in this business, ego and money, that's all there is to lose. So
which is it for you?
The more you focus on losing, the better off you will be. Winners plan what to do if their trades don't
work out. Losers have no plan for disaster; when it occurs, they don't know what to do ... and are stuck in
fear's grip.

188
Think about it. You, and you alone, have absolute and total control over what and how much you will
lose. You control the number of contracts you trade, you control the stop or dollar risk (you set your fear
level). Knowing that, what's there to be afraid of? That you might have another losing trade?
Let me tell you, 0 loyal follower, I have losing trades all the time. I had about 20 in a row a few years
ago ... losing trades are as much a part and parcel to this business as breathing is to living. It happens,
always has, always will. Once you fully acknowledge that at a deep inner level (looking it in the face), and
learn to only commit $$ up to your "Fear Level," fear will no longer have you in its ugly grasp.

June 1996

Volume 33, Issue 6

In an Information Age ... Information Is Not Enough
It takes more than data to be a winning trader ... it also takes ability, attitude, and most
importantly focus ...
What Dennis Rodman and You Should Have in Common
It's become increasingly clear to me, after all the seminars I've given, books and letters I've written,
that just having winning approaches and strategies is not enough. To actualize my intentions to make more
winning traders, I realized something was missing.
Years ago, I fell into the psycho-babble, mumbo-jumbo that psychological baggage kept us from
maximizing our success. I no longer feel that is the main problem. The problem is one of focus. I'll explain:
McDonald's is not the largest purveyor of fast foods. They are big, about 14,000 restaurants
worldwide. But the King of the business is, of all people, Pepsi Cola with over 24,000 stores including Taco
Bell, Chevy's, Pizza Hut, California Pizza Kitchen, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Hot 'n Now, and numerous
other food outlets. Pepsi's sales were recently 28.5 billion a year, Coca-Cola had 16.2 billion, and
McDonald's 7.4 billion.
Yet the total market valuation (shares x market price) of Coke is 93 billion compared to Pepsi's 44
billion and McDonald's has a 31 billion valuation on 25 percent of the revenues of Pepsi!
Profitwise Pepsi earned 4 percent on sales compared to McDonald's 15 percent and Coke's 13 percent.
The difference? Coke and McDonald's and more focused ... more profitable.
Dennis Rodman is a great showman and basketball star. Why? Because early on in his college days his
coach told him to focus exclusively on defense, forget being an offensive high scorer ... and away his career

189
skyrocketed. He has now become more profitable. Fellow team-mate Michael Jordan unfocused to become
a baseball player and became less profitable. Other unfocused sports stars Bo Jackson and Dion Sanders
have also done less well than they could have by being one sport athletes.
The year I turned $10,000 into $1,100,000 I was totally focused. Did nothing but trade, no marathons,
no fishing, no family life, but, boy did I make money!
There are three levels of market focus. The first level is that of time and commitment. Most folks think
that's all there is to it. It isn't. YOU must also focus on just a few markets and next focus on approach. Most
traders follow too many markets with too many systems or approaches, becoming unfocused and
unprofitable.
Like corporations that think they can grow by expanding into new areas, traders think they can make
more money by following more markets with more systems. On paper, both strategies look good. In reality
... they simply don't pan out thanks to the human element and Mr. Murphy's appearance and the least
expected, and most costly, times.
Therefore, my bottom line is that while it helps to have winning strategies and valid data to base
decisions upon, without focus-dedication-and single mindedness-you will never maximize your ability to be
a winning trader.
