
291

The market serves a
valuable function in our
economy not often talked
about: It provides an
efficient mechanism for
transferring precious
capital from those who
are ill-equipped to
steward its growth to
those who are adept. A
variety of market
participants provide this
service up and down the
food chain. The financial
markets are voluntary
arrangements. No one is
compelled to purchase a
piece of trading software.
No guns are involved in
herding investors into
seminars. Advisory letters
are sent to those who
willingly subscribe to
them, and may be
cancelled at will.
Investors who avail
themselves of these
services without
exercising due diligence
and taking responsibility
for their own actions are
the true dangerous lot—
they are a danger to
themselves. They blame
others for their bad
decisions and
misfortunes; they delude
themselves about the true
nature of their problem,
so the solution remains
ever beyond their ken.
Gibbons Burke, MarketHistory.com

292

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

predicted October 2008? No, they did not, but they sure made
fortunes in October 2008.
Another common source of confusion stems from not
understanding trend following’s reliance on reactive technical
analysis. For example, one form of technical analysis attempts to
“read” charts to divine the market direction. The second form of
technical analysis, practiced by trend followers, is based on reacting
to market movements whenever they occur. Although I make this
distinction clear in Chapter 1 of Trend Following, I still find myself
explaining the difference to bewildered investors and traders. Trend
followers are perfectly happy to accept the fact that their method of
price analysis never allows them to enter at the exact bottom or exit
at the exact top of a trend.

I mean, look at the
concept of price targets.
Someone—analyst,
mutual fund manager,
whoever—will come on
and say, “I have a price
target for this stock of
XXX—which is up 30pct
from here.’’ I see it getting
there over the next six
months. Yeah right. When
someone tells me they
know where a stock is
going, I can only laugh
and ask them why they
haven’t mortgaged the
house and put it all in the
stock. Of course I know
the answer. They don’t
want to put their money
in the stock; they want
YOU to put YOUR money
in the stock so the price of
the stock they own goes
up. Get long and get loud.
Why can’t we just admit
they are pitching a stock
and treat it like a trinket
on QVC?
Mark Cuban, www.blogmaverick.com

However, this particular concept is hard to fathom for many
market players. For example, when Citigroup fired their entire
technical analysis group as a cost-cutting measure and replaced it
with more fundamental analysis, media coverage jumped all over
the idea that technical analysis was dead. Immediately I started
receiving emails asking if trend following was dead.
The real question with the Citigroup firings is not why they
were replacing technical with fundamental analysis, but what kind
of technical analysis were they using in the first place. It certainly
wasn’t the price-based analysis used by trend followers. Yet the only
conclusion most people drew from Citigroup’s actions was that
technical analysis was now discredited. Did the performance data of
trend followers matter to the story? No, the reporters had to put a
story out and accuracy was not the issue.
Inaccurate media reports are encouraged by so-called financial
“experts” whose reputations hinge on making fundamental
predictions about market direction. James Altucher, a disciple of
Victor Niederhoffer and, these days, a popular financial writer,
posted an article on trend following. The article elicited an
abundance of feedback. One trend follower wrote me saying:
“John W. Henry and his peers advertise the riskiness of
their investments on their sleeve, while some of the mean
reversion hedge fund boys spend sleepless nights hoping no
one ever figures out how much risk they are really taking.
Most of those guys won’t even admit to themselves how
much risk they are taking!”

After word

293

What about supposed “lower-risk” strategies such as PIPEs or
other arcane forms of arbitrage trading? One trend follower emailed
me an observation:
“What a novel way to avoid being in a drawdown: Trade an
instrument that is so illiquid that there is no market for it
except under special circumstances. That makes it a lot
more convenient to pretend that there is very little risk. If
I get to make up my own price quote for an instrument on
every day between my buy and sell points, then I can create
an infinite Sharpe ratio as long as I sell it for more than I
buy it. The only case where I ever have to face up to the big
risks I really take is if the asset goes to a level that forces
me to liquidate at a big loss. In that case, my strategy does
not appear quite so risk free.”
As I accumulated reader feedback, it became clear that some
people thought that I had not accentuated the drawdowns of trend
followers enough. Yet, I am clear in this book. There are no free
lunches. You can make money, and you can lose money. To get the
big gains—there will be periods of pain and drawdown. No risk, no
return. However, how often do you hear about the Nasdaq being in
a –60 percent drawdown almost 10 years after that bubble burst?
If further proof was needed, it occurred when I picked up the
phone and called a top trend follower. His firm no longer reports
their performance data, but they continue to trade billions. I had
never talked with this man before, and he is not mentioned in this
book. At first, he was uneasy talking with me. “How did you find
me?” “Why are you calling?” However, he had a good sense of
humor, even though he quickly said that he did not want to be
quoted on the record. We talked for 45 minutes. His insights:
• He backed that many more Long Term Capital Managements
(LTCMs) are ready to implode. He said to look at the numbers
of the arbitrage guys. He pointed out that for the last four
years, the arbitrage (“stat arb., convertible arb., etc.”) guys are
using more leverage to generate less return (“too much
gearing”). He added, “They think they have found the Key to
Rebecca and they have not found anything.”
• He acknowledged that his billion dollar plus fund was on the
other side of LTCM’s losses in the zero-sum game: “We were the

If you have the good
fortune to make some
money in this world, you
will always have
detractors. John W.
Henry, the owner of the
Red Sox baseball team
and one of the best trend
followers ever, is no
exception. Spring 2005
has seen the catcalls for
John’s head in some
investment circles. Why is
this? You have a choice of
answers: John’s success
or his critic’s ignorance.
It’s probably both. And for
those who think Henry’s
trading prowess has
diminished, check out his
approximate +9 percent
return for May 2005 and
for good measure his +9
percent for June 2005.

294

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

other side…they were an accident waiting to happen…now
seven years later, the risks for these types of strategies are just
as great.”
• Wall Street investment banks only want 35-year-old traders.
You get to be 50 and they don’t want you. What’s his point
here? Wall Street ignores experience like Richard Donchian
trading into his nineties. I know great trend followers ranging
in age from age 40 to 70.

Critic Geetesh Bhardwaj
Let us believe that it is
possible to profit through
economic changes by
following today’s trend,
as it is revealed
statistically day-by-day,
week-by-week, or monthby-month. In doing this
we should entertain no
preconceived notions as
to whether business is
going to boom or bust, or
whether the Dow-Jones
Industrial Average is
going to 500 or 50. We
will merely chart our
course and steer our ship
in the direction of the
prevailing wind. When
the economic weather
changes, we will change
our course with it and
will not try to forecast the
future time or place at
which the wind will
change.
William Dunnigan (1954)

In the fall of 2008 I noticed an academic paper right at the time
trend followers were having some of their best performance ever.
The title of the paper, taking a stab at trend traders (commonly
referred to by the regulatory name of Commodity Trading Advisor),
was:
“Fooling Some of the People All of the Time: The Inefficient
Performance and Persistence of Commodity Trading
Advisors”
The author Geetesh Bhardwaj wrote that paper while working
at AIG Financial Products. So Bhardwaj was part of a firm that took
$150 billion of taxpayer dollars to stay afloat, but rips a strategy
(trend following) that actually makes money without the
government propping it up? The irony to me was inescapable.
Shortly after my criticism, Bhardwaj left AIG and joined index
mutual fund Vanguard. This whole episode generated great
feedback on my blog at michaelcovel.com, with Bhardwaj joining in
to make his defense:
“If my affiliation is the only criticism that you have of the
results, I am vindicated. So stop taking about who I work
for and start justifying the industry wide Sharpe Ratio of
0.09 to your invstors [sic]. You have been stealing investor
money for too long, 2-20 for trend following really?????”
Performance data for trend following traders, month-by-month
performance, is there for all to see (Appendix B and Iasg.com). If
those numbers are considered “stealing” to Bhardwaj, I can’t
convince him to see another light.

After word

Further, Bhardwaj thinks the Sharpe ratio is an appropriate
measure of trend following traders. It is not (see Chapter 3,
“Performance Data”). Trend following trader David Harding has
written on the Sharpe ratio: “The Sharpe ratio appears at first blush
to reward returns (good) and penalize risks (bad). Upon closer
inspection, things are not so simple. The standard deviation takes
into account the distance of each return from the mean, positive or
negative. By this token, large positive returns increase the
perception of risk as though they could as easily be negative, which
for a dynamic investment strategy [like trend following] may not be
the case. Large positive returns are penalized, and thus the removal
of the highest returns from the distribution can increase the Sharpe
ratio: a case of reductio ad absurdum for Sharpe ratio as a universal
measure of quality!”
Other readers on my blog responded to Bhardwaj:
“Of course Geetesh Bhardwaj’s affiliation is significant.
Vanguard is famous for taking the position that actively
managed funds are a waste of time. That is why the vast
majority of their assets under management are in indexed
funds. So is it surprising that their marketing department
hired an economics major to write reports that show active
management in a bad light? Don’t hold it against Geetesh.
His previous job being a vice president of a disaster like AIG
can’t look good on a resume. He’s probably lucky to be
working at all.”
Another reader responded:
“The Sharpe ratio of CTAs [trend following traders] does
not need to be ‘explained.’ Most investors want the
investment to be profitable. The Sharpe ratio does not
measure ‘risk’ as it is commonly understood. Even Sharpe,
in his original paper, wrote about ‘variability’ not ‘risk.’ The
Sharpe ratio punishes a spike up in the same way as a spike
down. Many managers have strategies that produce a good
average profit over a long period, but require the investors
to accept some gyration in the mean time. If you want
highly predictable earnings, invest with Madoff, who, if
news reports are correct, claimed to produce the same one
percent return every month. I’m sure Geetesh would have
loved his Sharpe ratio.”

295

All trends are historical;
none are in the present.
There is no way to
determine the current
trend, or even define
what current trend might
mean; we can only
determine historical
trends. The only way to
measure a now-trend
(one entirely in the
moment of now) would
be to take two points,
both in the now and
compute their difference.
Motion, velocity, and
trend do not exist in the
now. They do not appear
in snapshots. Trend does
not exist in the now, and
the phrase, “the trend”
has no inherent
meaning…There is no
such thing as a current
trend. When we speak of
trends, we are necessarily
projecting our own
definitions. With that in
mind, we can proceed to
examine ways to define,
compute, and use trends.
Ed Seykota
Seykota.com

296

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Yet another reader added:

I met with a near billiondollar hedge fund in their
Texas office in Spring
2005. Funded primarily
from the principals’
personal wealth (they hit
it big with one of the top
technology firms of alltime), their firm was
seeking insights into
trend following. They
want to invest with trend
following traders, but
they are having a hard
time wrapping their arms
around a strategy (trend
following) not rooted in
fundamentals. The three
executives I met with
were more comfortable
with a trader who traded
one market alone. They
liked the idea that a
trader might be able to
fundamentally know
everything he could about
that one market. They
liked the idea of that type
of skill compared to trend
following skill. The trend
following skill of reducing
all markets to the
common denominator of
price just did not connect
with them. This group is
very bright and they are
doing extreme due
diligence on trend
following trading. Unlike
some who dismiss trend
following, these folks will
get it since they are
willing to learn
something new.

“Ahhh, now I get it. The buy and hold crowd justifies their
50% drawdowns and 0% 10 year total return by the Sharpe
ratio, of course! I can hear the funds on the phone with
their investors now, ‘Yes, you’ve lost half your money in the
last year and you have made nothing in 10 years but don’t
worry, the Sharpe ratio was good!’ Is this what Vanguard
means by ‘sensible buy and hold’? If the Sharpe ratio is
good then it must be sensible, returns and drawdowns be
damned!”
Bhardwaj is a pawn of the mutual fund industry. The mutual
fund industry spends millions through lobbying in Washington and
propaganda (i.e ‘academic research’) to keep trend following traders
from advertising their performance. Why do this? The mutual fund
industry (i.e. Vanguard) has a stranglehold on the average investor
that they don’t want to lose. They keep the average guy stuck in
‘long only’ dead-end strategies to spin off their massive fees.
Bhardwaj is no prophet. His attack is transparent and ignorant.
When the immediate retort back is, ‘Sharpe ratio’, you know the
dice were loaded.
Worse for Bhardwaj? Witnessing this interchange online
happened to be a firm who manages money for AIG. This firm
happens to be a trend following trader (CTA):
“Great stuff with Geetesh. Very entertaining reading. Off
the record, here’s a bit of irony for you, we manage a
significant amount of money for AIG and have done so for
several years!”
I am not surprised that a trend following critic like Bhardwaj,
while working at AIG, failed to note that AIG actually had
investments with trend followers.

Final Thoughts
An associate of mine in fund management approached me
about attending an Altegris investment conference. Altegris has
placed over $1 billion of client assets with assorted fund managers
including significant placements with trend followers. Upon my

After word

arrival at the conference, I was introduced to the president of
Altegris, Jon Sundt. Sundt’s presentation at the conference hit
home. He postulated:
“Can a great trader have great skill and no opportunity to
make money? Can a bad trader have no skill and tons of
opportunity to make money? The answer is yes to both
questions. Luck is at play in the short-term for most
traders. There will always be ‘some guy’ with a great oneyear return, but the sustained edge appears only over
time.”
What’s Sundt’s big picture point? He wants you to think about
what happens when the bad trader with no skills finally finds
himself with no opportunity. If you don’t want to embrace his
wisdom, you will eventually feel massive pain in your trading
account.
There will always be critics, and there will always be
cheerleaders. I, however, find solace in performance numbers and
trend following performance numbers are the real story, the truth if
you will. Bottom line, no matter how many people agree or disagree
with the content of this book, and I know there are big fans and big
critics, positive performance numbers from trend followers,
especially from historic months like October 2008, paint a picture
you either accept or reject—it’s your choice. Although this is the
third edition of Trend Following since 2004, I have a feeling it will
not be the last. Some big, unexpected event will unfold in the
future, some event where trend followers make a killing, and I will
drive myself crazy until I get that “next” event profiled in these
pages. Trend Following is on its way to becoming an ongoing blog,
just like on the Web, except this one is in hard-copy format
available at Amazon, Borders, and Barnes and Noble.

297

When you strip away all
the noise, we see that
long-term price
movements, bull and bear
markets, are a function of
fear and greed. These
human emotions,
reacting to shifts and
imbalances of supply and
demand…will always
exist. Superfund employs
a disciplined, systematic
approach and profits
from investor emotion by
harnessing clear price
trends. Human emotion
does not impact the
positions we take or the
open risk that we allow
in our trades…
Christian Baha, CEO Superfund
Now, there’s one thing
that you men will be able
to say when you get back
home, and you may thank
God for it. Thirty years
from now when you’re
sitting around your
fireside with your
grandson on your knee,
and he asks you, “What
did you do in the great
World War Two?” You
won’t have to say, “Well, I
shoveled shit in
Louisiana.” Alright now,
you sons of bitches, you
know how I feel. I will be
proud to lead you
wonderful guys into
battle anytime, anywhere.
That’s all.
General George S. Patton,
3rd Army speech—May 31, 1944

This page intentionally left blank

Foreword to the
First Edition by
Charles Faulkner
If you are browsing through this in a bookstore, you are most
likely in the investments section. Look around. All of the people
near you are also looking for an investing edge. If you are online,
you can see by the ratings and recommendations that many other
people have been here before you. The other titles in front of you,
whether they are actual or virtual, all claim to represent an
opportunity to enrich you. Whether you know it or not, you are in
a market. You are looking for a winning trade—the information, the
edge—that will put you ahead in the markets of stocks, bonds, real
estate, or commodities.
When I first modeled the trading strategies of J. Peter
Steidlmayer, CBOT trader and the originator of the Market Profile,
I had a narrow notion of what makes a market, or how to make
money in one. I had heard of George Soros, Jim Rogers, Peter
Lynch, and a few others. When I heard the phrase, “buy low and sell
high,” it made sense to me. It also happened to appeal to me as a
former antiques dealer and all-round bargain hunter.
I didn’t know how little I knew. Somehow I traded my model of
the Market Profile—despite my utter ignorance of risk and money
management—into a tidy profit. A colleague pointed out to me, “So
you’re betting on your opinion of other people’s opinions.” The
reality of W.C. Fields’ famous retort to Mae West’s question (in My
Little Chickade) sunk in. “Is poker a game of chance?” “Not the
way I play it.” I was concerned only with market signals—I had a
stretch of what you’ll learn was “Dumb Luck,” instead of the “Poetic
Justice” usually dealt to traders with such a lack of preparation. I
got out to trade another day.

299

300

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

My chapter in Jack Schwager’s The New Market Wizards made
it possible for me to meet top traders across the industry.
Sometimes we appeared on professional panels together. Other
times, it was a private conversation. I want to share some of what I
learned with you. Before I do, though, I want you to take out a dollar
bill. Turn it over. You will see two seals. Look at the one on the left.
The one with the words “THE GREAT SEAL” inscribed underneath
it, the one with an unfinished pyramid of 13 steps with an eye in a
glowing triangle floating above it. It is a wonderful symbol for a
successful trader and represents a trading tool as well.
The stones of the pyramid represent the ways a trader can
make money. There’s intermediation (brokerage charges),
aggregating clients (reducing costs), carry trades, privileged
information (insider trading), assessing asset flows (an institutional
advantage), advanced technology (particularly for option pricing),
models of economic actors and data (fundamentals), models of
historical price data (technicals), and others. Some of these are
basic—those near the base of the pyramid—and so they offer low
returns. Other methods offer high returns. Naturally, as you make
your way up on the pyramid, there are fewer stones. No one should
be surprised by this. Neither was I.
What did surprise me when meeting and modeling these market
wizards was that despite their outward, often dramatic, differences
in trading and life style, their thinking about their trading principles
was extremely similar. It was like they were floating above the
world, seeing it from a different perspective than the rest of the
market participants. What are these differences? Here are a few
from the eye of the pyramid:
• It doesn’t matter what you think, it’s what the market does that
matters.
• What matters can be measured, so keep refining your
measurements.
• You don’t need to know when something will happen to know
that it will.
• Successful trading is a probabilistic business, so plan
accordingly.
• There is an edge to be gained in every aspect of your trading
system.

Foreword to the First Edition by Charles Faulkner

• Everyone is fallible, even you, so your system must take this
into account.
• Trading means losing as well as winning, something you must
learn to live with.
Now, you might say to yourself, “Where’s the secret sauce in
that?” In one sense, you’re right. These are extremely simple
principles. At the same time they are counterintuitive and take a
focused effort to apply. Let me give you an example: I was attending
the trading system conference where I first met market wizard Ed
Seykota. His table was talking about how successful trading systems
could, and should, be simple enough that they could fit on a bumper
sticker. Of course, skepticism emanated from other tables. “What
about the complexities of the markets?” Their response was that
they weren’t interested in the markets’ complexities; simply in
making money on changes in price. Ed and his traders saw through
the smokescreen of untested assumptions and beliefs about what
you need to know about a market and what it takes to make a
successful trading system. This is the difference between knowing a
principle and making its market application. Think about adding to
a position—also known as “pyramiding.” Adding less with each
addition to a position actually creates more gain than adding equal
amounts each time. It’s simple and it’s counterintuitive. Another
way that image on the dollar is a trading tool.
The book you have in front of you bridges this gap between
trading principles and their market application like no other. It may
look like a book, but it is really a set of trading tools—a complete
and detailed application of these principles and others to the
method of trading known as Trend Following.
Author and trader Michael Covel has arranged these master
lessons so that you can approach them according to your personal
preference, or as they call them these days, biases.
The Personalities—In the chapters on great trend followers,
you can read the personal histories of leading traders. You’ll find
there isn’t just one type of successful personality; they range from
college students to real scientists.
The Performance—For the factually minded, in the chapters on
ferformance data and big events in trend following, there is a
succinct summary of historical data from several trend following
funds, along with parallel events in the world.
