
CPWR

0.03

After Market Close

Add

Listen

CONMED

CNMD

0.41

Before Market Open

Add

Listen

Consolidated Edison,
Inc.

ED

0.26

Time Not Supplied

Add

Cooper Industries
Ltd.

CBE

0.86

Before Market Open

Add

Cooper Tire &
Rubber

CTB

0.39

Time Not Supplied

Add

Corus Entertainment
Inc.

CJRb.TO

N/A

5:00 pm ET

Add

CorVel

CRVL

0.32

Time Not Supplied

Add

Countrywide
Financial
Corporation

CFC

2.26

08:00 am ET

Add

Crane

CR

0.51

After Market Close

Add

Curon Medical, Inc.

CURN

⫺0.15 Time Not Supplied

Add

Cytec Industries Inc.

CYT

0.72

Add

After Market Close

Listen

Listen

Listen

Listen

Listen

Listen

292

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

volatile stocks (and, hence, the best trend-trading stocks),
then we have provided here for you an easy method for
checking.
To check for average daily volume and volatility, simply type the stock ticker at the end of this URL (after the
“⫽” sign) and paste it into your Web browser. Once it is in
your browser, simply delete the symbol and type in another
one to check the full list:
http://ﬁnance.yahoo.com/q/ks?s⫽
This is the Key Statistics page from Yahoo! Finance, which
will give you a reading both of the average daily volume
and of beta, which, as mentioned, is a function of the
stock’s volatility relative to the S&P 500. Here, then, are
the rules for further elimination using this information:
• Eliminate all stocks with less than 1 million daily

shares traded.
• Eliminate all stocks with less than 2.0 beta.
• Eliminate all stocks priced less than 40.00.
This process of elimination has now whittled our list of
A—C stocks down to two: AMZN and BRCM. No surprises there. To all active traders—at least at this writing—
these are very familiar symbols, and are nearly always on
the list of great trading vehicles.
The next thing we do with these two stocks is go to
the charts and ask this question: What have AMZN and
BRCM done in the previous two quarters at the announce-

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

293

ment of earnings—are they overbought, oversold, or somewhere in between?
AMZN last reported earnings after the bell on April
22. In anticipation of the announcement, traders ran price
up to a short-term high, and they were right: the news was
great. AMZN beat estimates by ⫹21 percent! However, on
the day following the announcement, the market sold off
strongly overnight on the news (it’s another one of those
weird Wall Street rituals!), and the stock gapped down.
This signaled a buying opportunity to traders, who then
rallied the stock back up into resistance (see Figure 15.1).
That is exactly the kind of volatility that can turn a
straddle into an easy winner. This is just what we are looking for when we go back to the previous two quarters’
announcements.
Two quarters ago, AMZN again showed great move-

Figure 15.1

AMZN showing earnings volatility.

294

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

ment. The stock was overbought and near new 52-week
highs. Earnings came in cold, and the stock gapped down
sharply and then went into a tailspin for several weeks. Figure 15.2 is what the chart looked like.
Again, another easy winner for the straddle strategy.
Clearly, AMZN is going on our list of straddles to put on.
It satisﬁes all our criteria: it is optionable and highly liquid,
it has a high beta (is very volatile), and it goes absolutely
bonkers at earnings time.
Now, let’s take a quick look at BRCM. Like AMZN,
BRCM reported after the bell on April 22, 2004. In anticipation, traders took a greatly oversold stock and ran it up
strongly (this is perfect for our legging-in strategy—see
later description). On the day of earnings, BRCM gapped
up strongly to continue the trend, then the shares met with
resistance. It came crashing back down again over the next
several days (see Figure 15.3).

Figure 15.2

AMZN showing earnings volatility.

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

Figure 15.3

295

BRCM showing earnings volatility.

In the previous quarter, BRCM did something very
similar. It ran up into the earnings announcement, gapped
up hugely the day after the announcement was made, then
proceeded to sell off for several days after that (see Figure
15.4).
Now we will add both AMZN and BRCM to our list
of straddles to put on. They have satisﬁed all our entry
requirements, and both are great candidates for huge
returns during the week of July 19, as we straddle each
stock with a pair of options.
The next thing we want to know is this: where are
these stocks with respect to oversold or overbought levels
three days before earnings are announced? If we get a clear
oversold or overbought reading on that day, then we are
given a green light to leg into the straddle trade. If not,
then we will have to wait to put the straddle on into the
close of the day that earnings are to be reported. Both

296

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 15.4

BRCM showing earnings volatility.

AMZN and BRCM, as mentioned, are announcing after
the close on July 22. This means that we will check their
charts on July 19 to determine these levels.
We use the following technical indicators to tell us just
where these stocks are on the oversold-overbought spectrum:
• RSI (5) reading
• Less than 30 (oversold) or more than 70

(overbought)
• Stochastics %K (5) reading
• Less than 25 (oversold) or more than 75
(overbought)
• CCI (20) reading
• Less than ⫺100 (oversold) or more than ⫹100
(overbought)

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

297

We need to see at least two out of three of these indicators give oversold or overbought readings in order to get
a green light to leg into the trade. On July 10, BRCM had
readings of 24.6, 6.24, and ⫺140.5. AMZN had readings
of 18.3, 23.17, and ⫺108.4. Clearly, both stocks are in an
oversold condition. If these numbers were to hold until
July 19 (three days before each announces earnings), we
would then have given the green light to leg into these
straddles. Again, if we do not get a green light, we will not
leg into the trade. We will wait until the day of earnings to
put on both sides of the straddle.
Deﬁnition: Legging into an options straddle
occurs when we buy each side of the straddle—
the calls and the puts—on different market days.
Legging out of an options straddle occurs when we
sell each side of the straddle on different market
days. The alternative is simply called putting on
the straddle: here both sides of the trade are
bought on the same market day, and usually at
the same time.
Legging in is the preferred mode of entry, since it has
the potential of maximizing our gains. But this is a more
complex form of the straddle and requires some market
timing. The simpler form of the straddle is to put the straddle on during the day that earnings are to be announced.
This can be done in the morning or afternoon; it doesn’t
matter. In both cases, however, we will be legging out of
the trade. Just how these are all done will be explained later.

298

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Keep in mind that a straddle is a market-neutral strategy, meaning that we are not sure going into the trade in
which direction the stock is likely to go after we put the
position on. We just believe that the stock will move, and
move big, in response to its earnings announcement.
Whether it moves up or down makes no difference to us.
We will proﬁt either way as long as the move is big enough.
The straddle is also, like the bull and bear spreads previously described, a compound trade. This means that we are
going to enter and exit more than one type of option. We
will, in fact, be buying both a call and a put. These may be
bought at separate times, which is what we mean by legging
into and legging out of the trade. Here is how we deﬁne the
straddle play.

MARKET NEUTRAL
Strategy: Straddle
Strategy rationale: The investor thinks that the stock
will be very volatile in the short term but does
not know which way the stock will move.
Strategy implementation: The call option and the put
option are bought at the same ATM strike
price; if the stock price is between two strikes,
then the call and the put are each bought at the
nearest strike.
Upside potential: Unlimited.
Break-even point at expiry: This trade is never held to

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

299

expiration; the trade always remains at or near
breakeven less spread and time value decay
Downside risk: Limited to the two premiums paid.
Margin: Not required.
Comment: The position loses value with the passage
of time as the time value decreases on options.

PUTTING ON THE STRADDLE
Now we are ready to put the trade on. We have two options
here: either we leg into the trade, meaning that we will buy
the two sides of the position on different days, or we will
simply put the trade on by buying both sides together.
We are given a green light to leg into the trade when
the stock is either oversold or overbought three days before
the earnings announcement. Here are the rules for legging
into the trade:
Three days before earnings, check the chart.
• If oversold, buy the call options at the close of
that day, and on the day of the earnings announcement, buy the puts at the close.
• If overbought, buy the put options at the close
of that day, and on the day of the earnings announcement, buy the calls at the close.
That is how we leg into the trade. Of course, you can tinker a bit with the “buy at the close” idea. If you are going
to leg into the calls, for example, and the market is strong
in the morning, you might want to buy them earlier in the

300

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

day rather than only at the end. But the simplest entry is to
buy them just a few minutes before the market closes at
4 p.m. EST. Keep in mind that options do not trade in
after-hours trading (at least not yet—in the future they
likely will).
Legging into the straddle position is a strategy aimed
at maximizing the potential return of one side of the trade
prior to the big move. The theory here is that in an oversold or overbought market, traders will move the stock in
the opposite direction a few days before the announcement
in anticipation of a contrary move after the announcement.
The other mode of entry is less complex. If we do not
get a green light to leg into the trade, we will simply buy
both sides of the trade, both call and put options, sometime
before the close on the day of the announcement.
Here is an important note: we want to buy the same
strike price for each side of the trade, and it should be the
nearest strike possible. Choosing an expiration month will
follow the same rules for all options trades as listed previously.

TAKING OFF A STRADDLE
We have selected our stocks to straddle and have entered
both sides of the trade: calls and puts. Now we need to
know how long to hold both. Here is how we do this.
We expect a large move to occur in the stock overnight as the numbers are announced and speculators pile
on orders in the after-market trading period. By 9:30 a.m.
EST, when the market opens the next day, we should see a
sizeable gap in price relative to the previous day’s close. If

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

301

the gap is up, then our calls are going to ramp up in value
and become winners for us. If the gap is down, then our
puts are going to ramp up in value and become winners for
us. Of course, the opposite is true for the other side of the
trade. In a gap up our puts are going to stink, and in a gap
down our calls are going to stink. But here is the great
thing about options, and what makes the straddle such a
low-risk play: because of the delta factor, the losing side of
the trade will not lose as much as the winning side of the
trade will win.
As mentioned previously, delta, or the rate of change
in an option’s premium to change in the value of the underlying stock, increases as a trade moves more and more inthe-money, and it decreases as a trade moves more and
more out-of-the-money. In other words, a big gap up will
increase the value of our calls more than it decreases the
value of our puts—and vice versa on a gap down. To our
bottom line, this means that as long as the stock moves big,
we should always show a proﬁt on the trade because of the
delta factor, and normally that proﬁt is large enough to
cover commissions and the spread and still post a solid
double-digit-percentage winner.
Now, after the opening gap, what usually happens is
that a “fade the news” mentality takes over, and traders seek
to close the gap. This is not always the case, so we always
have to anticipate a run in the direction of the gap. Often,
however, the gap will close and the market runs in the
opposite direction (a move we call, poetically, gap and crap).
With all this in mind, we can now establish our rules for
closing out the straddle position.
Here is how we take off the straddle.

302

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

If the market was oversold (we legged into the straddle) and gaps up more than $1.00 on the open after the
announcement:
• We will sell our puts at the open and hold our

calls.
• We will hold our calls for every day the stock
puts in a green candle (close is higher than the
open) up to ﬁve trading days after the
announcement.
• If we are still in our calls on the ﬁfth trading day
after the announcement, we will sell them at the
close.
If the market was oversold (we legged into the straddle) and gaps down more than $1.00 on the open after the
announcement:
• We will sell our calls at the open and hold our

puts.
• We will hold our puts for every day the stock
puts in a red candle (close is lower than the open)
up to ﬁve trading days after the announcement.
• If we are still in our puts on the ﬁfth trading day
after the announcement, we will sell them at the
close.
If the market was overbought (we legged into the straddle) and gaps down more than $1.00 on the open after the
announcement:

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

303

• We will sell our calls at the open and hold our

puts.
• We will hold our puts for every day the stock
puts in a red candle (close is lower than the open)
up to ﬁve trading days after the announcement.
• If we are still in our puts on the ﬁfth trading day
after the announcement, we will sell them at the
close.
If the market was overbought (we legged into the straddle) and gaps up more than $1.00 on the open after the
announcement:
• We will sell our puts at the open and hold our

calls.
• We will hold our calls for every day the stock
puts in a green candle (close is higher than the
open) up to ﬁve trading days after the
announcement.
• If we are still in our calls on the ﬁfth trading day
after the announcement, we will sell them at the
close.
If the market was neither oversold nor overbought (we did
not leg into the straddle) and gaps up or down more than
$1.00 on the open after the announcement:
• We will sell the winning side of the trade (calls in

a gap up, puts in a gap down) at the open and
hold the losing side of the trade.

304

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• We will hold our calls for every day the stock

puts in a green candle, or puts for every day the
stock puts in a red candle, up to ﬁve trading days
after the announcement.
• If we are still in our calls or puts on the ﬁfth
trading day after the announcement, we will sell
them at the close.
If the market fails to gap more than $1.00 at the open,
then we have a judgment call to make. Generally, if the gap
is between $0.50 and $1.00, we can still simply follow the
rules as listed previously. The larger the dollar amount of
the gap, however, the more proﬁtable the trade will be.
This is why it is so important to select stocks that are
higher in price, are very volatile, and have had a history of
multibucker gaps at earnings.
But if in the event a stock that has met all our other
conditions fails to open with a gap larger than $0.50, here
are the general rules to follow:
• If the market is oversold: sell the puts and hold the

calls, as previously described.
• If the market is overbought: sell the calls and hold
the puts, as previously described.
• If the market is neither oversold nor overbought: sell
the losing side of the trade and hold the winning
side, as previously described.
Our expected returns on any straddle depend a lot on
whether we legged in or not (we will always leg out). A perfect straddle trade is one where we generate a nice proﬁt in

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

305

the three days prior to earnings on our ﬁrst leg in. We have
to cash it out the next day on the gap for less than our maximum proﬁt, but we still bank, say, ⫹10 percent. Then the
other side of the trade, which we just bought on the day of
earnings, gets a great ramp-up on the following day’s gap
(let’s say it ramps up 25 percent on the close) and continues to run for the next ﬁve days. By the close of the ﬁfth
day, it may have doubled in premium value. This would
give us a total return on investment of ⫹55 percent (⫹110
percent total divided by 2) in eight trading days. While not
all straddles run this well, enough do if you follow our rules
to the letter to make this a very proﬁtable system. Losses
are normally small and usually just involve the loss of some
time value and the loss on spreads and commissions.
While these returns may sound ideal, keep in mind
that straddles work only during the peak of earnings season, so we have only about a 12- to 16-week window each
year. Moreover, there are quiet market cycles when even
the most volatile of stocks do not move that much in
response to earnings. During the straddle off-season, or
when the markets are less volatile, we will need to turn to
one or more of the other options strategies listed in the
previous two chapters.

THE STRADDLE STRATEGY:
AN 11-POINT REVIEW
The straddle is one of the best trading strategies you can
have in your arsenal of strategies. It takes some practice to
execute correctly, however, so the best advice I can give is
to trade the straddle initially with a very small amount of

306

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

capital (you can start with just one contract per side to get
the feel of it). But after an earnings season or two, you
should be able to put straddles on and off with some degree
of comfort.
Here is a review of the system as we outlined it in this
chapter:
1. Get a list of stocks reporting earnings three trading
days from today.
2. Eliminate all stocks not reporting earnings after the
bell.
3. Eliminate all stocks not trading more than 1 million
shares per day.
4. Eliminate all stocks with a beta less than 2.0.
5. Eliminate all stocks priced less than 40.00.
6. Check the chart to determine whether the stock
gapped more than $1.00 at its last two earnings
announcements. Eliminate those that did not.
7. Check the chart to determine whether the stock is
oversold or overbought using the following indicators:
• RSI (5) reading: less than 30 (oversold) or more
than 70 (overbought)
• Stochastics %K (5) reading: less than 25 (oversold) or more than 75 (overbought)
• CCI (20) reading: less than ⫺100 (oversold) or
more than ⫹100 (overbought)
8. We need agreement from any two of these
indicators to register an oversold or overbought

OPTIONS STRATEGIES: NEUTRAL

307

condition. If we get such a condition, then we will
leg into the trade:
• Buy the calls three days before earnings if oversold.
• Buy the puts three days before earnings if overbought.
• Then buy the other half of the trade before the
close on the day of the earnings announcement.
9. If neither oversold nor overbought, we will buy both
sides of the trade on the day of the announcement.
10. We will buy the same strike price for each side of
the trade, and it will be the nearest strike possible.
The expiration month chosen should follow the
same rules for all options trades, as listed in
Chapter 12.
11. We will hold both sides over the earnings
announcement, then leg out of the trade using the
rules listed in the previous section.
There is no substitute for hard work and real-time,
real-money experience when it comes to mastering the ﬁne
art of trend-trading options. You have in this and the preceding two chapters a number of strategies for enhancing
your trend-trading returns using stock options. Now is the
time to put this information to work. Start small: buy a
couple of calls or puts instead of shares in a stock that meets
one of our trend-trading setups. After you are comfortable
with that, try one of the compound strategies listed here.
If we are in earnings season, try the straddle. You may soon
ﬁnd yourself preferring options to stocks. But let me repeat

308

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

a warning I stated at the beginning of this section on
options: don’t even think about trend-trading options until
you are ﬁrst a proﬁtable trader of stocks. The leverage
found in options, along with the various factors that weigh
against your proﬁt margin (the spread, time value decay,
decreasing delta), will soon bring your trading career to a
swift demise if you haven’t yet mastered the art of trend
trading.

PA R T
FIVE

trading for
a living

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

the bigger vision:
where trend
trading can
take you

CHAPTER
16

I this last chapter of the book, I’d like to share with you
N

two things. First, I want to talk about some of the life lessons that can be learned from trading. I’m of the opinion
that if you are not willing to learn these lessons, if pride prevents you from building the kind of character that can both
trade well and live well at the same time, then you are much
better off—and your friends and family are much better
off—if you can ﬁnd some other way to improve your income.
And second, I want to share with you a vision I have for
where I’d like to see the whole stock-trading phenomenon
go over the next decade or two. It is a vision born out of both
my love for the trading game and my sense that it can provide immense beneﬁt to a large, growing, and increasingly
frustrated demographic in our society: the overworked,
underpaid, and, all too often, exploited worker.

TRADE FOR A LIVING;
TRADE FOR LIFE
The phrase that begins this section is the motto I gave to
Befriendthetrend.com at its inception back in October of
311

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

312

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

2002. The ﬁrst half of the motto is taken from the title of
Alexander Elder’s famous book, the book that so greatly
inﬂuenced my shift from fundamental to technical analysis
(read the story in the Introduction) and, of course, that so
greatly inﬂuenced the title of this book. I have always loved
the phrase trading for a living. It evokes all the hope and
promise that caused so many doctors and lawyers back in
the late 1990s to leave their lucrative jobs and set up trading stations in the basements of their suburban homes, and
so many busboys and taxi drivers to buy shares of Amazon
and Qualcomm in between shifts. To trade is to hope: to
hope for a better life. But unlike many other hope-inducing
schemes, trading is one that can reasonably fulﬁll what it
promises.
I am convinced that anyone with the right mindset,
strategic tools, and real-time experience can become a successful trader—successful enough to get out of debt, pay
cash for a daughter’s college education, retire early, and
endow a scholarship at an alma mater.
Beyond ﬁnancial success, however, the school of trading can also be an important teacher of character. This is
where the second half of our motto comes in: not only can
trading provide a good living, it can also help you “get a life.”
Traders sometimes get a bad rap for being self-centered egomaniacs, and no doubt this is true for some of the betterknown names in the business. In many ways Wall Street
functions a lot like Las Vegas: the enticement of a huge payoff has a tendency to lure some of humanity’s most seriously
ﬂawed characters. However, for every “mad money” clown,
there are 10 serious, principled, self-possessed traders grunting out a solid living for themselves and their families with
