
COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

281

A
B

Figure 10.8 Exit

EXIT
Daily: The rally is stalling, as prices have snapped back slightly above
their EMA. The two-day Force Index is tracing a bearish divergence A-B,
showing that the rally at the right edge is running out of steam.
Action: Sold longs on 4/27/2001 at 11.47. Trade rating 24% (took 1.42 out
of a 5.82-point channel).

282

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 3—Long PG
At the end of April 2001 I taught a weekend mini-Camp at a California
resort. Once I presented my methods, we spent the bulk of the time applying them to stocks chosen by campers. Out of dozens of stocks we analyzed
that weekend, none looked more appealing than PG. On Monday morning
I went on-line and placed a buy order.

Figure 10.9

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

283

B
A

Figure 10.10

B
A

Figure 10.11

C

D

284

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: Prices declining into support, weekly MACD-Histogram on the
verge of completing a bullish divergence, while the broad market is
rallying.
Daily: Bullish divergence of MACD-Histogram A-B with an extremely shallow second bottom B shows that bears are completely out of steam.
The two-day Force Index shows both a longer-term bullish divergence
A-B-C-D since February and a short-term C-D at the right edge, giving
the final command to pull the trigger. Expect prices to snap above their
EMA, at least as high as they are currently below that line.
Action: Long on 4/23/2001 at 58.02, with a stop at 55.95, below the latest
low.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

285

Figure 10.12

EXIT
Daily: At the right edge, prices gapped up on an earnings report; I had a
standing order to sell at 62, which was filled at 63.
Action: Sold longs on 5/1/2001 at 63. Trade rating 45% (took 4.98 out of
a 10.83-point channel).

286

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 4—Long IMPH
The same friend who called me about GX e-mailed and asked for my
opinion on another dozen stocks that she liked, among them this one,
which caught my attention.

A

Figure 10.13

B C

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

287

A

Figure 10.14

Figure 10.15

B

288

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: There is a kangaroo tail C at the right edge of the chart, a formation rarely seen on weekly charts. Previous tails A and B led to big
rallies. The overall market is bullish.
Daily: Prices are at the support level; a kangaroo tail B is also seen on the
daily chart. A deep bottom of the two-day Force Index near the right
edge reflects massive liquidation, which appears to be over, as prices rallied above support. Expect prices to snap back to their EMA.
Action: Long on 5/2/2001 at 33.86, with a stop at 30.50, half way down
the tail.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

289

Figure 10.16

EXIT
Daily: Another tail, this one pointing up. The expected rally to the EMA
did take place; unfortunately, prices recoiled before profits could be
taken at that level.
Action: Sold longs on 5/8/2001 at 36.39. Trade rating 16% (took 2.53 out
of a 16-point channel).

290

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 5—Short OCA
A dentist friend asked me to take a look at a firm that was trying to take
over his dental company. He was being offered its stock and did not know
whether it was a good deal. It looked just the opposite to me.

Figure 10.17

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

291

A
B
C

Figure 10.18

A

B
C

Figure 10.19

292

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: The rally is running into heavy resistance, with weekly MACDHistogram flattening at the right edge, indicating that the rally is near
its end.
Daily: Massive bearish divergences on the dailies of MACD-Histogram
and MACD-lines (A-B-C), as well as Force Index (A-B-C). The tiny daily
ranges during the last week show that bulls have retreated from the market; resistance to this rally is overwhelming. The plan is to sell short
with a SafeZone stop.
Action: Short on 6/11/2001 at 32.21, with a stop at 33.49.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

293

Figure 10.20

EXIT
Daily: Strong support near the EMA, prices not collapsing; the latest rally
day at the right edge hit the SafeZone stop.
Action: Covered shorts on 6/28/2001 at 31.46. Trade rating 11% (took 0.75
out of a 7-point channel).

294

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 6—Short EBAY
As the market was becoming “heavier” in summer 2001, with many stocks
breaking down, I found this trade in EBAY, which at that time was on my
regular scanning list.

resistance

Figure 10.21

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

295

A

B
C

Figure 10.22

A
B
C

Figure 10.23

296

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: The rally is running into resistance, and weekly MACD-Histogram
headed down during the past four weeks. The Impulse System is no
longer flashing its buy signal, as it last did at point A, permitting
shorting.
Daily: Massive bearish divergences between prices and MACD-Histogram
(A-B-C), as well as a rare bearish divergence with MACD-lines (B-C).
The triple bearish divergence A-B-C between Force Index and price at
the right edge gives a signal to pull the trigger. The plan is to sell short
with a SafeZone stop.
Action: Short on 6/25/2001 at 69, with a stop at 72.51.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

297

Figure 10.24

EXIT
Daily: Price collapses below the EMA, about as deeply below as it used to
be above it. Force Index is about as low as it gets—time to cover shorts.
Action: Covered shorts on 7/11/2001 at 59.34. Trade rating 42% (took 9.79
out of a 23-point channel).

298

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

YOUR NEXT TRADE
It took me twenty years of trading and three years of writing to complete
this book. The work was hard, but I enjoyed the journey. Reading must
have been hard work for you, especially if you studied this book and did
not just skim. I wrote on several levels, and it will probably take you more
than one reading to grasp all its ideas and concepts. Expect to return and
review sections of this book in the months and years ahead, as your expertise grows and new questions emerge.
We spent a lot of time together, but now our paths diverge.
I’ve accomplished what I wanted, summarized my ideas on trading.
Liberated from the word processor, I am off to pursue my passions, especially trading and travel. I will spend more time in front of the screen,
travel to faraway places, and if they have good Internet connections, I’ll
trade from there, combining my interests.
What will you do?
You had your lessons in psychology, technical analysis, money management, and record keeping. If you are serious about success, start applying what you’ve learned. You have your work cut out for you.
Your first task is to set up a record-keeping system. Keeping records is
like looking in a mirror while shaving with a very sharp blade. You’re safer
if you look. Hammering on this topic reminds me how I once sent a
patient to AA who told me that those meetings ruined him as an alcoholic.
Getting drunk could never be fun again. Keeping records will do the same
for you—it will immunize you against impulsive gambling.
Your next step is to set up a money management plan. Follow that by
writing down your trading plan, a decision-making tree. Once you do that,
you’ll be moving in the direction opposite to the majority of the trading
public. Test everything you read in this or any other book. Only testing
can make any method your own.
Those who concentrate on the rewards, which are considerable, often
push themselves too hard. It is better to trade small in order to be more
relaxed and enjoy the learning process. Then you will emerge not only
richer, but also more alert, aware, free, and at peace with yourself.
I have traveled this road, made my choices, and battled my demons,
growing from a wide-eyed beginner into someone who knows what he is
doing. The journey had many rough stretches, but both the trip and the
rewards are worth it.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

299

Closing this book does not mean having to say good-bye. If I continue
to run my Traders’ Camps, you may come to spend a week during which
we’ll work on trading together. All new ideas in this book have first been
presented to my campers, to whom my work is dedicated.
In writing this book I gave you my best and did not hold anything back.
I hope you will give all of yourself to becoming a good trader. I now
return to my trading room and wish you success in yours.

Dr. Alexander Elder
New York
February 2002

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

W

riting this page is like having a dessert—after working on this
book for more than three years, I get a chance to thank those
who helped me along the way.
Thanks, first of all, to my campers, the people to whom this book is
dedicated. For the past several years I have been running Traders’
Camps, becoming friends with some of the sharpest, most inquisitive
people in the markets. Their questions forced me to dig deeper and
articulate my ideas more clearly. To this day, one of the highlights of
each month is a meeting of campers in my apartment in Manhattan.
I want to thank my staff, especially my manager, Inna Feldman. I
trust her to take good care of my clients while I am traveling or trading overseas.
Fred Schutzman, an old and loyal friend, found time in his busy
schedule to read the entire manuscript, and his eagle eye caught several oversights. Fred did a similar review of my previous book, Trading
for a Living. At its publication party I introduced him to the woman
who was my assistant manager. They started dating, married, and last
year had their third child. Fred has a beautiful family, an unexpected
bonus for his hard work.
My best friend, Lou Taylor, to whom Trading for a Living was dedicated, died more than a year before the current book was completed.
His sage advice was priceless and his absence at the next book party
will feel like a huge void.
My older daughter Miriam, a journalist in Paris, helped edit this manuscript. It seems like just a few years ago I was correcting her homework, and now she takes a red pen to my pages. Her English and her
style are impeccable; it looks like that homework paid off. My second
301

302

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

daughter, Nika, an art historian in New York, another person with a
razor-sharp sense of taste, developed the design for the jacket of the
book. She also selected the fonts and made other suggestions to
improve the look and feel of the book. Both girls, as well as my youngest child Danny, provided many cheerful distractions from business. I
often took them on trips, and since they like to sleep late, I had the time
to work on this book in the cafes of Venice, Fiji, New Zealand, and
other locales, before a day of skiing or museum hopping.
My former manager, Carol Keegan Kayne, who edited all of my previous books, reviewed page proofs of this one. She convinced me once
and for all that no book of mine is finished until she signs off on it.
My old friend Ted Bonanno insulated me from the most stressful part
of writing a book—negotiating a publishing contract. Ted is an Olympic
rowing coach (not long ago he went to the Sydney Olympics and I
did not go near the gym for three blessed weeks). We work out
together, and it was fun discussing business with Ted while running or
between rounds of weight lifting.
Last but not least, I want to thank many friends around the world
in whose beach, mountain, or city houses I sometimes stayed while
writing this book. Since many of them are traders, I hope they benefited from the insights I shared with them as much as I enjoyed their
hospitality.
Dr. Alexander Elder
New York
February 2002

SOURCES

Achelis, Steven. Technical Analysis from A to Z (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995).
Appel, Gerald. Day-Trading with Gerald Appel (video) (New York: Financial
Trading, 1989).
Basso, Thomas F. Panic-Proof Investing (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994).
Belveal, L. Dee. Charting Commodity Market Price Behavior (1969) (Homewood,
IL: Dow Jones Irwin, 1989).
Bernstein, Peter L. Against the Gods (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
Bloom, Howard. The Lucifer Principle (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1995).
Briese, Stephen E. The Inside Track to Winning (video) (New York: Financial
Trading, 1993).
Brower, William. Personal communication.
Caplan, David. Trade Like a Bookie (Oxnard, CA: Com-Op Publishing, 1995).
Chande, Tushar S., and Stanley Kroll. The New Technical Trader (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1994).
Dominguez, Joe, and Vicki Robin. Your Money or Your Life (New York: Penguin
Books, 1992).
Douglas, Mark. The Disciplined Trader (New York: New York Institute of
Finance, 1990).
Douglas, Mark. Trading in the Zone (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
2001).
Edwards, Robert D., & John Magee. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (1948)
(New York: New York Institute of Finance, 1992).
Ehlers, John. Personal communication.
Ehlers, John. Rocket Science for Traders (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001).
Elder, Alexander. Rubles to Dollars (New York: New York Institute of Finance,
1999).
Elder, Alexander. Study Guide for Come Into My Trading Room (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 2002).
303

304

SOURCES

Elder, Alexander. Study Guide for Trading for a Living (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1993).
Elder, Alexander. Trading at the Right Edge (video) (New York: Financial
Trading, 1996).
Elder, Alexander. Trading for a Living (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993).
Elder, Alexander. Winning Psychology and Tactics (video) (New York: Financial
Trading, 1999).
Friedentag, Harvey Conrad. Options—Investing without Fear (Chicago: International Publishing, 1995).
Gleick, James. Chaos (New York: Viking Penguin, 1987).
Guppy, D. Personal communication.
Hagstrom, Robert G., Jr. The Warren Buffett Way (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1995).
Hartle, Thom. Talking with “Turtle” Russell Sands (Stocks & Commodities.
1992; 10(12): 544–548).
Hieronymus, Thomas A. Economics of Futures Trading (New York: Commodity
Research Bureau, 1971).
Hurst, J. M. The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970).
Kaufman, Perry J. Smarter Trading (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995).
LeBeau, Charles. Personal communication.
LeBeau, Charles, and David W. Lucas. Technical Traders Guide to Computer
Analysis of the Futures Market (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
Leigh, Norman. Thirteen against the Bank (London: Weidenfeld, 1976).
LeFevre, Edwin. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (New York: George H.
Doran Company, 1923).
Lynch, Peter. One Up on Wall Street (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989).
McMillan, Lawrence G. Options as a Strategic Investment, 3rd ed. (New York:
New York Institute of Finance, 1999).
Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1999).
Natenberg, Sheldon. Option Volatility and Pricing (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1994).
Nison, Steve. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New York: New York
Institute of Finance, 1991).
Perry, Roger. Personal communication.
Perry, Roger. RightLine Report—Stock Splits and Momentum Trading (a presentation in the Traders’ Camp, January 2001).
Schabacker, Richard W. Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits (London:
Pearson Professional, 1997).
Schwager, Jack D. Market Wizards (New York: HarperBusiness, 1990).

SOURCES

305

Schwager, Jack D. Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1995).
Schwager, Jack D. The New Market Wizards (New York: HarperBusiness, 1992).
Steidlmyer, J. Peter, and Kevin Koy. Markets & Market Logic (Chicago: Porcupine
Press, 1986).
Sweeney, John. Campaign Trading (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
Teweles, Richard J., and Frank J. Jones. The Futures Game, 3rd ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1998).
Tharp, Van K. Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom (New York: McGraw Hill,
1998).
Thorp, Edward O. Beat the Dealer (New York: Vintage Books, 1966).
Vince, Ralph. Portfolio Management Formulas (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1990).
Wilder, J. Welles, Jr. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems (Greensboro,
SC: Trend Research, 1976).

INDEX

