
The Evening News had been offered to the Washington Post, which had turned it down. Kay Graham could
not stomach another paper with a strong labor union. Buffett was not afraid of that. “We sat down with the
unions before we bought it and said, ‘Lookit, we could be wrong for a variety of reasons, but there’s one
thing that will kill any paper in a two-paper town, and that is an extended strike. You guys have got the
ability to do that to us. And if you do it, well, you know, we’ll have lost. But that is a risk we’re taking, and
we want you to understand we’re taking it. Although you hold the card, if you play it, we both lose.’” The
unions seemed to understand.
Buffett and Munger’s empire now had assets of over half a billion dollars,16 and controlled more than half of
Berkshire Hathaway and sixty-five percent of Blue Chip. These two companies owned National Indemnity,
the Rockford Bank, See’s, Wesco, ten percent of the Washington Post, a quarter of Pinkerton’s detective
agency, fifteen percent of GEICO, and a bushel of other stocks—and finally the daily city newspaper he had
sought for so long.17
Murray Light, the managing editor of the Evening News, quickly discussed a plan with Buffett to start a
weekend edition, a plan that the imperious former owner, the aristocratic heiress Kate Robinson Butler, had
never liked. The late Mrs. Butler, a diminutive tyrant with bouffant white hair, had growled at her employees,
pounded her fist on the leather surface of her imported French desk, and seen no need to change with the
times.18 She rode the few blocks to the office from her ornate mansion, a major Buffalo landmark, in the
back of a Rolls-Royce limousine and was said to be less interested in the newsroom than in her trips to
Europe in pursuit of a prince worthy of her daughter’s hand.19
The News’s publisher, Henry Urban, had gotten on well with Mrs. Butler, a large part of his job being to calm
her on the many occasions when she took issue with the paper’s editorials. Mrs. Butler’s focus was not on
profits, and neither was Urban’s. “You will not find a nicer man than Henry Urban. But the idea of
negotiating with the newsprint producers just wouldn’t enter his head. As soon as I got there, the newsprint
producers said, Does Mr. Buffett like to fish? And I told them, Well, Charlie likes to fish, but I buy the
newsprint.” The News was paying ten percent more than other papers just across the bridge in Canada paid,
and the same as publishers paid in Florida, California, and Dallas. Buffett wanted thirty bucks off to reflect
lower shipping costs. “We were buying forty-thousand-plus tons a year. So thirty bucks was $1.2 million on
a company that wasn’t making any money.” He Buffetted the newsprint producers. “I told all seven, we have
contracts for various lengths of time at the wrong price. You’ve got the lowest freight cost of any American
customer with us and you’re charging us the same. We will honor those contracts, but if you don’t
renegotiate them, you will never have another newsprint contract with us again.” He won.
But lower shipping costs alone would not cure the Evening News’s blues. Buffalo’s newspapers existed in an
odd sort of equilibrium. One controlled weekdays, another weekends.20 Buffett and Munger agreed with
Murray Light that the News had no choice but to extend its weekday advantage by expanding.21 “We had to
do what we did if we were going to compete effectively,” says Munger. “One side or the other was going to
win.”
Two weeks before the Evening News launched its new Sunday edition, the Courier-Express filed suit on
grounds of antitrust, saying the News’s plan to give away free papers on Sunday for five weeks, then to sell at
a discount, amounted to an illegal monopoly that was trying to run it out of business.22 The CourierExpress’s lawyer, Frederick Furth, hit upon an ingenious strategy to spin Buffett’s views about no red
ribbons into a story about monopolists from out of town stomping all over a local business.
Furth’s subpoenas produced a sheaf of documents suggesting that Buffett and Munger were well aware that
vigorous competition would doom the Courier-Express. The Courier-Express launched an all-out publicrelations war, starting with a page-one story, amply fleshed out inside, and days and weeks of follow-up
coverage, all portraying itself as a tiny neighborhood David fighting ruthless Goliaths from out of state. This
message found eager ears in Buffalo, where jobs fell like rust flakes from the once-proud city’s oxidizing
employment rolls.

No sooner had Buffett been released from the hell of the Wesco investigation than he found himself
embroiled in another bitter legal fight, one that would require his presence in the frigid, unfriendly locale of
Buffalo, New York.
The News began to drain Blue Chip’s coffers. Buffett’s lawyer, Chuck Rickershauser, had by now left
Munger, Tolles to become the head of the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. His replacement, Ron Olson, came
to Buffalo to fend off the charge of monopolist-as-liquidator, part of a team Munger had assembled from Los
Angeles. Olson filed an affidavit that spoke of his client’s love of newspapers beginning with his
inky-fingered childhood, and his role in the Sun’s Pulitzer Prize. The Courier-Express, meanwhile, had tried
to be so clever as to run a flattering profile of every judge who might be chosen for the trial, “to suck up to
the judge.”23 The case ended up being tried by one they missed. Still, fortune nonetheless favored the
Courier-Express in the assignment of federal judge Charles Brieant of the Southern District of New York.
Buffett had always prided himself on being able to size up a business very fast, from its balance sheet alone.
In his first appearance in court in Buffalo, the Courier-Express’s lawyer, Furth, portrayed Buffett as
someone who knew little of the Buffalo Evening News, having never inspected its plant and having failed to
hire consultants to study the paper before buying it. Furth accused Buffett of having discussed whether the
News would put the Courier-Express out of business, which Buffett denied. Furth approached the witness
stand waving a copy of a recent, glowing Wall Street Journal profile of Buffett. His growing fame was about
to be used against him as a weapon for the first time.24 Buffett had told the reporter how glad he was to be
out of money management, his ego no longer on the line. But, in fact, with his newly heightened profile, his
ego was now more on the line than ever before. In this story, his friend Sandy Gottesman had been quoted by
the reporter as saying, “Warren likens owning a monopoly or market-dominant newspaper to owning an
unregulated toll bridge. You have relative freedom to increase rates when and as much as you want.”25
Had he said this? Furth demanded in court.
No, well, Buffett responded, “whether it is like a toll bridge I don’t remember, but it is a great business. It
may be better than a toll bridge in Fremont, Nebraska. I know a lot of honest people, but when they start
giving quotes they don’t necessarily get them—”
Furth bore down. Did he believe it or not?
“I won’t quarrel with that characterization…. I would like to own one…. I have said in an inflationary world
that a toll bridge would be a great thing to own if it was unregulated.”
“Why?” asked Furth.
Buffett looked at the judge, to whom he was trying to teach economics. “Because you have laid out the
capital costs. You build the bridge in old dollars, and when there is inflation, you don’t have to keep replacing
it—a bridge you build only once.”
“And you used the term ‘unregulated’ so that you can raise prices; is that right?”
“That is true.”26
Buffett now hung twisting in a net of his own weaving. A toll bridge, the Douglas Street Bridge over the
Missouri River, was, in fact, a prominent feature of his youth.27 During Buffett’s childhood, Omaha had been
torn for more than a decade over how to liberate the only route to Iowa from the toll-taker’s grasp. He and
Munger later tried to buy the Detroit International Bridge Company, which owned the bridge that connected
Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, but wound up with only twenty-four percent of the company.28
“It was one hell of a bridge. A thousand square feet, and it made more money…I was terribly disappointed
when we didn’t get it. Charlie kept telling me how well off we were that we didn’t get it. Because, he said,
what could be worse for your image than a guy who raised the prices on a toll bridge?”

Indeed.
“The judge didn’t like me. For one reason or another, he just didn’t like me. He didn’t like our lawyers
either. Most people like Ron Olson, but the judge did not like Ron.”
Judge Brieant’s ruling on a preliminary injunction, which was issued in November 1977, said that the
Evening News was perfectly within its rights to start a Sunday paper and it was in the public interest that it
should do so. But Brieant, apparently taken with Furth’s exploitation of the toll-bridge theme, took off with it
on a flight to the land of metaphor, lamenting that the “readers and advertisers of Greater Buffalo [might]
conclude that they can get along with only one newspaper as their unregulated toll bridge to the events of the
outside world.”29 He deemed the News’s plan predatory and enjoined it against promoting, marketing, or
distributing its new Sunday edition except under severe restrictions. The judge hamstrung the News’s ability
to offer free papers, discount pricing, and guarantees to advertisers, among other restrictions. The most
problematic rule he imposed required subscribers to fill out a form each and every week to order that
Sunday’s paper. The Courier-Express fired a prepared publishing barrage crowing about its victory over an
out-of-town bully that was trying to drive a small-fry local business into the ground. The Evening News could
say nothing in response.
“Now we were going to lose or win, and we had a judge who didn’t like us, and we were operating with our
hands tied and under threat of contempt.”
Courier-Express employees began to police the minutiae of the order, and proved that the News had
delivered some Sunday papers to people who had not filled out the proper forms. Judge Brieant held the
News in contempt.
Five weeks later, advertisers had rallied behind the Courier-Express, and the new Sunday edition of the
News could boast of only a quarter of the Courier-Express’s ad lineage.30 The Evening News swung from a
modest profit to a whopping $1.4 million loss.31 Buffett was chilled by the news. No business he had ever
owned had lost so much money so fast.
On a miserable, rain-driven day the week before Christmas 1977, Judge Brieant called the court into session
for the beginning of a trial that would determine the terms of a final injunction. Buffett had spent the latter
part of the fall sleepless and in tears, trying to digest what it meant that Susie was gone and yet not really
leaving him. His idea of a distraction from his personal woes had been to cling like a junebug to Carol
Loomis, Astrid, and Kay Graham in turn as he flew back and forth between New York, Omaha, and
Washington. Certainly he had not wanted a distraction like this. The trial went into recess as he flew to
Emerald Bay for the annual holiday family gathering, the first under the new arrangement with Susie, during
which she would continue to reassure him that their lives would go on much as before. As soon as the
Buffetts’ New Year’s Day party was over, Warren and Susie went their separate ways, Judge Brieant
reconvened the litigants, and Olson and Munger began calling Buffett with updates on the trial as he returned
to work in Omaha.
In July 1978, he was with Carol and George Gillespie. “We were playing bridge in Kay’s apartment in New
York with Charlie, and Judge Brieant’s decision came in. I gave it to Charlie, and he read it, and he said,
‘Well, this is pretty well-written.’ I was so damned mad. I didn’t give a damn whether it was well-written or
not, I was living with all these restrictions. I was not about to admire his prose.”
Judge Brieant’s final opinion, a masterpiece of judicial unrestraint carrying the subtitle “Mr. Buffett Comes
to Buffalo,” kept in place restrictions against the Evening News. Munger and Olson planned to appeal.
Characteristically, Buffett did not want to lengthen the fight with the judge. Munger had always kidded
Buffett that his management technique was to take out all the cash from a company and raise prices. If that
failed, Buffett didn’t have any more arrows in his quiver. This technique wouldn’t solve the problems of the
Evening News. Buffett was so beaten down and wanted so badly not to get into a confrontation with the
judge that he was willing to let $35.5 million go down the drain. A remnant of his last big legal battle was only

now ending: The SEC had finally, at long last, approved the merger of Berkshire and Diversified. Buffett
wanted desperately to be done with lawyers, depositions, subpoenas, and fighting. “I didn’t want to appeal. I
just felt it would take so damned long, it would irritate the judge, and that we had more to lose by irritating
him as he enforced this injunction and as the Courier came up with all these furious attacks, and he could
just keep extending it. I declared, We’re not going to appeal because in a year or year and a half we’ll be
dead anyway. And Ron and Charlie told me I was wrong, and I was wrong.”
In the end, he decided to go along with them. “We had to appeal. I wasn’t going to give in to a set of
conditions which were going to make us noncompetitive. So basically I had no choice. We don’t bluff. It’s
not my style, anyway. Over a lifetime, you’ll get a reputation for either bluffing or not bluffing. And
therefore, I want it to be understood that I don’t do it.”
The Buffalo Evening News was Buffett’s single largest investment, and by a wide margin. It was tying up a
third of Blue Chip’s capital, losing money under Judge Brieant’s restrictions, and vulnerable to any strike that
would weaken it further at a time when the stock market was falling and Buffett needed it to produce cash to
buy stocks at the bargain-basement prices he always favored. The potential failure of the Buffalo Evening
News risked more than setting him and Munger back their $35 million; for the man who begrudged spending
$31,500 on a house because that money could ultimately turn into a million, the lost compounding potential
of their investment in the newspaper made the situation much graver than it appeared superficially. So
Buffett not only decided to appeal the decision, but he Tom Sawyered Stan Lipsey, who was thinking of
moving to San Francisco, into trying to turn the paper around. “What would you think about going up to
Buffalo?” Buffett asked. “My heart sank,” Lipsey says, “but I couldn’t turn Warren down on anything.”
Lipsey went to Buffalo to provide some temporary help and arrived in the aftermath of Buffalo’s worst
blizzard in years, banks of snow plowed as high as the rooftops of buildings. He stayed in the hotel that
Buffett recommended and ate at Buffett’s favorite steak house—and was baffled at how Buffett could stand
either one of them. The next morning when he arrived at the office of the Evening News, he quickly saw why
Buffett had sent him. The news product was excellent, but the business management was sloppy. He sat
down at a secretarial desk and worked from a manual typewriter. A manager appeared at his side and asked,
“What kind of liquor do you want?” Lipsey asked what he meant. Well, said the man, as a manager you’re
entitled to two cases of booze.32
Lipsey started spending one week a month in Buffalo. On one of his weeks in Omaha, he joined Warren and
Astrid to take the temperature of Buffett’s current life. Warren was clearly relaxed in his new relationship.
He let Astrid take them all to a drag show.33
By 1979, Lipsey had straightened out the paper’s management, and victory was approaching in the battle of
the legal briefs with the Courier-Express. In April 1979, nearly a year and a half after Brieant’s preliminary
injunction, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously reversed him, saying his opinion was “infected
with legal and factual error.” There was “simply no evidence that Mr. Buffett acquired the News with the
idea of putting the Courier out of business…. All that the record supports is a finding that Mr. Buffett
intended to do as well as he could with the News and was not lying awake thinking what the effect of its
competition on the Courier would be…. Courts must be on guard against efforts of plaintiffs to use the
antitrust laws to insulate themselves from the impact of competition.”34
But the reversal of Judge Brieant’s order was a victory that came almost too late. The Courier-Express
immediately appealed the ruling, seeking to reinstate the injunction. The News’s lawyers wearily took up their
swords to continue the ludicrous fight. Meanwhile, despite tighter management controls imposed by Lipsey,
the battle had cost so much in legal fees and lost advertising lineage while the News operated under all the
judge’s restrictions for the better part of two years that it was losing millions—a $5 million operating loss
before tax in 1979—multiples more than Buffett or Munger had ever experienced in any of their businesses.
It was going to take heroic work to make the money back.
“How about moving to Buffalo?” Buffett asked Lipsey. “I don’t really want to do that,” Lipsey replied.
Buffett said nothing, and Lipsey continued commuting.

By mid-1979, the stock market was sunk in gloom, and orders for stocks, Buffett said, were placed “with an
eyedropper.”35 The Dow had languished for a decade, bucking and stalling in snorts and gasps, like a beat-up
car with a faulty carburetor. Its latest stall-out took it back down to the familiar territory of the mid-800s.
Gerald Ford’s replacement in Washington, Jimmy Carter, wore Mister Rogers sweaters to promote energy
conservation; it backfired, and he seemed to embody the United States’ impotence in dealing with Iran,
where the Ayatollah Khomeini had deposed the Shah. The empress would no longer waltz around the dance
floor at the Iranian Embassy. A partial meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant released radioactive
material into the atmosphere; inflation galloped at double digits; and lines formed at the gas pumps.
BusinessWeek declared “The Death of Equities,” as if no one would ever buy stocks again. A mood of deep
pessimism settled on the country.
Investors piled into gold, diamonds, platinum, art, real estate, rare coins, mining stocks, feedlot cattle, and oil;
“cash is trash” was the watchword of the day. High school girls wore necklaces made of Krugerrand coins. A
brash new trustee at Grinnell, Steve Jobs, protégé of the esteemed Bob Noyce, tried to talk the investment
committee into selling all the stocks and buying gold.36 An engineer in his mid-twenties, Jobs was obviously a
very smart guy, but the investment committee demurred, and Grinnell did not buy gold.
In Forbes, Buffett wrote the opposite: It was time for investors to buy stocks. “The future is never clear,” he
wrote; “you pay a very high price in the stock market for a cheery consensus. Uncertainty actually is the
friend of the buyer of long-term values.”37 He was the buyer of long-term values—except that he had no
cash. Periodically, cash had showered on Buffett since the beginning of the decade—$16 million from
distributing the partnership assets, then millions more from the sale of Data Documents stock, a private
investment. But he had poured it all into Berkshire Hathaway. Buffett wanted money to invest. He had
always paid himself only $50,000 a year, a number that he now raised to a still-modest $100,000. He
borrowed some money from banks and started to invest again.
And finally, Stan Lipsey made the move Warren had been hoping for. One day in 1980 Lipsey showed up at
Warren’s unlocked back door in Omaha to say that his wife, Jeannie, wanted a divorce and that her lawyer
was, from Stan’s perspective, raising hell. Buffett reminded Lipsey of something Tom Murphy had taught
him. “You can always tell them to go to hell tomorrow, Stan,” he said. He invited the sparring lawyers to his
office and helped mediate the end of a marriage between his friends—the second time he had done so. Not
long before, Buffett had brokered peace between his friend Ed Anderson and his wife, Shirley Smith
Anderson, an old friend of Warren and Susie’s who had been Doris’s “sorority mother.” He was experienced
at easing his friends through difficult transitions. He began talking to Lipsey about the need to make changes
in his life. Maybe it’s time, Stan thought. As the conversation progressed, Buffett helped Lipsey talk himself
into moving to Buffalo. “It was typical Warren. He wanted me to come up here in the worst way,” but in the
end, just as with people investing in the partnership, it had to be Lipsey’s idea.
Lipsey went to Buffalo, and stayed. Every Friday night, he called and gave Buffett the latest “horrible
numbers,” and each time, no matter how bad the news, Buffett remained encouraging and upbeat, thanking
him for calling. “It was sort of mind-blowing,” Lipsey says.38 By the end of 1980, the losses had mounted to
$10 million. Munger’s 1980 Blue Chip annual report warned about the dire condition of the paper, and also
complained darkly about the “leapfrogging of benefits” for the unions, repeating a warning Munger had first
given in the 1978 report: “If any extended strike shuts down the Buffalo Evening News, it will probably be
forced to cease operations and liquidate.”39
Munger’s viewpoint as he wrote these words and steered Blue Chip through the legal maze of the Buffalo
Evening News could not have been helped by the dire and dark condition of his health. For several years he
had stoically tolerated growing cataracts, until they reached the point at which his eyesight was seriously
impaired. When he had cataract surgery on his left eye, it resulted in an extremely rare complication called
an epithelial downgrowth: A specialized type of primary body tissue from outside the eye (probably corneal
cells) got inside his eye and started growing like a cancer. The pressure and destruction of the optic nerve
caused severe, disabling pain.40 When he could no longer tolerate the agony of his slowly exploding eye,
Munger arranged to have it eviscerated and replaced with a glass eye. But afterward, “I was like a wounded
