• Of the other 22 advisers, only two were ahead
of the S&P 500 Index when they discontinued
publication.
• An initial $100,000 investment in the S&P 500
Index 26 years ago would be worth nearly
$2,500,000 today. By way of contrast, a similar
investment in the portfolios managed by the
advisers tracked by Hulbert would be worth
about $1,400,000.
Hulbert’s conclusion: “You can outperform more
than 80 percent of your fellow investors over the next sev-

S E E K I N G A DV I C E TO S E L E C T F U N D S ?

[111]

eral decades simply by investing in an index fund—and
doing nothing else.”

Index funds endure, while
most advisers and funds do not.

These examples surely reinforce the thesis that index
funds endure, while most advisers and funds do not; that
index fund returns strongly exceed the returns earned even
by those advisers and funds that do survive; that the odds
against successful fund selection by advisers are large, and
that compounding these rather consistent differentials in
rates of annual return mount up to truly staggering differences in wealth accumulation over the long term.
If you consider the selection of an adviser, please take
heed of these findings. If you decide to go ahead, make
sure you are paying a fair fee (which results in a deduction
from whatever rate of return your fund portfolio earns).
Since most investment advisory fees tend to begin in the
range of 1 percent per year, be sure to balance the worth of
the peripheral services that advisers provide against the reduction in your returns that those fees are likely to represent over time. Finally—and this will hardly surprise
you—look with particular favor on advisers who recommend stock and bond index funds in their model portfolios.

[112]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Don’t Take My Word for It
Listen, once again, to the widely respected investment adviser William Bernstein, who writes in The
Four Pillars of Investment Wisdom as follows: “You
will want to ensure that your adviser is choosing
your investments purely on their investment merit
and not on the basis of how the vehicles reward him.
The warning signs here are recommendations of
load funds, insurance products, limited partnerships, or separate accounts. The best, and only, way
to make sure that you and your adviser are on the
same team is to make sure that he is ‘fee-only,’ that
is, that he receives no remuneration from any other
source besides you. . . . ‘Fee-only’ is not without pitfalls, however. Your adviser’s fees should be reasonable. It is simply not worth paying anybody more
than 1 percent to manage your money. Above $1
million, you should be paying no more than 0.75
percent, and above $5 million, no more than 0.5
percent. . . . Your adviser should use index/passive
stock funds wherever possible. If he tells you that he
is able to find managers who can beat the indexes,
he is fooling both you and himself. I refer to a commitment to passive indexing as ‘asset-class religion.’
Don’t hire anyone without it.”

rE
apt e le ve

h

n

C

¸

Focus on the LowestCost Funds


The More the Managers Take,
the Less the Investors Make.

WHAT LESSONS HAVE YOU learned in Chapters 8
through 10? Selecting equity funds based on long-term
past performance hasn’t been the answer. Selecting funds
based on past short-term performance hasn’t been the answer either. Relying on even the best-intentioned financial
advice seems to work only spasmodically. How can successful fund selection prove so difficult? Because of something that, deep down, our common sense tells us:
Performance comes and goes.

[114]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

But there is also something else worth knowing: you
can be more successful in selecting winning funds by focusing, not on the inevitable evanescence of past performance, but on something that seems to go on forever or,
more fairly, a factor that has persisted over all the fund industry’s long history. That factor is the costs of owning
mutual funds. Costs go on foreve r.

Common sense tells us that performance comes
and goes, but costs go on forever.

One major cost is the fund’s expense ratio, and it tends
to change little over time. While some funds scale down
their fee rates as assets grow, the reductions are usually sufficiently modest that high-cost funds tend to remain highcost; lower-cost funds tend to remain lower-cost, and the
few very low-cost funds tend to remain very low-cost. The
average-cost funds, too, tend to persist in that category.
Another large cost of equity fund ownership is the
sales charge paid on each purchase of shares. It, too,
tends to persist. Load funds rarely become no-load funds,
and vice versa. (I can recall no large fund organization
making the immediate conversion from a load to a noload distribution system since Vanguard took that drastic
and unprecedented step 30 years ago.)

F O C U S O N T H E L OW E S T- C O S T F U N D S

[115]

The portfolio turnover costs of individual funds also
tend to persist. Transactions cost money, and we estimate
that turnover costs are roughly 0.5 percent on each purchase
and sale, meaning that a fund with 100 percent portfolio
turnover would carry a cost to shareholders of about 1
percent of assets, year after year. Similarly, 50 percent turnover would cost about 0.50 percent; and 10 percent
turnover would cost about 0.10 percent, and so on. Rule of
thumb: turnover costs equal 1 percent of the turnover rate.
Most comparisons of fund costs rely solely on reported expense ratios, and uniformly find that higher
costs are associated with lower returns. This pattern
holds not only for equity funds as a group, but in each of
the nine Morningstar style boxes (large-, mid-, and smallcap funds, each sorted into fund groups with growth,
value, and blended objectives). While few independent
comparisons take into account the additional cost of fund
portfolio turnover, a similar relationship exists. Funds in
the low-turnover quartile have consistently outperformed
those in the high-turnover quartile for all equity funds as
a group, and in each of the nine style boxes.
Adding that estimated turnover cost to each fund’s
expense ratio makes the relationship sheer dynamite. Taking into account both costs, we find that the all-in annual
costs range from 0.9 percent of assets in the lowest-cost
quartile to 3.0 percent in the highest-cost quartile as

[116]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

shown in Exhibit 11.1. (This exercise ignores sales
charges and, therefore overstates the net returns earned
by the funds in each quartile.)
Costs matter! That 2.1 percentage point difference
constitutes a huge portion of the 2.7 point advantage in
the returns among the lowest-cost funds over the highestcost funds during the past 10 years. Net annual return of
low-cost funds, 11.7 percent; net annual return of highcost funds, just 9.0 percent, a 30 percent enhancement in
each year’s return achieved simply by relying on relative
costs as a guide to performance success.
Also note that in each of the fund quartiles, when we
add the costs to the funds’ reported net returns, the gross
annual returns earned in each category are virtually identical. Pre-cost returns fall into a narrow range: a high of
12.8 percent for the third quartile and a low of 12.0 percent for the fourth quartile, just what we might expect.
Costs account for most of the difference in the annual net
returns earned by the funds.
And there is another significant difference. Step by
step, as costs increase, so does risk (using the volatility of
monthly returns relative to the volatility of the S&P 500
Index as the measure). Those highest-expense, highestturnover-cost funds assumed fully 34 percent more risk
than their lowest-cost cousins. If you take that reduction
in risk into account, the risk-adjusted annual return for

[117]
0.2%

−70%

+5%
11.4%

0.9%
1.5
2.0
3.0
1.9%

12.6%
12.5
12.8
12.0
12.5%

Costs

11.2%

+30%

11.7%
11.0
10.8
9.0
10.6%

Net
Return

15.7%

−34%

16.0%
17.0
18.5
21.4
18.2%

Risk

11.4%

+47%

11.9%
10.9
10.1
8.1
9.8%

Risk-Adjusted
Return

194%

+75%

207%
181
163
118
154%

Cumulative
Gain

Note: Costs include expense ratios and estimated turnover costs but exclude sales loads. Gross return was calculated
by adding these costs back into each group’s net return.

500 Index Fund

Low cost enhancement

One ( lowest )
Two
Three
Four (highest )
Average fund

Gross
Return

Equity Mutual Funds: Returns versus Costs, 1995 –2005

Cost Quartile

EXHIBIT 11.1

[118]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

the low-cost quartile comes to 11.9 percent, fully 47 percent higher than the 8.1 percent risk-adjusted return of
the high-cost quartile.
When we compound those annual returns over time,
the cumulative difference reaches staggering proportions.
Total compound gain for the period: 207 percent for the
low-cost funds, 118 percent for the high-cost funds, a
near doubling of profit arising almost entirely from the
cost differential. Talk about the relentless rules of humble
arithmetic!
In other words, the final value of the low-cost funds
more than tripled over the decade, whereas the value of
the high-cost funds barely doubled. Surely “fishing in the
low-cost pond” should enhance your returns, and by a
wide margin at that. Again, yes, costs matter!
But if you are seeking the lowest-cost funds, why limit
the search to actively managed funds? The classic index
fund had the lowest costs of all: an expense ratio averaging
0.2 percent per year during this period. With no measurable turnover costs, its total all-in costs were but 0.2 percent. The gross return of the 500 Index Fund was 11.4
percent per year; the net return 11.2 percent. Carrying a
lower risk than any of the four cost quartiles (annual price
volatility averaging 15.7 percent), its risk-adjusted annual
return was 11.4 percent, for a cumulative risk-adjusted
gain that was about in the middle of the top quartile.

F O C U S O N T H E L OW E S T- C O S T F U N D S

[119]


The index fund’s risk-adjusted return: 194
percent; average managed fund, 154 percent.

The index fund’s compound risk-adjusted profit of
194 percent surpassed the 154 percent compound profit
earned by the average fund by about one-third, all the
more impressive since that average is overstated (as always) by the fact that only the funds that were good
enough to survive the decade are included in the data.
What’s more, selecting the index fund eliminated the
need to look for those rare needles in the market
haystack represented by the very few active funds that
have performed better than that haystack, in the oftenvain hope that their winning ways will continue over
decades yet to come.
If investors could rely on only a single factor to select
future superior performers and to avoid future inferior
performers, it would be fund costs. The record could
hardly be clearer: the more the managers and brokers
take, the less the investors make. So why not own an
index fund with no active manager and no management
fee, and with virtually no trading of stocks through those
Helpers mentioned in Chapter 1? Why not, indeed?
Chapter 12 explores this idea further.

[120]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Don’t Take My Word for It
Beginning as far back as 1995, Tyler Mathisen,
then executive editor of Money, conceded the point:
“For nearly two decades, John Bogle, the tarttongued chairman of the Vanguard Group, has
preached the virtues of index funds—those boring
portfolios that aim to match the performance of a
market barometer. And for much of that time, millions of fund investors (not to mention dozens of financial journalists including this one) basically
ignored him. Sure, we recognized the intrinsic merits of index funds such as low annual expenses and
because the funds keep turnover to a minimum, tiny
transaction costs. Moreover, because index fund
managers convert paper profits into realized gains
less frequently than do the skippers of actively managed funds, shareholders pay less tax each year to
Uncle Sam. To be sure, those three advantages
form a trio as impressive as Domingo, Pavarotti,
and Carreras.
“Well, Jack, we were wrong. You win. Settling
for average is good enough, at least for a substantial
portion of most investors’ stock and bond portfolios. In fact, more often than not, aiming for benchmark-matching returns through index funds assures
shareholders of a better-than-average chance of outperforming the typical managed stock or bond portfolio. It’s the paradox of fund investing today:

F O C U S O N T H E L OW E S T- C O S T F U N D S

Gunning for average is your best shot at finishing
above average. We’ve come around to agreeing with
the sometimes prickly, always provocative, fund exec
known to admirers and detractors alike as Saint Jack:
Indexing should form the core of most investors’ fund
portfolios. So here’s to you, Jack. You have a right to
call it, as you recently did in a booklet you wrote, The
Triumph of Indexing.” (Thanks, Tyler!)

[121]

C

pte r Tw elv
e

ha

Profit from the Majesty
of Simplicity


Hold Index Funds That Own
the Entire Stock Market.

IF LOW COSTS ARE GOOD (and I don’t think a single analyst, academic, or industry expert would disagree that
low costs are good), why wouldn’t it be logical to focus on
the lowest-cost funds of all—index funds that own the entire stock market? Several index funds carry expense ratios as low as 0.10 percent or even less, and incur
turnover costs that turn out to be zero. They have all-in
costs of just 10 basis points per year, 80 percent lower

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[123]

even than the 90 basis points for the low-cost quartile of
funds described in Chapter 11.
And it works. Witness the real-world superiority of the
S&P 500 Index Fund compared with the average equity
fund over the past 25 years and over the previous decade,
as described in earlier chapters. The case for the success
of indexing in the past is compelling and unarguable. And
with the outlook for subdued returns on stocks during the
decade ahead, I am concluding my anecdotal stroll through
the relentless rules of humble arithmetic with a final statistical example that suggests what the future may hold.
We can, in fact, use statistics designed to project the
odds that a passively managed index fund will outpace an
actively managed equity fund over various time periods.
The complex exercise is called the “Monte Carlo simulation.”* What it does is make a few simple assumptions
about the volatility of equity fund returns and the extent
to which they vary from the returns earned in the stock
market, as well as an assumption about the all-in costs of
equity investing. The particular example presented here
assumes that index fund costs will run to 0.25 percent per
year and that the costs of active management will run to 2
* Basically, a Monte Carlo simulation takes all the monthly returns earned
by stocks over a long period—even a full century—scrambles them randomly, and then computes the annual rates of return generated by each of
the thousands of hypothetical portfolios.

[124]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

percent per year. (Index funds are available at far lower
costs, and the typical equity fund has even higher costs,
so we’ve given actively managed funds the benefit of a
very large doubt.)
Result: Over one year, about 29 percent of active
managers on average, would be expected to outpace the
index; over five years about 15 percent would be expected
to win; over 10 years, 9 percent; over 25 years, 5 percent;
and over 50 years just 2 percent of active managers would
be expected to win (Exhibit 12.1).
How will the future actually play out? Of course,
we can’t be sure. But we know what the past 25 years
look like, and we know that over the past 35 years only

EXHIBIT 12.1

Odds of Actively Managed Portfolio Outperforming
Passive Index Fund

30

Percent

29

20

15
9

10

5
2
0
1

5

10
Years

25

50

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[125]

9 of the 355 funds in business at the outset outperformed the stock market index by more than 2 percent
per year. What’s more, even the majority of these
winners lost their early edge a decade or more ago.
So it looks as if our statistical odds are in the right
ballpark. This arithmetic suggests—even demands—
that index funds deserve an important place in your
portfolio, even as they constitute the overriding portion
of my own.
Whatever the case, in the era of subdued stock and
bond market returns that most likely lies in prospect,
fund costs will become more important than ever. Even
more so when we move from the illusion that mutual
funds as a group can capture whatever returns our financial markets provide to the even greater illusion that most
mutual fund investors can capture even those depleted returns in their own fund portfolios. What the index fund
has going for it is, as I have often said, “the magic of simplicity in an empire of parsimony.”
To reiterate: all those pesky costs—fund expense ratios, sales charges, and turnover costs; tax costs; and the
most subtle cost of all, the rising cost of living (inflation)—are virtually guaranteed to erode the spending
power of our investments over time. What’s more, only in
the rarest cases do fund investors actually succeed in capturing the returns that the funds report.

[126]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING


My conclusions rely on mathematical facts—
the relentless rules of humble arithmetic.

My conclusions about the market returns we can
expect in the years ahead, as well as my conclusions
about the share of those returns that funds will
capture, and the share of those returns that we
investors will actually enjoy, have one thing in common: They rely, not on opinion, but largely on mathematical facts—the relentless rules of humble arithmetic
that make selecting winning funds rather like looking
for a needle in a haystack. You ignore these rules at
your peril.
If the road to investment success is filled with dangerous turns and giant potholes, never forget that simple arithmetic can enable you to moderate those turns
and avoid those potholes. So do your best to diversify
to the nth degree; minimize your investment expenses;
and focus your emotions where they cannot wreak the
kind of havoc that most other people experience in
their investment programs. Rely on your own common
sense. Emphasize all-stock-market index funds. Carefully consider your risk tolerance and the portion of
your investments you allocate to equities. Then stay
the course.

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[127]


All index funds are not created equal.
One example: the difference
between $122,700 and $99,100.

I should add, importantly, that all index funds are not
created equal. While their index-based portfolios are substantially identical, their costs are anything but identical.
Some have miniscule expense ratios; others have expense
ratios that surpass the bounds of reason. Some are no-load
funds, but nearly a third, as it turns out, have substantial
front-end loads, often with an option to pay those loads
over a period of (usually) five years; others entail the payment of a standard brokerage commission.
The gap between the costs charged by the low-cost funds
and the high-cost funds offered by 10 major fund organizations for their S&P 500-Index-based funds runs upward of an
amazing 1.2 percentage points per year. (Exhibit 12.2)
Today, there are some 115 index mutual funds designed
to track the S&P 500 Index. Astonishingly, more than half
of them carry an initial sales load, albeit often concealed by
offering class “B” shares with no front-end load but with an
additional heavy annual fee (used to pay the broker). The
wise investor will select only those index funds that are available without sales loads, and those operating with the lowest
costs. These costs—no surprise here!—are directly related to
the net returns delivered to the shareholders of these funds.

[128]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

EXHIBIT 12.2

Costs of Selected S&P 500 Index Funds

Five Low-Cost Index 500 Funds

Annual
Expense
Ratio

Annual Expense
Ratio Including Any
Sales Charges

1. Fidelity Spartana
2. Vanguard Admiral a
3. Vanguard (Regular)
4. USAA
5. T. Rowe Price

0.07%
0.09
0.18
0.19
0.35

0.07%
0.09
0.18
0.19
0.35

0.69%
0.64
0.64
0.56
0.53

1.45%
1.40
1.39
1.31
1.30

Five High-Cost Fundsb
1. UBS
2. Morgan Stanley
3. Wells Fargo
4. Evergreen
5. J.P. Morgan
a

Share classes available subject to initial minimum investments and/or specified holding periods.
b
Investors pay the lower expense ratio only if they first pay an initial sales
charge of about 5 percent.

In the past, some S&P 500-Index-based funds may
have earned small increases in return (or been penalized by
small reductions) based on their managers’ ability (or inability) to employ strategies that allow small short-term
departures from the exact weightings of the stocks in the
index. I assume, however, that these variations will be
lower in the future, and have therefore ignored them as an
element in the cost-value equation. Funds tracking a particular index are—or should be—commodities in terms of
their portfolios and the returns they provide. So variations

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[129]

in costs make the difference. While cost differentials may
look trivial when expressed on an annual basis, compounded over the years they make the difference between
investment success and failure.
In January 1984, the second index mutual fund was
formed—Wells Fargo Equity Index Fund. Its subsequent
return can be compared with that of the original Vanguard 500 Index Fund over the same period. Both funds
selected the S&P 500 Index as their benchmark. The
sales commission on the Vanguard Index 500 Fund was
eliminated within months of its initial offering, and it has
operated with an expense ratio averaging 0.28 percent annually. (By 2005, the ratio had decreased to 0.18 percent,
and to 0.09 percent for longer-term investors and those
who had $100,000 or more invested in the fund.) In contrast, the Wells Fargo fund carried an initial sales charge
of 5.5 percent througout the period, and its expense ratio
averaged 0.80 percent per year (0.64 percent in 2005).
These seemingly small differences added up to a 23
percent enhancement in value for the Vanguard fund. An
original investment of $10,000 in each produced a profit
of $122,700 for the Vanguard 500 Index Fund, compared
with $99,100 for the Wells Fargo Equity Index Fund. All
index funds are not created equal. Intelligent investors
will select the lowest cost index funds that are available
from reputable fund organizations.
