The following quarter JCB Superstores announces that earnings will
likely come in well below consensus estimates. The stock drops another 15%.
The company is trying to correct the distribution problem, but it is not something easily fixed. It decides to stop expanding and to concentrate on the profitability of its existing store base.
Two years later, Tom pulls up the stock chart. The dog has been flat for
so long it looks as if its heartbeat has stopped. He calls Jim and chats about the
outlook for JCB Superstores. Jim gushes enthusiastically about a new retailing
concept called the Internet. He is excited about the opportunity to sell office

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 3

The Database

3

supplies online without the need for bricks and mortar. There is some risk
because the online community is in its infancy, but Jim predicts it will expand
quickly. Tom is impressed, so he starts doing his homework and is soon buying the stock again.

Investment Footprints
If you picture in your mind the price action of JCB Superstores, you may recognize three chart patterns: a double bottom, a double top, and a dead-cat
bounce. To knowledgeable investors, chart patterns are not squiggles on a
price chart; they are the footprints of the smart money. The footprints are all
they need to follow as they line their pockets with greater and greater riches.
To others, such as Tom, it takes hard work and pavement pounding before
they dare take a position in a stock. They are the ones making the footprints.
They are the smart money that is setting the rules of the game—a game anyone can play. It is called investing.
Whether you choose to use technical analysis or fundamental analysis in
your trading decisions, it pays to know what the market is thinking. It pays to
look for the footprints. Those footprints may well steer you away from a cliff
and get you out of a stock just in time. The feet that make those footprints are
the same ones that will kick you in the pants, waking you up to a promising
investment opportunity.
Let me tell you how I followed one trail of footprints. I sold my holdings
in Alaska Air because I thought the stock was going down. Here is my notebook entry: “9/6/2001. I put a stop at 31.50 this morning and it hit. The stock
has breeched a support level and with weakness in the economy and September/October upon us, it’s time to leave with a small loss [2.5%]. I should have
bought at the breakout price [of an Eve & Adam double bottom]. The relative
strength index peaked twice and now is headed down, suggesting a sale, and the
commodity channel index says sell, too.”
I sold the airline two trading days before the terrorist attacks of 9/11.
Four days after trading resumed, the stock bottomed at 17.70, nearly half the
price at what I sold. The footprints did not lie; they led away from a cliff.
This book gives you the tools to spot the footprints, where they predict
the stock is heading, how far it will travel, and how reliable the trail you are following really is. The tools will not make you rich; tools rarely do. But they are
instruments to greater wealth. Use them wisely.

The Database
For this book, I used several databases in which to search for chart patterns. The
main database consists of 500 stocks, each with durations of 5 years beginning

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

4

11:28 AM

Page 4

Introduction

from mid-1991. I included the 30 Dow Jones industrials and familiar names
with varying market capitalizations. Stocks included in the database needed
a heartbeat (that is, they were not unduly flat over the 5-year period) and
did not have consistently large intraday price swings (too thinly traded
or volatile).
I usually removed stocks that went below $1.00, assuming bankruptcy
was right around the corner. Most of the names in the database are popular
American companies that trade on the NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq. The numerous illustrations accompanying each chapter give a representative sample of the
stocks involved.
To capture the bear market of 2000–2002 and expand on the bull market since 1996, I included two additional databases. The first uses about 200
stocks that I follow daily. The other contains about 300 stocks that I no longer
follow but that have historical data of limited duration (some issues no
longer trade).
For rare chart patterns, I use all three databases and search from 1991 to
the most recent date available. For plentiful patterns, I use already found patterns and add those appearing during the bear market. Thus, the number of
stocks I use to find patterns and the amount of historical price quotes varies.
In the first edition of this book, I used a combination of computerized
algorithms and manual searching to find chart patterns. The current edition
includes the 15,000 patterns from the first edition and others found manually
since then, for a total of more than 38,500 patterns.

Stock Performance from 1991 to 2004
Before reading about the various chart patterns in this book, it is wise to review
the performance of the stock market during the period. Figure I.1 shows a
monthly price chart of the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index. Beginning in
mid-1991, you can see that the market moved up at a leisurely pace, pausing
during much of 1994, and then resuming the climb at a steeper angle in 1995.
The index stumbled in August 1998 and made lower lows for 2 more months
before continuing upward, peaking in March 2000, and signaling an end to the
bull market. The move capped a rise of 418% from the start of the period.
After that, the downhill bear run began, reaching a low in October 2002, for a
decline measuring 51%. The index bounced once but made a higher low in
March 2003, signaling a trend change. Thus, the October low marked the end
of the bear market.
What does all this mean? The bear market measures from March 24,
2000, to October 10, 2002—about 2.5 years long. For data collection purposes, the bull market is everything else, about 11 years long. That covers the
period I used to search for chart patterns in this edition.

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 5

Developing an Investment Style

5

S & P 500 Index
1525
1426
1360
1294
1228
1162
1096
1030
964
898
832
766
Bear Market

Higher
Low

700
667
634
601
568
535
502
469
436
403

1992

1993

1994

Figure I.1

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

370

Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index from 1991 to 2004.

Investing Using Chart Formations
I could give a dentist’s drill to any person walking by, but that doesn’t mean I
would let that person near my teeth. This book is just like that. It gives you the
tools to invest successfully. It suggests which chart patterns work best and which
ones to avoid. Whether you can make money using them is entirely up to you.
I call this book an encyclopedia because that is how I use it. Whenever I
see a chart pattern forming in a stock I own, or am thinking of buying, I read
the applicable chapter. The information refreshes my memory about identification quirks, performance, and any tips on how I can get in sooner or more
profitably. Then I search for similar patterns in the same stock (using different
time scales), and if that does not work, I search for similar patterns in stocks in
the same industry. I look at them closely to determine if their secrets are
applicable to the current situation. I try to learn from their mistakes.

Developing an Investment Style
The question I am asked most often is, how do I develop an investment style? It is
usually not asked like that. Most take a more direct approach: How do I make
money trading stocks? When first asked this question, I stumbled over the
answer. I think it is like showing four people the color blue and asking them to

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

6

11:28 AM

Page 6

Introduction

describe it. One person is color blind so you automatically throw out whatever
he says. One says it is solid blue. Another says it is not blue at all but green,
while the third says it looks like a combination: blue-green. To each individual, blue looks like blue—just do not try to compare answers.
Developing a trading style is a lot like that. It is an individual endeavor
that has a lot in common with experience. I cannot give you experience; I can
only suggest ways to acquire your own.
If you read a chapter on a bullish chart pattern and buy the first stock
showing the pattern in a bull market, you will probably be successful. The first
trade nearly always works for the novice, maybe even the second or third one,
too. Eventually, though, someone is going to pull the rug out from under you
(who knows, maybe it occurs on the first trade). You will make an investment in
a chart pattern and the trade will go bad. Maybe you will stumble across a herd
of bad trades and get flattened. You might question your sanity, you might
question God, but one thing is for certain: Your trading style is not working.
Most people buy stocks like they buy fruit. They look at it, perhaps sniff
it, and plunk down their money. We are not talking about $1.59 here. We are
talking about thousands of dollars for part ownership in a company.
If you have ever been a board member, you know what I am talking about.
You have a fiduciary responsibility to the people who elected or appointed you
to that position. Not only should you study the material handed to you by the
staff, but you have to get out in the field and kick the tires. Do not assume that
what the staff says is always correct or represents the best solution. Question
everything but learn in the process and try to be helpful without being a pest
(I always seem to fall into the pest category). As a shareholder—an owner of the
company—should it be any different?
Once, I considered buying a position in a company showing an upward
breakout from a symmetrical triangle. My computer program told me the company is a member of the machinery industry and further research revealed that
it makes refractory products. I continued doing research on the company until
the problem gnawing at me finally sank in. I did not have the slightest idea
what a refractory product was. Despite my search for an answer, I was not getting the sort of warm fuzzies I usually get when researching a possible investment. So, I passed it over. I am trading it on paper, sure, but not in real life.
Call it the Peter Lynch Syndrome: Do not invest in anything you cannot
understand or explain in a paragraph. Good advice.
Of course, if you blindly invest in chart squiggles and it works for you,
who am I to tell you you are doing it wrong? The fact is, you are not. If you
consistently make money at it, then you have developed an investment style
that fits your personality. Good for you!
My investment style, as you might have guessed, combines fundamental
analysis, technical analysis, emotional analysis, and money management. Just
because I rely on technical analysis does not mean I do not look at the priceto-earnings, price-to-sales, and other more esoteric ratios. Then there is the

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 7

Day Traders, Position Traders, Buy-and-Hold Investors

7

emotional element. After going for months without making a single trade, suddenly a profitable opportunity appears and I will take advantage of it. Three
days later, I will want to trade again. Why? Am I trading just because it feels
good to be finally back in the thick of things? Am I trading just because the single woman living nearby does not know I exist, and I am acting out my frustrations or trying to impress her with the size of my wallet? That is where
paper trading comes in handy. I can experiment on new techniques without
getting burned. If I do the simulation accurately enough, my subconscious will
not know the difference, and I will learn a lot in the process.
Once I come to terms with any emotional issues, I look at money management. How much can I realistically expect to make, and how much can I
lose? What is the proper lot size to take? When should I add to my position?
How long will it take for the stock to reach my target and should I invest in a
less promising but quicker candidate?
Investing using chart formations is an exercise in probability. If you play
the numbers long enough, you will win out. Sure, some of your investments
will fail, and you must learn to cut your losses before they get out of hand. But
the winners should serve you well, providing you let them ride. Just do not
make the mistake of watching a stock double or triple only to reverse course
and drop back to where it started. Or worse.

Day Traders, Position Traders, Buy-and-Hold Investors
As I was writing this book, I kept asking myself what is the time horizon for chart
patterns? Are they best for day traders, position traders, or buy-and-hold
investors? The answer I kept coming up with is: Yes! Chart formations can be
profitable for day traders—those people who are in and out of a trade during a
single day. Many day traders have trading styles that depend on chart formations, support, and resistance. They concentrate on reliable formations that
quickly fulfill their measure rule predictions.
For position traders, those who hold the trade longer than a day but not
forever, chart patterns offer convenient entry and exit signals. I put myself in
this category. If the trade goes bad, I am out quickly. If it is profitable, I see no
need to cut my profits short. When the gains plateau, or if the stock has moved
about all it is going to, I consider moving on. Like the day trader, I try to keep
cash employed by buying formations that promise reliable returns and reach
the ultimate high quickly.
For the long-term investor, chart patterns also signal good entry and exit
points. I remember buying an oil services company knowing that the investment would not make a significant return for 2 or 3 years. (I was wrong: It doubled in 3 weeks) I believe that in 3 years’ time, the stock will be in the 30s, a
sixfold increase from its low. It probably will not qualify as a ten-bagger, but it
is not small change either. In the short term, the road is going to be rocky, and

4366_00.qxd

2/23/05

8

11:28 AM

Page 8

Introduction

I have added to my position as the stock has come down. Since I am in it for the
long term, I have an outstanding order to buy more shares. If this stock goes
nowhere, then my analysis of the market trend was wrong, and I will have
learned a valuable lesson.

The Sample Trade
Most of the sample trades included in the chapters of this book are fictitious.
Each sample trade uses techniques I wanted to illustrate, incorporating fictitious people in sometimes unusual circumstances. Call it poetic license, but I
hope they give you some ideas on how to increase your profits or to minimize
your losses.

Statistics: “I Don’t Believe the Numbers”
A high, tight flag has an average rise of 69% in a bull market. Question: If you
trade this pattern often enough in a bull market, will you make an average of
69%? Answer: No. Why not? Well, you may be like a friend of mine who has
traded stocks a dozen times but made money only once (a few hundred bucks).
But here is another reason: The 69% average rise represents 253 perfect trades.
A perfect trade is one in which you buy at the breakout price and sell at the ultimate high—the highest high before prices decline by at least 20%. Not only
are the trades perfect, but also commissions are not included. Your return may
be lower . . . or higher. However, I used the same spreadsheet formulas from
pattern to pattern, so you can compare performance in most cases (the exceptions: flags, measured moves, and pennants) without worrying about whether
you believe the numbers.
“If I reproduce your tests, will I get similar results?” Yes. A person in
India I know is pulling 30%, 40%, and more out of the market on a consistent
basis. He would claim my statistics are too conservative! A hedge fund manager
reports that my numbers for the dead-cat bounce are dead solid perfect.
Another says that while she was able to reproduce my dead-cat bounce numbers, she was having trouble reproducing others. If you do not follow the
methods I used, your results will vary. Guaranteed. So, this edition includes a
Glossary and Methodology chapter to explain how I measured each result.
The method I used opened a door to a new world. In this world, you will
find that a month after a breakout in a bear market, price often shows strength.
You will discover that when pullbacks occur, performance suffers. You will find
that failure rates start low but increase rapidly. Volume shapes, price gaps, pattern size, and a dozen other performance clues help some patterns but not others. Findings like these are what make this book unique. The numbers tell a
story of fact that I share with you within the following pages.

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 9

PART ONE

Chart Patterns

9

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 10

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 11

1
Broadening Bottoms

RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance

Price trend is downward leading to the formation.
Megaphone appearance with higher highs and
lower lows that widen over time. Breakout is
upward.

Reversal or continuation

Short-term bullish reversal
Bull Market

Bear Market

Performance rank

17 out of 23

12 out of 19

Break-even failure rate

10%

9%

Average rise

27%

21%

Change after trend ends

–34%

–35%

Volume trend

Upward

Upward

Throwbacks

41%

44%

Percentage meeting price
target

59%

53%

Surprising findings

Throwbacks hurt performance. Tall patterns
perform better than short ones; narrow ones
perform better than wide ones. Patterns with
falling volume and a random shape outperform.

See also

Broadening Tops

11

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

12

11:28 AM

Page 12

Broadening Bottoms

Downward Breakouts
Appearance

Same, but breakout is downward.

Reversal or continuation

Short-term bearish continuation
Bull Market

Bear Market

Performance rank

17 out of 21

18 out of 21

Break-even failure rate

16%

9%

Average decline

15%

18%

Change after trend ends

52%

46%

Volume trend

Upward

Flat

Pullbacks

42%

56%

Percentage meeting price
target

44%

31%

Surprising findings

Performs better when the breakout is near the
yearly low. Tall patterns perform better than short
ones. Patterns both tall and narrow outperform.
Patterns with a rising volume trend and random
shape do well.

See also

Broadening Tops

Broadening bottoms (BBs) are middle-of-the-road performers, sporting a 9%
break-even failure rate except in bull markets when double digits prevail (a
poor showing). The average rise or decline is also below that posted by other
chart pattern types.
Surprises are many and a few appear in the snapshot. I discuss them in
more detail later.

Tour
You may be wondering what differentiates a broadening bottom from a broadening top. A broadening bottom has a price trend leading down to the start of
the formation; a broadening top has prices trending up. This differentiation is
an arbitrary designation I made to separate the two formation types. I ignore
brief dips or rises a few days before the pattern as Figure 1.1 shows.
Some maintain that a broadening bottom does not exist. They simply
lump every broadening pattern into the broadening top category. I decided to
separate the two on the chance that their behavior differs.
Figure 1.1 is an example of a broadening bottom. This particular one is
called a five-point reversal because there are five alternating touches, two

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

11:28 AM

Page 13

Identification Guidelines

13

Banc One Corp. (Bank, NYSE, ONE)
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
5

– 26

3

1

– 25
– 24
Partial Decline
2

– 23

4

– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18

Aug 94

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan 95

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Figure 1.1 A broadening bottom formation, specifically a five-point reversal, so
called because of the two minor lows (the even numbers) and three minor highs
(the odd numbers).

minor lows and three minor highs. A five-point reversal is also rare: I located
only 5 in the 77 broadening bottoms I examined. The price trend begins moving down in late August and reaches a low 2 days before the formation begins.
Yes, prices do move up for several days, leading to the first touch of the top
trend line, but I still consider the overall price trend to be moving down to
the formation. Price overshooting or undershooting the formation start is
common.
This particular chart pattern shows a partial decline. Prices move down
from 26 to 24.50, then reverse course and shoot out the top. The stock reached
a high of 38.50 just over a year later.

Identification Guidelines
Table 1.1 lists the identification guidelines for broadening bottoms.
Price trend. As mentioned earlier, a declining price trend precedes a
broadening bottom. Even if prices rise just before the formation begins, ignore
it. It is still a bottom. This arbitrary designation also makes intuitive sense: A
bottom should appear at the end of a downtrend, not when prices are climbing
to the moon.

4366_01.qxd

2/23/05

14

11:28 AM

Page 14

Broadening Bottoms
Table 1.1
Identification Characteristics of Broadening Bottoms

Characteristic

Discussion

Price trend

The short-term price trend should be downward leading to the
formation.

Shape

Megaphone shape with higher highs and lower lows.

Trend lines

Prices follow two trend lines: The top one slopes up and the bottom
one slopes down.

Touches

Should have at least two minor highs and two minor lows, but not
necessarily alternating touches.

Volume

The overall trend is usually upward, sometimes with a U shape.

Breakout

A breakout occurs when price closes above the formation’s high
(upward breakout) or below the pattern’s low (downward breakout).
See text for details. The breakout can occur in either direction and
prices may move horizontally for several months before staging a
definitive breakout.

Shape. The shape of the formation is distinct. It reminds me of chaos
theory where small disturbances oscillate back and forth, then grow unbounded, wreaking havoc. In the stock market, price reaches a new high then
crosses over and makes a new low, creating the broadening pattern. When you
draw a trend line across the minor highs and another connecting the minor
lows, the formation looks like a megaphone.
Trend lines. The two trend lines drawn across the minor highs and lows
are important. The top trend line should slope up; the bottom one should
slope down. The diverging trend lines distinguish the broadening bottom from
other types of formations, such as the right-angled broadening formation
(which has one horizontal trend line) or the broadening wedge (both trend
lines slope in the same direction). So it is important that each trend line has a
slope that is opposite the other.
Touches. A broadening bottom needs at least two minor highs and two
minor lows to be a valid formation. Anything fewer means you are incorrectly
identifying the formation. What is a minor high or low? A minor high is when
prices trend up, then drop back down, leaving a clearly defined peak. A minor
low is just the same thing flipped upside down: Prices move lower, then head
back up leaving a clearly defined valley. Figure 1.1 shows five minor highs or
lows, labeled by numbers. The odd numbers tag the minor highs and the even
numbers are the minor lows. Let me stress that the minor highs and lows need
not be alternating, as in Figure 1.1. Just as long as you can count at least two
peaks and two valleys—wherever they may appear—that is fine.
Volume. There is nothing magical in the volume trend. I performed linear regression from the start of each formation to the end point (not the breakout point that is usually a month beyond the end of the formation) and found
that volume rises about 57% of the time.
