
In the twenty-first century, the innovation lab concept has been embraced
most famously by Google, which encourages creativity and innovation beyond
an employee’s current position. The company has created the Google Garage26

Burniske 03.indd 273

9/9/17 2:41 PM

274 CRYPTOASSETS

as a (somewhat) formal structure in which employees can pursue innovations
with others in the company. This has resulted in projects, such as its autonomous vehicles effort, that Google has grown organically in the hopes of providing additional future revenue.
A key feature that needs to be reinforced from Christensen’s quote is the
need to “set up an autonomous organization.” Just setting up an innovation lab
within a company is not a guarantee of success. These labs must be allowed to
function as autonomous organizations, without the tunnel vision of existing
business and profit models.

THE GREATEST OPPORTUNITY STILL AWAITS
We believe the greatest opportunities for investment growth are in public
blockchains and their associated assets. It is the companies that stretch themselves to work with cryptoassets that will benefit the most over the long term.
If instead a company pursues its own DLT solution, investors must decide if
that solution will enhance the value of the company in the long term.
The opportunities are endless and will be only limited by the ingenuity of
visionaries, developers, and business leaders. It will be an exciting time for
innovation, and potentially, a rewarding time for those innovative investors
who are equipped to recognize the opportunities that lie ahead.

TAX REPORTING OF CRYPTOASSET GAINS
Any financial professional or successful investor knows that managing an
investment portfolio requires an understanding and approach to the tax ramifications (both on the gain and loss side) when making investment decisions.
These types of strategies should also be part of innovative investors’ approach
to cryptoassets within their portfolio. While some decisions have been made
related to the tax treatment of these assets, overall there’s a lack of clarity, and
even worse, a lack of understanding by the agencies providing tax guidance. As
cryptoassets gain more publicity and acceptance, rest assured that government
regulators and tax collectors will take more and more notice.
All cryptoassets have a value, and when bought or sold, can create a gain or
loss for the innovative investor. It should come as no surprise that the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) of the United States has made clear its desire to get a cut
of this digital pie. In 2014, the IRS decided it understood bitcoin and issued

Burniske 03.indd 274

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

275

guidance on its tax treatment with IRS Notice 2014-21. Without detailing the
fine print of the ruling,27 the basic message was that although bitcoin may be
called a virtual currency, for tax purposes the IRS would treat it as property.
For example, stocks, bonds, and real estate are also considered property. The
guidance stated, “General tax principles that apply to property transactions
apply to transactions using virtual currency.” 28
Therefore, an investor, or even a casual user of bitcoin, must treat it for tax
purposes the same way they would stocks, bonds, and real estate. A capital
gain in any of these assets would warrant a taxable event. Accordingly, capital
losses could be utilized as well. The bottom line with bitcoin, either for transactions or investing, is that the purchase and sale prices need to be tracked.
The difference will be capital gains or losses, with appropriate tax treatment
based on long- or short-term holds. The regulation also addresses income
paid in bitcoin and even the mining of bitcoin, which are treated as immediate
income at the market value of bitcoin at the time of possession.
The 2014 IRS guidance is interesting because, although it rules primarily on
bitcoin, it refers to “virtual currency, such as bitcoin.” Does this mean that the
ruling includes all cryptoassets in the “virtual currency” classification?
Here’s how the guidance defines what it means by virtual currency:
In some environments, virtual currency operates like “real” currency—i.e., the coin and paper money of the United States or of
any other country that is designated as legal tender, circulates,
and is customarily used and accepted as a medium of exchange
in the country of issuance—but it does not have legal tender
status in any jurisdiction.

Looking at IRS Notice 2014-21, which provides a bit more information on
tax guidance related to bitcoin and virtual currency, we find an attempt at further clarification:
Virtual currency that has an equivalent value in real currency, or
that acts as a substitute for real currency, is referred to as convertible virtual currency. Bitcoin is one example of a convertible
virtual currency. Bitcoin can be digitally traded between users
and can be purchased for, or exchanged into, U.S. dollars, Euros,
and other real or virtual currencies.29

Burniske 03.indd 275

9/9/17 2:41 PM

276 CRYPTOASSETS

In this case, bitcoin is considered a “convertible” virtual currency. The ruling
also refers the reader (who is by now rather confused) to a more “comprehensive description of convertible digital currencies” that was provided by the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) back in 2013.30 Although
the FinCEN opinion has less to do with taxation and more to do with addressing the misuse of digital currencies for illegal activities, it reveals the fact that
numerous regulatory agencies in the United States have been unable to provide clarity and a unified voice on how to classify bitcoin and cryptoassets.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) also entered the fray
when it charged a startup seeking to offer bitcoin-based options for not registering the product with it. This defined the asset as a commodity, not property,
which would then be covered by the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).31
The CFTC Director of Enforcement, Aitan Goelman, tried to clarify his
opinion with this statement, “While there is a lot of excitement surrounding
bitcoin and other virtual currencies, innovation does not excuse those acting
in this space from following the same rules applicable to all participants in
the commodity derivatives markets.”32 It is clearly confusing that the Director
of Enforcement of the agency that ruled bitcoin a commodity also called it a
“virtual currency.”
If some cryptoassets are commodities, this could open them up to different
tax treatment than if they were considered solely as property. Commodities
fall under the 60/40 tax ruling, meaning 60 percent of the gains on a commodity transaction are treated as long-term capital gains and 40 percent are treated
as short-term capital gains. This is different from taxing stocks where profitably selling an equity after 12 months is classified as a long-term capital gain
with a current tax rate cap of 15 percent. Selling prior to 12 months would be
considered a short-term gain with the tax ramification based on an investor’s
income bracket.
All cryptoassets are not alike. There needs to be further clarity and understanding of these assets by government agencies and potentially a new set of
regulations (including tax treatments) that recognize these differences. For
now, the IRS and the CFTC view these assets differently, and this will surely
necessitate further clarifying rulings by the IRS to provide appropriate direction. Don’t expect this to happen quickly; it took the IRS over 15 years to provide tax guidance on derivatives.33
For now, the course to take regarding tax treatment of these assets should
rest with the investor and their accountant. The IRS considers them property,

Burniske 03.indd 276

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

277

and therefore recording a gain or a loss in a similar manner to equities or
bonds seems the prudent path to take.
Neither of us is an accountant, and we can’t forecast how governmental
regulators will ultimately reconcile the issues. Regarding taxes, the first thing
investors should do is to discuss any bitcoin or cryptoasset activities with their
accountant and lean on the accountant for information and advice. Second,
and probably most important, is to keep records of all activities with these
assets (this should include not only buys and sells, but if an asset was used to
purchase a good or service).34 It can be as simple as maintaining a paper-based
or Excel spreadsheet that tracks the date and price of an asset when acquired
and the same information when sold or when purchases are made with that
asset. In time, more detailed reporting tools and resources will be available
from the more reputable exchanges and from startups creating tools to track,
record, and provide resources for blockchain tax reporting.
Even though the rules regarding taxation of these assets may change, one
thing is clear: as with any other asset, the IRS is watching.

Burniske 03.indd 277

9/9/17 2:41 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 03.indd 278

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Chapter 18
The Future of Investing Is Here

T

hroughout this book, we’ve tried to provide historical context on investing and cryptoassets. Hopefully at this point, there’s a clear recognition that crypto­assets should be evaluated alongside other traditional
and alternative asset classes. Just as with any other asset class, there are good
crypto­asset investments and there are bad ones. Considering these investments requires the same level of due diligence and research as does any other
potential investment.
Although investment opportunities in cryptoassets are growing, currently most access is available through the purchase and trading in individual
crypto­assets on exchanges. As we outlined in Chapter 15, some capital market
investments currently exist and more will come to market in the future. What
form these investments will take is yet to be seen. Will they be mutual funds
made up of various cryptoassets? Perhaps an ETF that invests in an index of a
specific slice of cryptoassets, like a focused privacy portfolio of monero, dash,
and zcash? Already opportunities for investors to gain access to hedge funds
that actively manage different cryptoassets, including the latest ICOs, are arising. But maybe the hedge fund structure will largely become a relic of the
past, with asset management infrastructure decentralized through platforms
like Melonport. The potential products and vehicles are endless and provide
investors and money managers with great opportunities for profit.

279

Burniske 03.indd 279

9/9/17 2:41 PM

280 CRYPTOASSETS

Will individual money managers become famous for their expertise and
active management of these assets, or will passive investments consisting of
rules-based categories of cryptoassets become the vehicle of choice?
In the 1980s, Fidelity’s Magellan Fund was where investors wanted to
place their money, and it was all because of one person: Peter Lynch. During
Lynch’s time, the fund grew from $20 million to $14 billion, and he beat the
S&P 500 index 11 out of 13 years. It was a heyday for active managers and for
mutual funds in general, and investors chased money managers, not stocks.
This enthusiasm for specific money managers wasn’t isolated to equities in the
eighties. As recently as 2015, much was made about bond guru Bill Gross’s
departure from Pimco to Janus, as Pimco found that 21 percent of its total
assets left when Gross did.1
Twenty-five years after Peter Lynch left Fidelity, many financial pundits and
writers have criticized his techniques, specifically his “buy what you know”
advice. This was a cornerstone of his philosophy, as he bought stocks based on
products he used as a customer, experiencing the company’s business model in
the flesh. In clarifying his famous comment in the face of criticism for active
management, Lynch stressed the need for fundamental analysis of any investment. “People buy a stock and they know nothing about it,” Lynch said. “That’s
gambling, and it’s not good.”2
For the innovative investor, recognizing that no investment should be
made with little to no knowledge is not only sage advice but common sense.
Here’s another Burniske-Tatar Rule: Don’t invest in bitcoin, ether, or any other
crypto­asset just because it’s doubled or tripled in the last week. Before investing, be able to explain the basics of the asset to a friend and ascertain if it fits
well given the risk profile and goals of your investment portfolio.

The Millennial Age of Investing
We’ve provided a substantial amount of historical context in this book as it relates
to investing in cryptoassets. Many longtime investors may regard this information as a reminder of how they’ve formed their own investing approaches and
strategies, often having learned the hard way. For these investors, taking the step
to considering and potentially investing in cryptoassets may be an evolution in
their own investing strategy as they become innovative investors. However, a
segment of millennials recognizes these opportunities and are becoming newly
minted investors through their forays into crypto­assets.

Burniske 03.indd 280

9/9/17 2:41 PM

The Future of Investing Is Here

281

Much has been written and hypothesized about millennials, or those that
entered adulthood around the turn of the century. Millennials have an entirely
different approach to banking and investing than baby boomers who invested
through the dot-com crash and the financial crisis of 2008.
Having come of age through market crises, millennials are surprisingly
conscious of their financial well-being. A recent study conducted through
Facebook found millennials are highly educated, and perhaps due to the student loans required to gain this status, their financial situation is an important
consideration in their life. In fact, 86 percent of millennials put money away
each month.3 Equally interesting, according to a Goldman Sachs survey, 33
percent of millennials think they won’t need a bank by 2020.4
Seeing these statistics, it’s no wonder that many financial institutions are
seeking ways to engage the millennial banking and investing client. The problem is that the business models of many wealth managers are not positioned to
cater to millennials. Over the last two decades, wealth management firms have
encouraged their financial advisors to sign up only investors with $250,000
in assets and move away from servicing all levels of investors.5 The reasoning has been to allow advisors to provide better service to a smaller base of
clients, which is also good for profit margins. However, this means that their
client base is aging. Because of these business policies, they are now less able
to acquire and support young investors who are perhaps most in need of their
assistance.
Perhaps, when wealth management firms were shifting millennials to
online investing sites, rather than providing them access to personal financial advisors, they were doing this to address the disruptions that millennials
were bringing to their model. From a business perspective, it was a more costeffective way to support this demographic. However, this approach addressed
rather than engaged the demographic. Further research is making it clear that
millennials are concerned enough to talk about their financial futures, sometimes more so than their baby boomer parents. A study from Transamerica
reports the following:
Three out of four (76 percent) Millennial workers are discussing
saving, investing, and planning for retirement with family and
friends. Surprisingly, Millennials (18 percent) are twice as likely
to “frequently” discuss the topic compared to Baby Boomers
(9 percent).6

Burniske 03.indd 281

9/9/17 2:41 PM

282 CRYPTOASSETS

