
EMOTIONS OF TRADING
Emotions are intense mental states that come from the subjective mind
instead of an effort or consciousness. They usually manifest as strong feelings, such as love, hate, fear, pleasure, happiness, pride, etc. Emotions can
be positive or negative.
Any kind of emotions can interfere with your trading because a trader
is a human being at any time independent of the degree of experience possessed. Having emotions is a normal human condition; determining how to
deal with them so that they do not disturb or represent an obstacle to your
trading success is what counts.

NEGATIVE EMOTIONS
Negative emotions are one of the main factors that cause trading failures.
The focus of the trader is mostly on fear, failure, greed, self-sabotage, ego,
self-destruction, etc. As a result, enormous amounts of energy are diverted
from the normal learning process. Of themselves, emotions are not a bad

100

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

thing; they are normal reactions that normal human beings experience
when confronted with different situations. However, how to handle those
emotions is the key. Being able to overcome a failure, control oneself, and
move the focus to a new trading opportunity are necessary to let go of the
past and keep on track, with persistence, on the path to success. If you are
unable to let go of the bad trades, disappointment will take over and
obstruct little by little any further attempt at entering winning trades.

POSITIVE EMOTIONS
Positive emotions are the result of a desire for happiness and success, such
as when you have closed a successful trade, accomplished a certain goal, or
finally solved a problem. When you experience positive emotions, they can
enhance your life and uplift you.
However, overconfidence, excessive exhilaration over a series of winning trades, and the rush that comes from the challenge and expectation of
making huge profits also can hinder the outcome of your trades.

STRESS AND CONFUSION
An excess of information—too many books, too many systems, too many
gurus, too many indicators—can get in the way of acquiring essential
knowledge. Traders still fail despite all the fancy tools, multiscreen monitors, superfast computers, and vast amounts of data that become too much
to absorb. Too many news services; too many signal services that often give
contradictory opinions; all the chat rooms, traders’ forums, and webinars;
and the latest guru with his or her “from 1K to 1 million in 2 months” 100
percent successful and foolproof system all push us into complete and
exhausting confusion because of information overload. This raises your
stress level, which will have a negative effect on your trading decisions.
There is nothing wrong with studying and absorbing as much realistic
information about your career as you can. But more important is how you
apply all that information. Successful traders will look only for the most
relevant and essential data that can help them to refine their trading
systems and that they can apply to their own psychological traits, personal
situations, and trading styles.

HOW CAN YOU USE EMOTIONS TO YOUR ADVANTAGE?
Emotions definitely can be used in a positive way. They are a valuable
source of information that can help us in making the right decisions. The
goal is not to get rid of them, but rather to learn to control and use them for
the best outcome. You shouldn’t avoid them; on the contrary, you must get

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

101

in touch with your deeper feelings and thus know yourself more thoroughly. Disappointment or frustration appears when losing; happiness and
excitement arrive when you are winning. It would be extremely difficult
not to feel anything and become like a robot.
The first step is to learn to focus your emotions on your positive trading and life goals, dreams, and projects. When you experience a loss, you
should review the trade and then use the fear of making that mistake again
to help you get out of future trades earlier or plan your exit strategies more
carefully. This would be a positive outcome that will help you to succeed in
the future. A negative outcome would be using hope to stay in a losing trade
in the expectation that the market will reverse. This should be avoided.
Negative emotions have a tremendous impact on your mind and body.
They will affect all your thinking processes and become an obstacle to your
trading. You can’t feel happy, confident, and peaceful when you are having
a negative emotion. You can’t be in control either. The emotion takes hold
of your mind and leads to wrong assessments or decisions.
Accept your losses as part of the business. Learn from them, and try not
to repeat the mistake in the future. Take some time off periodically in your
daily schedule to relax your mind and your body. In this way, you can take
the attention off the negative feelings and turn toward more positive
thoughts. You could try to use some sort of meditation routine as a means to
achieve peace of mind. Among other activities, physical exercise is an excellent way to get rid of all the accumulated stress, and it also keeps you healthy
and thus more fit and energized when you come back to the trading charts.
Listen to good music, music that elevates your mind and spirit and calms
your senses. Let go of the past. Don’t cling to past failures. Move on to the
next challenge because there will be many to come, and they all will be
interesting and yield additional knowledge and certitude. You cannot change
the past, and you don’t know what the future will bring about, but you can
assuredly change the now, which is the place where you should try to live
the most. Changing the now will automatically change any future outcome.
Prepare yourself, and be confident about your skills and experience.

HOW TO GAIN CONFIDENCE IN TRADING
You should prepare yourself by acquiring an adequate skill level through
the study of technical and fundamental analysis, plus a sufficient amount of
screen time. Go back to the basics. Review your trading plan periodically,
as well as your system and strategies. Be sure to understand all the steps,
and make sure that you follow them as per your trading plan. Check the
reasons why you sometimes do not follow the rules.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

102

To avoid stress buildup, work with small position sizes until your
successful trades become consistent and steady. When you start winning,
even if small, you should reward yourself in some way for the success.
Learn from your mistakes whenever they occur. Accept losses as part of the
business experience. Some traders even have more losers than winners as a
percentage, but they cut the losses as soon as possible and let the winners
run, so their risk-reward ratio is high even if they win less than 50 percent
of the time. Use positive affirmations, and visualize your goals. Feel like a
winner, act like a winner, be a winner! Do not waste any time or energy on
negative emotions or doubts.
Choose a strategy that fits you and that you understand and like. There
are hundreds of systems, but it is better to master a single one or, at best,
two or three depending on market conditions. This will allow you to be
completely focused on the price action instead of wandering around the
details that you do not fully grasped.
Observe your thought processes. Be aware of what you think, especially when taking a trade. Thoughts tend to materialize, independent of
whether they are positive or negative. Do not judge yourself; observe and
detect any negativity arising. Replace negative thoughts with a positive
counterpart. Use visualization as a means to make the negativity disappear,
replacing it with a powerful and positive energy that fills your mind and
body with renovated impulses. Feel strong, feel calm, and feel that you are
in control.
Avoid the company of negative people, don’t view negative movies,
and avoid negative surroundings. Read positive books and quotes, think
positive, and speak positive. Thoughts should inspire you to improve and
get better in all areas of your life that you want to improve. Try to be specific about your goals and the steps you will undertake to reach them. Reinforce the positive with your ability to focus by remembering great moments
where you had a successful outcome, happy moments, and beautiful places.
Surround yourself with harmony, order, and beauty.

NEGATIVE FORCES
Negative forces are overwhelming behavioral patterns that you direct
against yourself and that invariably will lead you to a loss.
Self-destruction. Individuals who are self-destructive tend to minimize
themselves and thus their future evolution. They don’t have a clear
sense of self-identity and fluctuate between other people’s ideas
and ways of being. Contradiction and confusion are common.

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

103

Doing too much. This is another form of self-destruction through
exhaustion. People undertake too many projects and activities for
short spans of time, touching superficially on everything and
mastering nothing. They are too busy to pay attention to results;
they always feel that they aren’t doing enough. This leads to
permanent dissatisfaction and unfinished issues and projects.
Distraction. Not living in the now can be a very powerful negative
force. Your energies are diverted from the actual present activity,
and your mind wanders about, for example, regretting the past,
worrying about others’ opinions, fearing the future, and being
absolutely overwhelmed by the present. Such people are not
living, nor are they focused on what has to be done now. Thus
they have no real control over what happens in their lives.
Inefficiency. A lot of people continually complain about not having
enough resources to get the job done. Meanwhile, they are
wasting the few resources they have. They waste time, money, and
energy and at the same time think that they are productive
because they are always moving things, going here and there
repetitively, taking more steps than needed to realize an activity,
not planning carefully in advance what has to be done, checking
once and again the same point obsessively, and not scheduling
and organizing their activities in a logical fashion.
Poor discipline. Discipline is erroneously seen by some people as
something enforced on you by someone else. This is wrong. You
are the one who decides to follow up a series of rules; you choose
to be your own master. A lack of discipline leads to poor focusing
ability, inconsistency, and impatience. It can only be resolved by
building up one’s own self-esteem.
Insufficient training. Skills have to be built. Natural talent can be a
wonderful asset, but if you lack the needed foundation that comes
from a thorough apprenticeship in any career or technical field,
sooner or later you will be whipsawed by the forces of good and
bad fortune. Building your attitude through discipline and
adequate learning is a must. Most people want to reap the rewards
right now and procrastinate at developing all the needed skills
that will yield those rewards. Practice makes perfect, day after
day. Most people just react in the moment and are swung around
any way the wind blows while feeling overly powerful and
neglecting any kind of preparation. Know your own limitations,

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

104

and strive to push them further away from yourself through
education and a thorough practice of what you have learned.

A TRADER’S CAPITAL SINS
There are seven capital sins: pride, avarice, envy, wrath, lust, gluttony, and
sloth. A trader’s capital sins would number eight because you have to add
fear to the deadly list.
Pride. Overconfidence is one of the biggest causes of bankruptcy in
FOREX trading. You think that you know it all, you risk a little
too much, you win, excess of confidence is reinforced, and
suddenly you lose grip on an unexpected market reaction because
of the cloudy vapors of glory stemming from your ego. You will
need to continuously criticize your strategy with perspicacity,
keep studying the market as it changes continuously, and always
find out the cause for the outcome of your trading.
Avarice. Greed or excessive and unrealistic ambition is, in fact,
caused by a subconscious fear. It is impossible to become rich in
a week without making an effort to learn and investing your own
time, hard-earned money, and dedication. There is no free lunch,
and you will have to be persistent at acquiring the necessary skills
if you want to succeed.
Envy. Some traders are always comparing themselves with other
apparently more successful traders, trying to copy their strategies,
clinging around to get their trading calls or signals, and asking for
directions. Always doubt that anyone has really found that elusive
Holy Grail. Analyze by yourself, use your own common sense,
and develop and build your own system. It will save you a lot of
money in the end.
Wrath. Anger and revenge will cloud your judgment. You feel that the
market is against you, price always moves in the opposite
direction of your trade, and your broker is after you and wants
you to lose, hunts your stop losses, and separates you from your
money and potential profits. Watch closer: If price is always
going against your trade, most probably you simply made a
mistake. Assume your losses, wait for another opportunity,
reinforce your discipline, and above all, do not try to get even or
revenge-trade. This is the best way to lose even more and faster.
Refine your money-management rules, reduce your risks, and

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

105

correct the flaws that your system could have. This is the only
way to recover and win in the end.
Lust. The ultimate technological gadgets will not help you to advance
a millimeter in your trading career. Worse, excess in any field can
be counterproductive. Too many screens and too much time
watching the charts lead to stress and anxiety, eye strain, and a
state similar to hypnosis and delusion. You will begin seeing
nonexistent signals, or you will be paralyzed and fascinated by
screen movement when it is the moment to act. Never spend more
than eight hours a day watching your computer monitor; if you
trade and analyze full time, it is even better to make several small
pauses during the day because a focused activity has a relatively
short time span, something around two or three continuous hours,
maybe even less. Stay healthy. If your health declines, you will
not be able to apply your methodology as well, and the odds will
start piling against your success. Your ability to manage your
screen time and overall daily life schedule efficiently will
determine your success or failure.
Gluttony. Respect your stops. Take profits with prudence and
intelligence. You can never catch a complete rally. Not all trades
will be winners. One pip more can become 50 pips less.
Sloth. Nothing happens by chance. Gambling is not trading. You need
to design a plan and trade following its rules. Barely using vague
hunches or intuition or other people’s random calls is the same as
tossing a coin—heads or tails, bulls or bears. The only path to
success is through a methodical and systematic approach.
Fear. Fear is paralyzing. But you can use it to your advantage! Employ
the fear emotions to help you get out of trades much sooner. You
risk not being able to trade another day! Control the fear, and
make it work for your benefit.

HOW TO GET OUT OF A BAD TRADE
There’s no “perfection to the pip” with so many different prices at different
brokers and times—only ranges (which on longer time frames I would say
have ⫹20/⫺20 accuracy). This seems like a lot, but remember that you
should not be seeking to catch the very bottom or top and then bring the
position to its very utmost perfect exit target. As in a sandwich, the meat is
in the middle.

106

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Scalping is a different thing, of course. In longer time frames, though,
it is better (and easier) to plan on that middle range.
Every system (paired with the trader himself or herself) has an average
win-loss ratio that is the result of previous thorough testing. For example, a
certain system can have a win-loss ratio of around 75:35. This means that
for every 100 trades, you have to be prepared to accept a third of them to be
stopped out.
Now, what is a “good trade”? How can a losing or stopped-out trade be
good? A good trade is a position that has been taken based on the rules, the
rules of the system itself and your own money-management rules. In this
way, you can have good losing trades and bad winning trades. Let’s say
your money-management rule is “not to risk more than 2% on a single
trade,” plus your system’s rules. You suddenly decide to have a go at gambling and open a position with half the money in your account and enter the
trade without waiting for the entry rules to be met. Suddenly, you’re lucky!
The trade goes in your direction, and after a few minutes, you close the
trade with positive pips. Wow, what a winner!
In fact, no! That super-duper “winning” trade is a bad trade in your
books because you broke every rule of your trading plan, and in so doing,
you put at risk much more than what your money-management rule says.
And finally, you didn’t execute the trade with discipline. Next time you
happen to do this, who can guarantee you’ll be as lucky?
Every trade taken by the rules is a good trade. Every trade in which
you break the rules and do not follow your trading plan and your personal
discipline is a bad trade.
Now, how do you get out of a bad trade? Fast! Exit strategies should
always be planned carefully in advance because you will never know if a
trade is good or bad unless you are in it! Planning how to exit a position is
one of the most important parts of a trading plan. Entries are less important
than exits unless your style is to be scalping.
To get out of a trade, you have a choice among several techniques.
For example, you can use trailing stops, which help in securing the profits while letting the trade run further. With trailing stops, you go on tracking the positive movement of the trade, and as soon as it moves in the
opposite direction, you exit the trade. Stops never should be changed
back because you would not be securing your profits anymore! Initial or
fixed stops are intended to take you out of a trade when it has moved
against you.
Another good exit strategy is to place a profit target. You can exit
the trade as a whole or scale out your position in several installments.

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

107

For example, if your money-management rule allows you to take 3 lots
(standard, minilots, or microlots), you break the position in three parts. You
open a trade, for example, in EUR/USD at 1.2600 with a 30-pip stop. When
the trade is 30 pips into profits, you close one of the lots and move the stops
on the other two positions to breakeven. Breakeven stops are usually set to
the entry price or at one or two additional positive pips. In this way, you
have locked some profits, and if you are stopped out, you won’t lose any
money, and you have two “free trades” to move on further if the price keeps
rising. If it does and moves to 60 pips of profit, you close the second lot,
and let the last third lot run as long as possible, using trailing stops or just
leaving the stop to breakeven. This strategy takes the fear out of the picture
and decreases the risk of drawdowns of your system while also allowing
you to profit more from a single position.
If you have open orders at news time, it would be preferable to close a
trade before the trailing stops get hit because big whipsaws could stop you
out anyway with much less profit. This especially happens when the result
of economic releases is very different from what was expected. Another
fundamental time to watch is when institutional representatives are making
public announcements.
Finally, a good stop-loss strategy is to use the nearest support or resistance by examining the charts and noticing where the price has bounced
many times and reversed. Previous lows or highs, pivots, and Fibonacci levels are usually quite safe. You should place the stop at around 1 or 2 percent
away from the support or resistance. Prices usually will test those levels or
even break them a little and come back. You should leave a prudent distance
so that the trade can breathe and go beyond until it returns.

HOW TO DEVELOP AN EXIT STRATEGY
To implement a successful exit strategy, you should consider the following
factors: the total time that you plan to stay in the trade, the amount of risk
that you will allow yourself to take (this pertains to money management
more properly), and finally, where and when will you want to get out of
your position. This will all depend on your trading style and your trading
personality. A long-term trader will set profit targets over many years, making many fewer trades. He or she will study specific trailing stop levels to
lock some profits in order to limit the potential drawdown. The primary
goal of a long-term trader is to preserve capital. Profits can be taken incrementally, especially on huge positions, to avoid volatility at the moment of
closing. Strategies will be oriented mostly toward including fundamental
factors that can influence the markets over a larger time span.

108

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

A short-term trader will set targets at nearer-term levels, such as pivot
points, Fibonacci retracements, trendlines, or other technical zones. Stop
losses will be calculated to get out immediately if the position is not performing. Exit strategies will be devised by taking account of short-term
technical studies or fundamental events.
Accurately gauging risk is very important when you are investing. You
need to determine how much you can afford to lose, which, in turn, will
have an effect on the duration of your trades and what kinds of stop losses
or exit strategies you should use. If you want less risk, use a tighter stop. If
you want the greatest possibility of profit from a longer-term trade and can
afford it, set wider stops, and decrease the size of your position accordingly.
Stops always should be set at levels where the normal market volatility is
less likely to reach them.

A TRADER’S TEN COMMANDMENTS
1. You can’t predict the future. Long-term technical analysis is useless in
the short term. It is not designed to predict, but rather to explain past
behaviors of the market. It can be used to have a probable idea about
the possible future behavior and chances that the past will repeat itself.
2. Don’t be prejudiced. You always must examine both sides of the
