
128

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

But a new era has come, the era of “community of interest,” whereby it is hoped
to avoid ruinous price cutting and to avert the destruction which has in the
past, when business depression occurred, overtaken so many of the competing
concerns in every branch of industry. In the great iron and steel industry, for
example, which, as Andrew Carnegie has said, has been the prince and the
pauper of the industrial world, now highly prosperous again and again deeply
depressed, consolidations of scores of scattered concerns into a dozen larger
ones within the last two years have now been followed by the combination
of the latter into the most gigantic combination the world has ever known, a
combination which, if the expectations of its projectors are fulfilled, will result
in the avoiding of much economic waste through eliminating the possibility
of the erection of unnecessary plants for competitive reasons, in the effecting
of many economies through the abolishing of duplicate official positions and
establishment of a uniform price list, and in the enlargement of export trade
by reason of the lower prices which can be fixed in consequence of the various
economies coincident to consolidation.
In the railroad field, too, combination is the ruling idea, and for the same
reasons. Competing roads are being consolidated or leased, with resulting
economy of operation and permanent cessation of rate cutting, and representatives of powerful roads are going into the boards of heretofore incorrigible rate
cutting lines, in which bodies they have an influence potent, if not controlling.8

These reasons for optimism for the stock market are certainly plausible. It
is easily believable that elimination of competition might create monopoly
profits for corporations, thus boosting their share prices.
But the editorial does not mention the potential for antitrust law to end
the “community of interest” era. In September 1901, the pro‑business president William McKinley was assassinated while visiting the Pan‑American
Exposition; he was succeeded by his “cowboy” vice-president, Teddy Roosevelt.
It was only six months later, in March 1902, that Roosevelt dusted off the
almost‑forgotten Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 and used it against the
Northern Securities Company. Over the next seven years, he embarked on a
vigorous antitrust policy. When the defects of the Sherman Act became apparent, the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 furthered the government’s assault on
corporate combinations.
The premise of the “community of interest” theory of stock prices turned
out to be wrong; those who expressed high optimism for stocks on this basis
were not thinking of all that could go wrong. People were not considering
the possibility that society would not tolerate this shift of wealth toward
stockholders. Presumably they did not consider this because there had not
yet been any concrete antitrust activity. Yet in thinking about the level of the
stock market, one must of course consider the long‑run earnings, spread over
future decades, that the market represents, and the potential for society to
make adjustments, positive or negative, to control this earnings stream.

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

129

Rarely do discussions of the level of the stock market consider the possibility
of government reaction to the level of profits, even though government policy
toward corporations has changed substantially and dramatically over time. The
U.S. Federal statutory corporate profits tax alone has been adjusted many times,
from 0% in 1901, to 1% in 1911, to 10% in 1921, to 14% in 1931, to 31% in 1941, to
50.75% with a 30% excess‑profits tax in 1951, to 35% today. Despite the fact that the
U.S. government’s past actions raised the corporate profits tax from 0% to 50.75%,
effectively nationalizing something on the order of half the stock market (to the
extent that they actually enforced and sustained the tax), potential future adjustments in this tax are rarely mentioned in discussing the outlook for the market.
The 1901 example illustrates one way in which new era thinking can go
wrong: such thinking concentrates attention on the effects of events currently
prominent in the news. Little attention is paid to “what‑ifs,” even if they have
substantial probability.
There was another important theme in 1901—that stocks were now being
held in “strong hands”: “The ownership of stocks has changed hands. The
public speculators do not now own them. They are owned by people who are
capable of protecting them under any circumstances, such as the Standard
Oil, Morgan, Kuhn Loeb, Gould and Harriman Interests. These people who
are the foremost financiers of the country evidently know when they go into a
proposition what ultimate results may be expected.”9 This theory, like theories
expressed at other market peaks, finds it inconceivable that there could be a
selling panic. In the shortest run, perhaps this theory was right. But those
strong hands did not stop the stock market crash of 1907 or the dramatic slide
of stock values between 1907 and 1920.

The 1920s Optimism
The bull market of the 1920s was apparently a time of relatively great public
enthusiasm for and interest in the stock market, and the enthusiasm seemed
to peak in 1929 with the market. In his 1931 book Only Yesterday, Frederick
Lewis Allen wrote of 1929:
The rich man’s chauffeur drove with his ears laid back to catch the news of an
impending move in Bethlehem Steel; he held 50 shares himself on a twenty‑point
margin. The window cleaner at the broker’s office paused to watch the ticker, for
he was thinking of converting his laboriously accumulated savings into a few
shares of Simmons. Edwin Lefevre (an articulate reporter on the market at this
time who could claim a considerable personal experience) told of a broker’s valet
who made nearly a quarter of a million in the market; of a trained nurse who
cleaned up thirty thousand following the tips given her by grateful patients; of
a Wyoming cattleman, thirty miles from the nearest railroad, who bought or
sold a thousand shares a day.10

130

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

Although this account may create an exaggerated impression of the level of
public attention to the stock market, there is no question that attention was
much keener in the 1920s than at other times, and that enthusiastic investors
were not hard to find.
The 1920s were a time of rapid economic growth and, in particular, of the
widespread dissemination of some technological innovations that had formerly
been available only to the wealthy. The automobile came into common use at
roughly this time. In 1914, only 1.7 million automobiles were registered in the
United States, but by 1920 there were 8.1 million, and by 1929, there were 23.1 million. The automobile brought with it a new sense of freedom and possibility
and a widespread awareness that these personal values could be attained by
new technology.
The 1920s were also the time when the electrification of the country was
extended beyond the major cities, which had already been electrified. By 1929,
twenty million U.S. homes were wired. Kerosene lamps were out; electric light
bulbs were in. By 1929, nearly half of all wired homes had vacuum cleaners,
and a third had washing machines. Moreover, the 1920s saw the expansion
of radio broadcasting and the development of radio as a mature national
entertainment medium. In 1920, there were only three radio stations in the
entire United States; by 1923, there were over five hundred. Nationally known
radio stars like Rudy Vallee and nationally popular shows like Amos ’n’ Andy
appeared in the 1920s. The National Broadcasting Company formed the first
national network in 1926, and regular shows created a sense of national culture
previously unknown. Sound also invaded our movies. Lee De Forest invented
the sound‑on‑film system in 1923, and talkies had completely displaced silent
movies by the end of the decade. Because these innovations had such an
impact on everyday lives, affecting people in their homes and in their hours
of leisure, the 1920s were a time when massive technological progress was
unusually apparent to even the most casual observer.
There were, at the time of the 1920s stock market boom, many clear statements proclaiming a new era for the economy. For example, as early as 1925
we hear, “There is nothing now to be foreseen which can prevent the United
States from enjoying an era of business prosperity which is entirely without
equal in the pages of trade history.”11
John Moody, head of Moody’s Investors Service, a rating agency, said in
an article about the stock market in 1928, “In fact, a new age is taking form
throughout the entire civilized world; civilization is taking on new aspects.
We are only now beginning to realize, perhaps, that this modern, mechanistic
civilization in which we live is now in the process of perfecting itself.”12
Given the public enthusiasm for stocks and the enormous run‑up in the
market, there was a corresponding demand for books that interpreted and
justified the market boom. In 1929, Charles Amos Dice, in New Levels in the

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

131

Stock Market, gave a number of reasons to expect the increase to continue.
He preferred the term new world to new era, but the idea was the same. He
wrote of a “new world of industry,” referring to techniques of mass production, large research departments, the beginning of the electrical age,
the industrialization of the South, the emergence of large‑scale production,
and the mechanization of agriculture. Furthermore, Dice wrote of a “new
world of distribution,” predicting the proliferation of installment credit, the
chain‑store movement, new techniques of advertising that would stimulate
demand, and new market research techniques. He also spoke of a “new world
of finance,” referring to the expansion of investment banking to provide
new sources of funds for corporations, the rise of the holding company as
a tool to make financing more flexible, and advances in the Federal Reserve
System’s understanding of how to stabilize business. Dice described the
Federal Reserve as analogous to the governor on a steam engine, regulating
the speed of the economy.13
The Dice book, curiously, was printed in August 1929, a month before the
peak of the market prior to the onset of the Great Depression. The timing of
the book’s appearance seems even more remarkable when one finds attached
at page 69 a small slip of paper titled “Errata.” The slip, apparently added after
the text was printed but before the book was bound, notes that the Dow Jones
Industrial Average rose on September 3, 1929, to over 20 points above the level
indicated in the book. The slip of paper instructs the reader to adjust upward
the projections for the Dow given in the printed book by 15 to 20 points. Thus
Dice managed to time his book for the exact peak of the market, and thus managed to make the most catastrophic error possible in forecasting the market.
Professor Irving Fisher at Yale, who has been described as one of America’s
most eminent economists of his day, argued that the U.S. stock market was
not at all overvalued. He was quoted as saying just before the peak in 1929
that “stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.”
He wrote a book titled The Stock Market Crash—and After, with a preface dated
less than two months after Black Thursday. Fisher must have been working
on this book at the same time as Dice was writing his, but his timing was not
so bad. The 1929 crash came while he was still at work on the book. Yet Fisher
was still able to be optimistic after the crash, especially since the market had
gone down only a fraction of the distance it ultimately would by 1932, and the
crash did not yet seem to signal anything like the end of an era.
Fisher argued in his book that the outlook was for rapidly increasing earnings for a number of reasons, some of them parallel to those cited by Dice.
First, he pointed out that the merger movement of the 1920s allowed economies of large‑scale production. He noted that “the economies from mergers
take time to develop, while the effect on the stock market of their formation
is instant.” Scientific research and invention were proceeding at a faster pace

132

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

than before. The advantages of the automobile were only just beginning to be
exploited, with the development of a rapidly widening network of surfaced
highways. Much was being learned about the efficient use of waste products.
In agriculture, recent inventions included subsoil plowing, better fertilizers,
enhanced breeds of farm animals, and new and improved crops. As all of these
inventions gradually came to be applied, further earnings increases could
be anticipated from them. Fisher also maintained that the management of
American corporations was improving, thanks to the application of “scientific”
methods, improved layouts of manufacturing facilities, and more sophisticated management techniques. Businesses were able to plan better for the
future, he claimed, partly because of his own invention of “master‑charting,”
a pencil‑and‑paper method of priority planning for executives. Fisher also
was encouraged by his perception that labor unions were now accepting joint
responsibility for the solution of industrial problems.14
Others argued that the market valuations of the 1920s were sound because
we were in a more sober time—and not just figuratively. The prohibition of
alcoholic beverages was thought to be a sign of greater steadiness and intelligence: “Many different things contributed to this happy result. . . . [including]
the elimination from our national life of the saloon and its destructive elements,
and consequent comparative sobriety among the population as a whole. Most of
the money formerly spent in the saloon has since gone into continually higher
standards of living, investments and savings banks.”15
Of course, optimistic sentiments for the market were not the only sentiments expressed at the time. The high price of the market relative to rough
measures of fundamental value did not go unnoticed in 1929. The New York
Times and the Commercial and Financial Chronicle consistently pointed out what
they interpreted as speculative excess. Paul M. Warburg of the International
Acceptance Bank decried the “unrestrained speculation.”16 Yet we know, from
the level of the stock market itself, that the weight of public sentiment was
overwhelmingly positive in the 1920s.

New Era Thinking of the 1950s and 1960s
New era thinking also seemed, judging from media accounts, to undergo
a sudden surge in the mid‑1950s, when the market increased 94.3% in real
(inflation‑corrected) terms between September 1953 and December 1955. The
market had been stalled during most of the early 1950s, amid lingering fears
that the economy might sink back into a depression now that the stimulus of
increased World War II production was absent. But the sudden near‑doubling
in the stock market, supported by a solid growth in earnings, apparently
caused the investing public to forget such fears and to indulge in genuine new
era thinking. In May 1955, U.S. News and World Report wrote:

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

133

Once again the feel of a “new era” is in the air. Confidence is high, optimism
almost universal, worry largely absent.
War is receding as a threat. Peace is a growing prospect. Jobs are quite plentiful. Pay never was so good. The promise is that taxes will be cut. Everywhere
things are in a rising trend.
Three times in 10 years a depression scare has come and gone without
amounting to much. The first scare came in 1946, right after World War II. Military spending was cut drastically with scarcely a ripple. The second scare came
in 1949. The public went right on buying, oblivious to the worries of business­
men, and this scare faded. The third scare began in mid‑1953. It now is little
more than a memory.17

The sense that investors were terribly optimistic and confident of the market
was in and of itself part of the new era thinking. Newsweek wrote in December
1955 that “basic to the upsurge [in the stock market] was an investor faith in
the overwhelming strength of the economy—and the fact that corporations
were cashing in on this prosperity.”18
In a development strongly paralleling the evolution of radio in the 1920s as
the vehicle for a mass national culture, the early 1950s had seen the widespread
introduction of television. In 1948, only 3% of U.S. families owned television
sets; by 1955, 76% did. Like the Internet, television was a vivid technological
innovation that captured the imagination of almost everyone. It was evidence
for technological progress that could not be overlooked; within a few short
years the majority of Americans began regularly spending hours watching
an electronic device.
Inflation was very low at the time, and people credited this to newly
enlightened Fed policy. Treasury Secretary George Humphrey boasted in 1955:
In the past 2¾ years, the value of the dollar has changed only one‑half of one
cent. We have kept inflation’s hand out of your savings almost entirely.
We regard inflation as a public enemy of the worst type. But we have not
hesitated, either, to ease or restrict the basis of credit when need was indicated.
The full force of monetary policy has been made effective more promptly than
ever before to respond to natural demands. This has been done by the timely use
of monetary policy and credit; by the return to the public of purchasing power
through the biggest tax cut in the history of the nation; by cutting unjustified
Government spending; by timely encouragement to construction, home building and needed improvements.19

Something analogous to the “strong hands” theme seen in the 1900s—the idea
that the demand for stocks was stable enough to prevent any downturn—was
present in the 1950s as well. Newsweek wrote in 1955:
Many financial men like to think that the nation has developed a “new capitalism” with an ever‑broadening base. Some 7.5 million people hold stock in

134

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

publicly owned corporations, compared with 6.5 million three years ago. Assets
of mutual funds, which give the small investor a chance to spread his risk,
have soared from $1.3 billion in 1946 to $7.2 billion. Thousands of workers have
become owners of the firms they work for via employee stock‑purchase plans.
All this may not add up to an absolute guarantee against another ’29, but
most experts are confident that it goes a long way.20

The idea that Irving Fisher had presented in the 1920s as a reason for optimism,
that businesses were able to plan better for the future, was floated again as a
new idea in the 1950s: “There is a new attitude of business itself that promises
to avoid deep depressions in the future. Business firms today make long‑term
plans and appear to be less influenced than in the past by short‑term fluctuations in activity.”21
The Baby Boom was seen as another important factor driving prosperity
and the market, because people needed to spend money on their babies (just
as the grown‑up babies themselves, despite having fewer children, are now
perceived as bidding up stock prices as they save for their retirement): “It is
this boom in babies that is being counted on now to make the latest ‘new era’
different from the last one. Families are growing bigger. Good roads and fine
automobiles are opening the countryside. The urge is toward suburban living
and for houses with three or four bedrooms instead of one or two.”22
The increase in the use of consumer credit was also cited, as it had been
in the 1920s, as a reason to expect prosperity: “This willingness to lay out
cash amounted, in the opinion of one influential Washington individual, to
a ‘consumer spending revolution.’ . . . In spending his money, the average
individual’s wants have gradually been upgraded.”23
With the election of John Kennedy as president in 1960, and given his
advocacy of economic stimulus measures, it was generally thought that the
economy ought to do especially well. Kennedy inspired confidence beginning with his initial State of the Union message in 1961. He was perceived as
showing vision and optimism, and he hit upon a dramatic symbol for that
vision by promising, in a special message to Congress in May 1961, that the
United States would land men on the moon before 1970. Americans expected
that such an achievement would be remembered for centuries, marking as it
would humankind’s first escape from its planet of origin. Kennedy was viewed
as the incarnation of the national optimism and of the strength of the stock
market: “Wall Street has a simple description for the phenomenal strength of
stock prices, ‘The Kennedy Market.’” The confidence inspired by the Kennedy
economic program led some to conclude that the country was entering a “new
economy” in which “businessmen can enjoy reasonably continuous prosperity
indefinitely” and that there was “more justification for confidence” in mone­
tary policy than in times past.24 The Kennedy initiatives were expanded by
the “Great Society” program of his successor, Lyndon Johnson, beginning in

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

135

1964; Johnson’s program set as its primary goals nothing less than an end to
poverty and urban decay.
In the 1960s, the theory that the stock market is the “best investment” was
prominent: “Investors feel that stocks are the best investment medium—as
a hedge against possible inflation, as a means of participating in the future
growth of business.” “Investors seem to be betting that inflation will accompany recovery—and that common stocks, even at present prices, represent
the only real hedge.”25 At that time, investors believed that if inflation broke
out, the stock market would go up, rather than down, as is now commonly
thought; therefore, the prospect of inflation was a reason to own stocks. There
was concern in the early 1960s that, even though there was virtually no inflation, the Kennedy‑Johnson economic programs could become inflationary.
A possibly significant factor behind the 1960s market peak was the Dow’s
approach to 1,000. That the approach of a new milestone such as a four‑digit
Dow would have an impact on the public imagination may seem silly, but,
given the lack of any other solid basis for the market’s valuation, talk of such
an arbitrary level provided a solid anchor for people’s expectations.
Even before the Dow got close to 1,000, the press was counting the milestones. A 1965 Business Week article noted, “Like the four‑minute mile, psycho­
logical barriers are made to be cracked. It’s no less so in Wall Street, where the
900 ‘magic’ mark on the Dow‑Jones industrial average (as the 600, 700, and
