
Finding a better plan
Approaching the trader’s dilemma as though it were a business problem for
you to solve can be helpful. The business of women’s fashions provides an
analogy that will do so nicely. The fashion industry works in obvious cycles.
For example, you see long-term cycles at work as hemlines rise and fall and
even longer cycles as you witness periodic mysteries that cause Capri pants

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em
and bell-bottom trousers to appear and just as easily disappear. You also see
shorter cycles as clothing for the current season is discounted to make way
for the next season’s fashions. These shorter seasonal cycles illustrate the
day-to-day issues that traders face.

Picking stock for the seasons
As spring approaches, retailers stock up on colorful, lightweight merchandise.
You may even see swimsuits before then for those lucky souls who head to
the tropics to escape the frosty chill. Fall clothes start showing up in stores
as summer heats up. Before summer is over, heavier-weight clothes, including
a selection of winter coats, begin appearing on clothing racks.
Ideally, retailers try to sell all their winter coats — and all their bathing suits
and spring outfits — before the next season arrives, but that rarely happens.
Retailers often have unsold inventory as the end of the season approaches.

Cleaning out the stock
You can use a couple of alternatives for handling unsold seasonal inventory,
but neither is pleasant. The retailer can store the merchandise until next
year, but storage costs carry charges that eat into capital. The greatest cost
of storing merchandise is the lost opportunity. The retailer’s capital gets
locked up in unsold merchandise and thus can’t be used to buy currentseason inventory that’s more in demand. Making matters worse is the fact
that fashions offer no guarantee that they’ll remain fashionable, so selling
this year’s inventory next year may be impossible.
Another alternative is marking down the price of your merchandise beginning
relatively early in the season and continuing to do so until all the merchandise
is sold. This approach quickly
✓ Frees up capital that the retailer then can use to buy newer inventory
✓ Stops the accrual of carrying charges
✓ Clears out storage and display space
✓ Avoids the risk that the merchandise will become worthless in the future
This solution is better, even though it sometimes means selling the merchandise below cost.
Clothiers buy inventory to sell it at a profit. They know their costs, and they
determine the profits they want to earn from the sale of each item. Retailers
try to earn as much profit as possible, but start cutting prices whenever sales
don’t happen quickly enough. Retailers cannot afford to fall in love with their
winter coats. They need the space and capital for spring merchandise. They
don’t get choked up when it’s time to sell.

191

192 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Keeping your inventory current
Managing your trading business as if you were a retail merchant is a good
idea. The cycle of economic expansion, peak, recession, and trough, as
described in Chapter 5, is somewhat akin to the four seasons. Your stocks
are your inventory. Their prices rise and are discounted in anticipation of
the changing economic cycles, as described in Chapter 13. And your trading
account is your working capital. Just like the retail merchant, your goal is to
protect your principal, your working capital, so you can stay in business.
However, you may find that some factors differ. The stock market is, of
course, a much more efficient pricing mechanism than the retail clothing
industry. You can’t set the price of merchandise; the market does it for you.
You can take several approaches to keep your trading inventory current.
Many traders use trend analysis and relative strength analysis, as described
in Chapters 10 and 11, to try to take positions in the best performing stocks
and sectors. Some traders also track general market conditions, quarterly
and annual SEC filings, company announcements, and key analysts’ reports,
as described in Chapters 5, 6, and 7.
We tend to combine both approaches in the ways we trade. We want to own
strong stocks in strong sectors, and we want to know how well the companies manage their businesses. Although any changes in these elements
are worth a look-see, we don’t have immediate hair-trigger reactions. We
do sometimes replace positions that begin to underperform, relative to the
market, with emerging leaders, and yet we show a little extra patience with
positions that are profitable but are beginning to slightly underperform. If,
however, a stock position starts losing money, then we close the position
without a second thought. The goal is to protect your trading capital, and
we show you some techniques and examples to accomplish this in the next
section.

Protecting Your Principal
In the same way that retail merchants face the possibility of holding on to
their stock of winter coats that may fall out of style, you can avoid the risk of
owning a stock that falls out of favor with other investors and loses its value.
By acting quickly when you see changes in the market, you can avoid losing
a large chunk of your trading capital (or principal). As long as you get out of
your position quickly, your trading capital won’t be tied up in a losing stock
position any longer, and you’ll escape the losing trade with most of your cash
intact. More importantly, you’ll be able to trade another day.

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em
It makes sense, of course, to hold on to a stock as long as its price is appreciating.
However, being mindful of when your stock price begins to fall is important.
You must have a plan for dealing with losing trades or deteriorating profits.
Time to fold up the stock and get out!
If your goal is to keep trading for a long time, the only way to do that is to
not lose too much money. This might seem patently obvious, but you would
be surprised by how few investors, and even some traders, make capital
preservation their highest priority. To keep from making that mistake, it helps
if you keep these important goals in mind as you trade:
✓ Protect your principal first.
✓ Don’t let a large profit turn into a small profit.
✓ Don’t let a small profit turn into a loss.
✓ Don’t let a small loss turn into a large loss.

Recovering from a large loss: It ain’t easy
When thinking about protecting your principal, you need to accept that taking
a small loss is better than risking a larger one. You need to understand how
badly (and quickly) things can go wrong, and how that can result in a loss of a
huge chunk of your capital with little chance of recovering it. To illustrate,
check out an example of the impact that large losses can have on your money.
Perhaps you bought XYZ stock for $10 per share. The stock falls to $9, representing a $1 loss. You’ve lost 10 percent of the original price of the stock. To
recover from that loss, the stock price must rise from $9 to $10, but notice
that 10 percent of $9 is only 90 cents. In other words, your stock must gain
more than 10 percent to recover from a 10 percent loss. Here’s how to review
the math using percentages.
To find the percentage loss, push or click on the respective percent button
on your calculator or in a computer spreadsheet, or simply divide $1 by $10.
$10 – $9 = $1 → $1 ÷ $10 = 0.10 → 0.10 × 100 = 10%
To find the percentage gain required to recover that $1 loss — again notice
that your stock is now a $9 stock and that 10 percent of $9 is only 90 cents,
not $1 — divide $1 by $9.
$1 ÷ $9 = 0.1111 → 0.1111 × 100 = 11.11%
In other words, your $9 stock needs to gain a little more than 11 percent to
get back to even.

193

194 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
For losses of less than 10 percent, the required gain isn’t significantly greater
than the loss you’ve just experienced. But for larger losses, the problem
grows unmanageably. Look at Table 12-1 to see what we mean.

Table 12-1

Percentage Gain Required to Recover Loss

Loss of

Percentage Gain Required to Recover Loss

5%

5.2%

10%

11.1%

25%

33.3%

50%

100%

75%

300%

100%

Game Over

Getting a stock to go up 5 or even 10 percent is hard enough. It seems
irrational to hope for a stock that’s fallen by 50 percent to quickly recover
100 percent, or for one that’s fallen by 75 percent to ever recover 300 percent.
Selling quickly and avoiding large losses is a much better course. Otherwise,
you’ll be out of trading capital, and out of business, in a mighty quick hurry.

Why traders use percentages to describe results
Why do traders use percentages to describe
their results? The use of percentages is a simple
way of accurately comparing the results of one
trade with the results of another — as a percentage, a $1 gain on a $10 stock is identical to
a $10 gain on a $100 stock. The price per share is
not as important as the percentage gain (or loss)
or the total gain (or loss). Look at it like this: If
you have $1,000 in your trading account, you can
buy 100 shares of a $10 stock, or you can buy
10 shares of a $100 stock. If the price of either
stock rises by 10 percent, your account total is
the same in either case — $1,100. A 10 percent
rise in a $10 stock is $1. A 10 percent rise in a
$100 stock is $10. But the total amount of money
earned is the same in either scenario.

If you think in terms of percentage gains or
losses, you can correctly compare the results
of one trade with that of another. The actual
price of a stock, and the actual number of points
gained or lost, isn’t as important as the size of
the move in percentage terms. Although you
can buy many more shares of the lower priced
stock, it’s equally difficult for either stock to
move 10 percent. If you think about it like this,
you will see that there is no reason to favor the
lower priced stock, even if you can buy more
shares, over the higher priced stock.

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em

Setting a target price for handling losses
The most important concept of protecting your principal is accepting the fact
that you made a mistake and moving on. Sell that loser. Don’t let a small loss
turn into a large one. Before entering a trade, make sure you set a target price
that you’re willing to initially pay for a stock, and set a target price for selling
it if the trade results in a loss.
Setting a stop-loss price (or, as traders say, “setting your stop”) is more akin
to an art than a science. You can employ several techniques for determining
your stop-loss price. One that others often advocate, but we don’t recommend, is choosing a predetermined percentage loss as your stop-loss price.
We think using technical analysis (see Chapters 9 and 10) to identify when a
trade has failed is a better approach. Here’s an example.
Figure 12-1 is a daily price chart of the Gold Trust Shares (GLD) exchangetraded fund that shows support and resistance lines, respectively, drawn on
the chart at approximately $63.62 and $67.47 and indicates the ETF has just
broken out of a long trading range on high-volume. Support, resistance, and
breakouts are discussed in Chapter 9. The breakout is identified on the chart.
Figure 12-1 represents a picture-perfect setup for entering a trade. As
discussed in Chapter 9, your entry point for this trade occurs above $67.50
when the ETF breaks through the resistance line. But how do you handle the
trade if it doesn’t work out? Or, perhaps a better question to ask is, how do
you know when the trade has failed?
One of several approaches suggests that if the breakout fails (the price
declines below the resistance level), you need to exit your position
immediately. For the GLD example in Figure 12-1, if the ETF were to fall below
the resistance line ($67.47) after it breaks out above it, you should exit.
Another approach suggests that if the ETF falls below the mid-point of the
trading range, in this case somewhere around $65.50, then the breakout buy
signal has failed. In that case, you can use any price below $65.50 as the
stop-loss price to exit from this position.
In the first scenario, the financial risk is small. As long as you get good fill
prices (fills) on both your entry and exit orders, your risk should be no more
than $1.00 to $2.00 per share, which reflects a loss of only 1.5 percent to 3
percent on the trade. We discuss fills further in Chapter 15.
In the second approach, the risk is greater. The difference between the $67.47
breakout price and the $65.50 stop-loss price is $1.97, but the breakout gap
means that your actual fill price will be $67.90 or more, resulting in a greater
percentage risk on the trade. Poor fills on either entry or exit orders increase
the amount at risk.

195

196 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Breakout Gap
Resistance

Breakout

Figure 12-1:
Daily
chart of
Gold Trust
Shares
(GLD) ETF.

Midpoint

Support

Higher than Average Breakout Volume

The trade-off between the two approaches is clear. The first one risks a
smaller amount before triggering the exit trade, but is prone to whipsaws,
which means that you may be bumped out of a potentially winning trade.
The second risks a greater amount but is less prone to whipsaws. In general,
shorter-term swing traders and day traders (see Chapters 16 and 17) are
more likely to choose the first, and position traders who expect to hold a
trade for several weeks or months are more likely to choose the second.
Either approach is rational, so you need to choose the one that you can live
with. If you start second-guessing your stop-loss points, they’re no longer
useful, so be sure to use an approach that you’ll honor. Using the first
approach may make more sense for new position traders, so tight stops can
serve as educational tools. You’ll risk less on each trade but you’ll be subject
to a few whipsaws, and you’ll get into the habit of selling when you have small
losses. And that’s a good habit to learn.

Determining good trading candidates
Whether the ETF in this example (Figure 12-1) is a good trading candidate is
open to discussion. From a technical perspective (see Chapter 9), it has many
of the characteristics of a good setup. The same is true for the fundamental
point of view. The price of the Gold Trust ETF correlates closely with the rate

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em
of inflation and with many commodity prices, both of which had been rising.
It also has an inverse correlation to the value of the local currency, which in
our case is the U.S. dollar. The dollar had been losing value for years.
However, GLD had been in an uptrend from 2001 through early 2006. The ETF
then traded in an increasingly tighter range that lasted through the period
shown in Figure 12-1. After a long run up in price like this, you must be circumspect about any stock or ETF, even following the long consolidation
period in this example. While stocks can continue to rise in price for very
long periods of time, neither stocks nor ETFs grow to infinity or beyond.
Even though the technical and fundamental conditions favored this trade,
these late-to-the-party setups do not always work out. That’s why we like
to keep our stops very tight in this kind of a situation. As it turned out, this
trade was profitable. GLD rallied into the first part of 2008 and peaked over
$100 before ultimately breaking down.
This example is applicable to any new trading position. To find good trading
candidates, you need to decide whether the trade makes sense from financial
and technical perspectives. Then you’ll be better able to identify a trading
pattern that clearly shows a good entry point and identifies the price point
when the original trading signal has failed. Only then can you place a stoploss order nearby to reduce your risk of losing too much of your precious
trading capital. Only under those circumstances should you enter the trade.

Strategies for handling profitable trades
Profitable trades are somewhat easier to handle than losses, but they’re not
without complications. You must decide whether you want to leave your
stop-loss point where it is or try to lock in a small profit by moving it up.
You obviously want to try to keep any profit from turning into a loss. For
example, say that you enter the GLD trade in the Figure 12-1 example, and a
few days after entering the order it remains in positive territory with a small
profit. For this discussion, assume that your original stop price is $65.50, the
mid-point of the trading range. Your choice is to leave the stop where it is or
move it above the resistance line, to $67.50. If you choose the former, and the
stock trades below $65.50, your formerly profitable trade will be closed for
a loss. If you choose the latter, you will be stopped out if GLD trades below
$65.50. You must now decide whether to move your stop-loss order to protect the small profit, or leave the stop where it is to keep from jeopardizing
the stock’s chances of gaining more.
This balancing act is delicate. You’re trying to catch a bigger trend higher
and ride it, which argues for leaving the stop where it is for a little while
longer. But sooner, rather than later, you’ll want to move your stop-loss

197

198 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
above your entry price. This decision becomes easier as the position progresses. As your profit grows, you’ll want to continue adjusting your exit
points upward. This is called a trailing stop, and is discussed in the section
“Using trailing stops.”

Breaking the pattern of higher highs and higher lows
Trends are easy to see on charts. Examine Figure 12-2, and you can easily
identify the trend that carried the price of this GLD ETF from less than $65
per share to $100 per share in six months’ time. In this case, the ETF creates
a series of higher highs followed by higher lows, interspersed with several
retracements. See Chapter 10 for more on trends, higher highs and higher
lows, and retracements.

Gaps

Figure 12-2:
Broken
pattern of
higher highs
and higher
lows.

Moving Average

High Volume

Although this pattern sometimes is difficult to define rigorously, you can
easily identify it on a chart. Take note that the ETF’s price appears to ride the
moving average line (see Chapter 11) as it progresses. As a trader, this kind
of trend is the type you want, and like, to ride for as long as you can, because
it’ll make you some money.
Figure 12-2 also provides a couple of clues that this trend came to an end in
March 2008. Notice the price gaps (see Chapter 10) that occur in March, and
the accompanying high trading volume. These gaps are your first hint that
the ETF may be in trouble. Another hint is shown at the point where the line
indicating the ETF’s price closes significantly below its moving average. A
third hint is when the stock fails to reach a higher price after the gap occurs.

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em
Any one of these events may carry enough weight for you to close your
position. Taken together, they clearly signal that the upward trend probably
is over, and you need to exit your position.

Using trailing stops
After you’ve entered a position and it becomes profitable, you want to move
your stop to protect your profits. This is known as a trailing stop, because
you keep moving it higher as your profits grow. In an uptrend, a stock makes
intermittent higher highs and intermittent higher lows (see Chapter 10). Use
the higher lows to define your stop points. After the ETF has made a higher
high, reset the stop to either the most recent higher low, or the one just
before it. Using Figure 12-2, after the ETF reaches a new high in early October,
you should reset the stop using the most recent interim closing low around
$72.00.

Tracking market indexes
Individual stocks and entire sectors of similar stocks regularly fall in and out
of fashion. Sometimes these changes happen in a grand way, such as when
the financial sector fell out of favor in 2007 and 2008.
Look at the weekly chart of the S&P 500 Index in Figure 12-3. Although the
S&P 500 index peaked in October 2007, by 2008 it had formed a lower high
and lower low below its recent intermittent lows. The price also closed well
below its 52-week moving average. By the time 2008 rolled around, the vast
majority of financial stocks were in worse shape than the broad market
index — a prime example of a dramatic shift in market conditions. If you were
trading at the time, you could
✓ Sell your positions when you saw that prices, market fundamentals, and
technical indicators were simultaneously deteriorating.
✓ Wait out the market, hoping things would get better.
If you held financial stocks during that time and chose the second option,
you took a much greater loss by selling later. Unfortunately, many buy-andhold investors unwisely believed that the downturn was a temporary blip
and that financial investments would remain viable. In fact, a number of
companies never recovered and some no longer are trading.
The right choice then, as usual, was to close your positions. By following
these simple strategies, you’d have had more than enough information to
know that things were not going according to plan. Although you wouldn’t
have sold your stocks at the highest prices, neither would you have ridden
them to their ultimate lows. By selling, you protect your profits and your
trading capital, so you can trade another day.

199

200 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks

Figure 12-3:
Weekly
Chart of
the S&P
500 Index,
2003–2008.

Knowing when a trend is complete is just as difficult as knowing when it
began. You can’t trade with perfect knowledge, and you can’t predict the
future — neither can we. But you can use these tools to identify when a trend
is likely to begin, and when it’s likely to end. And if you use excellent money
management, you’re likely to trade profitably.

Understanding Your Risks
You need to look at the risks that traders face. The three general categories
are market risks, investment risks, and trading risks.

Market risks
Market risks are pretty much out of your control. Of course you understand
the risk that the markets are bound to rise and fall, but understanding the
risks you face when they do helps you manage your money better. Three key
risks that you can manage as a trader are
✓ Inflation risk: Although inflation is a risk that traders rarely consider, it
nevertheless impacts people who are afraid to take risks. You definitely
can’t be a trader if you’re afraid of taking risks. Basically, the risk that
this factor poses is that your money won’t grow fast enough to exceed
the increases in costs that inflation causes. As you know, the basics —
housing, clothing, medical expenses, and food — increase in price each
year. By investing in monetary vehicles that don’t keep pace with inflation, you actually end up losing money.
