
25th, 1720." The immense number of spies with which the city was infested rendered the
people mistrustful of one another, and beyond some trifling disturbances made in the
evening by an insignificant group, which was soon dispersed, the peace of the capital was
not compromised.
The value of shares in the Louisiana, or Mississippi stock, had fallen very rapidly, and
few indeed were found to believe the tales that had once been told of the immense wealth
of that region. A last effort was therefore tried to restore the public confidence in the
Mississippi project. For this purpose, a general conscription of all the poor wretches in
Paris was made by order of government. Upwards of six thousand of the very refuse of
the population were impressed, as if in time of war, and were provided with clothes and
tools to be embarked for New Orleans, to work in the gold mines alleged to abound there.
They were paraded day after day through the streets with their pikes and shovels, and
then sent off in small detachments to the out-ports to be shipped for America. Two-thirds
of them never reached their destination, but dispersed themselves over the country, sold
their tools for what they could get, and returned to their old course of life. In less than
three weeks afterwards, one-half of them were to be found again in Paris. The
manoeuvre, however, caused a trifling advance in Mississippi stock. Many persons of
superabundant gullibility believed that operations had begun in earnest in the new
Golconda, and that gold and silver ingots would again be found in France.
In a constitutional monarchy some surer means would have been found for the restoration
of public credit. In England, at a subsequent period, when a similar delusion had brought
on similar distress, how different were the measures taken to repair the evil; but in
France, unfortunately, the remedy was left to the authors of the mischief. The arbitrary
will of the Regent, which endeavoured to extricate the country, only plunged it deeper
into the mire. All payments were ordered to be made in paper, and between the 1st of
February and the end of May, notes were fabricated to the amount of upwards of 1500
millions of livres, or 60,000,000 pounds sterling. But the alarm once sounded, no art
could make the people feel the slightest confidence in paper which was not exchangeable
into metal. M. Lambert, the President of the Parliament of Paris, told the Regent to his
face that he would rather have a hundred thousand livres in gold or silver than five
millions in the notes of his bank. When such was the general feeling, the superabundant
issues of paper but increased the evil, by rendering still more enormous the disparity
between the amount of specie and notes in circulation. Coin, which it was the object of
the Regent to depreciate, rose in value on every fresh attempt to diminish it. In February,
it was judged advisable that the Royal Bank should be incorporated with the Company of
the Indies. An edict to that effect was published and registered by the Parliament. The
state remained the guarantee for the notes of the bank, and no more were to be issued
without an order in council. All the profits of the bank, since the time it had been taken
out of Law's hands and made a national institution, were given over by the Regent to the
Company of the Indies. This measure had the effect of raising for a short time the value
of the Louisiana and other shares of the company, but it failed in placing public credit on
any permanent basis.

A council of state was held in the beginning of May, at which Law, D'Argenson (his
colleague in the administration of the finances), and all the ministers were present. It was
then computed that the total amount of notes in circulation was 2600 millions of livres,
while the coin in the country was not quite equal to half that amount. It was evident to the
majority of the council that some plan must be adopted to equalise the currency. Some
proposed that the notes should be reduced to the value of the specie, while others
proposed that the nominal value of the specie should be raised till it was on an equality
with the paper. Law is said to have opposed both these projects, but failing in suggesting
any other, it was agreed that the notes should be depreciated one-half. On the 21st of
May, an edict was accordingly issued, by which it was decreed that the shares of the
Company of the Indies, and the notes of the bank, should gradually diminish in value, till
at the end of a year they should only pass current for one half of their nominal worth. The
Parliament refused to register the edict--the greatest outcry was excited, and the state of
the country became so alarming, that, as the only means of preserving tranquillity, the
council of the regency was obliged to stultify its own proceedings, by publishing within
seven days another edict, restoring the notes to their original value.
On the same day (the 27th of May) the bank stopped payment in specie. Law and
D'Argenson were both dismissed from the ministry. The weak, vacillating, and cowardly
Regent threw the blame of all the mischief upon Law, who, upon presenting himself at
the Palais Royal, was refused admitance. At nightfall, however, he was sent for, and
admitted into the palace by a secret door,[Duclos, Memoires Secrets de la Regence.]
when the Regent endeavoured to console him, and made all manner of excuses for the
severity with which in public he had been compelled to treat him. So capricious was his
conduct, that, two days afterwards, he took him publicly to the opera, where he sat in the
royal box, alongside of the Regent, who treated him with marked consideration in face of
all the people. But such was the hatred against Law that the experiment had well nigh
proved fatal to him. The mob assailed his carriage with stones just as he was entering his
own door; and if the coachman had not made a sudden jerk into the court-yard, and the
domestics closed the gate immediately, he would, in all probability, have been dragged
out and torn to pieces. On the following day, his wife and daughter were also assailed by
the mob as they were returning in their carriage from the races. When the Regent was
informed of these occurrences he sent Law a strong detachment of Swiss guards, who
were stationed night and day in the court of his residence. The public indignation at last
increased so much, that Law, finding his own house, even with this guard, insecure, took
refuge in the Palais Royal, in the apartments of the Regent.
The Chancellor, D'Aguesseau, who had been dismissed in 1718 for his opposition to the
projects of Law, was now recalled to aid in the restoration of credit. The Regent
acknowledged too late, that he had treated with unjustifiable harshness and mistrust one
of the ablest, and perhaps the sole honest public man of that corrupt period. He had
retired ever since his disgrace to his country-house at Fresnes, where, in the midst of
severe but delightful philosophic studies, he had forgotten the intrigues of an unworthy
court. Law himself, and the Chevalier de Conflans, a gentleman of the Regent's
household, were despatched in a post-chaise, with orders to bring the ex-chancellor to
Paris along with them. D'Aguesseau consented to render what assistance he could,

contrary to the advice of his friends, who did not approve that he should accept any recall
to office of which Law was the bearer. On his arrival in Paris, five counsellors of the
Parliament were admitted to confer with the Commissary of Finance, and on the 1st of
June an order was published, abolishing the law which made it criminal to amass coin to
the amount of more than five hundred livres. Every one was permitted to have as much
specie as he pleased. In order that the bank-notes might be withdrawn, twenty-five
millions of new notes were created, on the security of the revenues of the city of Paris, at
two-and-a-half per cent. The bank-notes withdrawn were publicly burned in front of the
Hotel de Ville. The new notes were principally of the value of ten livres each; and on the
10th of June the bank was re-opened, with a sufficiency of silver coin to give in change
for them.
These measures were productive of considerable advantage. All the population of Paris
hastened to the bank, to get coin for their small notes; and silver becoming scarce, they
were paid in copper. Very few complained that this was too heavy, although poor fellows
might be continually seen toiling and sweating along the streets, laden with more than
they could comfortably carry, in the shape of change for fifty livres. The crowds around
the bank were so great, that hardly a day passed that some one was not pressed to death.
On the 9th of July, the multitude was so dense and clamorous that the guards stationed at
the entrance of the Mazarin Gardens closed the gate, and refused to admit any more. The
crowd became incensed, and flung stones through the railings upon the soldiers. The
latter, incensed in their turn, threatened to fire upon the people. At that instant one of
them was hit by a stone, and, taking up his piece, he fired into the crowd. One man fell
dead immediately, and another was severely wounded. It was every instant expected that
a general attack would have been commenced upon the bank; but the gates of the
Mazarin Gardens being opened to the crowd, who saw a whole troop of soldiers, with
their bayonets fixed, ready to receive them, they contented themselves by giving vent to
their indignation in groans and hisses.
Eight days afterwards the concourse of people was so tremendous, that fifteen persons
were squeezed to death at the doors of the bank. The people were so indignant that they
took three of the bodies on stretchers before them, and proceeded, to the number of seven
or eight thousand, to the gardens of the Palais Royal, that they might show the Regent the
misfortunes that he and Law had brought upon the country. Law's coachman, who was
sitting on the box of his master's carriage, in the court-yard of the palace, happened to
have more zeal than discretion, and, not liking that the mob should abuse his master, he
said, loud enough to be overheard by several persons, that they were all blackguards, and
deserved to be hanged. The mob immediately set upon him, and, thinking that Law was
in the carriage, broke it to pieces. The imprudent coachman narrowly escaped with his
life. No further mischief was done; a body of troops making their appearance, the crowd
quietly dispersed, after an assurance had been given by the Regent that the three bodies
they had brought to show him should be decently buried at his own expense. The
Parliament was sitting at the time of this uproar, and the President took upon himself to
go out and see what was the matter. On his return he informed the councillors, that Law's
carriage had been broken by the mob. All the members rose simultaneously, and
expressed their joy by a loud shout, while one man, more zealous in his hatred than the

rest, exclaimed, "And Law himself, is he torn to pieces ?" [The Duchess of Orleans gives
a different version of this story; but whichever be the true one, the manifestation of such
feeling in a legislative assembly was not very creditable. She says, that the President was
so transported with joy, that he was seized with a rhyming fit, and, returning into the hall,
exclaimed to the members :-"Messieurs ! Messieurs ! bonne nouvelle ! Le carfosse de Lass est reduit en canelle !"]
Much undoubtedly depended on the credit of the Company of the Indies, which was
answerable for so great a sum to the nation. It was, therefore, suggested in the council of
the ministry, that any privileges which could be granted to enable it to fulfil its
engagements, would be productive of the best results. With this end in view, it was
proposed that the exclusive privilege of all maritime commerce should be secured to it,
and an edict to that effect was published. But it was unfortunately forgotten that by such a
measure all the merchants of the country would be ruined. The idea of such an immense
privilege was generally scouted by the nation, and petition on petition was presented to
the Parliament, that they would refuse to register the decree. They refused accordingly,
and the Regent, remarking that they did nothing but fan the flame of sedition, exiled them
to Blois. At the intercession of D'Aguesseau, the place of banishment was changed to
Pontoise, and thither accordingly the councillors repaired, determined to set the Regent at
defiance. They made every arrangement for rendering their temporary exile as agreeable
as possible. The President gave the most elegant suppers, to which he invited all the
gayest and wittiest company of Paris. Every night there was a concert and ball for the
ladies. The usually grave and solemn judges and councillors joined in cards and other
diversions, leading for several weeks a life of the most extravagant pleasure, for no other
purpose than to show the Regent of how little consequence they deemed their
banishment, and that when they willed it, they could make Pontoise a pleasanter
residence than Paris.
Of all the nations in the world the French are the most renowned for singing over their
grievances. Of that country it has been remarked with some truth, that its whole history
may be traced in its songs. When Law, by the utter failure of his best-laid plans, rendered
himself obnoxious, satire of course seized hold upon him, and, while caricatures of his
person appeared in all the shops, the streets resounded with songs, in which neither he
nor the Regent was spared. Many of these songs were far from decent; and one of them in
particular counselled the application of all his notes to the most ignoble use to which
paper can be applied. But the following, preserved in the letters of the Duchess of
Orleans, was the best and the most popular, and was to be heard for months in all the
carrefours of Paris. The application of the chorus is happy enough :-Aussitot que Lass arriva Dans notre bonne ville, Monsieur le Regent publia Que Lass
serait utile Pour retablir la nation. La faridondaine! la faridondon. Mais il nous a tous
enrich!, Biribi! A la facon de Barbari, Mort ami!

Ce parpaillot, pour attirer Tout l'argent de la France, Songea d'abord a s'assurer De notre
confiance. Il fit son abjuration. La faridondaine! la faridondon! Mais le fourbe s'est
converti, Biribi! A la facon de Barbari, Mon ami!
Lass, le fils aine de Satan Nous met tous a l'aumone, Il nous a pris tout notre argent Et
n'en rend a personne. Mais le Regent, humain et bon, La faridondaine! la faridondon!
Nous rendra ce qu'on nous a pris, Biribi! A la facon de Barbari, Mon ami!
The following smart epigram is of the same date:-Lundi, j'achetai des actions; Mardi, je gagnai des millions; Mercredi, j'arrangeai mon
menage, Jeudi, je pris un equipage, Vendredi, je m'en fus au bal, Et Samedi, a l'Hopital.
Among the caricatures that were abundantly published, and that showed as plainly as
graver matters, that the nation had awakened to a sense of its folly, was one, a fac-simile
of which is preserved in the "Memoires de la Regence." It was thus described by its
author: "The 'Goddess of Shares,' in her triumphal car, driven by the Goddess of Folly.
Those who are drawing the car are impersonations of the Mississippi, with his wooden
leg, the South Sea, the Bank of England, the Company of the West of Senegal, and of
various assurances. Lest the car should not roll fast enough, the agents of these
companies, known by their long fox-tails and their cunning looks, turn round the spokes
of the wheels, upon which are marked the names of the several stocks, and their value,
sometimes high and sometimes low, according to the turns of the wheel. Upon the ground
are the merchandise, day-books and ledgers of legitimate commerce, crushed under the
chariot of Folly. Behind is an immense crowd of persons, of all ages, sexes, and
conditions, clamoring after Fortune, and fighting with each other to get a portion of the
shares which she distributes so bountifully among them. In the clouds sits a demon,
blowing bubbles of soap, which are also the objects of the admiration and cupidity of the
crowd, who jump upon one another's backs to reach them ere they burst. Right in the
pathway of the car, and blocking up the passage, stands a large building, with three doors,
through one of which it must pass, if it proceeds further, and all the crowd along with it.
Over the first door are the words, "Hopital des Foux," over the second, "Hopital des
Malades," and over the third, "Hopital des Gueux." Another caricature represented Law
sitting in a large cauldron, boiling over the flames of popular madness, surrounded by an
impetuous multitude, who were pouring all their gold and silver into it, and receiving
gladly in exchange the bits of paper which he distributed among them by handsfull.
While this excitement lasted, Law took good care not to expose himself unguarded in the
streets. Shut up in the apartments of the Regent, he was secure from all attack, and,
whenever he ventured abroad, it was either incognito, or in one of the Royal carriages,
with a powerful escort. An amusing anecdote is recorded of the detestation in which he
was held by the people, and the ill treatment he would have met, had he fallen into their
hands. A gentleman, of the name of Boursel, was passing in his carriage down the Rue St.
Antoine, when his further progress was stayed by a hackneycoach that had blocked up the
road. M. Boursel's servant called impatiently to the hackneycoachman to get out of the
way, and, on his refusal, struck him a blow on the face. A crowd was soon drawn

together by the disturbance, and M. Boursel got out of the carriage to restore order. The
hackney-coachman, imagining that he had now another assailant, bethought him of an
expedient to rid himself of both, and called out as loudly as he was able, "Help! help!
murder! murder! Here are Law and his servant going to kill me! Help! help!" At this cry,
the people came out of their shops, armed with sticks and other weapons, while the mob
gathered stones to inflict summary vengeance upon the supposed financier. Happily for
M. Boursel and his servant, the door of the church of the Jesuits stood wide open, and,
seeing the fearful odds against them, they rushed towards it with all speed. They reached
the altar, pursued by the people, and would have been ill treated even there, if, finding the
door open leading to the sacristy, they had not sprang through, and closed it after them.
The mob were then persuaded to leave the church by the alarmed and indignant priests;
and, finding M. Boursel's carriage still in the streets, they vented their ill-will against it,
and did it considerable damage.
The twenty-five millions secured on the municipal revenues of the city of Paris, bearing
so low an interest as two and a half per cent., were not very popular among the large
holders of Mississippi stock. The conversion of the securities was, therefore, a work of
considerable difficulty; for many preferred to retain the falling paper of Law's Company,
in the hope that a favourable turn might take place. On the 15th of August, with a view to
hasten the conversion, an edict was passed, declaring that all notes for sums between one
thousand and ten thousand livres; should not pass current, except for the purchase of
annuities and bank accounts, or for the payment of instalments still due on the shares of
the company.
In October following another edict was passed, depriving these notes of all value
whatever after the month of November next ensuing. The management of the mint, the
farming of the revenue, and all the other advantages and privileges of the India, or
Mississippi Company, were taken from them, and they were reduced to a mere private
company. This was the deathblow to the whole system, which had now got into the hands
of its enemies. Law had lost all influence in the Council of Finance, and the company,
being despoiled of its immunities, could no longer hold out the shadow of a prospect of
being able to fulfil its engagements. All those suspected of illegal profits at the time the
public delusion was at its height, were sought out and amerced in heavy fines. It was
previously ordered that a list of the original proprietors should be made out, and that such
persons as still retained their shares should place them in deposit with the company, and
that those who had neglected to complete the shares for which they had put down their
names, should now purchase them of the company, at the rate of 13,500 livres for each
share of 500 livres. Rather than submit to pay this enormous sum for stock which was
actually at a discount, the shareholders packed up all their portable effects, and
endeavoured to find a refuge in foreign countries. Orders were immediately issued to the
authorities at the ports and frontiers, to apprehend all travellers who sought to leave the
kingdom, and keep them in custody, until it was ascertained whether they had any plate
or jewellery with them, or were concerned in the late stock-jobbing. Against such few as
escaped, the punishment of death was recorded, while the most arbitrary proceedings
were instituted against those who remained.

Law himself, in a moment of despair, determined to leave a country where his life was no
longer secure. He at first only demanded permission to retire from Paris to one of his
country-seats; a permission which the Regent cheerfully granted. The latter was much
affected at the unhappy turn affairs had taken, but his faith continued unmoved in the
truth and efficacy of Law's financial system. His eyes were opened to his own errors, and
during the few remaining years of his life, he constantly longed for an opportunity of
again establishing the system upon a securer basis. At Law's last interview with the
Prince, he is reported to have said--" I confess that I have committed many faults; I
committed them because I am a man, and all men are liable to error; but I declare to you
most solemnly that none of them proceeded from wicked or dishonest motives, and that
nothing of the kind will be found in the whole course of my conduct."
Two or three days after his departure the Regent sent him a very kind letter, permitting
him to leave the kingdom whenever he pleased, and stating that he had ordered his
passports to be made ready. He at the same time offered him any sum of money he might
require. Law respectfully declined the money, and set out for Brussels in a postchaise
belonging to Madame de Prie, the mistress of the Duke of Bourbon, escorted by six
horse-guards. From thence he proceeded to Venice, where he remained for some months,
the object of the greatest curiosity to the people, who believed him to be the possessor of
enormous wealth. No opinion, however, could be more erroneous. With more generosity
than could have been expected from a man who during the greatest part of his life had
been a professed gambler, he had refused to enrich himself at the expense of a ruined
nation. During the height of the popular frenzy for Mississippi stock, he had never
doubted of the final success of his projects, in making France the richest and most
powerful nation of Europe. He invested all his gains in the purchase of landed property in
France - a sure proof of his own belief in the stability of his schemes. He had hoarded no
plate or jewellery, and sent no money, like the dishonest jobbers, to foreign countries. His
all, with the exception of one diamond, worth about five or six thousand pounds sterling,
was invested in the French soil; and when he left that country, he left it almost a beggar.
This fact alone ought to rescue his memory from the charge of knavery, so often and so
unjustly brought against him.
As soon as his departure was known, all his estates and his valuable library were
confiscated. Among the rest, an annuity of 200,000 livres, (8000 pounds sterling,) on the
lives of his wife and children, which had been purchased for five millions of livres, was
forfeited, notwithstanding that a special edict, drawn up for the purpose in the days of his
prosperity, had expressly declared that it should never be confiscated for any cause
whatever. Great discontent existed among the people that Law had been suffered to
escape. The mob and the Parliament would have been pleased to have seen him hanged.
The few who had not suffered by the commercial revolution, rejoiced that the quack had
left the country; but all those (and they were by far the most numerous class) whose
fortunes were implicated, regretted that his intimate knowledge of the distress of the
country, and of the causes that had led to it, had not been rendered more available in
discovering a remedy.
