
122

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

undeniable that such strategy might work; money spent bears no fruit
(except the enjoyment of the spender). But the benefits promised in the
book seem grossly overstated. A finer read of their thesis- reveals that
their sample includes a double dose of survivorship bias. In other words,
it has two compounding flaws.

visibility winners

The first bias comes from the fact that the rich people selected for their
sample are among the lucky monkeys on typewriters. The authors made
no attempt to correct their statistics with the fact that they saw only the
winners. They make no mention of the "accumulators" who have
accumulated the wrong things (members of my family are experts on
that; those who accumulated managed to accumulate currencies about
to be devalued and stocks of companies that later went bust). Nowhere
do we see a mention of the fact that some people were lucky enough to
have invested in the winners; these people no doubt would make their
way into the book. There is a way to take care of the bias: lower the
wealth of your average millionaire by, say, 50%, on the grounds that the
bias causes the average net worth of the observed millionaire to be
higher by such amount (it consists in adding the effect of the losers into
the pot). It would certainly modify the conclusion.

t

it's a b u l l

market

As to the second, more serious flaw, I have already discussed the
problem of induction. The story focuses on an unusual episode in
history; buying its thesis implies accepting that the current returns in
asset values are permanent (the sort of belief that prevailed before the
great crash that started in 1929). Remember that asset prices have (still
at the time of writing) witnessed the greatest bull market in history and
that values did compound astronomically during the past two decades.
A dollar invested in the average stock would have grown almost twentyfold since 1982 - and that is the average stock. The sample might
include people who invested in stocks performing better than average.

TOO

MANY

MILLIONAIRES

NEXT

DOOR

123

Virtually all of the subjects became rich from asset price inflation, in
other words from the recent inflation in financial paper and assets that
started in 1982. An investor who engaged in the same strategy during
less august days for the market would certainly have a different story to
tell. Imagine the book being written in 1982, after the prolonged erosion
of the inflation-adjusted value of the stocks, or in 1935, after the loss of
interest in the stock market.
Or consider that the United States stock market is not the only
investment vehicle. Consider the fate of those who, in place of spending
their money buying expensive toys and paying for ski trips, bought
Lebanese lira denominated Treasury bills (as my grandfather did), or
junk bonds from Michael Milken (as many of my colleagues in the
1980s did). Go back in history and imagine the accumulator buying
Russian Imperial bonds bearing the signature of Czar Nicholas II and
trying to accumulate further by cashing them from the Soviet government, or Argentine real estate in the 1930s (as my great grandfather
did).
The mistake of ignoring the survivorship bias is chronic, even (or
perhaps especially) among professionals. How? Because we are trained
to take advantage of the information that is lying in front of our eyes,
, ignoring the information that we do not see.
A brief summing up at this point: I showed how we tend to mistake
one realization among all possible random histories as the most
representative one, forgetting that there may be others. In a nutshell,
the survivorship bias implies that the highest performing realization will
be the most visible. Why? Because the losers do not show up.

A Guru's Opinion
The fund management industry is populated with gurus. Clearly, the
field is randomness-laden and the guru is going to fall into a trap,
particularly if he has no proper training in inference. At the time of
writing, there is one such guru who developed the very unfortunate
habit of writing books on the subject. Along with one of his peers, he

124

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

computed the success of a "Robin Hood" policy of investing with the
least successful manager in a given population of managers. It consists in
switching down by taking money away from the winner and allocating
it to the loser. This goes against the prevailing wisdom of investing with
a winning manager and taking away money from a losing one. Doing so,
their "paper strategy" (i.e. as in a Monopoly™ game, not executed in
real life) derived considerably higher returns than if they stuck to the
winning manager. Their hypothetical example seemed to them to prove
that one should not stay with the best manager, as we would be inclined
to do, but rather switch to the worst manager, or at least such seems to
be the point they were attempting to convey.
Their analysis presents one severe hitch that any graduate student in
financial economics should be able to pinpoint at the first reading. Their
sample only had survivors. They simply forgot to take into account the
managers who went out of business. Such a sample includes managers
that were operating during the simulation, and are still operating today.
True, their sample included managers who did poorly, but only those
managers who did poorly and recovered, without getting out of
business. So it would be obvious that investing with those who fared
poorly at some point, but recovered (with the benefit of hindsight)
would yield a positive return! Had they continued to fare poorly, they
would be out of business and would not be included in the sample.
How should one conduct the proper simulation? By taking a
population of managers in existence, say, five years ago and running
the simulation until today. Clearly, the attributes of those who leave the
population are biased towards failure; few successful people in such a
lucrative business call it quits for making too much money. Next we
turn to a more technical presentation of these issues.

nine

i t is e a s i e r t o b u y a n d s e l l
than fry an egg
Some technical extensions of the survivorship bias. On the
distribution of "coincidences" in life. It is preferable to be lucky
than competent (but you can be caught). The birthday paradox.
More charlatans (and more journalists). How the researcher
with work ethics can find just about anything in data. On dogs
not barking.

his afternoon I have an appointment with my dentist (it will mostly
consist in the dentist picking my brain on Brazilian bonds). I can state
with a certain level of comfort that he knows something about teeth,
particularly if I enter his office with a toothache and exit it with some form
of relief. It will be difficult for someone who knows literally nothing about
teeth to provide me with such relief, except if he is particularly lucky on
that day - or has been very lucky in his life to become a dentist while not
knowing anything about teeth. Looking at his diploma on the wall, I
determine that the odds that he repeatedly gave correct answers to the
exam questions and performed satisfactorily on a few thousand cavities
before his graduation - out of plain randomness - are remarkably small.
Later in the evening, I go to Carnegie Hall. I can say little about the
pianist; I even forgot her unfamiliar foreign sounding name. All I know

126

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

is that she studied in some Muscovite conservatory. But I can expect to
get some music out of the piano. It will be rare to have someone who
performed brilliantly enough in the past to get to Carnegie Hall and now
turns out to have benefited from luck alone. The expectation of having a
fraud who will bang on the piano, producing only cacophonous sounds,
is indeed low enough for me to rule it out completely.
I was in London last Saturday. Saturdays in London are magical;
bustling but without the mechanical industry of a weekday or the sad
resignation of a Sunday. Without a wristwatch or a plan I found myself
in front of my favorite carvings by Canova at the Victoria and Albert
Museum. My professional bent immediately made me question whether
randomness played a large role in the carving of these marble statues.
The bodies were realistic reproductions of human figures, except that
they were more harmonious and finely balanced than anything I have
seen mother nature produce on its own (Ovid's materiem superabat
opus comes to mind). Could such finesse be a product of luck?
I can practically make the same statement about anyone operating in
the physical world, or in a business in which the degree of randomness is
low. But there is a problem in anything related to the business world. I
am bothered because tomorrow, unfortunately, I have an appointment
with a fund manager seeking my help, and that of my friends, in finding
investors. He has what he claims is a good track record. All I can infer is
that he has learned to buy and sell. And it is harder to fry an egg than
buy and sell. W e l l . . . the fact that he made money in the past may have
some relevance, but not terribly so. This is not to say that it is always the
case; there are some instances in which one can trust a track record, but,
alas, there are not too many of these. As the reader now knows, the fund
manager can expect to be heckled by me during the presentation,
particularly if he does not exhibit the minimum of humility and selfdoubt that I would expect from someone practicing randomness. I will
probably bombard him with questions that he may not be prepared to
answer, blinded by his past results. I will probably lecture him that.
Machiavelli ascribed to luck at least a 50% role in life (the rest was
cunning and bravura), and that was before the creation of modern
markets.
In this chapter, I discuss some well-known counterintuitive properties
of performance records and historical time series. The concept presented

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

127

here is well known for some of its variations under the name survivorship
bias, data mining, data snooping, overfitting, regression to the mean, etc.,
basically situations where the performance is exaggerated by the
observer, owing to a misperception of the importance of randomness.
Clearly, this concept has rather unsettling implications. It extends to
more general situations where randomness may play a share, such as the
choice of a medical treatment or the interpretation of coincidental events.
When I am tempted to suggest a possible future contribution of
financial research to science in general, I adduce the analysis of data
mining and the study of survivorship biases. These have been refined in
finance but can extend to all areas of scientific investigation. Why is
finance so rich a field? Because it is one of the rare areas of investigation
where we have plenty of information (in the form of abundant price
series), but no ability to conduct experiments as in, say, physics. This
dependence on past data brings about its salient defects.

Fooled by Numbers
placebo

investors

I have often been faced with questions of the sort: "Who do you think
you are to tell me that I might have been plain lucky in my life?" Well,
nobody really believes that he or she was lucky. My approach is that,
with our Monte Carlo engine, we can manufacture purely random
situations. We can do the exact opposite of conventional methods; in
place of analyzing real people hunting for attributes we can create
artificial ones with precisely known attributes. Thus we can manufacture situations that depend on pure, unadulterated luck, without the
shadow of skills or whatever we have called non-luck in Table P.l. In
other words, we can man-make pure nobodies to laugh at; they will be
by design stripped of any shadow of ability (exactly like a placebo drug).
We saw in Chapter 5 how people may survive owing to traits that
momentarily fit the given structure of randomness. Here we take a far
simpler situation where we know the structure of randomness-, the first

128

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

such exercise is a finessing of the old popular saying that even a broken
clock is right twice a day. We will take it a bit further to show that
statistics is a knife that cuts on both sides. Let us use the Monte Carlo
generator introduced earlier and construct a population of 10,000
fictional investment managers (the generator is not terribly necessary
since we can use a coin, or even do plain algebra, but it is considerably
more illustrative - and fun). Assume that they each have a perfectly fair
game; each one has a 50% probability of making $10,000 at the end of
the year, and a 50% probability of losing $10,000. Let us introduce an
additional restriction; once a manager has a single bad year, he is
thrown out of the sample, good-bye and have a nice life. Thus we will
operate like the legendary speculator George Soros who was said to tell
his managers gathered in a room: "half of you guys will be out by next
year" (with an Eastern European accent). Like Soros, we have extremely
high standards; we are looking only for managers with an unblemished
record. We have no patience for low performers.
The Monte Carlo generator will toss a coin; heads and the manager
will make $10,000 over the year, tails and he will lose $10,000. We run
it for the first year. At the end of the year, we expect 5,000 managers to
be up $10,000 each, and 5,000 to be down $10,000. Now we run the
game a second year. Again, we can expect 2,500 managers to be up two
years in a row; another year, 1,250; a fourth one, 625; a fifth, 313. We
have now, simply in a fair game, 313 managers who made money for
five years in a row. Out of pure luck.

n o b o d y h a s t o be c o m p e t e n t

Let's push the argument further to make it more interesting. We create a
cohort that is composed exclusively of incompetent managers. We will
define an incompetent manager as someone who has a negative expected
return, the equivalent of the odds being stacked against him. We instruct,
the Monte Carlo generator now to draw from an urn. The urn has 100
balls, 45 black and 55 red. By drawing with replacement, the ratio of
red to black balls will remain the same. If we draw a black ball, the
manager will earn $10,000. If we draw a red ball, he will lose $10,000.
The manager is thus expected to earn $10,000 with 45% probability,

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

129

and lose $10,000 with 55%. On average, the manager will lose $1,000
each round - but only on average.
At the end of the first year, we still expect to have 4,500 managers
turning a profit (45% of them), the second, 45% of that number, 2,025.
The third, 911; the fourth, 410; the fifth, 184. Let us give the surviving
managers names and dress them in business suits. True, they represent
less than 2 % of the original cohort. But they will get attention. Nobody
will mention the other 98%. What can we conclude?
The first counterintuitive point is that a population entirely composed
of bad managers will produce a small amount of great track records. As
a matter of fact, assuming the manager shows up unsolicited at your
door, it will be practically impossible to figure out whether he is good or
bad. The results would not markedly change, even if the population
were composed entirely of managers who are expected in the long run to
lose money. Why? Because owing to volatility, some of them will make
money. We can see here that volatility actually helps bad investment
decisions.
The second counterintuitive point is that the expectation of the
maximum of track records, with which we are concerned, depends more
on the size of the initial sample, than on the individual odds per
manager. In other words the number of managers with great track
records in a given market depends far more on the number of people
who started in the investment business (in place of going to dental
school), rather than on their ability to produce profits. It also depends
on the volatility. Why do I use the notion of expectation of the
maximum? Because I am not concerned at all with the average track
record. I will get to see only the best of the managers, not all of the
managers. This means that we will see more "excellent managers" in
2002 than in 1998, provided the cohort of beginners was greater in
1997 than it was in 1993 - I can safely say that it was.

ergodicity

To get more technical, I have to say that people believe that they can
figure out the properties of the distribution from the sample they are
witnessing. When it comes to matters that depend on the maximum, it is

130

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

altogether another distribution that is being inferred, that of the best
performers. We call the difference between the average of such
distribution and the unconditional distribution of winners and losers
the survivorship bias - here the fact that about 3% of the initial cohort
will make money five years in a row. In addition, this example illustrates
the properties of ergodicity, namely, that time will eliminate the
annoying effects of randomness. Looking forward, in spite of the fact
that these managers were profitable in the past five years, we expect
them to break even in any future time period. They will fare no better
than those of the initial cohort who failed earlier in the exercise. Ah, the
long term.
A few years ago, when I told one A., a then Master-of-the-Universe
type, that track records were less relevant than he thought, he found the
remark so offensive that he violently flung his cigarette lighter in my
direction. The episode taught me a lot. Remember that nobody accepts
randomness in his own success, only his failure. His ego was pumped up
as he was heading up a department of "great traders" who were then
temporarily making a fortune in the markets. They subsequently blew
up during the harsh New York winter of 1994 (it was the bond market
crash that followed the surprise interest rate hike by Alan Greenspan).
The interesting part is that six years later I can hardly find any of them
still trading (ergodicity).
Recall that the survivorship bias depends on the size of the initial
population. The information that a person made money in the past, just
by itself, is neither meaningful nor relevant. We need to know the size of
the population from which he came. In other words, without knowing
how many managers out there have tried and failed, we will not be able
to assess the validity of the track record. If the initial population
includes ten managers, then I would give the performer half my savings
without a blink. If the initial population is composed of 10,000
managers, I would ignore the results. The latter situation is generally the
case; these days so many people have been drawn to the financial
markets. Many college graduates are trading as a first career, failing,
then going to dental school.
If, as in a fairy tale, these fictional managers materialized into real
human beings, one of these could be the person I am meeting tomorrow
at 11.45 a.m. Why did I select 11.45 a.m.? Because I will question him

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

131

about his trading style. I need to know how he trades. I will then be able
to claim that I have to rush to a lunch appointment if the manager puts
too much emphasis on his track record.

Life Is Coincidental
Next we look at the extensions to real life of our bias in the
understanding of the distribution of coincidences.

the mysterious

letter

You get an anonymous letter on January 2nd informing you that the
market will go up during the month. It proves to be true, but you
disregard it owing to the well-known January effect (stocks have gone
up historically during January). Then you receive another one on Feb 1st
telling you that the market will go down. Again, it proves to be true.
Then you get another letter on March 1st - same story. By July you are
intrigued by the prescience of the anonymous person and you are asked
to invest in a special offshore fund. You pour all your savings into it.
Two months later, your money is gone. You go spill your tears on your
neighbor's shoulder and he tells you that he remembers that he received
two such mysterious letters. But the mailings stopped at the second
letter. He recalls that the first one was correct in its prediction, the other
incorrect.
What happened? The trick is as follows. The con operator pulls
10,000 names out of a phone book. He mails a bullish letter to one half
of the sample, and a bearish one to the other half. The following month
he selects the names of the persons to whom he mailed the letter whose
prediction turned out to be right, that is, 5,000 names. The next month
he does the same with the remaining 2,500 names, until the list narrows
down to 500 people. Of these there will be 200 victims. An investment
in a few thousand dollars worth of postage stamps will turn into several
million.

132

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

an interrupted tennis

game

It is not uncommon for someone watching a tennis game on television to
be bombarded by advertisements for funds that did (until that minute)
outperform others by some percentage over some period. But, again,
why would anybody advertise if he didn't happen to outperform the
market? There is a high probability of the investment coming to you if
its success is caused entirely by randomness. This phenomenon is what
economists and insurance people call adverse selection. Judging an
investment that comes to you requires more stringent standards than
judging an investment you seek, owing to such selection bias. For
example, by going to a cohort composed of 10,000 managers, I have 2/
100 chances of finding a spurious survivor. By staying home and
answering my door bell, the chance of the soliciting party being a
spurious survivor is closer to 100%.

the birthday

paradox

The most intuitive way to describe the data mining problem to a nonstatistician is through what is called the birthday paradox, though it is
not really a paradox, simply a perceptional oddity. If you meet
someone randomly, there is a one in 365.25 chance of your sharing
their birthday, and a considerably smaller one of having the exact
birthday of the same year. So, sharing the same birthday would be a
coincidental event that you would discuss at the dinner table. Now let
us look at a situation where there are 23 people in a room. What is the
chance of there being two people with the same birthday? About 50%.
For we are not specifying which people need to share a birthday; any
pair works.
