
Why Wouldn’t I Buy These Particular Options with My Mother-in-Law’s Trading Account?
Okay, up to this point, I’ve been talking about what options are and how they work. Now let’s talk about the main reason that people lose money trading options. It’s
very simple: it’s because they focus mainly on buying cheap out-of-the-money call options. In Figure 5.1, the $410.00 AAPL call options are trading at $12.30. This is
100 percent premium. There is zero intrinsic value here. In this case, the trader looked at the $390.00 call options, but found them to be “too expensive” at $22.75.
AAPL is currently at $399.26. Let’s say it had a nice steady move into expiration, rallying just over $10.00 per share, and closed at $409.75. A trader bought the
79

$410.00 call option because he thought AAPL would go up. He was right. It did. How much money is his option worth at expiration? A big goose egg. He lost every
dime. In fact, AAPL would have had to close above $422.30 for him to make a profit on this trade. At $422.30, the $410.00 call option at expiration is worth $12.30—
the exact price that he paid for the option. Although he didn’t lose money on the trade, he didn’t make anything either. In other words, when buying out-of-the-money
call options, not only does a trader have to be right, but he has to be right in a big way. A steady move higher won’t do. It has to be explosive.
In this same scenario, had the trader bought the “expensive” $390.00 call option at $22.75, a move to $422.30 would price the call, at expiration, at $32.30, resulting
in a profit of $9.55 ($955.00) on the trade. Would you rather buy an option for $2,275 and make $955 or buy an option for $1,230 and make $0.00? Buying an option
“just because it’s cheap” is a ridiculous trading strategy. In the options world, a fairly common scenario is (1) retail traders buy out-of-the-money calls (without
paying attention to fair value or implied volatility; more on that later), and (2) professional traders gladly sell them these calls all day long. “Hey, you want some
more?” they ask eagerly. “Because we’ve got more to sell you.” I’ve known guys who have traded options on the floor for more than 20 years. They have never
bought an out-of-the-money call. Not one. To them, there could be nothing worse on this planet than buying an out-of-the-money call.
That’s not to say that out-of-the-money options don’t have their place. Believe it or not, there are scenarios where it can make sense to buy them, but these are the
exception rather than the rule. And this brings me to my first options strategy.

Directional Plays: Why Is Delta 0.70 or Better Superior?
Buying a cheap out-of-the-money option is enticing because if it works out, the trade could win in a big way. Everyone wants to be able to buy an option for $1.00
and sell it for $15.00. That’s the “quit your job and travel the world” trade if it’s done right. Yes, this could happen with an out-of-the-money option, just like you
could get a royal flush when you’re playing poker. The odds aren’t great, but the chance is there, however remote. Personally, I’m more interested in increasing the
odds for creating a consistent income stream than crossing my fingers and swinging for the fence.
Figure 5.2 lays out an option diagram with “the Greeks,” known as delta, gamma, theta, and vega. The good news is that, for what I like to do, a trader doesn’t need
to know too much about these. The only one I want to talk about here is delta. This is important. Delta simply tells us how far the option price will move in relation
to each $1.00 move in the underlying stock. A delta of 1.00 means that the option price will move right along with the stock, dollar for dollar. If the stock moves up
$1.00, then the option will move up $1.00. A delta of 0.10 means that if the stock moves up $1.00, then the option will move up only 10 cents. The deeper in the
money the call option is, the higher the delta. The further out of the money it is, the lower the delta.
For purely directional plays, I simply view the option as a cheaper way to participate in the price movement of the underlying stock. One of the plays I’ll talk
about later in the book (the squeeze play) is a favorite of mine for option plays. This setup indicates a high probability that the stock is ready to make a larger-thanaverage move. In this case, I simply want to participate in the movement of the stock, without having to fork over all the money required to buy the actual stock. For
these trades, I simply buy an in-the-money option with a delta of 0.70 or higher. This means that as the stock price moves in my favor, the option will move right
along with it at the rate of 70 cents for every dollar the stock moves. As a bonus, as the stock moves my way, placing my option even deeper in the money, the delta
also increases. For the first 2 points of a move, my option might move $1.40 (70 cents per dollar). For the next 2 points, it might move $1.60, as the delta increases
from 0.70 to 0.80. A far-out-of-the-money option, on the other hand, will stay at a low delta for quite some time. Buying far-out-of-the-money options is a lose/lose,
unless you have some inside information, such as Bear Stearns being about to collapse. Someone actually bought $1.4 million in far-out-of-the-money put options a
few weeks before Bear Stearns went bankrupt. He knew what was coming down the pipeline, and he made a fortune.

80

Figure 5.2

In Figure 5.2, on the left-hand side, we can see the corresponding delta values for the AAPL call option strike prices from $375.00 up to $430.00. At point 1, we see
the strike prices with a delta of 0.70 or higher (the $395.00 call has a delta of 0.69, which is close enough). These are for the recently introduced September weekly
option series, which have 2 days left till expiration. As a side note, up until recently, all stock options traded monthly, expiring the third Friday of every month. Now
we also have “weekly options” on some of the bigger names, like AAPL and AM ZN. These options have a very high premium because—you guessed it—retail traders
are clamoring to buy these “cheap” options. I would never buy one, ever, ever, ever. But I’m happy to sell them to anyone who thinks she’s getting a bargain.
A glance at point 4 shows the deltas for the monthly options, which expire in 23 days. Note that the delta levels are not the same for each strike price. The further
out the expiration, the deeper in the money a trader needs to go in order to achieve a delta of 0.70. At point 3, we see the delta levels for the out-of-the-money options,
which fall precipitously the further away from the current price we move. That is, a trader could buy the $430.00 call option for a nickel, and if AAPL moved $10.00 a
share the next day, the option price would barely budge. For put options, the story is the same, just in reverse. The delta levels we want for puts are –0.70 or greater,
as highlighted at point 5.

81

Figure 5.3
I’m the first to admit that purely directional plays aren’t sexy. They are just simple, and they work. Let’s take a look at Figure 5.3, which details one of my favorite
“short-term swing trading strategies” in options. By short-term, I mean a trade that I’m generally in for one to three days. For these types of trades, I look at hourly
charts, and one of my favorite setups on the hourly charts is a “squeeze.”
1. At point 1, a squeeze sets up on the hourly chart of GS (Goldman Sachs), as indicated by the darker-colored dots within the square. When the dots turn back to
lighter-colored, the trade is a buy if the histogram is above zero and a sell (short) if the histogram is below zero (note: there is more about the squeeze in a later
chapter). In this case, it’s a buy.
2. At point 2, GS is trading near $159.00. I want to buy calls, as the squeeze has generated a buy signal. Of course, I want to go for a delta 0.70 call, which in this case
turns out to be the 155 strike price. I buy over the course of the next hour at prices of $7.25, $7.35, and $7.40. I’m willing to risk a move of $2.00 against me on
the underlying stock, at which point I would close out the options at their current price. With a delta of 0.70, I already know that means that the option would
drop about $1.40 if the stock dropped $2.00.

82

Figure 5.4

3. At point 3, the squeeze indicator has issued a sell signal, as the move has started to lose momentum. This is indicated by the darker-colored histogram. As a result, I
start closing out this position at point 4.
4. For this particular trade, as seen in Figure 5.4, I scaled into 300 contracts at prices of $7.25, $7.35, and $7.40. I then scaled out of these 300 contracts at prices of
$9.05 and $9.25, for an average profit of $1.85 (+$185.00) per contract. This trade was done during one of our quarterly live trading mentorships, so I was able to
take screen shots of it as the trade unfolded.
The main idea here is that when I’m looking for a stock to move a few dollars, I want my option to move up as much in lockstep with that price movement as
possible. With a delta of 0.70, a $2.60 move in GS resulted in a $1.85 move in the price of the option. I’m more than happy to buy an option for $7.30 on Thursday
(GS October 155 call) and sell it for $9.20 on Friday. There is no need to hold it to expiration to “see what happens” or hope that the option will quadruple in value. I
buy based on an underlying signal in the stock, and then close out the option based on an underlying signal in the stock.
And that’s the last point on this trade. M ost of the literature on options talks about buying or selling an option and “holding it until expiration.” I rarely do that. As
traders, it is perfectly okay to make a living practicing what I call BASAARP: buying and selling at a reasonable price.
For more advanced options traders, there are of course a couple of ways to play this GS trading signal. The signal gives a high probability that the “stock will move
up a point or two.” Traders who are more familiar with option strategies could also initiate a variety of spreads on this position, some of which I’ll talk about shortly.
This list could go on and on, but hopefully you get the idea. The key is first having a clean signal on the underlying stock, and then stepping in with option strategies
in an attempt to leverage that move. For the most part, I’m fine with a pure directional move, where I just buy a delta 0.70 option and exit that same option based on
the underlying movement of the stock. It’s simple and clean.

The Importance of Implied Volatility Crush, or “Look, Ma, They’re Panicking!”
The biggest mistake newer option traders make is not understanding the role of implied volatility (IV) and how it affects the price of an option. Although a portion of
the option price is calculated based on the underlying stock, another significant portion of the price is based on its implied volatility. Have you ever bought a call
option on AAPL the day before earnings, watched AAPL trade $20.00 higher overnight, and then been unable to sleep because you were mentally counting all the
money you were about to make at the open? Then, the next day, you looked on in horror as your option actually opened lower in price than where you bought it, and
you ended up losing money on the trade instead? WTF? Welcome to the world of implied volatility.
In this case, the market makers know that the earnings report is going to be a high-volatility event, so they price the options much higher to account for this
anticipated volatility. In other words, they are pricing in the expected stock movement. If a trader bought AAPL calls the day before earnings, then the earnings report
came and went, and AAPL opened the next day at about the same price where it had closed, the options price would actually open much lower, even though the stock
didn’t move from the day before. The reason for this is that the event that caused the price gouge has now disappeared. And once that happens, the options price gets
crushed. Hence the term IV crush.
Implied volatility increases with panic, uncertainty, or a looming big event. Implied volatility decreases right after those events, and also remains low when there is
nothing on the horizon to be worried about. For example, implied volatility on AAPL options is currently around 35 percent (this is a number that is available on most
option trading platforms). Right before earnings, this can jump to 100 percent, which essentially triples the premium portion of the options price. In general, a trader
wants to buy options only when implied volatility is low. If implied volatility gets too high, it’s really a losing proposition to buy the option, though it does become
attractive to sell (more on that in a bit).
Just how important is implied volatility? Here is a story courtesy of Jeff Roth, from our office. During the 1987 crash, when the stock market dropped 20 percent
(that is like the Dow dropping more than 2,300.00 points in one day in 2011, a total and utter panic), some of the floor traders who owned call options on the market
actually made money. Uh, say that again? Aren’t calls supposed to make money only when the markets go up? Yes, but if the implied volatility explodes, it increases
the price of all options. On that day it exploded to an unprecedented level … to the point that even the call options, the very options that should have collapsed in
83

value, made money.
Here is one way a trader can utilize this knowledge to her advantage. Figure 5.5 shows an hourly chart of GS (Goldman Sachs). On August 18, 2011, the stock
gapped down more than $3.00 per share. A “gap down” event is a situation where some panic ensues at the open. People who own GS panic to buy puts to protect
themselves, and the gap itself creates uncertainty in the market. There is a window of about 5 to 10 minutes at the open when the put option prices are artificially high
because of all this—in other words, the implied volatility increases. It pops at the open, and the premium price of the option expands accordingly.

Figure 5.5

The thing about gap downs is that most of the news is already in the price once the stock opens. After the gap down and the initial flurry of activity, a stock will
often spend the rest of the day trading in a choppy, quiet range. As things quiet down, the implied volatility drops … and so does the price of the options. This is
called an implied volatility (IV) crush. And there is a way to take advantage of this.
In this particular trade, we aren’t looking to buy puts; we are looking to sell them to someone who is panicking. Since this person is panicking, he will pay up to buy
the puts. We will gladly sell those puts to him, and then buy them back when the market quiets down. The trade goes like this:
1. About half an hour before the cash open at 9:30 p.m. eastern, I scan for stocks that are gapping down of their own accord. This is mostly due to a news event
specific to that stock. In Figure 5.5, we can see at point 1 that we have a nice gap down in GS from the previous day’s close.
2. Within a few minutes after the open, I sell puts that are one strike out of the money (remember, we want to buy in-the-money options but sell out-of-the-money
options). In this case, GS opened at $114.07 and quickly traded lower. The first out-of-the-money puts are the $110.00 strike, and I sell these at current market
prices at point 2.
3. The goal with this trade is to then close it out that day. As we near the close at point 3, GS rallies back toward the $114.00 level. At this point, the uncertainty is no
longer there, and the implied volatility gets “crushed” back to what it had been the day before. The option that I sold for $1.20 drops back down to $0.60 by the
84

close, even though the stock hasn’t really moved since the open.
4. For stop losses, I’m looking at a 1:1 risk/reward ratio. That is, if I’m looking to make $1.00, then I am willing to risk $1.00. It’s important to figure out a stop,
because there will be instances where the stock could just keep falling. Selling a naked option is risky in this regard. In this case, if GS kept selling off and ended up
down $10.00, the option I sold for $1.50 could be trading for $5.00 or even higher. (Of course, I could also buy the next strike out-of-the-money put as protection
against this situation.) As a seller in this case, any price over $1.50 represents a loss, and it’s wise not to let that loss get carried away. This is why selling naked
calls and holding them overnight is inherently dangerous; it is the riskiest option strategy alive. If a trader sells 20 naked call options at $5.00 (collecting
$10,000.00) on a stock, and then wakes up the next morning to see that the stock is up $80.00 a share on a takeover, then that trader is hosed. That option is now
worth $160,000.00, and the guy who sold it has just lost $150,000.00. This is where “verticals” and “credit spreads” come into play, because they protect an
option seller against a “takeover situation.”
To summarize, if I’m buying options, I try to avoid buying them when IV is high. This is typically right after a huge move (wow, AAPL is up $10.00 today—I’d
better buy some out-of-the-money calls!) and right before earnings. I’d rather wait for a “quiet period” to buy options, such as a squeeze play, which forms when a
market is quiet. However, high IV does give a trader the opportunity to sell options. For example, back in the day, there was a period of several years when every time
IBM approached $280.00, it would then sell off. Thus, every time IBM approached this level, the floor traders would sell naked the $280.00 call options on IBM and
collect the extremely high premium. Of course, the retail traders who bought these call options (hoping that IBM would blast through $280.00) got hosed. The saying
for years was, “Sell the 80s and buy a M ercedes.” This party ended the day IBM finally broke through $280.00 and kept on going.
In the GS example, I sold “naked” puts (they weren’t backed by underlying stock) at a high IV, and bought them back when the IV normalized.

How Do You Know When to Hold ‘Em and When to Spread ‘Em?
When you’re trading options, you have two choices: buy an in-the-money option during a quiet IV period for a directional play, or sell options during high-IV periods.
As we have already seen, selling naked options is riskier than buying options, even though they have a higher probability of working in our favor. When buying an
option, we are limited to losing only the amount we paid for the option. If we sell a naked call, our loss is theoretically unlimited, as the stock could go to infinity. Of
course, I have yet to see a stock do that, but in theory it could happen.
Other than an IV crush situation, the main reason to sell options, especially out-of-the-money options, is that they are literally losing premium value each and every
day. Think of the premium portion of the option as a bright, juicy peach … covered with ants. Every day those ants are going to work on that peach, little by little,
stripping away the flesh, until at some point there is nothing left but the seed in the middle. This happens all the way to options expiration until the premium portion
of the option price is zero, and all that’s left is the real or intrinsic value of the option. If that option is out of the money, then it expires worthless.
This premium decay is actually measured by theta, which is one of the “Greeks” that is readily available on most option platforms. If a call option is trading at
$11.50 (total value is $1,150.00) and the theta is 53.80, then this option is losing $53.80 in premium each and every day. That is, the $11.50 option is losing more than
50 cents per day just in premium. To put this in perspective, if the underlying stock traded sideways for three days and didn’t budge in price, this option price would
plummet to $10.00, a loss of $150.00 per contract, even though the stock hasn’t budged. If this option had a delta of 0.50, then the stock would have to move up $1.00
a day just to keep this option at the same price. Even more brutal, if the stock drops $2.00 today, but has a fierce $3.00 rally the next day, your option is back at …
merely breakeven. The closer an option gets to expiration, the higher the theta— that is, the faster the premium erodes. This is critical to keep in mind, and it’s why
buying far-out-of-the-money call options a few weeks out from expiration is such a low-probability event.
And that is also why selling options is so attractive. They literally lose value each and every day. The only problem in selling them is that the risk of loss is great
should the stock have a big move against you. You could literally have 15 winning trades in a row and then get wiped out on the sixteenth trade. The way around this
risk is to initiate what is called a vertical spread. Spreads are attractive because a trader doesn’t have to be “dead right” in order to make money on the trade. I’m not
going to spend a lot of time on this concept because there are entire books written on the subject. Let’s take a quick look.
If we revisit the GS trade from Figure 5.3, I could have initiated a bullish vertical spread on this trade to lessen the risk. I could have still purchased the $155 calls at
$7.30, but instead of having a $2.00 stop based on the underlying movement of the stock, I could at the same time have sold the same amount of $160 calls at the thencurrent price of $3.80. Remember, this out-of-the-money call is all premium, and the ants are eating away daily at that juicy peach. It is losing value each day. Because
of this, had the GS position traded sideways for a few days, I could still have closed out the position for a small profit, making money on the premium erosion. I could
also have
1. Legged into the same spread as described earlier, instead of initiating it all at once. That is, I could have bought in-the-money calls initially, and then, when the
squeeze signal finished the next day, stepped in and sold out-of-the-money calls. Once the signal finishes, a stock will generally trade sideways for a few days. The
small price spurt gooses the IV, thereby increasing the pricing on the out-of-the-money calls. In other words, it’s a good time to sell them. Ideally, the stock then
trades sideways for a few days, and I’m able to close out both legs of the trade for a profit.
2. Sold a naked at-the-money or one strike out-of-the-money put, buying it back when the squeeze signal was done. The risk with this is if GS receives bad news (for
