
CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

FIGURE 6-1

91

USD/JPY (Daily Chart)

TRADING A TREND UNTIL IT BENDS
Currency trading is very different than trading stocks. Companies can
file bankruptcy, like Enron, or go completely out of business, taking their
share value down to zero. On the other hand, with currency trading, there is
no threat of a country going bankrupt. The country is not going to go
bankrupt and turn the currency worthless. What can happen is that severe
economic changes take place between countries, creating dramatic changes
in the currency value of one country versus another. When that happens, it
can create an incredible financial return for savvy, educated currency
traders.
Study the four charts of Figure 6-2. In Figure 6-2A, the euro trended
down 1,300 pips in four months, creating a $13,000 return trading one lot,
or investing $1,000. How would you like to learn how to make this type of
passive income trading long-term positions in currencies? A $10,000
investment would have brought a return of $130,000.
In Figure 6-2B, the Swiss franc (CHF) trended up 1,400 pips in four
months, creating approximately a $13,000 return trading one lot, or investing

FIGURE 6-2

Identifying Trend Direction on Different Currency Pairs

FIGURE 6-2 Continued

94

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

$1,000. The reason is that the CHF does not pay $10 per pip—it has a fluctuating pip value.
In Figure 6-2C, the British pound (GBP) trended down 1,600 pips in
four months, creating approximately a $16,000 return trading one lot, or
investing $1,000.
In Figure 6-2D, the Canadian dollar (CAD) traded against the U.S. dollar (USD) and trended down 2,400 pips in seven months, creating a return
of approximately $19,000 if you were trading one lot, or investing $1,000.
The CAD also has a fluctuating pip value.
Trends appear across all time frames. They appear on monthly, weekly,
and daily charts for long-term trading; they appear from eight-hour charts
down to one-hour charts for day trading; and even on one-hour down to
three- to five-minute charts for scalping.
Learning how to spot a trend that can last several hours for scalping, several days for day trading, and several months for long-term trading can create
an enormous financial return for the skilled and educated trader.
The Forex trades 24 hours a day, and any time during those 24 hours
you can turn on your computer and sit down to trade. The most important
first step of success in trading currencies is determining market direction.
The fact is if you want to make money currency trading, you will have to
take a bullish or bearish position. One or the other—never both! You cannot make money taking a bullish and bearish position at the same time; you
would be in a net zero position, making and losing the same amount of
money with every pip movement.
People trade according to their personalities. Aggressive people love to
scalp, while passive people prefer long-term trading. Figuring out your trading
style is very important before you trade. However, whether you are a passive
trader or an aggressive trader, you need to be able to determine market direction before you trade. You need to learn how to find the current trend before
you enter the market, because you need to trade in the direction of the trend at
all times. Do not fight the trend. Fighting a trend is like trying to swim
upstream through violent forceful rapids. It doesn’t work. Traders can make
many mistakes. The biggest mistake is trading in the wrong direction!
One of the best ways to determine market direction is to have a piece of
trading software, such as MTI 4.0, with an automated trend indicator that
keeps up with the trend direction on any time frames (see Figure 6-3). As
the market moves, the trend lines move with it. You can see how the market
is constantly bouncing off the inner trend line. For example, on April 12,
2005, if the uptrend is going to stay in place when the inner trend line is
broken, the market moves to the outer trend line and that is where the next

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

FIGURE 6-3

95

USD/CHF (Daily Chart)

bounce will take place. It is when the outer trend line is broken that the
majority of the time the market incurs a major reversal, as you see taking
place around August 1, 2005, in Figure 6-3.
If you are an active trader and you use trading software that does not
have a moving trend line indicator, you will need to learn the skill of
drawing correct trend lines—with correct being the operative word. An
incorrectly drawn trend line can mean the difference between making and
losing money on a trade. Drawing trend lines is a skill that can be taught,
but I think it is always best to have an automated trend line indicated on
your software to keep up constantly with the trends you want to monitor.
In this chapter, we focus on finding, drawing, and monitoring three
trend lines:
1.
2.
3.

An inner trend line
An outer trend line
A long-term trend line

These Three trend lines form on all time frames and in both uptrends
and downtrends (see Figure 6-4).

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

96

FIGURE 6-4

Drawing Uptrend Lines

As the market moves, it will only move in one of three directions: up,
down, or sideways. When it moves in any direction, it waves. Those waves
become the emotional enemy of most traders. For some traders, it can take
years to trust those waves and ride them to their end target.

SPOTTING AN UPTREND
If the market is going to move up, or trend up, on any time frame, it will
wave up, creating higher highs, then wave back down, creating higher lows.
I have never seen it go directly to the moon like an Apollo rocket. If it were
to go to the moon, it would wave as it went, creating higher highs and
higher lows. At some point, the trend will end, but until it ends, most
successful traders try to take advantage of the move and take the ride up
until it bends or ends. Believe it or not, most traders make all their money
in trends and lose it all again in consolidation.
As the market trends in any direction, it moves at different speeds, just
like a car. Most trends travel at a 45-degree angle as they move, akin to a
car driving at normal speed. The trend line that is used for that 45-degree
movement is called the outer trend. When a trend moves at a slower pace, a
long-term trend line is created. Every now and then, the trend gets on a
freeway at highway speed, ascending at a greater angle than 45-degrees,
creating what is called an aggressive trend, or the inner trend line. Up and

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

97

down inner trends, outer trends, and long-term trends all develop at the
same time on all time frames (see Figure 6-5).

DRAWING UPTREND LINES
In drawing any uptrend line, you will draw a straight line, connecting all
your visible levels of support without penetrating the bodies or wicks of the
candles (see Figure 6-6). I have found that drawing the uptrend lines across
the wick lows is more accurate than drawing them across the lows of the
candle bodies and allows the trader to project the exact place of the future
bounce (see Figure 6-6).
There is something magical that takes place when the market hits a
trend line. Most traders call it a phenomenon. You will appreciate this phenomenon when it is explained in Chapter 8.
The market is like a large, never-ending river filled with violent rapids
as well as slow-moving, calm waters. The market goes where it wants,
when it wants, and yet it is governed by a set of natural laws, just like a river
FIGURE 6-5

EUR/USD (Various Time Frames)

98

FIGURE 6-6

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

is governed by gravity and obstacles in its path. As the market moves in a
direction, it has a tendency to retrace back to a trend line as if it were being
directed by gravity and obstacles. If any current trend is going to stay in
place, once it retraces back to a trend line, the market will bounce in the
direction of its previous trend, and the trend line will act as the obstacle that
will change the direction of the current movement. In other words, correctly drawn trend lines can project future levels of potential support in an
uptrend and future levels of resistance in a downtrend.

FINDING AND DRAWING INNER, OUTER, AND LONG-TERM
UPTREND LINES
You find and draw inner uptrend lines by finding the last two levels of support and drawing the line from left to right. You find and draw the outer
uptrend line by starting at the far left of the chart and moving to the right,
connecting the majority of your lower levels of support with a straight line.
In other words, you start at the left of the chart and find your lowest wick

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

99

low. From there you draw a straight line at about a 45-degree angle up,
finding the next or higher level of support. You then connect the two wick
lows, or levels of support, with the uptrend line, without penetrating any
candles on the chart. As long as the chart is making higher highs and higher
lows, you stay below the lows of support (see Figure 6-7).
Find and draw the long-term trend line by either compressing the
chart or going to a larger time frame, connecting your levels of support
starting from the far left of the chart moving forward. Because inner and
outer trend lines form on all time frames, you need to look at a daily chart,
where if you happen to see an inner and an outer uptrend line, the inner
uptrend line will represent the most recent up movement for that time
frame. The outer uptrend line represents the up movement over the past
couple of months. If you look at an hourly chart, the inner uptrend line represents the up price movement over the past few hours, whereas the outer
uptrend line represents the up price movement over the past couple of days.
It is always best to compress your charts in the time period you are looking
at to find any additional outer trend lines, or the long-term trend line.

FIGURE 6-7

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

100

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Successful traders constantly monitor all uptrend lines on all time
frames. Why? The movement on smaller time frames will always respond
to the trend lines on larger time frames. This means that if the market is
retracing back down toward an uptrend line on a daily chart, that retracement on the daily chart may be a 200-pip retracement and will form a downtrend on a 60-minute chart. If you only look at the 60-minute chart to do
your analysis, you will be in a strong downtrend and your bias will be
bearish. You will probably enter the market bearish. However, the way
Murphy’s law works, you will be entering at the end of that 60-minute trend,
because as soon as the market from the daily chart hits its up trend line, the
60-minute chart will reverse and begin to rally, and you will be sitting there
scratching your head, losing money and wondering what happened.
Once again, the inner, outer, and long-term uptrend lines can be
found on any chart and on any time frame. Outer trend lines represent
the overall movement on the chart for that time frame, and the inner trend
line represents the most recent movement for the time frame. As long as
the market is above the outer uptrend line, there is an 80 percent chance the
market will continue bullish. You must remember, uptrend lines act as future
levels of support. They are like a floor, and when the market hits them, they
usually bounce back up. If the inner trend line is broken, the market usually
moves to the outer trend line and will bounce back up from there. If the
market breaks the outer trend line, the market will predominately move to
the long-term trend line and bounce back up from there. If the long-term
trend line is broken, as a rule there will be a major reversal (see Figure 6-8).

INCORRECT WAYS OF DRAWING UPTREND LINES
Correctly drawing trend lines will be critical to your success and will help
to prevent you from losing money.
On one of my many trips to South Africa, I flew down to Cape Town to
meet with a gentleman named Joubert who owned a trading company that
was struggling. All their traders were losing way more money than they
were making.
As I walked around the room for the first time, looking at their trading
screens, I saw screen after screen with nothing but incorrectly drawn trend
lines. I said to myself “no wonder they are all losing money!”
As I continued to walk around the room, looking at their screens, I
noticed different trading systems and I wondered what other things
they were doing wrong that they thought they were doing right. I was still

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

FIGURE 6-8

101

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

standing there when, all of a sudden, one trader yelled out: “Swiss is getting ready to hit an uptrend line, get ready to trade it!” I walked over and
looked at his screen only to quickly see, like all the others, he had incorrectly drawn his uptrend line.
I said, “Short the Swiss.” Surprised and shocked, everyone in the room
looked at me as if I were crazy.
He said, “Swiss is hitting an uptrend line, why would you even think of
shorting it? Swiss is still in an uptrend and getting ready to hit a level of
support.”
I calmly replied, “The uptrend is dead on the Swiss, it is not hitting an
uptrend line, it has already broken the inner and outer uptrend lines and
is now moving to the long-term uptrend line, which is about 150 pips away.
I would go short on the Swiss.”
He asked, “What is an inner, outer, and long-term trend line?”
I replied, “That is why I am here.”
He said, “Well, I’m going long.”

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

102

I looked at everyone and said, “I guess this will be a moment of truth
then.” Then I looked at the traders and said, “From the screens I can see you
are all drawing trend lines incorrectly. But if you believe in your uptrend
line, then trade it and go long and I will understand.” Then I said, “Anyone
wanting to make money on Swiss, go short for the next 125 to 150 pips,
then reverse your position and go long for another major move up.”
As I walked into Joubert’s office I held my breath, hoping that the
market would continue to fall as I had predicted, knowing full well that the
market does what it wants to do. Fortunately, Swiss fell exactly 150 pips to
the long-term uptrend line and bounced back up like a basketball.
Trend lines need to be drawn correctly in order to make money trading.
Learning the simple skill of correctly drawing trend lines can help you
learn where to get in and can help you learn how to preserve your equity by
getting out when it begins to turn. The following charts show the wrong
ways to draw uptrend lines. In Figure 6-9, you cannot draw your uptrend
lines through the candles of support—they must be at the bottom wicks of
support.

FIGURE 6-9

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

103

In Figure 6-10, the dotted line was at one point the correct uptrend line,
but the market broke the uptrend line and retraced, continuing in an
uptrend. As long as the market is making higher highs and higher lows, you
cannot draw the line through the candles—you must draw the uptrend line
across the lows of support.
In Figure 6-11, the uptrend is over and has been broken. The market
is reversing and is currently trending down creating lower lows and
lower highs. In this case, with the market creating lower lows and lower
highs, you need to draw the uptrend line across the lows of support, until
the market quits making higher highs and higher lows. The moment
the market stops making higher highs and higher lows and starts
making lower lows and lower highs, that is the moment the market is
reversing.
Figure 6-12 shows that your trend lines must always be straight; they
cannot be crooked. Only automated trend lines from your computer can
wave or be crooked.

FIGURE 6-10

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

FIGURE 6-11

EUR/USD (15-Minute Chart)

FIGURE 6-12

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

105

FINDING AND DRAWING DOWNTREND LINES
One of the neatest things about learning to trade in this market is that
in a downtrend, the market reacts the same way as an uptrend, but in the
opposite direction. That means all the rules are the same, but in the opposite direction. Instead of the market making higher highs and higher lows
as it trends up, it makes lower lows and lower highs as it trends down.
Instead of the market bouncing up off an uptrend line, which is a future
level of support, the market bounces down on a downtrend line, creating a
level of resistance. Downtrend lines act as ceilings for the market and are
future projected levels of resistance.
Once again, the best way to determine market direction is to start drawing trend lines. If the candles are above the uptrend line, the market is probably going to continue up. If the candles are below the downtrend line, the
market is probably going to continue to trend down. Drawing downtrend
lines is a skill that just about anyone can learn.
At the risk of repeating myself, the rules for drawing downtrend lines
are exactly the same as drawing in an uptrend, but in the opposite direction.
It is like turning everything upside down. Instead of drawing the lines
across the lows of support we will draw the lines across the highs of resistance (see Figure 6-13).
FIGURE 6-13

Drawing Downtrend Lines
The Long-term

Outer

Inner

106

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FINDING AND DRAWING INNER, OUTER, AND LONG-TERM
DOWNTREND LINES
You find and draw the inner downtrend line by finding the last two levels of
resistance and drawing the line from left to right. You find and draw the
outer downtrend line by starting at the far left of the chart and moving to the
right, connecting the majority of your higher levels of resistance using a
straight line. In other words, you start at the left of the chart and find the
highest wick high and, from there, you draw a straight line at about a
45-degree angle down, finding the next or lower level of resistance. You
then connect the two wick highs or levels of resistance with the downtrend
line, without penetrating any candles on the chart, following the lower lows
and lower highs. As long as the chart is making lower lows and lower highs,
you will stay above the highs of resistance (see Figure 6-14).
Now find and draw the long-term downtrend line by either compressing
the chart or going to a larger time frame, connecting the levels of resistance
starting at the far left of the chart moving downward. Because inner and outer

FIGURE 6-14

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

107

trend lines form on all time frames, if you look at a daily chart and happen to
see an inner and an outer downtrend line, the inner downtrend line will represent the most recent down movement for that time frame, or the movement
over the past few days. The outer downtrend line will represent the down
movement over the past couple of months. If you are looking at an hourly
chart, the inner downtrend line will represent the down price movement over
the past few hours, and the outer downtrend line may represent the down
price movement over the past couple of days. It is always best to compress
your charts in the time period you are looking at to find any additional outer
downtrend lines or any long-term uptrend or downtrend lines.
Successful traders are constantly aware and monitor all trend lines on
all time frames because the movement on smaller time frames will always
respond to the trend lines on larger time frames. For example, if the market
is retracing back up toward a downtrend line on a daily chart, that retracement on the daily chart may be a 200-pip move up. A 200-pip retracement
from a daily chart will be an uptrend on a 60-minute chart. If you only look
at the 60-minute chart to do your analysis, you will be in a strong uptrend
and your bias will be bullish. You will probably enter the market bullish,
however, the way Murphy’s law works, you will be entering at the end of
that 60-minute trend, because as soon as the market from the daily chart
hits its trend line, the 60-minute chart will reverse and begin to dip, and you
will lose money.
Just like uptrend lines, the inner, outer, and long-term downtrend lines
can be found on any chart and on any time frame (see Figure 6-15).
Outer downtrend lines represent the overall movement on the chart for
that time frame, and the inner trend line represents the most recent movement on that time frame. As long as the market is below the outer downtrend line, there is an 80 percent chance the market will continue bearish.
Downtrend lines act as ceilings and future levels of resistance. If the inner
downtrend line is broken, the market usually moves to the outer downtrend
line and will bounce back down from there. If the market breaks the outer
downtrend line, the market will generally move to the long-term downtrend
line and bounce back down from there. If the long-term trend line is
broken, as a rule there will be a major reversal (see Figure 6-16).

INCORRECT WAYS OF DRAWING DOWNTREND LINES
The same rules apply to drawing incorrect downtrend lines as they do to
drawing incorrect uptrend lines, but in the opposite direction. Traders need

FIGURE 6-15

USD/CHF (Various Time Frames)

FIGURE 6-16

GBP/USD (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

109

to learn how to draw downtrend lines correctly in order to help them project the next bounce down. When you draw downtrend lines, you cannot
draw your lines through the candles of resistance—they must be at the tops
of the wicks of resistance.
As long as the market is making lower lows and lower highs, you cannot draw the line through the candles—you must attach the downtrend line
across the highs of resistance.
The downtrend is over when the market stops making lower lows and
lower highs and begins making higher highs and higher lows. When that
happens, an inner, outer, or long-term downtrend line has been broken. As
a rule, the market will begin to reverse in the opposite direction.

TRENDS INSIDE OF TRENDS
As the market moves, it can create trends inside of trends (see Figure 6-17).
In this chart, you see the market aggressively trending up on the north

FIGURE 6-17

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

110

side of the outer uptrend line, then breaking the inner uptrend line and
reversing. After it reverses, it trends back down, forming the inner downtrend line until it hits the outer uptrend line, where it bounces and begins to
trend back up forming an inner uptrend line again.
