
officials at the SEC. The three of them also placed a call to Gerald Corrigan, the beefy six-foot-four president
of the New York branch of the Federal Reserve.
Using a different set of talking papers, Gutfreund and Strauss told Breeden, McLucas, and Corrigan more of
the story than Salomon’s board had just heard. Mozer had not just overbid. To get around the thirty-five
percent limit, at the February 1991 Treasury auction he had entered a fake bid in the name of a customer and
stashed the bonds he got in Salomon’s account. In fact, he had placed more than one false bid in that auction.
As to why these had not been reported earlier, they explained the delay as an oversight. Yet the SEC and the
Treasury were in the midst of investigating Mozer, for he had pulled a huge squeeze in the May
two-year-note auction. His actions were under intense scrutiny by regulators. That should have been true at
Salomon as well. How could the delay have been an oversight? Now, the regulators had to consider whether
this confession indicated some major systemic problem at Salomon.
No matter what, these admissions were going to be highly embarrassing to the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve. Corrigan was shocked that the firm had not come to him saying that it had already fired Mozer and
created a remedial program that involved instituting all sorts of new controls. But he expected something like
that to be announced within twenty-four or forty-eight hours, after which he could “keep them on probation
for a while and hope that would be the end of it.” He told Gutfreund and Strauss, “patiently and
dispassionately,” as he recalls, that they had an immediate obligation to release this information to the public.
Based on what he knew, he surmised that the incident could blow up into a “very, very, very significant
problem.”12 It seemed to him, however, that Strauss and Gutfreund did not fully grasp this. Indeed, with
hindsight, the fact that Gutfreund had gone off to London, thus placing his ability to participate in the calls
with Buffett, Munger, and the other directors in the hands of an airline, was itself a telling sign.
The next day, Friday, August 9, Buffett was enjoying himself with Astrid and the Blumkins, walking along
the board sidewalks of Virginia City, the old Western gold-rush town. He called in to his office. Nothing
urgent was happening. Nobody at Salomon had called him. Salomon had put out the press release describing
the events in fairly bland terms. The stock had fallen five percent, however, to $34.75.
Buffett called Munger on Saturday at his cabin on Star Island in Minnesota. Munger flatly told him a much
more detailed and alarming story. Feuerstein, reciting from the list of “talking points,” had said that “one part
of the problem has been known since last April.” While these same words had been read to the other
directors, including Buffett, they had the effect of technically informing without really enlightening.13 But
Munger picked up instantly on bullshit legalese and the passive voice, which irritated him. What did that
mean, “has been known”? What exactly had been known? And by whom?14 When pressed, Feuerstein gave
Munger a much fuller description of events, similar to what Corrigan had been told.15
As Feuerstein recounted, Mozer had gotten a letter from the Treasury Department in April saying they were
investigating one of his bids.16 Realizing that the game was up, on April 25 he had gone to his boss, John
Meriwether, and made a confession of sorts. In February, to get around the thirty-five percent limit, he had
not only bid in Salomon’s name, he had also submitted phony bids under real customers’ names.17 Mozer
swore to Meriwether that this was the only time, and he would never do it again.
Meriwether had recognized immediately that this was “career-threatening,” had said so to Mozer, and had
reported the situation to Feuerstein and Strauss. On April 29, the three of them went to Gutfreund and told
him what Mozer had confessed. Gutfreund, they said later, had been red-faced and pissed off when he heard
the news.
Therefore, in April, Gutfreund knew. Strauss knew. Meriwether knew. Feuerstein, the general counsel, knew.
They all knew.
Feuerstein had informed Gutfreund at the time that Mozer’s actions appeared criminal. He didn’t believe that
the firm technically had a legal reporting requirement. Still, Feuerstein was sure that Salomon would run
seriously afoul of the regulators if it didn’t do something, and therefore the Federal Reserve must be told.
Gutfreund said it would be taken care of. Curiously, however, no specific plans were made to march down to

the Federal Reserve’s ornate Italianate building and give Jerry Corrigan the news. Moreover, having
concluded that the phony bid was a “one-time, aberrant act,” they had decided to leave Mozer in charge of
the government desk. Hearing this, “Well, that’s just thumb-sucking,” Munger had said. “People do that all
the time.” He later explained that by thumb-sucking he meant “sitting there thinking and doggling, musing,
and consulting, when you should be acting.”18
Munger told Buffett that he had challenged the press release: Shouldn’t management’s prior knowledge be
disclosed? Feuerstein said that, yes, it should be, but the decision had been made not to because Salomon’s
management thought that disclosure would threaten the company’s funding. Salomon had tens of billions of
short-term commercial paper debt that rolled over day by day. If the word got out, lenders would refuse to
renew. To Munger, “funding difficulties” was shorthand for “financial panic.”19 Lacking the leverage to
insist, he had given in, but he and Buffett now agreed that more disclosure was required. They mentally
braced themselves for what would follow.
Two days later, on Monday morning, August 12, the Wall Street Journal reported the alleged details, with a
blaring headline: “The Big Squeeze: Salomon’s Admission of T-Note Infractions Gives Market a Jolt—Firm’s
Share of One Auction May Have Reached 85%; Investigations Under Way—How Much Did Bosses Know?”
It mentioned the possibility of “civil charges of market manipulation, violations of the antifraud provisions of
securities law, misrepresentations to federal authorities,” “books and records violations,” and “criminal
charges” for committing “both wire and mail fraud.”20
Gutfreund called Buffett, sounding calm. Buffett thought that he seemed to believe the whole situation meant
“a few points on the stock.” In light of the disastrous article, Buffett thought this attitude was unrealistic, a
sign that Gutfreund believed the whole affair could somehow be finessed.21 It seemed of a piece with
Gutfreund’s unwarranted composure the previous week. Buffett pressed for more disclosure. Salomon’s
treasury division was beginning to have trouble rolling over its commercial paper, meaning the firm’s lenders
were starting to show signs of nervousness.22
Meanwhile, Munger was trying to get in touch with Wachtell, Lipton’s Marty Lipton, who was John
Gutfreund’s indispensable best friend as well as Salomon’s outside counsel. So entwined with Salomon was
Lipton that the speed-dial buttons on Donald Feuerstein’s phone rang his wife, the Sotheby’s and Christie’s
auction houses, and Marty Lipton, not necessarily in that order.23 Munger knew that Lipton and his
telephone were as inseparable as Buffett and his Wall Street Journal. Cell phones still being so rare,
however, that even name partners of major law firms did not use them, Munger relied on Wachtell, Lipton’s
office, which, he would later observe to the SEC, had the “finest phone system for reaching Marty Lipton at
any hour of the day or night that I have ever seen in the history of the world…. I think even if he was
engaged in sexual intercourse, you could get through to him.”24
Whether Lipton was horizontal when reached by Munger was never specified, but Munger badgered him for
a follow-up press release, saying the first had been inadequate. Lipton agreed that the board would hold a
telephone meeting to discuss it on Wednesday.
Not surprisingly, Jerry Corrigan at the Federal Reserve was even less satisfied than Munger with Salomon’s
muted response. On Monday, August 12, he decided to have Peter Sternlight, one of his executive vice
presidents, draft a letter to Salomon Inc. stating that the firm’s actions had called into question its “continuing
business relationship” with the Fed, which was “deeply troubled” by the failure to make a timely disclosure
of what the firm had learned. Salomon would have ten days to report on all “irregularities, violations, and
oversights” that it had discovered.
In light of Corrigan’s earlier conversation with Strauss and Gutfreund, this letter would be a death threat. If
the Fed cut off Salomon’s business relationship with the government, customers and lenders would desert in
droves. The consequences would be huge and immediate.
Salomon had the United States’ second-largest balance sheet—larger than Merrill Lynch, Bank of America,

or American Express. Nearly all of its loans consisted of short-term debt that was callable by lenders in days
or at most weeks. Only $4 billion of equity supported $146 billion of debt. Dangling off the side of the
balance sheet on any given day were tens more billions, perhaps as many as $50 billion a day, of uncleared
trades—transactions executed, but not yet settled. These would stall midair. Salomon also had many
hundreds of billions of derivative obligations not recorded anywhere on its balance sheet—interest-rate
swaps, foreign-exchange swaps, futures contracts—a massive and intricate daisy chain of obligations with
counterparties all over the world, many of whom in turn had other interrelated contracts outstanding, all part
of a vast entangled global financial web. If the funding disappeared, Salomon’s assets had to be sold—but
while the funding could disappear in a few days, the assets would take time to liquidate. The government had
no national policy to provide loans to teetering investment banks because they were “too big to fail.” The
firm could melt into a puddle overnight.25
Corrigan sat back in his chair, confident that once Salomon received Sternlight’s letter, management would
understand the loaded gun cocked at its head, and would respond accordingly.
Within Salomon, after the press release and the Wall Street Journal story, rumors were running wild. Late
Monday afternoon, it held an all-hands-on-deck meeting in its huge auditorium on its lowest floor. Nearly
five hundred people crowded in, while hundreds, maybe more, from upstairs and from Salomon offices
around the world, watched on television screens. Gutfreund and Strauss walked the audience through a
baked-Alaska version of events, a crisp well-done meringue of a surface that hid the chilly surprise.
Afterward, Bill McIntosh, the head of the bond department, was summoned upstairs to Gutfreund’s office,
where he found Gutfreund, Strauss, and Marty Lipton, “three very scared men.” Earlier in the day he had
been calling for Gutfreund’s head, but unexpectedly, they asked what he thought of the situation. McIntosh
demanded more explanation; he felt the all-hands version and the press release had been misleading.26 He
and assistant general counsel Zach Snow ended up getting drafted to write another press release.
The next morning, McIntosh and Snow began drafting. Around midday, McIntosh went to tell Deryck
Maughan, the vice chairman of investment banking, who had just come back from running the firm’s Asian
operations, what was going on. Maughan knew he was hearing the harbinger of a disaster. He went to find
Snow and pounced on him, saying you’d better be telling the whole truth to a vice chairman.
But Snow had no intention of hiding anything from Maughan. He started talking, and a tale unfolded of what
had transpired behind the scenes. He explained that in April, after Mozer made his first confession about the
February auction, Meriwether had pleaded that Mozer not be fired, even though Feuerstein had said he
believed Mozer’s actions were criminal in nature. Snow had been told—in confidence—about the situation.
A month later, Mozer still ran the government desk; Feuerstein was nagging Gutfreund to come clean;
Gutfreund was telling him that he would. But in fact no one had told the government. Meanwhile,
Meriwether was charged with keeping an eye on Mozer, who had supposedly reformed.
Then Mozer had asked for funding to bid on more than one hundred percent of the two-year-note auction in
late May. Even though some of the funding was supposedly to put in bids for customers, John Macfarlane,
Salomon’s treasurer, had become alarmed. He thought it an obvious red flag and called a meeting with Snow
and Meriwether. Snow had gone to Feuerstein, his boss, who agreed that it was an outrageous request. They
had decided not to give Mozer the funds.27
But Mozer had secretly juggled the bids and money anyway.28 Managing to evade his overseers, he put in
one suspicious bid and pulled off an enormous auction coup. Salomon wound up with eighty-seven percent of
the Treasury bonds, and it and a small group of customers controlled the two-year notes afterward. The price
shot up.29 Others’ losses from the “squeeze” topped $100 million, and several small firms suffered so
severely that they filed for bankruptcy.30
Within Salomon, the squeeze had caused considerable angst. In the press, the firm was painted by its
competitors as the pirate of Wall Street. The board members, including Buffett, had expressed outrage at a
meeting that Salomon had cornered the market for two-year notes. Feuerstein had had Snow commence an
internal investigation of the squeeze in June. As it turned out, Mozer had held a dinner with two hedge-fund

customers right before the auction, and these customers had placed bids involved in the squeeze. With
hindsight, the dinner pointed to possible collusion and market manipulation. But in the absence of proof,
Mozer explained it away.31 Gutfreund had set up a meeting to see his overlords at the Treasury and the Fed
to mend fences over the squeeze. When he went to see Glauber in mid-June, he sat on the sofa puffing a
cigar. He offered a mea culpa to Glauber for the aftereffects of the squeeze and offered to cooperate with the
Treasury—but defended Mozer against allegations of intentionally rigging the May auction. And he made no
mention of what else he knew, leaving out anything about Mozer’s false bids in the earlier auction. In
response to the squeeze and to the earlier run-ins with Mozer, however, unbeknownst to anyone at Salomon,
the SEC and the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department began investigating the firm anyway.
About a week after the Glauber meeting, Gutfreund, Strauss, and Meriwether met to consider whether the
firm should now come clean with the Treasury about the February auction. Because the hue and cry over the
squeeze had not abated, they decided to keep silent. They felt the time was not right. Days later, the SEC sent
Salomon a letter asking for information about the May auction. This was the first indication that the problem
of the two-year note auction might be escalating instead of fading away. Anyone receiving this inquiry letter
might reasonably have gotten nervous about the SEC’s sudden interest in the operations of the
government-bond trading desk.
Two days later, Gutfreund had flown to Omaha to visit Buffett, while on his way to Las Vegas to see some
property that Salomon had financed. In telling the backstory to Maughan, Snow, who did not know about this
trip, left it out. Buffett would later fill in these details.
“I picked him up at the airport. John was in the office for about an hour and a half. He spent about an hour
making some calls, then we talked for about half an hour. He was sort of pacing around. We didn’t talk
about anything in the end. It’s a pain in the neck to stop in Omaha, yet he really had nothing to say.”
Somewhat baffled as to the purpose of the visit, Buffett took Gutfreund to a quick lunch, then for a visit to
the recently acquired Borsheim’s jewelry store, near the Furniture Mart. The proprietor, Ike Friedman, Mrs.
B’s nephew, was cast in the same mold, and like her, somewhat larger than life.
Friedman took Gutfreund to Borsheim’s “center island,” where the really expensive goods were displayed.
Gutfreund picked out a $60,000 item for Susan. It mattered to Buffett, Gutfreund said later, that he had made
a purchase.32 Then he glanced at the expensive watches strategically displayed just behind the center island,
and strolled over to look at the merchandise. Friedman preferred selling very expensive jewelry to
timepieces. “Oh, watches,” he said to Gutfreund. “You lose them, you break them. Why pay a lot of money
for a watch?” He looked at the fancy wristwatch on Gutfreund’s wrist and asked Gutfreund what he paid for
it. Gutfreund told him.
“$1,995,”33 Friedman repeated. “Well. You got taken, John.”
“And you should have seen the look on John’s face.”
Wearing the watch on which he got taken, Gutfreund returned to New York at the end of June to present the
burgundy-colored satin-lined Borsheim’s box to Susan.
Within days—by early July—the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department formally notified Salomon that
it was investigating the squeeze in the May two-year-note auction, which the letter from the SEC had
inquired about. Gutfreund now got serious, said Snow, and hired Marty Lipton’s firm Wachtell, Lipton,
Salomon’s outside counsel, to begin its own investigation, on behalf of Salomon, of the circumstances
surrounding the May squeeze.34 People within Salomon had mixed views about the squeeze. Some said the
Treasury market was inherently designed to be collusive. The job of a dealer was to work with its customers
to distribute huge blocks of bonds into the market. Little squeezes happened all the time. This one was big. So
what? The Treasury was picking on Salomon. It was the years of hubris, the wildness depicted in Liar’s
Poker, the gradual erosion of power that had made Salomon a punching bag.35

But others were furious that Mozer had once again defied the Treasury. They were baffled that he would pull
a huge squeeze when it was well-known that he and Basham were already at loggerheads. Later, these
questions would increase. Why did Mozer—on probation, told his behavior had been “probably criminal”
—taunt the Treasury so outlandishly that his coup splashed headlines all over the financial press, in a way
guaranteed to draw even more attention to himself?36
Snow, who reported to Feuerstein on trading operations, had been in charge of the internal investigation
involving the May squeeze. In June, he was out of the office some of the time with knee surgery, and neither
he nor Feuerstein was involved in the Glauber meeting, nor knew about the subsequent decision to further
delay reporting Mozer’s actions.37 But once Snow returned full-time to the office in July, increasingly he
started to realize that he was out of the loop. People began disappearing into meetings. The situation preyed
on his mind. One night he had a dream. He walked into Feuerstein’s office the next morning and said he had
dreamed that he and Feuerstein had actually called Warren Buffett and told him about the false bid, because
they were both so frustrated that Gutfreund and Strauss had done nothing about it.
Feuerstein looked at Snow cross-eyed. “No, no,” he said. “It won’t come to that.” Feuerstein was still trying
to influence Gutfreund. Going to Buffett would be throwing that relationship away.38 Snow had not intended
his account of the dream to come across as a subtle threat to bypass his boss and call Buffett, but he thought
Feuerstein seemed to have taken it that way.39
A few days after beginning their work, the Wachtell, Lipton investigators had returned with a preliminary
report on the May squeeze. Only now, however, were the investigators told that senior management had
known since April that Mozer had submitted an unauthorized bid in the February auction.
With hindsight, Salomon’s actions looked far worse. After learning of Mozer’s false bid in February, which
Feuerstein had said was criminal in nature, management had taken Meriwether’s vouching for Mozer and
Mozer’s word that he had never done it before, without investigating further or disciplining Mozer in any
way. They had left him in place, which allowed the May squeeze to occur. Once it did occur, Salomon was in
more trouble, because telling the government they knew about Mozer’s previous phony bids but had only
now reported them would probably have conveyed the sense that Salomon was a gang of thieves. Worst of
all, Gutfreund had met with Bob Glauber in mid-June about the May squeeze, but had said nothing about all
these earlier events. Now, as Snow explained to Maughan, when things started blowing up, everyone
involved started excusing the original delay by saying the matter was a single minor event that caused no
customer any harm, cost the government nothing, and didn’t make sense, even from the standpoint of the
trader involved.40 Given the pressure of business, Gutfreund said, he simply hadn’t deemed it that
important.41
Unfortunately, he was wrong about that. The Wachtell investigators had discovered that the February auction
was not the only one that Mozer had rigged. They now knew that five auctions had been compromised.42
Two of these false bids had only just been unearthed. Snow concluded by telling Maughan about the previous
evening’s meeting with all the inside and outside lawyers that had followed the half-baked explanation given
to all employees. Snow had argued that management’s prior knowledge had to be disclosed. He was batted
down. “I’m going to take a lot of heat for this,” Gutfreund told him. “I don’t see why you can’t do your
part.”43
Maughan had been deeply concerned even before hearing all this new information from Snow. Seven days
had passed since the first press release—seven days that included a salvo of stories in the media, the firm’s
falling stock price, trouble rolling over the commercial paper, the discovery of new false bids, and Gutfreund
and Strauss feeding baked Alaska to the troops at an internal meeting. By the time Snow finished telling him
all of this additional history of what Mozer had done and what others had not done, Maughan blew up and
started pounding Snow to make sure there was nothing else. Then he went down to the trading floor and
confronted Meriwether, Mozer’s boss. “What the hell is going on, John?” he asked.
Meriwether hung his head. “It’s too late,” he said. He refused to talk further.44
