
Warren to look after part of his aunt’s and mother’s money.6 Ever since, Warren had been investing it with
utmost caution in government bonds under a different, more modest fee arrangement.
He could have invited Gottschaldt and Elberfeld into the partnership, but he felt that it was unfair to charge
them a higher fee than they were already paying. Of course, if the partnership was the sure thing he thought it
was, that meant he was depriving them of a golden opportunity. If something went wrong with the
investments, however, his aunt and his sister and Doc Thompson would never condemn him. He wasn’t so
sure about anybody else.
Acting as a “fiduciary” meant to Warren that any responsibility he took on would be unlimited. To lay out
the ground rules for his partners, he called the first official meeting of Buffett Associates on the very day he
founded the partnership. Chuck got them a reservation for dinner at the Omaha Club, the best place in town
if you wanted a private room. Warren meant to carefully define and limit his responsibilities; one
responsibility he was not assuming was picking up the check for dinner. He told Chuck to pass the word that
everyone was going dutch.7 He then used the dinner as an opportunity to talk not just about the partnership’s
ground rules, but about the stock market. Already he viewed the partnership as a teaching exercise.
The partners quickly split into two camps: the teetotalers and the rest. From his end of the table, Doc
Thompson suggested, in a paternal way, that the other faction was going to hell. It was Warren, however,
who was the preacher that night; they were there for him to hold forth.
“I started with an agreement with the investors, which has not needed to be changed much as we’ve
evolved. All kinds of good things have flowed out of that, you know. It is the least complicated thing I can
imagine.
“I gave them a little summary of the ground rules: Here’s what I can do. Here’s what I can’t do. And here
are some things I don’t know whether I can do or not. Here’s how I’ll judge myself. It was fairly short. If
you don’t feel this way you shouldn’t join, because I don’t want you unhappy while I’m happy or vice
versa.”8
After Warren launched the partnership, the Buffetts returned to New York for their final summer. Warren
would be helping Ben Graham and Jerry Newman as the partnership wound down. Mickey Newman was now
the CEO of Philadelphia & Reading, a full-time job. With neither he nor Warren available to serve as general
partner, Graham had decided to shut down the firm.9 Warren had rented a rustic seaside cottage on Long
Island for his family from his friend Tom Knapp. The house, part of a group built for people fleeing an
influenza epidemic many years before, sat on West Meadow Beach, near Stony Brook on Long Island’s
North Shore, and faced Connecticut, across Long Island Sound.
During the week, Warren saved money by bunking in the city with his stockbroker friend Henry Brandt,
whose wife and children were also summering on Long Island. On the weekends he joined his family at the
shore and worked in a tiny bedroom in the house. The neighbors told the Knapps they never saw him.10
While Warren worked, Susie, who was afraid of the water and never swam, beachcombed with the kids along
the bluffs near the water’s edge. Since the cottage had minimal plumbing facilities, the Buffetts fetched
drinking water from a spring across the street, and Susie bathed Little Susie, now almost three, Howie,
eighteen months old, and herself in the unheated outdoor shower.
That summer brought them two pieces of shocking news. The father of Warren’s boyhood friend Bob Russell
had committed suicide. And Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, the mother and aunt of Fred
Kuhlken, Warren’s friend from Columbia, called to say that Fred had been killed in Portugal after his car
skidded eighty feet and rammed into a cork tree.11
***

As the summer ended, the Buffetts made their plans to return to Omaha. The extreme caution Warren
displayed in trying never to disappoint anyone stood in sharp contrast with his risky decision to pursue an
investing career working on his own outside of New York City. The market was composed of relationships,
people who lunched together at the Stock Exchange or played poker once a week. It hummed along on tips
and rumors, gossip passed on by personal contacts and connections made at investor luncheons, in bars, on
squash courts, at chance meetings at university-club coat checks. While every small regional city had its little
brokerage firm or two—like Buffett-Falk—these were not important players. The hinterlands were staffed by
stockbrokers—prescriptionists who survived or prospered by filling the scrips written by the Manhattan
money doctors. At that time, no serious American money man worked anywhere but New York City. To
leave all this, to go it alone, to think of getting really rich anywhere farther than a limo ride from Wall and
Broad was a truly bold and venturesome stroke.
Indeed, for a college graduate to become self-employed, to work at home, to work alone, was strikingly
unusual in the 1950s. The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit was the guy who got ahead.12 Businessmen joined a
big organization—the bigger the better—then competed with polished ferocity for the best-paying job on the
steady climb up the ladder of success, trying not to break a sweat or a golf club along the way. They
competed to amass not riches but power—or at the very least to buy the right kind of house in a good
suburban neighborhood, to get a new-model car every year, and to pave the way for a lifetime of security.
In his choice of occupation, therefore, Warren was as rare as a Buffett who voted for Democrats. Well aware
of her husband’s unusual qualities—if not of the apparent riskiness of the course he was charting—Susie
arranged for the movers to come, said good-bye to the neighbors, sent out the change-of-address cards, had
the telephone service turned off, and packed up their belongings. She flew to Omaha with Little Susie and
Howie and moved them all into the house Warren had rented from Chuck Peterson on Underwood Avenue.
He had chosen an inviting gray two-story Tudor with picturesque half-beams, a big stone chimney, and a
cathedral ceiling. Even the decision to rent a home had been unconventional; owning a home was the
quintessence of what most young Americans aspired to in the mid-1950s. The hopelessness of the Depression
and the dreary wartime days of making do were fading into memory. Americans stocked their new houses
with all the exciting new features and appliances that were suddenly available: washer-dryers, freezers,
dishwashers, electric mixers. The Buffetts had plenty of money to buy all these things. But Warren had other
plans for his capital, so they rented. And the house they were renting, while attractive, was just barely big
enough for them. Howie at almost two would have to sleep in a largish closet.
As Susie began to settle her family in Omaha, Warren closed out his own affairs in New York. He packed up
his own desk and files, and sent out his own notices to the companies whose stocks he owned to ensure that
the dividend checks followed him to Omaha. Then he got in his car and started driving back to Nebraska,
visiting companies along the way.
“I did this zigzag across the country. I just thought it was a great time to hit these companies. I drove
through Hazleton, Pennsylvania, and visited the Jeddo-Highland Coal Company. I went through
Kalamazoo, and saw the Kalamazoo Stove and Furnace Company. This little odyssey went through
Delaware, Ohio, and I visited Greif Bros. Cooperage. That was a company selling at a ridiculously cheap
price”—a company he had first discovered in 1951 by flipping through the Moody’s Manuals. He and his
father had each bought two hundred shares and put them in their little partnership.
Warren arrived in Omaha toward the end of the summer and found that he was needed at home. Little Sooz,
calm and timid, sat watching while her brother’s inexhaustible demands vacuumed up her mother’s
energies.13 But in the evenings she wanted her father; she was now afraid to go to bed. When they arrived at
the house on Underwood, a moving-company man wearing glasses had spoken to her, and though she did not
remember his saying anything untoward, she had frozen in terror and was now convinced that the “glasses
man” lurked just outside her bedroom, next to a wrought-iron balcony that overlooked the living room.
Warren had to inspect the balcony every night and reassure her that it was safe to go to sleep.
After he had taken care of the “glasses man,” he went down the hall to the tiny sunporch off his and Susie’s
bedroom and got down to business, either partnership work or preparing his lessons—for the first thing he
had done when he returned to Omaha, besides forming a partnership, was to take on two classes for the fall

semester at the University of Omaha: Investment Analysis for Men Only, and Intelligent Investing. Before
long he would add a third course, Investing for Women. The terrified boy who so recently couldn’t even
strike up a conversation in a Dale Carnegie class had vanished. In his place was a still-awkward young man
who nonetheless made a striking impression as he moved restlessly around the room, exhorting the students
and spouting an inexhaustible series of facts and figures. Dressed as usual in a cheap suit that looked a couple
of sizes too large, he seemed more like a youngish preacher from some missionary sect than a college
lecturer.
Despite his brilliance, Warren was still very immature. For Susie, his helplessness at home meant that he was
like having a third child to care for. His personality and interests also shaped their social life. In Omaha, a
midsize Midwestern city with relatively few important cultural institutions, weekends were filled with
weddings, parties, teas, and charity events. The Buffetts lived a much quieter life than most young married
couples of their class and era. Although Susie began to climb the ladder of the Junior League and they joined
a “gourmet group”—where Warren politely asked each month’s hostess to make him a hamburger—they
socialized with friends less in crowds than in ones and twos. Most of their social life took place at dinner with
other couples, in small groups, or at occasional dinner parties where Warren could talk about stocks. It was
always the same: Warren entertained, either holding forth to an audience on stocks or playing the ukulele.
Under Susie’s tutelage, he could now exchange remarks about other subjects more easily than before, but his
mind remained fixated on making money. During meals and parties at home, he often fled small talk by
leaving the table to go upstairs. But unlike Ben Graham, he was not upstairs reading Proust; he was working.
As for Susie, she knew little and cared less about what Warren did. “I used to write ‘security analyst’ for his
job, and people thought he checked burglar alarms,” she said.14
All Warren’s recreations remained repetitive, competitive, or, better yet, both. He found playing bridge with
Susie unendurable because she wanted the other side to win, and soon sought other partners.15 His mind was
like a restless monkey; to relax, he needed an active form of concentration that could keep the monkey
occupied. Ping-Pong, bridge, poker, golf all absorbed him and took his mind off money temporarily. But he
never hosted backyard barbecues, lazed around a swimming pool, stargazed, or simply went for a walk in the
woods. A stargazing Warren would have looked at the Big Dipper and seen a dollar sign.
All of this, plus his nonconformist streak, meant that Warren was not a “joiner,” sitting through committee
and board meetings. Still, family loyalty did lead him to say yes when his uncle Fred Buffett came over to the
house and asked him to join the Rotary Club. He was fond of Fred, proprietor of the Buffett grocery; he and
Fred went bowling at the Rotary (repetitive, competitive)—and besides, his grandfather had been president
of the Rotary.
On the other hand, when asked to join the Knights of Ak-Sar-Ben, a more important group of civic leaders
that combined philanthropy, business, boosterism, and social activities, he said no. For a budding money
manager who needed to raise funds for his business, that was like thumbing his nose in the faces of the men
who ran Omaha—an act of cocky self-assurance, even arrogance, which set him apart from much of his
social set. His sister Doris had made her debut as a Princess of Ak-Sar-Ben. The sister of his brother-in-law
and former roommate, Truman Wood, had been Queen of Ak-Sar-Ben. Friends like Chuck Peterson were
regulars on its social circuit. As a Congressman, Howard had been obligated to join. But Warren found social
hierarchy repugnant and he disdained the smoke-filled backroom clubbiness and conformity of the
Ak-Sar-Ben crowd. These were the people who had looked down on his father as the “son of a grocer man.”
Warren reveled in the chance to spurn Ak-Sar-Ben, and disparaged it with withering comments.
Susie had her own gentler brand of nonconformity. She began to bring Warren into her unusually diverse
network of friends. Since high school, she had prided herself on her openness and her commitment to
inclusiveness at a time when most people chose friends who were religious, cultural, ethnic, and economic
clones. Unlike her own family, Susie did not think this way, and many of her friends—and by this time many
of Warren’s—were Jewish. In segregated Omaha—not to mention within the Buffett and Thompson families
—choosing to cross these social lines was a bold, even defiant act. Susie was aware of this, just as she had
been aware in high school and college that dating a Jew was considered shocking. Although she came from a
prominent family, social status had value to her mostly as a way to make her friends feel more included.
Warren, the anti-elitist, found this aspect of Susie highly attractive. And the Jewish friends he’d made at

Columbia and while working for Graham-Newman had opened his eyes to anti-Semitism.
In contrast to Susie, Warren’s mother had always been obsessed with fitting in. Leila had researched her
ancestry and joined the Daughters of the American Revolution and the Huguenot Society, perhaps searching
the past for a stability that she could not find in the present, and certainly not in her immediate family. She
had recently received word from Norfolk State Hospital that her sister Bernice had thrown herself into the
river in an apparent suicide attempt. Leila, now responsible for Bernice and their mother, handled their
affairs in businesslike fashion, striving to be a dutiful daughter while keeping some distance from the family’s
problems. She and her sister Edie went to visit Bernice and their mother periodically, Leila with less
enthusiasm. The Stahl family’s history of mental illness was a threatening and shameful topic in the Buffett
family, just as it was in society as a whole at the time. Ozzie and Harriet Nelson, Ward and June Cleaver, the
prototypical white Anglo-Saxon Protestant American families so ubiquitous on television that they seemed to
define an idyllic sort of normality, did not have mentally ill or suicidal family members. The Buffetts’
perception of the family history was further muddied by uncertainty over Stella’s and Bernice’s diagnoses.
The doctors could give only vague descriptions of what were clearly serious problems. Obviously, however,
the mental illness was inherited, and it manifested in adulthood. Warren and Doris, who were close to their
aunt Edie, knew that their mother had grown apart from her as Edie, too, had become more impulsive and
moody. They had some suspicions that Leila’s own behavior and personality might be at least partly related
to the family lineage. The ticking clock hung over them, and they examined themselves for any signs of
abnormality.
Warren, who desperately wanted to be but had never felt “normal,” assuaged his anxiety with statistics,
reasoning that the mysterious disorder seemed to affect only the family’s women. He never dwelled on the
unpleasant. He would later come to think of his memory as functioning like a bathtub. The tub filled with
ideas and experiences and matters that interested him. When he had no more use for information,
whoosh—the plug popped up, and the memory drained away. If new information about a subject appeared, it
would replace the old version. If he didn’t want to think about something at all, down the drain it went.
Certain events, facts, memories, and even people appeared to vanish. Painful memories were the first to be
flushed. The water went somewhere, and along with it might go context, nuance, and perspective, but what
mattered was that it was gone. The bathtub memory’s efficiency freed up enormous amounts of space for the
new and the productive. At times, however, disturbing thoughts did bubble up from somewhere, as when he
expressed concern for other people: for example, several friends who cared for mentally ill wives. Buffett
thought of the bathtub memory as a helper that allowed him to “look forward,” rather than “looking
backward” all the time like his mother. And it allowed him, at the age of twenty-six, to ruminate in depth on
business to the exclusion of almost everything else—in pursuit of his goal of becoming a millionaire.
The fastest way to that goal was to raise more money to manage. In August, he went back to New York to
attend the final shareholders’ meeting of the Graham-Newman Corporation. Everyone important on Wall
Street seemed to be present at Graham-Newman’s wake. Investor Lou Green, his head wreathed in clouds of
foul-smelling smoke from an enormous stogie, towered over them from his six-foot-four height.16 He accused
Graham of making a big mistake. Why had Graham and Newman not developed talent? he asked. “They’d
been working here for thirty years building up this business,” he declared to everyone standing nearby. “And
all they would have had to run it was this kid named Warren Buffett. He’s the best they could come up with.
And who’d want to ride with him?”17
Warren’s long-ago mistake of telling Lou Green that he bought Marshall-Wells “because Ben Graham bought
it” had now come back to dilute Graham’s endorsement of him in front of an important audience, with
unknowable consequences. Yet Graham’s imprimatur had already paid him one important dividend. Homer
Dodge, a Harvard-educated physics professor who was the president of Norwich University in Northfield,
Vermont, until 1951, and a long-time investor in Graham-Newman, had gone to Graham and asked him what
he should do with his money now that Graham-Newman was shutting down. “And Ben said, ‘Well, I’ve got
this fellow who used to work with us that might be a possibility.’”
So one hot Midwestern day that July, Dodge had stopped in Omaha on his way to a vacation out west, a blue
canoe strapped to the roof of his woody wagon. “He talked to me for a while and said, ‘Would you handle
my money?’ And I set up a separate partnership for him.”

Dodge gave him $120,000 to manage in the Buffett Fund, Ltd., on September 1, 1956.18 That was more
money than the original Buffett Associates partnership—an enormous step*19 that made Warren a
professional money manager, not just a former stockbroker running a little money for his family and friends.
Now he had invested for someone recommended by Ben Graham.19
“Later in the year, a friend of mine, John Cleary, who used to be my dad’s secretary in Congress, saw in a
legal notice that I’d formed this partnership and asked me what it was. I told him about it, and he said,
‘Well, how about doing it with me?’ So we formed something called B-C, Ltd. That was the third
partnership. He put in fifty-five thousand dollars.”20
With the formation of the B-C partnership on October 1, 1956, Warren was now managing more than half a
million dollars, including his own money, which was not in any of the partnerships. He operated out of a tiny
study at home that could be entered only by passing through the bedroom. He worked odd hours, a night owl
like Susie, reading annual reports in his pajamas, drinking Pepsi-Cola and eating Kitty Clover potato chips,
enjoying the freedom and solitude. He pored over the Moody’s Manuals looking for ideas, absorbing statistics
on company after company. During the day, he went to the library and read newspapers and industry trade
magazines. As with his boyhood paper route, he took care to handle everything of value personally, a
pleasure in and of itself. He typed his own letters on an IBM typewriter, carefully lining up his letterhead
sheet on the carriage. To make copies he slid sheets of blue carbon paper and tissue-thin onionskin behind the
first page. He did all his own filing. He did the bookkeeping himself and prepared his own tax returns. With
its numbers, accuracy, and the measuring of results, the recordkeeping aspect of the job pleased him.
Every stock certificate was delivered directly to him, made out in the partnerships’ names, rather than left on
deposit with a broker as was the usual practice. When they arrived, he carried them—smooth cream-colored
diplomas in investing, engraved with finely etched drawings of railroads and bald eagles, sea beasts and
toga-clad women—down to the Omaha National Bank in his own hands and placed them in a safety deposit
box. Whenever he sold a stock, he went to the bank, riffled through the collection of certificates, and mailed
off the correct ones from the post office on 38th Street. The bank would call to let him know when a dividend
check came in to be deposited, and he would go there, examine the check, and endorse it personally.
He tied up the family’s single telephone line with his daily calls to the handful of brokers he used. His
expenses were as close to zero as he could get. He listed them by hand on a lined sheet of yellow paper: 31¢
for postage, $15.32 for a Moody’s Manual, $4.00 for the Oil & Gas Journal, $3.08 for telephone calls.21
Except for more meticulous accounting and a great deal more thought, he ran the business much as though he
were just anybody trading stocks through a broker for a personal account.
At the end of 1956, Warren wrote a letter to the partners outlining the partnership’s results at year-end. He
reported that it had earned a total income of slightly more than $4,500, beating the market by about four
percent.22 By then, Dan Monen, his lawyer, had withdrawn from the first partnership, with Doc Thompson
buying out his share. Monen had joined Warren on a personal side project that he had been pursuing for some
time: buying the stock of an Omaha-based insurer, National American Fire Insurance. This company’s
worthless stock had been sold to farmers all over Nebraska in 1919 by unscrupulous promoters in exchange
for the Liberty Bonds issued during World War I.23 Since then, its certificates had lain crumbling in drawers,
while their owners gradually lost hope of ever seeing their money again.
Warren had discovered National American while working at Buffett-Falk, flipping through the Moody’s
Manual.24 The company was headquartered only a block away from his father’s office. William Ahmanson,
a prominent Omaha insurance agent, had originally been sucked into it unawares, set up as a local front man
for what had started out as a fraud. But the Ahmanson family had gradually turned it into a legitimate
company. Now, Howard Ahmanson, William’s son, was feeding top-drawer insurance business into National
American through Home Savings of America, a company he had founded in California, which was becoming
one of the largest and most successful savings-and-loan companies in the United States.25
