
'I'he ltil1'usion of InfOl'maUon Among Inveslol's.

366 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
idea that had been hibernating in investors' minds to spring to life and
consume their attention.
Shifts in Investor Attention. Where investors are focusing their attention at any given moment can shift dramatically due to minor changes
in the news. "The human brain is structured to have essentially a single focus of attention at a time and to move rapidly from one focus to another. "78 The brain had to evolve a capacity to selectively attend to only a
tiny trickle of the torrent of information that pours in from the world. This
filtering process is both a mark of human intelligence and a source of
judgment error. Numerous instances of expert error are attributable to
missing important details. However, before outcomes are known, we
never know which details deserve our attention.
Among the automatic unconscious rules used by the brain to filter relevant from irrelevant information is the rule to look to other people for
cues. In other words, we presume that what grabs the attention of others
must be worthy of our attention as well. According to economist Robert
Shiller, "the phenomenon of social attention is one of the great creations
of behavioral evolution and is critical for the functioning of human society. "79 Although communal attention has great social value, because it promotes collaborative action, it has a downside. It can lead an entire group
to hold an incorrect view and take similar mistaken actions.
In the opposite situation, where individuals form their own views independently, errors of attention would be random and self-canceling. Although this mode of thought makes it harder to organize joint efforts
around common views and goals, it is less likely to overlook important details. Dramatic market movements can easily grab the attention of the
community of investors and encourage them to act in ways that amplify
the movement, even if there is no fundamental reason for it.
Robert Shiller has studied the way dramatic price movements capture
investor attention and trigger herd behavior. Even institutional investors,
who would be expected to select stocks in systematic ways based on statistically valid characteristics, are prone to buying a stock simply because
it has experienced a rapid price increase. 80 This mechanism can explain
how a market boom can be triggered just by a vivid initial price movement
that calls attention to the stock market. Moreover, Shiller's studies show
that investors are often not even aware that it was a dramatic price movement that motivated them to act.

Social
interaction among investors creates feedback. Feedback refers to
the channeling of a system's output back into the system as input. See

'fhe Role of Feedback in Systematic Price Movements.

367

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

Figure 7.9, where two systems are compared-one with no feedback
and one with feedback.
There are two types of feedback, positive and negative. One way to
think of the difference is as follows. In the case of negative feedback, the
system output is multiplied by a negative number and the result is feedback in. In the case of positive feedback the multiplier is a positive number. This is illustrated in Figure 7.10.

External
----+
Input

External
Input

System
with
No Feedback

----+ Output

System
with
Feedback

----+ Output

G
1

Feedback loop

FIGUK~ 7.9

4
1

Feedback: output becomes input.

~

External
Input ---.~ ~ ----+ Output

~~I~P6Y

[

Negative Feedback Loop

~

External
Input ---.~ ~ ----+ Output

[

FIGUKI~ 7.10

~~~~

Positive Feedback Loop

Positive and negative feedback loops.

368 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Negative feedback has the effect of dampening system behavior, driving the output back toward a level of equilibrium. Positive feedback has
the opposite effect, amplifying a system's behavior, thus driving its output
further from equilibrium. This is illustrated in Figure 7.11.
An example of a negative feedback system is a household heating &
air conditioning system. When the temperature falls below a desired or
equilibrium level, the thermostat turns on the furnace, returning the system's output, the household temperature, back to the desired level. Temperature above the desired level turns on the NC, bringing the temperature
back down. This is all accomplished by feeding the system's output back
into the system as an input. This allows the system to self-regulate its way
toward equilibrium.
Positive feedback is illustrated by the growing screech in a publicaddress system when the speakers are placed too close to the microphone. The normal hum corning out of the speakers (output) gets fed
back into the audio system via the microphone, where it is amplified by
the system. With each cycle, the sound comes out louder, developing into
a loud screech. Positive feedback is also known as the snowball effect or
vicious cycle.
Financial markets, like other self-organizing self-regulated systems,
rely on a healthy balance between negative and positive feedback. sl Arbitrage provides negative feedback. Prices that are too high or too low

-AAr
FIGURE 7.11
amplifying.

----+

Positive and

Negative
Feedback
System

----+

Positive
Feedback
System

----+

negative feedback loops: dampening versus

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

369

trigger arbitrage trading that pushes prices back toward rational levels.
Positive feedback occurs when investor decisions are dominated by imitative behavior rather than independent choice. In this regime, investors will hop aboard an initial price movement, buying after first
signs of strength or selling after first signs of weakness, thus amplifying
an initial small price movement into a large-scale trend. A TA approach,
known as trend following, depends on large-scale price moves for its
profitability and thus is most effective during times when positive feedback dominates.
Positive feedback can cause a vicious cycle of price increases or decreases, which take prices far beyond rational levels even if the initial
price move that triggered the whole affair was justified. In other words,
price trends can go far above or below rational levels simply due to the
amplifying effect of positive feedback.
Positive feedback can also result from they way people adapt their expectations to recent changes. Although it generally makes sense to alter
expectations when conditions change, people do it imperfectly. At times,
they adjust insufficiently (the conservatism bias), whereas at other times
they are overly sensitive to change and alter their expectations more than
is justified. Investors are especially likely to overreact to new information
that is prominent. Either a single large price change or a sequence of similar changes can induce investors to alter their expectations too much.
These price changes can feed on themselves, thus generating price momentum that may lead to a bubble or crash.
A judgment error that sometimes contributes to positive feedback is
mental accounting. This is the irrational tendency to think about money as
if it belonged in separate accounts, which should be treated differently.
Gains from prior speculative ventures may be assigned to the hot-action
account, whereas money accumulating in the home-equity account is
treated with greater conservatism. Rationally, all of an investor's money,
regardless of how it was made or in which asset it is invested, should be
treated in the same way. A dollar is a dollar. However, speculative gains
from a recent market rise are often, irrationally, earmarked for further
speculation, thus adding fuel to a rising market.
At some point, the increasing expectations that fuel a bubble run
out. Common sense would suggest, and some analysts insist, that a
price bubble necessarily ends in market crashes (Le., a negative bubble). At times they do, but other bubble termination patterns are possible. Computer simulations of systems that incorporate feedback loops
show that bubbles not only develop in ajagged fashion with many intervening pauses, but they can also deflate in a similar manner. If the late
1990s was a price bubble, it seems to be ending with many intervening
pauses.

370 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Self-Organizing Ponzi Schemes
The feedback theory of price bubbles is appealing because of its plausibility and the numerous historical examples that seem to confirm its validity.
However, it is hard to prove that a simple feedback mechanism involving
heightened investor focus, imitative behavior, and exaggerated investor
confidence is truly operational in financial markets.
Nevertheless, Yale economist Robert Shiller believes actual cases of
pyramid frauds lrnown as Ponzi schemes offer evidence that confirms the
feedback theory. The scheme, named after the infamous Charles Ponzi,
who invented the idea in the 1920s, involves promising investors a high
rate of return from some sort of business venture or investment. However,
the investors' money is never put to work in the way promised. Instead,
the commitments of new investors are used to payoff earlier investors.
This serves two purposes: it makes the venture look legitimate and it encourages the first investors to spread the story of their success. As the tale
gains popularity, new investors are motivated to make investments. Their
funds are, in turn, used to payoff a prior round of investors, who now go
out and tell their story. This cycle of using Peter's investment to payoff
Paul to prove the success of the enterprise continues and grows. The
number of people influenced by the scam follows a curve similar to the
diffusion of an infection throughout a population. Ultimately, a saturation
level is reached. The supply of noninfected speculators gets exhausted,
and so there are no new investments with which to payoff the last round
of investors. At this point, the scheme crashes.
Recently a housewife from a small town in Alaska collected an estimated $10 to $15 million over a six-year period by promising a 50 percent return. Her business was purportedly based on unused frequent
flyer miles accumulated by large companies. In fact, this was very similar to Ponzi's original scheme, which was based on international postage
coupons.
Ponzi scams evolve in a typical pattern. Initially, investors are skeptical and invest only small amounts, but once early investors reap profits
and tell their success story, later-stage investors gain confidence and the
flow of capital into the scheme gains momentum. Frequently there are rational skeptics issuing warnings, but the greedy pay no heed. Wellfounded cynical arguments cannot compete with vivid accounts of fat
profits. The moths dive into the flame.
Shiller contends that speculative bubbles are naturally occurring Ponzi
schemes that emerge spontaneously in financial markets, without requiring
the machinations of a fraudulent promoter. 82 Such self-organizing phenomena are common in complex systems. There is no need for false stories because there is always some buzz about the stock market anyway. A trend

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

371

of rising prices acts as a call to action much like the gains of early investors in a Ponzi scheme. The message is then amplified by Wall Street's
salesmen, and they need not tell lies. They simply pitch the upside potential while downplaying the risk side of the story. The parallels between
Ponzi schemes and speculative bubbles are so clear in Shiller's opinion
that the burden of proof is on those who deny the similarity.
Competing Hypotheses of Behavioral Finance

A mathematical model quantifies a scientific hypothesis about some aspect of the world, This allows quantitative predictions to be made that can
be tested against future observations. Of course, those proposing the
model hope its predictions will coincide with said observations. Nevertheless, if they should clash, a true scientist stands ready to formulate a new
model that both explains the discordant observations and makes additional predictions that can be tested against further observations. This cycle of refinement never ceases because knowledge is never complete.
Pseudoscientific stories resemble legitin1ate scientific hypotheses, but
only superficially. A scientific hypothesis is compact, yet it accounts for a
wide range of observations. Pseudoscientific stories tend to be complicated. Scientific hypotheses make precise predictions that can be checked
against future observation. Pseudoscientific accounts make vague predictions that are consistent with prior observations but never make predictions specific enough to permit clear refutation. Thus, pseudoscientific
accounts survive in the minds of the gullible, no matter how far off the
mark they may be.
On this basis, behavioral finance qualifies as science, albeit a young
one. Although as yet, there is no agreement on a single theory, there has
been substantial progress. Within the last decade behavioral-finance practitioners have proposed several hypotheses to explain investor behavior
and key features of market dynamics. These are important to TA because
they provide a rationale for the occurrence of systematic price movements, the "without-which-not" of TA.
The behavioral-finance hypotheses have been formulated as mathematical models, thus allowing them to generate testable predictions of
how markets would behave if the hypothesis were correct. This opens the
hypotheses to refutation if markets do not manifest the predicted behaviors. For example, if a model predicts the occurrence of trend reversals
similar to those actually observed in market data, the hypothesis gains
some confirmation. However, if the model's predicted scenarios are contradicted by actual market behavior, then the hypothesis would be refuted. This makes the hypotheses of behavioral finance scientiiically
meaningful.

372 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Recall that the random-walk model of EMH predicts that systematic
price motion should not be observed in market behavior. In contrast, the
behavioral-finance hypotheses described later predict the occurrence of
systematic price motion and offer an explanation about why they should
occur. Even though none of the hypotheses provides a comprehensive
theory of market behavior, they have a common a message of importance
to TA: There is good reason to believe financial markets are not entirely
random walks.
Biased Interpretation of Public Information: 'I'he 1131'beris,
Shleifer, and Vishny (IISV) Hypothesis. Empirical studies show
that investors display two distinct errors in response to news releases.
Sometimes they underreact, and consequently prices change less than the
new fundamentals say they should. At other times, investors overreact,
causing prices to change more than is justified by the news. Ultimately,
however, these pricing errors are rectified by systematic price movements
toward price levels that accurately reflect the new information.
The puzzle is: Why do investors sometimes overreact while at other
times they underreact? A hypothesis proposed by Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny83 (BSV) offers an explanation. First, BSV asserts that two distinct
cognitive errors are involved: conservatism bias and sample-size neglect.
Second, they assert that the particular error that is operative at a given
point in time depends on circumstances.
To briefly recap: The conservatism bias describes the tendency to alter a prior belief less than new information would warrant. Existing opinions are sticky. Sample-size neglect, also known as the crime of small
numbers, is the tendency to draw too grand a conclusion from a small
sample of observations. Thus, the conservatism bias is the opposite of the
crime of small numbers. In the former, new evidence is given too little
weight; in the latter, it is given too much.
The conservatism bias is at work when investors underreact to news,
leaving prices too low after good news or too high after bad news. However, as investors gradually realize the new information's true significance, prices make a gradual systematic march to a level that properly
reflects the news. Thus, some price trends can be explained by investor
underreaction.
The crime of small numbers explains investor overreaction. For example, if investors observe a small number of positive earnings changes,
they may conclude, too hastily, that a valid growth pattern has been established. This stimulates overly aggressive buying that pushes prices higher
than warranted. Investors can overreact in the same way to a few negative
observations and push the price too low.

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

373

The mathematical model put forward by BSV makes the following
simplifying assumptions: (1) the market has a single stock, (2) its earnings
stream follows a random walk, but (3) investors do not realize this,84 so
(4) investors labor under the false impression that the stock's earnings
stream shifts back and forth between two distinct regimes, a growth trend
phase and a mean-reverting (oscillating) phase, but they do not consider
the possibility that the earning may follow a random walk, (6) therefore,
investors believe their job is to figure out which of these two regimes is
operative at any given point in time.
Let's see how BSV's mythical investor might react to the releases of
new earnings information. At any given time, the investors hold a belief
that the earnings are in either one of two nonrandom regimes: a growth
trend or mean reverting process. The possibility of a random walk is not
considered. Recall that a random walk displays less mean reversion than
a true mean-reverting process and also displays streaks that are shorter
in duration than those found in a truly trending process. As we pick up
the story, an investor holds some prior belief about the earnings regime
and hears news about earnings. Suppose the news announcement contradicts the investor's belief. For example, if the investor had believed the
stock's earnings had been in a growth trend, and a negative earnings report can1e out, the investor would be surprised. Similarly, if the investor
had been under the belief that earnings were in a mean-reverting regime,
a streak of similar changes would also be surprising. According to the
BSV hypothesis, both kinds of surprises would trigger an underreaction
by the investor due to the conservatism bias. In other words, regardless
of whether the investor's prior belief was in a mean-reverting regin1e or in
a growth regime, news contradicting the belief would be given too little
weight causing prices to underreact to the new information. However, if
news that is at odds with a prior belief continues to occur, the investor
will become convinced that the regime has switched, either from mean
reverting to growth or from growth to mean reverting. In this case, the
BSV hypothesis predicts that investors will switch from the mistake of
being too stuck with their prior beliefs and underreacting (the conservatism bias) to the mistake of committing the crime of small numbers
and overreacting. Thus, the BSV model accounts for both kinds of investor error as well as the systematic price movement that corrects both
forms of errors.
I illustrate the type of behavior predicted by BSV in Figure 7.12.
Here I posit the case where investors initially believe that earnings are
in a mean-reverting regime. Thus, they expect positive earnings reports
to be followed by a negative report. For this reason, they underreact to
the first two positive earnings reports. However, after the third positive

374 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Price

Conservatism Bias

-------.
: Rational I
Price ~

-

Belief:
Earnings Mean Revert

Belief:
Positive Earnings Trend
Time

FIGURE 7.12

+ News

+ News

+ News

Event
#1

Event
#2

Event
#3

BSV: underreaction followed by overreaction.

report, not at all unusual in a random process (three heads in a row),
they abandon their earlier belief and adopt the idea that earnings have
entered a growth regime and have established an uptrend. Consequently they now expect that future reports will also be positive. This
causes investors to overreact, pushing the stock above a rational level.
The systematic price movements resulting from both types of investor
error are highlighted in grey.
Thus BSV's model also shows how a feedback loop emerges from the
crime of small numbers. When investors see earnings move in the same direction several times in succession, they switch from doubting the trend
to assuming it is real. 85 However, the conservatism bias initially impedes
the adoption of the new belief. The interaction between the crime of small
numbers and the conservatism bias determines the speed at which speculative feedback develops.86 Simulations of the BSV model show several
kinds of actual market behavior such as price trends following surprising
earnings, price momentum, long-term reversals, and the forecasting
power of fundamental ratios such as price-to-book. Thus, the BSV model
explains how investors' biased interpretations of public information can
predict the occurrence of phenomena that are observed in actual market
data. This suggests that the model does capture some of the dynamics of
real financial markets.

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

375

Biased Interpretation of Private Infol'mation: 'rhe Daniel, Hirshleifel" and Subrahmanyam (OIlS) Hypothesis. An alternative

hypothesis proposed by Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998,
2001)87 (DHS) suggests a different explanation for systematic price movements such as trend reversals and trend persistence (momentum). In contrast to BSV, the DHS hypothesis is founded upon investors' biased
interpretations of private research. In addition, DHS emphasizes somewhat different cognitive errors: the endowment bias, the confirmation
bias (see Chapter 2), and the self-attribution bias (see Chapter 2).
Private research refers to an investor's independently derived interpretations of public information (i.e., proprietary research). The hypothesis put forward by DHS predicts that investors will be overly confident
about the quality of their private research and hence will have a tendency
to overreact to it. This prediction is based on the endowment bias-the
predisposition to place too high a value on what we own or create. This
overreaction pushes prices beyond rational levels, which ultimately leads
to a price reversal back toward rational prices. So in DHS's view of the
world, price reversals are an effect of overconfidence in privately derived
signals.
DHS also explains price momentum (nonrandom price trends) as the
result of two other cognitive biases: confirmation bias and self-attribution
bias. They assert price momentum develops because news releases and
price movements impact investors in a biased manner. Because of the
confirmation bias, news or price movements that confirm an investor's
prior beliefs, (i.e., those founded on their private signals and research),
will be given excessive weight. News events and/or price movements
that are confirmatory have the effect of increasing the investors' confidence that their private research was indeed accurate. This induces
them to take additional action (buying or selling), which amplifies the
momentum of the current price trend. The self-attribution bias also
causes investors to view confirmatory news or price movement as a sign
that their private research is good. Recall that self-attribution causes
people to take credit for outcomes, even if they occur because of good
luck, but to deny responsibility for bad outcomes by attributing them to
bad luck. Thus, both the confirmation bias and self-attribution bias induce investors to overreact to confirmatory evidence, thereby amplifying the market's positive feedback.
Conversely, if public information or price behavior contradicts the
investor's private research, it will be given too little weight (confirmation bias) and investors will attribute it to bad luck rather than to poor
private research (self-attribution bias). Therefore, regardless of whether
the news or the price movement confirms or contradicts the investor's
