
3

That’s not to say that these funds would have done better if their “superstar” managers had stayed in place; all we can be sure of is that the two
funds did poorly without them.

Commentary on Chapter 9

247

Rising expenses. It often costs more to trade stocks in very large
blocks than in small ones; with fewer buyers and sellers, it’s harder to
make a match. A fund with $100 million in assets might pay 1% a year
in trading costs. But, if high returns send the fund mushrooming up to
$10 billion, its trades could easily eat up at least 2% of those assets.
The typical fund holds on to its stocks for only 11 months at a time, so
trading costs eat away at returns like a corrosive acid. Meanwhile, the
other costs of running a fund rarely fall—and sometimes even rise—as
assets grow. With operating expenses averaging 1.5%, and trading
costs at around 2%, the typical fund has to beat the market by 3.5
percentage points per year before costs just to match it after costs!
Sheepish behavior. Finally, once a fund becomes successful, its
managers tend to become timid and imitative. As a fund grows, its
fees become more lucrative—making its managers reluctant to rock
the boat. The very risks that the managers took to generate their initial
high returns could now drive investors away—and jeopardize all that fat
fee income. So the biggest funds resemble a herd of identical and
overfed sheep, all moving in sluggish lockstep, all saying “baaaa” at
the same time. Nearly every growth fund owns Cisco and GE and
Microsoft and Pfizer and Wal-Mart—and in almost identical proportions. This behavior is so prevalent that finance scholars simply call it
herding.4 But by protecting their own fee income, fund managers compromise their ability to produce superior returns for their outside
investors.

4

There’s a second lesson here: To succeed, the individual investor must
either avoid shopping from the same list of favorite stocks that have already
been picked over by the giant institutions, or own them far more patiently.
See Erik R. Sirri and Peter Tufano, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,”
The Journal of Finance, vol. 53, no. 8, October, 1998, pp. 1589–1622;
Keith C. Brown, W. V. Harlow, and Laura Starks, “Of Tournaments and
Temptations,” The Journal of Finance, vol. 51, no. 1, March, 1996, pp.
85–110; Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “What Do
Money Managers Do?” working paper, University of Illinois, February, 1997;
Stanley Eakins, Stanley Stansell, and Paul Wertheim, “Institutional Portfolio
Composition,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, vol. 38, no. 1,
Spring, 1998, pp. 93–110; Paul Gompers and Andrew Metrick, “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
116, no. 1, February, 2001, pp. 229–260.

248

Commentary on Chapter 9

FIGURE 9-2 The Funnel of Fund Performance
Looking back from December 31, 2002, how many U.S. stock
funds outperformed Vanguard 500 Index Fund?

One year:
1,186 of 2,423 funds (or 48.9%)

Three years:
1,157 of 1,944 funds (or 59.5%)
Five years:
768 of 1,494 funds (or 51.4%)
Ten years:
227 of 728 funds (or 31.2%)
Fifteen years:
125 of 445 funds (or 28.1%)
Twenty years:
37 of 248 funds (or 14.9%)

Source: Lipper Inc.

Because of their fat costs and bad behavior, most funds fail to earn
their keep. No wonder high returns are nearly as perishable as unrefrigerated fish. What’s more, as time passes, the drag of their excessive expenses leaves most funds farther and farther behind, as Figure
9.2 shows.5
What, then, should the intelligent investor do?
First of all, recognize that an index fund—which owns all the stocks

5

Amazingly, this illustration understates the advantage of index funds, since
the database from which it is taken does not include the track records of
hundreds of funds that disappeared over these periods. Measured more
accurately, the advantage of indexing would be overpowering.

Commentary on Chapter 9

249

in the market, all the time, without any pretense of being able to select
the “best” and avoid the “worst”—will beat most funds over the long
run. (If your company doesn’t offer a low-cost index fund in your
401(k), organize your coworkers and petition to have one added.) Its
rock-bottom overhead—operating expenses of 0.2% annually, and
yearly trading costs of just 0.1%—give the index fund an insurmountable advantage. If stocks generate, say, a 7% annualized return over
the next 20 years, a low-cost index fund like Vanguard Total Stock
Market will return just under 6.7%. (That would turn a $10,000 investment into more than $36,000.) But the average stock fund, with
its 1.5% in operating expenses and roughly 2% in trading costs, will
be lucky to gain 3.5% annually. (That would turn $10,000 into just
under $20,000—or nearly 50% less than the result from the index
fund.)
Index funds have only one significant flaw: They are boring. You’ll
never be able to go to a barbecue and brag about how you own the
top-performing fund in the country. You’ll never be able to boast that
you beat the market, because the job of an index fund is to match the
market’s return, not to exceed it. Your index-fund manager is not likely
to “roll the dice” and gamble that the next great industry will be teleportation, or scratch-’n’-sniff websites, or telepathic weight-loss clinics; the fund will always own every stock, not just one manager’s best
guess at the next new thing. But, as the years pass, the cost advantage of indexing will keep accruing relentlessly. Hold an index fund for
20 years or more, adding new money every month, and you are all but
certain to outperform the vast majority of professional and individual
investors alike. Late in his life, Graham praised index funds as the best
choice for individual investors, as does Warren Buffett.6

6

See Benjamin Graham, Benjamin Graham: Memoirs of the Dean of Wall
Street, Seymour Chatman, ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996), p. 273, and
Janet Lowe, The Rediscovered Benjamin Graham: Selected Writings of the
Wall Street Legend (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999), p. 273. As Warren Buffett wrote in his 1996 annual report: “Most investors, both institutional and individual, will find that the best way to own common stocks is
through an index fund that charges minimal fees. Those following this path
are sure to beat the net results (after fees and expenses) delivered by the
great majority of investment professionals.” (See www.berkshirehathaway.
com/1996ar/1996.html.)

250

Commentary on Chapter 9

T I LT I N G T H E TA B L E S
When you add up all their handicaps, the wonder is not that so few
funds beat the index, but that any do. And yet, some do. What qualities do they have in common?
Their managers are the biggest shareholders. The conflict of
interest between what’s best for the fund’s managers and what’s best
for its investors is mitigated when the managers are among the
biggest owners of the fund’s shares. Some firms, like Longleaf Partners, even forbid their employees from owning anything but their own
funds. At Longleaf and other firms like Davis and FPA, the managers
own so much of the funds that they are likely to manage your money
as if it were their own—lowering the odds that they will jack up fees, let
the funds swell to gargantuan size, or whack you with a nasty tax bill. A
fund’s proxy statement and Statement of Additional Information, both
available from the Securities and Exchange Commission through the
EDGAR database at www.sec.gov, disclose whether the managers
own at least 1% of the fund’s shares.
They are cheap. One of the most common myths in the fund business is that “you get what you pay for”—that high returns are the best
justification for higher fees. There are two problems with this argument. First, it isn’t true; decades of research have proven that funds
with higher fees earn lower returns over time. Secondly, high returns
are temporary, while high fees are nearly as permanent as granite. If
you buy a fund for its hot returns, you may well end up with a handful
of cold ashes—but your costs of owning the fund are almost certain
not to decline when its returns do.
They dare to be different. When Peter Lynch ran Fidelity Magellan, he
bought whatever seemed cheap to him—regardless of what other fund
managers owned. In 1982, his biggest investment was Treasury bonds;
right after that, he made Chrysler his top holding, even though most
experts expected the automaker to go bankrupt; then, in 1986, Lynch put
almost 20% of Fidelity Magellan in foreign stocks like Honda, Norsk
Hydro, and Volvo. So, before you buy a U.S. stock fund, compare the holdings listed in its latest report against the roster of the S & P 500 index; if
they look like Tweedledee and Tweedledum, shop for another fund.7

7

A complete listing of the S & P 500’s constituent companies is available at
www.standardandpoors.com.

Commentary on Chapter 9

251

They shut the door. The best funds often close to new investors—
permitting only their existing shareholders to buy more. That stops the
feeding frenzy of new buyers who want to pile in at the top and protects the fund from the pains of asset elephantiasis. It’s also a signal
that the fund managers are not putting their own wallets ahead of
yours. But the closing should occur before—not after—the fund
explodes in size. Some companies with an exemplary record of shutting their own gates are Longleaf, Numeric, Oakmark, T. Rowe Price,
Vanguard, and Wasatch.
They don’t advertise. Just as Plato says in The Republic that the ideal
rulers are those who do not want to govern, the best fund managers often
behave as if they don’t want your money. They don’t appear constantly on
financial television or run ads boasting of their No. 1 returns. The steady little Mairs & Power Growth Fund didn’t even have a website until 2001 and
still sells its shares in only 24 states. The Torray Fund has never run a retail
advertisement since its launch in 1990.
What else should you watch for? Most fund buyers look at past
performance first, then at the manager’s reputation, then at the riskiness of the fund, and finally (if ever) at the fund’s expenses.8
The intelligent investor looks at those same things—but in the opposite order.
Since a fund’s expenses are far more predictable than its future risk
or return, you should make them your first filter. There’s no good reason ever to pay more than these levels of annual operating expenses,
by fund category:
•
•
•

8

Taxable and municipal bonds:
U.S. equities (large and mid-sized stocks):
High-yield ( junk) bonds:

0.75%
1.0%
1.0%

See Noel Capon, Gavan Fitzsimons, and Russ Alan Prince, “An Individual
Level Analysis of the Mutual Fund Investment Decision,” Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 10, 1996, pp. 59–82; Investment Company
Institute, “Understanding Shareholders’ Use of Information and Advisers,”
Spring, 1997, at www.ici.org/pdf/rpt_undstnd_share.pdf, p. 21; Gordon
Alexander, Jonathan Jones, and Peter Nigro, “Mutual Fund Shareholders:
Characteristics, Investor Knowledge, and Sources of Information,” OCC
working paper, December, 1997, at www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/workpaper/
wp97-13.pdf.

252

•
•

Commentary on Chapter 9

U.S. equities (small stocks):
Foreign stocks:

1.25%
1.50%9

Next, evaluate risk. In its prospectus (or buyer’s guide), every fund
must show a bar graph displaying its worst loss over a calendar quarter. If you can’t stand losing at least that much money in three months,
go elsewhere. It’s also worth checking a fund’s Morningstar rating. A
leading investment research firm, Morningstar awards “star ratings” to
funds, based on how much risk they took to earn their returns (one
star is the worst, five is the best). But, just like past performance itself,
these ratings look back in time; they tell you which funds were the
best, not which are going to be. Five-star funds, in fact, have a disconcerting habit of going on to underperform one-star funds. So first find
a low-cost fund whose managers are major shareholders, dare to be
different, don’t hype their returns, and have shown a willingness to
shut down before they get too big for their britches. Then, and only
then, consult their Morningstar rating.10
Finally, look at past performance, remembering that it is only a pale
predictor of future returns. As we’ve already seen, yesterday’s winners
often become tomorrow’s losers. But researchers have shown that
one thing is almost certain: Yesterday’s losers almost never become
tomorrow’s winners. So avoid funds with consistently poor past
returns—especially if they have above-average annual expenses.
TH E CLOS E D WOR LD OF
CLOS E D-E N D FU N D S
Closed-end stock funds, although popular during the 1980s, have
slowly atrophied. Today, there are only 30 diversified domestic

9

Investors can search easily for funds that meet these expense hurdles by
using the fund-screening tools at www.morningstar.com and http://money.
cnn.com.
10
See Matthew Morey, “Rating the Raters: An Investigation of Mutual Fund
Rating Services,” Journal of Investment Consulting, vol. 5, no. 2, November/
December, 2002. While its star ratings are a weak predictor of future
results, Morningstar is the single best source of information on funds for
individual investors.

Commentary on Chapter 9

253

equity funds, many of them tiny, trading only a few hundred shares
a day, with high expenses and weird strategies (like Morgan FunShares, which specializes in the stocks of “habit-forming” industries
like booze, casinos, and cigarettes). Research by closed-end fund
expert Donald Cassidy of Lipper Inc. reinforces Graham’s earlier
observations: Diversified closed-end stock funds trading at a discount
not only tend to outperform those trading at a premium but are likely
to have a better return than the average open-end mutual fund.
Sadly, however, diversified closed-end stock funds are not always
available at a discount in what has become a dusty, dwindling
market.11
But there are hundreds of closed-end bond funds, with especially
strong choices available in the municipal-bond area. When these
funds trade at a discount, their yield is amplified and they can be
attractive, so long as their annual expenses are below the thresholds
listed above.12
The new breed of exchange-traded index funds can be worth
exploring as well. These low-cost “ETFs” sometimes offer the only
means by which an investor can gain entrée to a narrow market like,
say, companies based in Belgium or stocks in the semiconductor
industry. Other index ETFs offer much broader market exposure. However, they are generally not suitable for investors who wish to add
money regularly, since most brokers will charge a separate commission on every new investment you make.13

11

Unlike a mutual fund, a closed-end fund does not issue new shares
directly to anyone who wants to buy them. Instead, an investor must buy
shares not from the fund itself, but from another shareholder who is willing
to part with them. Thus, the price of the shares fluctuates above and below
their net asset value, depending on supply and demand.
12
For more information, see www.morningstar.com and www.etfconnect.
com.
13
Unlike index mutual funds, index ETFs are subject to standard stock commissions when you buy and sell them—and these commissions are often
assessed on any additional purchases or reinvested dividends. Details are
available at www.ishares.com, www.streettracks.com, www.amex.com, and
www.indexfunds.com.

254

Commentary on Chapter 9

KNOW WH E N TO FOLD ’E M
Once you own a fund, how can you tell when it’s time to sell?
The standard advice is to ditch a fund if it underperforms the market
(or similar portfolios) for one—or is it two?—or is it three?—years in
a row. But this advice makes no sense. From its birth in 1970
through 1999, the Sequoia Fund underperformed the S & P 500
index in 12 out of its 29 years—or more than 41% of the time. Yet
Sequoia gained more than 12,500% over that period, versus 4,900%
for the index.14
The performance of most funds falters simply because the type of
stocks they prefer temporarily goes out of favor. If you hired a manager
to invest in a particular way, why fire him for doing what he promised?
By selling when a style of investing is out of fashion, you not only lock
in a loss but lock yourself out of the all-but-inevitable recovery. One
study showed that mutual-fund investors underperformed their own
funds by 4.7 percentage points annually from 1998 through 2001—
simply by buying high and selling low.15
So when should you sell? Here a few definite red flags:
•

•
•
•

14

a sharp and unexpected change in strategy, such as a “value”
fund loading up on technology stocks in 1999 or a “growth” fund
buying tons of insurance stocks in 2002;
an increase in expenses, suggesting that the managers are lining their own pockets;
large and frequent tax bills generated by excessive trading;
suddenly erratic returns, as when a formerly conservative fund
generates a big loss (or even produces a giant gain).

See Sequoia’s June 30, 1999, report to shareholders at www.sequoia
fund.com/Reports/Quarterly/SemiAnn99.htm. Sequoia has been closed to
new investors since 1982, which has reinforced its superb performance.
15
Jason Zweig, “What Fund Investors Really Need to Know,” Money, June,
2002, pp. 110–115.

WHY WE LOVE OU R OU I JA B OAR D S
Believing—or even just hoping—that we can pick the best funds
of the future makes us feel better. It gives us the pleasing sensation that we are in charge of our own investment destiny. This
“I’m-in-control-here” feeling is part of the human condition; it’s
what psychologists call overconfidence. Here are just a few
examples of how it works:
• In 1999, Money Magazine asked more than 500 people
whether their portfolios had beaten the market. One in four
said yes. When asked to specify their returns, however, 80%
of those investors reported gains lower than the market’s.
(Four percent had no idea how much their portfolios rose—
but were sure they had beaten the market anyway!)
• A Swedish study asked drivers who had been in severe car
crashes to rate their own skills behind the wheel. These people—including some the police had found responsible for the
accidents and others who had been so badly injured that
they answered the survey from their hospital beds—insisted
they were better-than-average drivers.
• In a poll taken in late 2000, Time and CNN asked more than
1,000 likely voters whether they thought they were in the top
1% of the population by income. Nineteen percent placed
themselves among the richest 1% of Americans.
• In late 1997, a survey of 750 investors found that 74%
believed their mutual-fund holdings would “consistently beat
the Standard & Poor’s 500 each year”—even though most
funds fail to beat the S & P 500 in the long run and many fail
to beat it in any year.1
While this kind of optimism is a normal sign of a healthy psyche, that doesn’t make it good investment policy. It makes sense
to believe you can predict something only if it actually is predictable. Unless you are realistic, your quest for self-esteem will
end up in self-defeat.

See Jason Zweig, “Did You Beat the Market?” Money, January, 2000, pp.
55–58; Time/CNN poll #15, October 25–26, 2000, question 29.
1

256

Commentary on Chapter 9

As the investment consultant Charles Ellis puts it, “If you’re not prepared to stay married, you shouldn’t get married.” 16 Fund investing is
no different. If you’re not prepared to stick with a fund through at least
three lean years, you shouldn’t buy it in the first place. Patience is the
fund investor’s single most powerful ally.

16

See interview with Ellis in Jason Zweig, “Wall Street’s Wisest Man,”
Money, June, 2001, pp. 49–52.

CHAPTER 10

The Investor and His Advisers

The investment of money in securities is unique among business

operations in that it is almost always based in some degree on
advice received from others. The great bulk of investors are amateurs. Naturally they feel that in choosing their securities they can
profit by professional guidance. Yet there are peculiarities inherent
in the very concept of investment advice.
If the reason people invest is to make money, then in seeking
advice they are asking others to tell them how to make money. That
idea has some element of naïveté. Businessmen seek professional
advice on various elements of their business, but they do not
expect to be told how to make a profit. That is their own bailiwick.
When they, or nonbusiness people, rely on others to make investment profits for them, they are expecting a kind of result for which
there is no true counterpart in ordinary business affairs.
If we assume that there are normal or standard income results to
be obtained from investing money in securities, then the role of the
adviser can be more readily established. He will use his superior
training and experience to protect his clients against mistakes and
to make sure that they obtain the results to which their money is
entitled. It is when the investor demands more than an average
return on his money, or when his adviser undertakes to do better
for him, that the question arises whether more is being asked or
promised than is likely to be delivered.
Advice on investments may be obtained from a variety of
sources. These include: (1) a relative or friend, presumably knowledgeable in securities; (2) a local (commercial) banker; (3) a brokerage firm or investment banking house; (4) a financial service or
257

258

The Intelligent Investor

periodical; and (5) an investment counselor.* The miscellaneous
character of this list suggests that no logical or systematic approach
in this matter has crystallized, as yet, in the minds of investors.
Certain common-sense considerations relate to the criterion of
normal or standard results mentioned above. Our basic thesis is
this: If the investor is to rely chiefly on the advice of others in handling his funds, then either he must limit himself and his advisers
strictly to standard, conservative, and even unimaginative forms of
investment, or he must have an unusually intimate and favorable
knowledge of the person who is going to direct his funds into other
channels. But if the ordinary business or professional relationship
exists between the investor and his advisers, he can be receptive to
less conventional suggestions only to the extent that he himself has
grown in knowledge and experience and has therefore become
competent to pass independent judgment on the recommendations
of others. He has then passed from the category of defensive or
unenterprising investor into that of aggressive or enterprising
investor.
