Third, and this relates mostly to the shorter-term news-driven momentum
that we will talk about in the next chapter, the duration over which momentum remains in force gets progressively shorter as more traders catch on to
it. For example, price momentum driven by earnings announcements used to
last several days. Now it lasts barely until the market closes. This is quite understandable if we view price momentum as generated by the slow diffusion
of information. As more traders learn about the information faster and earlier,
the diffusion—and thus, momentum—also ends sooner. This of course creates a problem for the momentum trader, since we may have to constantly
shorten our holding period, yet there is no predictable schedule for doing so.
Lest you think that we should just give up on momentum strategies, let’s
look at the list of pros for momentum strategies. Such lists usually start with
the ease of risk management. To see why, we observe that there are two common types of exit strategies for momentum strategies: time-based and stop
loss. All the momentum strategies I have discussed so far involve only timebased exits. We specify a holding period, and we exit a position when we
reached that holding period. But we can also impose a stop loss as the exit
condition, or maybe as an additional exit condition. Stop losses are perfectly
consistent with momentum strategies. If momentum has changed direction,
we should enter into the opposite position. Since the original position would
have been losing, and now we have exited it, this new entry signal effectively
served as a stop loss. In contrast, stop losses are not consistent with meanreverting strategies, because they contradict mean reversion strategies’ entry
signals. (This point will be taken up again in Chapter 8.) Because of either a
time-based exit or a stop loss, the loss of a momentum position is always limited. In contrast, we can incur an enormous drawdown with just one position
due to a mean-reverting strategy. (This is not to say that the cumulative loss of
successive losing positions due to a momentum strategy won’t bankrupt us!)
Not only do momentum strategies survive risks well, they can thrive in
them (though we have seen how poorly they did in the aftermath of risky
events). For mean-reverting strategies, their upside is limited by their natural profit cap (set as the “mean” to which the prices revert), but their downside can be unlimited. For momentum strategies, their upside is unlimited
(unless one arbitrarily imposes a profit cap, which is ill-advised), while their
downside is limited. The more often “black swan” events occur, the more
likely that a momentum strategy will benefit from them. The thicker the
tails of the returns distribution curve, or the higher its kurtosis, the better that market is for momentum strategies. (Remember the simulation in
Example 1.1? We simulated a returns series with the same kurtosis as the

futures series for TU but with no serial autocorrelations. We found that it
can still generate the same returns as our TU momentum strategy in 12 percent of the random realizations!)
Finally, as most futures and currencies exhibit momentum, momentum
strategies allow us to truly diversify our risks across different asset classes and countries. Adding momentum strategies to a portfolio of meanreverting strategies allows us to achieve higher Sharpe ratios and smaller
drawdowns than either type of strategy alone.

KEY POINTS
• Time-series momentum refers to the positive correlation of a price series’
past and future returns.
• Cross-sectional momentum refers to the positive correlation of a price
series’ past and future relative returns, in relation to that of other price series
in a portfolio.
• Futures exhibit time series momentum mainly because of the persistence of
the sign of roll returns.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

154

• If you are able to find an instrument (e.g., an ETF or another future) that
cointegrates or correlates with the spot price or return of a commodity,
you can extract the roll return of the commodity future by shorting that
instrument during backwardation, or buying that instrument during
contango.
• Portfolios of futures or stocks often exhibit cross-sectional momentum: a
simple ranking algorithm based on returns would work.
• Profitable strategies on news sentiment momentum show that the slow
diffusion of news is a cause for stock price momentum.
• The contagion of forced asset sales and purchases among mutual funds
contributes to stock price momentum.
• Momentum models thrive on “black swan” events and the positive kurtosis
of the returns distribution curve.

CHAPTER 7

Intraday
Momentum
Strategies
I

n the preceding chapter we saw that most instruments, be they stocks or
futures, exhibit cross-sectional momentum, and often time-series momentum as well. Unfortunately, the time horizon of this momentum behavior tends
to be long—typically a month or longer. Long holding periods present two
problems:They result in lower Sharpe ratios and backtest statistical significance
because of the infrequent independent trading signals, and they suffer from underperformance in the aftermath of financial crises. In this chapter, we describe
short-term, intraday momentum strategies that do not suffer these drawbacks.
We previously enumerated four main causes of momentum. We will see
that all but one of them also operate at the intraday time frame. (The only
exception is the persistence of roll return, since its magnitude and volatility
are too small to be relevant intraday.)
There is an additional cause of momentum that is mainly applicable to
the short time frame: the triggering of stops. Such triggers often lead to the
so-called breakout strategies. We’ll see one example that involves an entry
at the market open, and another one that involves intraday entry at various
support or resistance levels.
Intraday momentum can be triggered by specific events beyond just price
actions.These events include corporate news such as earnings announcements
or analyst recommendation changes, as well as macro-economic news. That

155

these events generate time series momentum has long been known, but I
present some new research on the effects of each specific category of events.
Intraday momentum can also be triggered by the actions of large funds.
I examine how the daily rebalancing of leveraged ETFs leads to short-term
momentum.
Finally, at the shortest possible time scale, the imbalance of the bid and
ask sizes, the changes in order flow, or the aforementioned nonuniform distribution of stop orders can all induce momentum in prices. Some of the
common high-frequency trading tactics that take advantage of such momentum will be presented in this chapter.
■ Opening Gap Strategy

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

156

In Chapter 4, we discussed a mean-reverting buy-on-gap strategy for stocks.
The opposite momentum strategy will sometimes work on futures and currencies: buying when the instrument gaps up, and shorting when it gaps down.
After being tested on a number of futures, this strategy proved to work
best on the Dow Jones STOXX 50 index futures (FSTX) trading on Eurex,
which generates an annual percentage rate (APR) of 13 percent and a Sharpe
ratio of 1.4 from July 16, 2004, to May 17, 2012. Example 7.1 shows the
gap momentum code (available for download as gapFutures_FSTX.m).
Example 7.1: Opening Gap Strategy for FSTX
This code assumes the open, high, low, and close prices are
contained in T × 1 arrays op, hi, lo, cl. It makes use of utilities function
smartMovingStd and backshift available from epchan.com/book2.
entryZscore=0.1;
stdretC2C90d=backshift(1, smartMovingStd(calculateReturns ...
(cl, 1), 90));
longs=op

> backshift(1, hi).*(1+entryZscore*stdretC2C90d);

shorts=op < backshift(1, lo).*(1-entryZscore*stdretC2C90d);
positions=zeros(size(cl));
positions(longs)=1;
positions(shorts)=-1;
ret=positions.*(op-cl)./op;

The equity curve is depicted in Figure 7.1.

FIGURE 7.1 Equity Curve of FSTX Opening Gap Strategy

■ News-Driven Momentum Strategy
If, as many people believe, momentum is driven by the slow diffusion of news,
surely we can benefit from the first few days, hours, or even seconds after
a newsworthy event. This is the rationale behind traditional post–earnings

157
INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

The same strategy works on some currencies, too. However, the daily
“open” and “close” need to be defined differently. If we define the close to
be 5:00 p.m. ET, and the open to be 5:00 a.m. ET (corresponding to the
London open), then applying this strategy to GBPUSD yields an APR of
7.2 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from July 23, 2007, to February 20,
2012. Naturally, you can experiment with different definitions of opening
and closing times for different currencies. Most currency markets are closed
from 5:00 p.m. on Friday to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, so that’s a natural “gap” for
these strategies.
What’s special about the overnight or weekend gap that sometimes triggers momentum? The extended period without any trading means that the
opening price is often quite different from the closing price. Hence, stop
orders set at different prices may get triggered all at once at the open. The
execution of these stop orders often leads to momentum because a cascading effect may trigger stop orders placed further away from the open price
as well. Alternatively, there may be significant events that occurred overnight. As discussed in the next section, many types of news events generate
momentum.

announcement drift (PEAD) models, as well as other models based on various corporate or macroeconomic news.

Post–Earnings Announcement Drift

BOX 7.1

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

158

There is no surprise that an earnings announcement will move stock price.
It is, however, surprising that this move will persist for some time after the
announcement, and in the same direction, allowing momentum traders to
benefit. Even more surprising is that though this fact has been known and
studied since 1968 (Bernard and Thomas, 1989), the effect still has not been
arbitraged away, though the duration of the drift may have shortened. What
I will show in this section is that as recently as 2011 this strategy is still profitable if we enter at the market open after the earnings announcement was
made after the previous close, buying the stock if the return is very positive
and shorting if the return is very negative, and liquidate the position at the
same day’s close. Notice that this strategy does not require the trader to
interpret whether the earnings announcement is “good” or “bad.” It does not
even require the trader to know whether the earnings are above or below
analysts’ expectations. We let the market tell us whether it thinks the earnings are good or bad.
Before we backtest this strategy, it is necessary to have historical data of
the times of earnings annoucements. You can use the function parseEarnings
CalendarFromEarningsDotcom.m displayed in the box to retrieve one year or
so of such data from earnings.com given a certain stock universe specified
by the stock symbols array allsyms. The important feature of this program
is that it carefully selects only earnings announcements occurring after the
previous trading day’s market close and before today’s market open. Earnings announcements occurring at other times should not be triggers for our
entry trades as they occur at today’s market open.
Function for Retrieving Earnings Calendar from earnings.com
This function takes an input 1xN stock symbols cell array allsyms and creates
a 1 × N logical array earnann, which tells us whether (with values true or false)
the corresponding stock has an earnings announcement after the previous
day’s 4:00 P.M. ET (U.S. market closing time) and before today’s 9:30 A.M. ET
(U.S. market opening time). The inputs prevDate and todayDate should be in
yyyymmdd format.
function [earnann]= ...
parseEarningsCalendarFromEarningsDotCom(prevDate, ...
todayDate, allsyms)

BOX 7.1 (Continued)

% [earnann]==parseEaringsCalendarFromEarningsDotCom
% (prevDate,todayDate, allsyms)
earnann=zeros(size(allsyms));
prevEarningsFile=urlread([‘http://www.earnings.com/earning ...
.asp?date=’, num2str(prevDate), ‘&client=cb’]);
todayEarningsFile=urlread([‘http://www.earnings.com ...
/earning.asp?date=’, num2str(todayDate), ‘&client=cb’]);
prevd=day(datenum(num2str(prevDate), ‘yyyymmdd’));
todayd=day(datenum(num2str(todayDate), ‘yyyymmdd’));
prevmmm=datestr(datenum(num2str(prevDate), ‘yyyymmdd’), ...
‘mmm’);
todaymmm=datestr(datenum(num2str(todayDate), ‘yyyymmdd’), ...
‘mmm’);
patternSym=’<a\s+href=”company.asp\?ticker=([%\*\w\._ ...
/-]+)&coid’;
% prevDate
patternPrevDateTime=[‘<td align=”center”><nobr>’, ...
num2str(prevd), ‘-’, num2str(prevmmm), ‘([ :\dABPMCO]*) ...
</nobr>’];
symA=regexp(prevEarningsFile, patternSym , ‘tokens’);

159

timeA=regexp(prevEarningsFile, patternPrevDateTime, ...
‘tokens’);

INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

symsA=[symA{:}];
timeA=[timeA{:}];
assert(length(symsA)==length(timeA));
isAMC=~cellfun(‘isempty’, regexp(timeA, ‘AMC’));
patternPM=’[ ]+\d:\d\d[ ]+PM’; % e.g. ‘ 6:00 PM’
isAMC2=~cellfun(‘isempty’, regexp(timeA, patternPM));
symsA=symsA(isAMC | isAMC2);
[foo, idxA, idxALL]=intersect(symsA, allsyms);
earnann(idxALL)=1;
% today
patternTodayDateTime=[‘<td align=”center”><nobr>’, ...
num2str(todayd), ‘-’, num2str(todaymmm), ...
‘([ :\dABPMCO]*)</nobr>’];
(Continued )

BOX 7.1 (Continued)

symA=regexp(todayEarningsFile, patternSym , ‘tokens’);
timeA=regexp(todayEarningsFile, patternTodayDateTime, ...
‘tokens’);
symsA=[symA{:}];
timeA=[timeA{:}];
symsA=symsA(1:length(timeA));
assert(length(symsA)==length(timeA));
isBMO=~cellfun(‘isempty’, regexp(timeA, ‘BMO’));
patternAM=’[ ]+\d:\d\d[ ]+AM’; % e.g. ‘ 8:00 AM’
isBMO2=~cellfun(‘isempty’, regexp(timeA, patternAM));
symsA=symsA(isBMO | isBMO2);
[foo, idxA, idxALL]=intersect(symsA, allsyms);
earnann(idxALL)=1;
end

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

160

We need to call this program for each day in the backtest for the PEAD
strategy. We can then concatenate the resulting 1 × N earnann arrays into
one big historical T × N earnann array for the T days in the backtest.
Assuming that we have compiled the historical earnings announcement
logical array, whether using our function above or through other means,
the actual backtest program for the PEAD strategy is very simple, as shown
in Example 7.2. We just need to compute the 90-day moving standard deviation of previous-close-to-next day’s-open return as the benchmark for
deciding whether the announcement is “surprising” enough to generate the
post announcement drift.
Example 7.2: Backtest of Post-Earnings
Annoucement Drift Strategy
We assume the historical open and close prices are stored in the
T × N arrays op and cl. The input T × N logical array earnann indicates
whether there is an earnings announcement for a stock on a given day
prior to that day’s market open but after the previous trading day’s
market close. The utility functions backshift, smartMovingStd and

Example 7.2 (Continued)
smartsum are available for download from epchan.com/book2. The
backtest program itself is named pead.m.
lookback=90;
retC2O=(op-backshift(1, cl))./backshift(1, cl);
stdC2O=smartMovingStd(retC2O, lookback);
positions=zeros(size(cl));
longs=retC2O >= 0.5*stdC2O & earnann;
shorts=retC2O <= -0.5*stdC2O & earnann;
positions(longs)=1;
positions(shorts)=-1;
ret=smartsum(positions.*(cl-op)./op, 2)/30;

FIGURE 7.2 Cumulative Returns Curve of PEAD Strategy

161
INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

For a universe of S&P 500 stocks, the APR from January 3, 2011, to April
24, 2012, is 6.7 percent, while the Sharpe ratio is a very respectable 1.5.
The cumulative returns curve is displayed in Figure 7.2. Note that we have
used 30 as the denominator in calculating returns, since there is a maximum
of 30 positions in one day during that backtest period. Of course, there is a
certain degree of look-ahead bias in using this number, since we don’t know
exactly what the maximum will be. But given that the maximum number of

announcements per day is quite predictable, this is not a very grievous bias.
Since this is an intraday strategy, it is possible to lever it up by at least four
times, giving an annualized average return of close to 27 percent.
You might wonder whether holding these positions overnight will generate additional profits. The answer is no: the overnight returns are negative
on average. On the contrary, many published results from 10 or 20 years
ago have shown that PEAD lasted more than a day. This may be an example
where the duration of momentum is shortened due to increased awareness
of the existence of such momentum. It remains to be tested whether an even
shorter holding period may generate better returns.

Drift Due to Other Events

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

162

Besides earnings announcements, there are other corporate events that
may exhibit post-announcement drift: An incomplete list includes earnings guidance, analyst ratings and recommendation changes, same store
sales, and airline load factors. (A reasonable daily provider of such data is
the Dow Jones newswire delivered by Newsware because it has the code
specific to the type of event attached to each story and is machine readable.) In theory, any announcements that prompt a reevaluation of the
fair market value of a company should induce a change in its share price
toward a new equilibrium price. (For a recent comprehensive study of all
these events and their impact on the stock’s post-event returns, see Hafez,
2011.) Among these events, mergers and acquisitions, of course, draw
the attention of specialized hedge funds that possess in-depth fundamental
knowledge of the acquirer and acquiree corporations. Yet a purely technical model like the one described earlier for PEAD can still extract an APR
of about 3 percent for mergers and acquisitions (M&As). (It is interesting
to note that contrary to common beliefs, Hafez found that the acquiree’s
stock price falls more than the acquirer’s after the initial announcement
of the acquisition.)
In Chapter 6, we described how momentum in a stock’s price is generated by large funds’ forced buying or selling of the stock. For index funds
(whether mutual or exchange traded), there is one type of forced buying
and selling that is well known: index composition changes. When a stock
is added to an index, expect buying pressure, and vice versa when a stock
is deleted from an index. These index rebalancing trades also generate momentum immediately following the announced changes. Though some researchers have reported that such momentum used to last many days, my

own testing with more recent data suggests that the drift horizon has also
been reduced to intraday (Shankar and Miller, 2006).
While we are on the subject of momentum due to scheduled announcements, what about the impact of macroeconomic events such as Federal
Open Market Committee’s rate decisions or the release of the latest consumer price index? I have tested their effects on EURUSD, but unfortunately have found no significant momentum. However, Clare and Courtenay
reported that U.K. macroeconomic data releases as well as Bank of England
interest rate announcements induced momentum in GBPUSD for up to at
least 10 minutes after the announcements (Clare and Courtnenay, 2001).
These results were based on data up to 1999, so we should expect that the
duration of this momentum to be shorter in recent years, if the momentum
continues to exist at all.
■ Leveraged ETF Strategy

163
INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

Imagine that you have a portfolio of stocks that is supposed to track the
MSCI US REIT index (RMZ), except that you want to keep the leverage
of the portfolio at 3, especially at the market close. As I demonstrate in
Example 8.1, this constant leverage requirement has some counterintuitive
and important consequences. Suppose the RMZ dropped precipitously one
day. That would imply that you would need to substantially reduce the positions in your portfolio by selling stocks across the board in order to keep the
leverage constant. Conversely, if the RMZ rose that day, you would need to
increase the positions by buying stocks.
Now suppose you are actually the sponsor of an ETF, and that portfolio
of yours is none other than a 3× leveraged ETF such as DRN (a real estate
ETF), and its equity is over a hundred million dollars. If you think that this
rebalancing procedure (selling the component stocks when the portfolio’s
return is negative, and vice versa) near the market close would generate
momentum in the market value of the portfolio, you would be right.
(A large change in the market index generates momentum in the same
direction for both leveraged long or short ETFs. If the change is positive,
a short ETF would experience a decrease in equity, and its sponsor would
need to reduce its short positions. Therefore, it would also need to buy
stocks, just as the long ETF would.)
We can test this hypothesis by constructing a very simple momentum
strategy: buy DRN if the return from previous day’s close to 15 minutes

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

164

before market close is greater than 2 percent, and sell if the return is smaller
than −2 percent. Exit the position at the market close. Note that this momentum strategy is based on the momentum of the underlying stocks, so
it should be affecting the near-market-close returns of the unlevered ETFs
such as SPY as well. We use the leveraged ETFs as trading instruments simply to magnify the effect. The APR of trading DRN is 15 percent with a
Sharpe ratio of 1.8 from October 12, 2011, to October 25, 2012.
Naturally, the return of this strategy should increase as the aggregate assets
of all leveraged ETFs increase. It was reported that the total AUM of leveraged ETFs (including both long and short funds) at the end of January 2009 is
$19 billion (Cheng and Madhavan, 2009). These authors also estimated that a
1 percent move of SPX will necessitate a buying or selling of stocks constituting about 17 percent of the market-on-close volume. This is obviously going
to have significant market impact, which is momentum inducing. (A more updated analysis was published by Rodier, Haryanto, Shum, and Hejazi, 2012.)
There is of course another event that will affect the equity of an ETF, leveraged or not: the flow of investors’ cash. A large inflow into long leveraged
ETFs will cause positive momentum on the underlying stocks’ prices, while
a large inflow into short leveraged (“inverse”) ETFs will cause negative momentum. So it is theoretically possible that on the same day when the market
index had a large positive return many investors sold the long leveraged ETFs
(perhaps as part of a mean-reverting strategy). This would have neutralized
the momentum. But our backtests show that this did not happen often.
■ High-Frequency Strategies
Most high-frequency momentum strategies involve extracting information
from the order book, and the basic idea is simple: If the bid size is much
bigger than the ask size, expect the price to tick up and vice versa. This
idea is backed by academic research. For example, an approximately linear
relationship between the imbalance of bid versus ask sizes and short-term
price changes in the Nasdaq market was found (Maslov and Mills, 2001). As
expected, the effect is stronger for lower volume stocks. The effect is not
limited to just the national best bid offer (NBBO) prices: an imbalance of the
entire order book also induces price changes for a stock on the Stockholm
stock market (Hellström and Simonsen, 2006).
There are a number of high-frequency momentum strategies based on
this phenomenon. Many of those were described in books about market
