
Winners receive less than what losers lose because the industry drains money from
the markets.
For example, roulette in a casino is a minus-sum game because the casino sweeps
away between three and six percent of every bet. This makes roulette unwinnable in
the long run. You and I can get into in a minus-sum game if we make the same $20
bet on the next 100-point move in the Dow through brokers. When we settle, the
loser will be out $23, and the winner will collect only $17, while two brokers will
smile on their way to the bank.
Commissions and slippage are to traders what death and taxes are to all of us.
They take some fun out of life and ultimately bring it to an end. A trader must support his broker and the machinery of exchanges before he collects a dime. Being
simply “better than average” is not good enough. You have to be head and shoulders
above the crowd to win a minus-sum game.

Commissions
Commissions have become much smaller in the past two decades. Twenty years ago,
there were still brokers who charged one-way commissions of between half a percent
and one percent of trade value. Buying a thousand shares of GE at $20 a share, with
a total value of $20,000, would have set you back $100 to $200 on the way in—and
again on the way out. Fortunately for traders, commission rates have plummeted.
The extortionate rates haven’t completely disappeared. While preparing this
book for publication, I received an e-mail from a client in Greece with a small account whose broker—a major European bank—charged him a $40 minimum on
any trade. I told him of my broker whose minimum for a hundred shares is only $1.
Without proper care, even seemingly small numbers can raise a tall barrier to
success.
Look at a fairly active trader with a $20,000 account, doing one roundtrip trade
per day, four days a week. Paying $10 one way, by the end of the week he’ll spend
$80 in commissions: $40 for entries and $40 for exits. If he does that 50 weeks per
year (if he lasts that long), by the end of the year he will have spent $4,000 on commission. That would be 20% of his account!
George Soros, a top money manager, delivers an average 29% annual return. He
wouldn’t be where he is if he paid 20% a year in commissions! Even a “small commission” can build up a major barrier to success! I’ve heard brokers chuckle as they
gossiped about clients who beat their brains out just to stay even with the game.
Shop for the lowest possible commissions. Don’t be shy about bargaining for lower rates.
I’ve heard many brokers complain about a shortage of customers—but not many customers
complain about the shortage of brokers. Tell your broker it is in his best interest to charge you
low commissions because you will survive and remain a client for a long time. Design a trading
system that will trade less often.
In my own trading, I maintain one major account with a broker who charges me
$7.99 for unlimited size trades and another with a broker who charges a penny a
share, with a $1 minimum. When I trade expensive stocks, where I buy fewer than
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

3. THE ODDS AGAINST YOU

7

800 shares, I give that order to the penny-a-share broker; otherwise, I go with the
$7.99-per-trade broker. A beginning trader, making his first steps, should look for
a penny-a-share broker. Then you can trade your 100 shares for a dollar. A futures
trader can expect to pay just a couple of dollars for a roundtrip trade.

Slippage
Slippage means having your orders filled at a different price than what you saw on the
screen when you placed your order. It is like paying 50 cents for an apple in a grocery
store even though the posted price is 49 cents. A penny is nothing—but if you’re
buying a thousand apples or a thousand shares with a penny slippage, it’ll come to
$10 per order, probably greater than your commission.
There are two main types of orders: market and limit. Your slippage depends on
which of these types you use.
A limit order says—‘give me that apple at 49 cents.’ It guarantees the price, but
doesn’t guarantee a fill.You’ll pay no more than 49 cents, but you may end up without the apple that you wanted.
A market order says—‘give me that apple.’ It guarantees a fill, but doesn’t guarantee the price. If prices of apples are rising when you place your order, you may well
pay more than you saw on the screen when you pushed the buy button.You may get
hit by slippage.
Slippage on market orders rises with market volatility.When the market begins to
run, slippage goes through the roof.
Do you have any idea how much slippage costs you?
There is only one way to find out: write down the price at the time you placed a
market order, compare it with your fill, and multiply the difference by the number of
shares or contracts. Needless to say, you need a good record-keeping system, such as
a spreadsheet with columns for each of the above numbers. We offer such a spreadsheet to traders as a public service at www.elder.com.
You’ll be reading “record this” and “record that” throughout this book. Remember
that good record-keeping is essential for your success. You have to keep an eye on
your wins and an even sharper eye on your losses because you can learn much more
from them.
Here’s a shocking number, which you can confirm by keeping good records: an
average trader spends three times more on slippage than on commissions.
Earlier we talked about commissions raising a barrier to success. The barrier from
slippage is three times higher. This is why, no matter how tempting a trade, you need
to avoid buying “at the market.”
You want to be in control and trade only at prices that suit you. There are thousands of stocks and dozens of futures contracts. If you miss a trade due to a limit
order, there’ll be countless other opportunities. Do not overpay! I almost always use
limit orders and resort to market orders only when placing stops. When a stop level
gets hit, it becomes a market order. When a trade is flaming out, it’s not the time to
economize. Get in slow but get out fast.

8

INTRODUCTION

To reduce slippage, trade liquid, high-volume markets and avoid thinly traded stocks, where
slippage tends to be higher. Go long or short when the market is quiet, and use limit orders to
buy or sell at specified prices. Keep a record of prices at the time you placed your order. Demand
your broker fight the floor for a better fill when necessary.

Bid-Ask Spreads
Whenever the market is open, there are always two prices for any trading vehicle—a
bid and an ask. A bid is what people are offering to pay for that security at that moment; an ask is what sellers are demanding in order to sell it. A bid is always lower,
an ask higher, and the spread between them keeps changing.
Bid-ask spreads vary between different markets and even in the same market at
different times. Bid-ask spreads are higher in thinly traded vehicles, as the pros who
dominate such markets demand high fees from those who want to join their party.
The bid-ask spreads are likely to be razor-thin, perhaps only one tick on a quiet day
in an actively traded stock, future or option. They grow wider as prices accelerate
on the way up or down and may become huge—dozens of ticks—after a severe drop
or a very sharp rally.
Market orders get filled at the bad side of bid-ask spreads. A market order buys at
the ask (high) and sells at the bid (low). Little wonder that many professional traders make a good living from filling market orders. Don’t feed the wolves—use limit
orders whenever possible!

The Barriers to Success
Slippage and commissions make trading similar to swimming in a piranha-infested
river. Other expenses also drain traders’ money. The cost of computers and data,
fees for advisory services and books—including the one you are reading now—all
come out of your trading funds.
Look for a broker with the cheapest commissions and watch him like a hawk. Design a trading system that gives signals relatively infrequently and allows you to enter markets during
quiet times. Use limit orders almost exclusively—except when placing stops. Be careful on what
tools you spend money: there are no magic solutions. Success cannot be bought, only earned.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 1

Individual Psychology

■■4. Why Trade?
Trading appears deceptively easy. A beginner may cautiously enter the market, win a
few times, and start feeling brilliant and invincible. That’s when he starts taking wild
risks and ends up with bad losses.
People trade for many reasons—some rational and many irrational. Trading offers
an opportunity to make a lot of money in a hurry. Money symbolizes freedom to
many people, even though they often don’t know what to do with it.
If you know how to trade, you can make your own hours, live and work anywhere
you please, and never answer to a boss. Trading is a fascinating game: chess, poker,
and a video game rolled into one. Trading attracts people who love challenges.
It attracts risk-takers and repels those who avoid risk. An average person gets up in
the morning, goes to work, has a lunch break, returns home, has a beer and dinner,
watches TV, and goes to sleep. If he makes a few extra dollars, he puts them into a savings account. A trader keeps odd hours and puts his capital at risk. Many traders are
loners who abandon the certainties of the routine and take a leap into the unknown.

Self-Fulfillment
Many people have an innate drive to achieve their personal best, to develop their
abilities to the fullest. This drive, along with the pleasure of the game and the lure of
money, propels traders to challenge the markets.
Good traders tend to be hardworking and shrewd people, open to new ideas. The
goal of a good trader, paradoxically, is not to make money. His goal is to trade well.
9

10

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

If he trades right, money follows almost as an afterthought. Successful traders keep
honing their skills as they try to reach their personal best.
A professional trader from Texas invited me to his office and said: “If you sit across
the table from me while I day-trade, you won’t be able to tell whether I am $2,000
ahead or $2,000 behind on that day.” He has risen to a level where winning does not
elate him and losing does not deflate him. He is so focused on trading right and improving his skills that money no longer influences his emotions.
The trouble with self-fulfillment is that many people have self-destructive streaks.
Accident-prone drivers keep destroying their cars, and self-destructive traders keep
destroying their accounts. Markets offer vast opportunities for self-sabotage, as well
as for self-fulfillment. Acting out your internal conflicts in the marketplace is a very
expensive proposition.
Traders who are not at peace with themselves often try to fulfill their contradictory wishes in the markets. If you don’t know where you are going, you’ll wind up
somewhere you never wanted to be.

■■5. Reality versus Fantasy
If a friend with little farming experience told you that he planned to feed himself
with food grown on a quarter-acre (1,000 square meters) plot, you’d expect him to
go hungry. One can squeeze only so much from a small piece of land. There is, however, a field in which grown-ups let their fantasies fly—in trading.
A former employee told me that he planned to support himself trading a $6,000
account. When I tried to show him the futility of his plan, he quickly changed the
topic. He was a bright analyst, but refused to see that his “intensive farming” plan was
suicidal. In his desperate effort to succeed, he’d have to take on large positions—and
the slightest wiggle of the market will quickly put him out of business.
A successful trader is a realist. He knows his abilities and limitations. He sees
what’s happening in the markets and knows how to react. He analyzes the markets
without cutting corners, observes himself, and makes realistic plans. A professional
trader cannot afford illusions.
Once an amateur takes a few hits and gets a few margin calls, he swings from
cocky to fearful and starts developing strange ideas about the markets. Losers buy,
sell, or avoid trades due to their fantastic ideas. They act like children who are
afraid to pass a cemetery or look under their bed at night because they are afraid
of ghosts. The unstructured environment of the market makes it easy to develop
fantasies.
Most people who grow up in Western civilization have several similar fantasies.
They are so widespread that when I studied at the NewYork Psychoanalytic Institute,
there was a course called “Universal Fantasies.” For example, many people have a
fantasy in childhood that they were adopted. This fantasy seems to explain the unfriendly and impersonal world. It consoles a child but prevents him from being aware
of a reality he’d rather not see—that his parents aren’t that good. Our fantasies influence our behavior, even if we aren’t consciously aware of them.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

5. REALITY VERSUS FANTASY

11

In talking to hundreds of traders, I keep hearing several universal fantasies. They
distort reality and stand in the way of trading success. A successful trader must identify his fantasies and get rid of them.

The Brain Myth
Losers who suffer from the “brain myth” will tell you, “I lost because I didn’t know
trading secrets.” Many have a fantasy that successful traders have some secret knowledge. That fantasy helps support a lively market in advisory services and ready-made
trading systems.
A demoralized trader may whip out his credit card to buy access to “trading
secrets.” He may send money to a charlatan for a $3,000 “can’t miss,” backtested,
computerized trading system. When that system self-destructs, he’ll pull out his
almost-maxed-out credit card again for a “scientific manual” that explains how he
can stop losing and begin winning by contemplating the moon, the stars, or even
Uranus.
At an investment club we used to have in New York, I often ran into a famous
financial astrologer. He often asked for free admission because he couldn’t afford to
pay a modest fee for the meeting and a meal. His main source of income remains
collecting money for astrological trading predictions from hopeful amateurs.
Losers don’t realize that trading is intellectually fairly simple. It is nowhere near
as demanding as taking out an appendix, building a bridge, or trying a case in court.
Good traders are shrewd, but few are intellectuals. Many have never been to college,
and some have dropped out of high school.
Intelligent and hardworking people who have succeeded in their careers often feel
drawn to trading.
Why do they fail so often? What separates winners from losers isn’t intelligence
or secrets, and certainly not education.

The Undercapitalization Myth
Many losers think that they would trade successfully if they had a bigger account.
People destroy their accounts either by a string of losses or a single abysmally bad
trade. Often, after the loser is sold out, unable to meet a margin call, the market
reverses and moves in the direction he expected. He starts fuming: had he survived
another week, he would have made a fortune instead of losing!
Such people look at market reversals that come too late and think that those turns
confirm their methods. They may go back to work and earn, save, or borrow enough
money to open another small account. History repeats itself: The loser gets wiped
out, the market reverses and “proves” him right, but only too late—he’s been sold
out again.That’s when the fantasy is born: “If only I had a bigger account, I could have
stayed in the market longer and won.”
Some losers raise money from relatives and friends by showing them a paper track
record. It seems to prove that they would have won big, if only they had had more

12

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

money to work with. But even if they raise more money, they lose that, too—as if
the market were laughing at them!
A loser is not undercapitalized—his mind is underdeveloped. A loser can destroy
a big account almost as quickly as a small one. An acquaintance of mine once blew
out over 200 million dollars in a day. His broker sold him out—and then the market
turned. He sued the broker and said to me: “If only I had a bigger account….” Apparently an account with $200 million wasn’t big enough.
A loser’s true problem is not account size but overtrading and sloppy money management. He takes risks that are too big for his account size, however small or big. No matter how good his system may be, a streak of bad trades is sure to put him out of business.
Amateurs neither expect to lose nor are prepared to manage losing trades. Calling
themselves undercapitalized is a cop-out that helps them avoid two painful truths:
their lack of a realistic money management plan and lack of discipline.
A trader who wants to survive and prosper must control losses. You do that by
risking only a tiny fraction of your equity on any single trade (see Section Nine, “Risk
Management”). Learn from cheap mistakes in a small account.
The one advantage of a large trading account is that the price of equipment and
services represents a smaller percentage of your money. The owner of a milliondollar fund who spends $5,000 on classes is only ½ percent behind the game. The
same expenditure would represent a deadly 25 percent of equity for a trader with a
$20,000 account.

The Autopilot Myth
Traders who believe in the autopilot myth think that the pursuit of wealth can be
automated. Some people try to develop an automatic trading system, while others
buy systems from vendors. Men who have spent years honing their skills as lawyers,
doctors, or businessmen plunk down thousands of dollars for canned competence.
Most are driven by greed, laziness, and mathematical illiteracy.
Systems used to be written on sheets of paper, but now they get downloaded on
a computer. Some are primitive; others are elaborate, with built-in optimization and
even money management rules. Many traders spend thousands of dollars searching
for magic that will turn a few pages of computer code into an endless stream of
money. People who pay for automatic trading systems are like medieval knights who
paid alchemists for the secret of turning base metals into gold.
Complex human activities do not lend themselves to automation. Computerized
learning systems have not replaced teachers, and programs for doing taxes haven’t
created unemployment among accountants. Most human activities call for an exercise of judgment; machines and systems can help but not replace humans.
Had there been a successful automatic trading system, its purchaser could move
to Tahiti and spend the rest of his life at leisure, supported by a stream of checks from
his broker. So far, the only people who’ve made money from trading systems are their
sellers. They form a small but colorful cottage industry. If their systems worked,
why would they sell them? They could move to Tahiti themselves and cash checks
from their brokers! Meanwhile, every system seller has a line. Some say they like
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

5. REALITY VERSUS FANTASY

13

programming better than trading. Others claim that they sell their systems only to
raise capital or even out of love for humanity.
Markets are always changing and defeating automatic trading systems.Yesterday’s
rigid rules will work less well today and will probably stop working tomorrow. A
competent trader can adjust his methods when he detects trouble. An automatic
system is less adaptable and self-destructs.
Airlines pay high salaries to pilots despite having autopilots. They do it because
humans can handle unforeseen events. When a roof blows off an airliner over the
Pacific or when a passenger jet loses both engines to a flock of geese over Manhattan, only a human can handle such crises. These emergencies have been reported in
the press, and in each of them, experienced pilots managed to land their airliners by
improvising solutions. No autopilot can do that. Betting your money on an automatic
system is like betting your life on an autopilot. The first unexpected event will make
your account crash and burn.
There are good trading systems out there, but they have to be monitored and adjusted using individual judgment.You have to stay on the ball—you cannot abdicate
responsibility for your success to a mechanical system.
Traders with autopilot fantasies try to repeat what they felt as infants. Their
mothers used to fulfill their needs for food, warmth, and comfort. Now they try to
recreate the experience of passively lying on their backs and having profits flow to
them like an endless stream of free, warm milk. The market is not your mother. It
consists of tough men and women who look for ways to take money from you rather
than pouring warm milk into your mouth.

The Cult of Personality
Most people pay lip service to their wish for freedom and independence, but when
they come under pressure, they change their tune and start looking for “strong leadership.” â•—Traders in distress often seek directions from assorted gurus.
When I was growing up in the former Soviet Union, children were taught that
Stalin was our great leader. Later we found out what a monster he was, but while he
was alive, most people enjoyed following the leader. He freed them from the need
to think for themselves.
“Little Stalins” were installed in every area of society—in economics, biology,
architecture, and so on. When I came to the United States and began to trade, I was
amazed to see how many traders were looking for a guru—their own “little Stalin.”
The fantasy that someone else can make you rich is always with us.
There are three types of gurus in the financial markets: market cycle gurus, magic
method gurus, and dead gurus. Cycle gurus call important market turns. Method
gurus promote new highways to riches. Still others have escaped criticism and invited cult following through the simple mechanism of departing this world.
Market Cycle Gurus

For many decades, the U.S. stock market has generally followed a four-year cycle.
The broad stock market has normally spent 2.5 or 3 years going up and 1 or 1.5 years

14

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

going down. A new market cycle guru emerges in almost every major stock cycle,
once every 4 years. A guru’s fame tends to last for 2 to 3 years. The reigning period
of each guru coincides with a major bull market in the United States.
A market cycle guru forecasts rallies and declines. Each correct forecast increases
his fame and prompts even more people to buy or sell when he issues his pronouncements. A market cycle guru has a pet theory about the market. That theory—cycles,
volume, Elliott Wave, whatever—is usually developed several years prior to reaching
stardom. At first, the market refuses to follow an aspiring guru’s pet theory. Then
the market changes and for several years comes in gear with the guru’s calls. That is
when the guru’s star rises high above the marketplace.
Compare this to what happens to fashion models as public tastes change. One year,
blondes are popular, another year, redheads. Suddenly, last year’s blonde star is no longer wanted for the front cover of a major magazine. Everybody wants a dark model,
or a woman with a birthmark on her face. A model doesn’t change—public tastes do.
Gurus always come from the fringes of market analysis. They are never establishment analysts. Institutional employees play it safe—afraid to stick their necks out—
and almost never achieve spectacular results. A market cycle guru is an outsider with
a unique theory.
A guru remains famous for as long as the market behaves according to his the–
ory—usually for less than the duration of one 4-year market cycle. At some point,
the market changes and starts marching to a different tune. A guru continues to use
old methods that worked so well in the past and loses his following. When the guru’s
forecasts stop working, public admiration turns to hatred. It’s impossible for a discredited market cycle guru to return to stardom.
All market cycle gurus have several traits in common. They become active in
the forecasting business several years prior to reaching stardom. Each has a unique
theory, a few followers, and some credibility, conferred by sheer survival in the advisory business. The fact that each guru’s theory did not work for a number of years
is ignored by his followers. When the theory becomes correct, the mass media take
notice. When a theory stops working, mass adulation turns to hatred.
When you recognize that a successful new guru is emerging, it may be profitable
to jump on his bandwagon. It’s even more important to recognize when a guru has
reached his peak. All gurus crash—and by definition, they crash from the height of
their fame. When a guru becomes accepted by the mass media, it’s a good sign that
he has reached his crest. The mainstream media is wary of outsiders. When several
mass magazines devote space to a hot market guru, you know that his end is near.
Mass psychology being what it is, new gurus will continue to emerge.
Magic Method Gurus
