
Figure 13.1
I prefer to look at TTM trend bars (similar to Heikin-Ashi bars), which take the action of the prior six bars into account before rendering a verdict of bullish or
278

bearish. This technique literally takes in the average price of the prior six bars. If the average price of the prior six bars is in the upper half of that trading range, then it
will paint the current bar blue, representing a bullish bias and solid buying pressure. However, if the average price of the prior six bars is in the lower half of that
trading range, then it will paint the current bar red, representing a bearish bias and steady selling pressure. On the right-hand chart (Chart B) in Figure 13.1, this “bullish
blue” is shown as light gray bars, and “bearish red” is shown as black bars. Let’s take a look. This is where it all starts coming together.
Figure 13.1 shows a squeeze that fired off long. As we learned in the squeeze chapter, these moves are considered to be over once there is a loss of momentum,
which occurs at point 2. This is a valid exit strategy. However, I’ve noticed that many times, a market will keep moving higher after this exit signal. What do I do? I
will take off half my position at the loss of momentum at point 2, and I will move my stop to my entry point. I will then wait for the TTM trend bar to change color
for two bars in a row before I get out of the rest of the position.

How Do I Protect Myself When They Are Trying to Shake Me Out of My Position?
Figure 13.1 shows “nasty candles” on the left-hand side (Chart A) at points 3 and 4. These look scary, as if real selling is coming into the market. It’s a sign to bail out,
right—to get out frantically before the market can take away any more of our profit? Or … is it meant to be a fake-out? After all, the market continues moving nicely
higher right after these two “short and nasty” selling sprees. To be blunt, it’s meant to be a fake-out. It’s meant to shake traders out of their positions. Not that anyone
at Goldman Sachs would try to shake us out of our position so that he could get back in at a cheaper price …
How do we fight this? Take a look at Chart B in Figure 13.1. It’s the same trade. The same points are marked on the chart at 5 and 6. And yet what looked like
nasty selling candles on Chart A show up as “merely nothing” on Chart B. There is no sell signal on Chart B. Remember, since we are long, we are looking for two
black bars (which, on a color chart, would show up as red) before we bail. These two black bars would represent real selling and a potential trend change coming into
this market on this time frame. On Chart B, there is no exit signal. We are still long at the top of the chart, with gold trading at $1,795.00, while many newbie
candlestick traders got shaken out at points 3 and 4 on Chart A.
Trading is not meant to be easy. It is meant to trick most of the people most of the time. No one is going to make it easy for you to stay in a position. Others will
try to scare you out so that they can take your position from you at a cheaper price. Where do you think liquidity and volume come from? If you sell too soon and get
panicked out of a trade too fast, well, that liquidity comes from you. Whereas it is easy to get faked out of a trade by a scary candlestick, a trader who takes the current
price action’s behavior into consideration will be able to withstand the small countertrend shocks that are meant to shake traders out of their position.
Let’s take a look at another trade. Figure 13.2 shows the devious ES contract on a two-minute chart. The ES is famous for shaking traders out of their positions right
before they make their next move. A squeeze fires off at 8:30 a.m., allowing traders to get in on the long side at 1171.00. Prices grind higher for about 10 minutes, and
then, wham, prices get knocked down from 1176.25 to 1172.75 quickly, as indicated by point 1 on Chart A. M any traders would get knocked out here on a trailing
stop that they are trailing too closely. Others would see the nasty candles and just get the hell out, probably near the lows. Did they still make money on the trade?
Yes, there is nothing wrong with making 1.75 points (7 ticks) on the ES, or $87.50 per contract. But take a look at Chart B. The nasty selling at point 2 never
materialized into “two black selling bars,” so there was nothing to do here but hold on to the position until that event took place on the chart. This eventually did
happen, about an hour and a half later, at point 3. At this point, a trader could get out near 1182.50, a gain of 11.50 (46 ticks), or $575.00 per contract. That is the
difference between getting suckered into selling too soon and staying in a trade until it is truly over.

279

Figure 13.2

280

Figure 13.3
I utilize the TTM trend bars for exit management. I typically don’t use them for entry signals, as I’d rather wait for something like a squeeze to get into a position,
or even use other entry techniques discussed in this book. I have found, however, that this is one of the better tools for managing exits.
The indicators I’ve discussed so far are mostly proprietary. They can be programmed, found on some platforms, or downloaded from our website. Figure 13.3
shows the TD Ameritrade/thinkorswim platform, which has some of our indicators already built into its platform. For other platforms, like TradeStation, eSignal,
Ninja Trader, or Infinity Futures, and others, we have these indicators available for download from our website. Some are free, and others have a fee that we split with
the programmers who put them together.
For additional videos on the TTM trend, visit www.tradethemarkets.com/trend for the most up-to-date ways in which I’m utilizing this indicator.

281

14
Scalper Alerts:
Is This the Best Tool
for Quick Price Trend
Change Confirmation?
How Do You Identify and Profit from Changes in Trend Without
Catching a Falling Knife or Stepping in Front of a Freight Train?
In watching the markets over the years, I’ve observed that most reversals take place after three consecutive higher closes or three consecutive lower closes, and this
tendency is valid for all time frames. The key to this setup is that it is based on consecutive closes and not just on intraday or daily high and low price action for an
individual price bar on a chart. In other words, the highs and lows are not important. I’m not interested in three higher price highs or three lower price lows. I want to
see where the action settles or closes, because that is where the rubber meets the road.
The hard way to follow this play, especially intraday, is to stare at the charts and keep track of consecutive lower or higher closes until you get three in a row. This
can cause a person to go bug-eyed, not to mention insane, and is recommended only for those who get a thrill from “the little things in life.” I’m not a big fan of staring
at charts, and I would be a prime candidate for the mental hospital if I did this with the naked eye. Instead, I’ve developed a simple indicator that will “paint” the first
bar in the sequence after the third bar has met the criteria for a signal. Once I see the painted bar, I just place a market order, and I’m in the trade. Even better, I set up
an audio alert so that if I’m down the hall, I’ll hear the signal and come back to my computer to place the trade. This works when I’m on the phone with my wife as
well, although she has yet to appreciate the importance of the signal and my urgent need to hang up in the middle of our conversation. Such is the life of a trader.
For the indicator, I did add one key filter. I found that at times I could get shaken out of a play that was consolidating (that is, a bull flag) when prices made a series
of lower closes within that consolidation. So, if there are three lower closes, but this price action does not go below the signal bar’s low, then I ignore the signal. For
this indicator on a long signal, then, the trigger bar would be the first bar that has a higher low than the previous bar. The next bar that closes above the high of this
trigger bar paints this previous low bar, which now becomes the swing low point. In most cases, all of this happens with “three higher closes,” but there are times
when it is not as clean, and these instances are taken into account with the one confirmation that really matters—price.
I use this signal in various time frames. For scalping the E-mini S&Ps, I like to use a 233-tick chart, because the signals are very fast. On the mini-sized Dow, I will
use a 144-tick chart for scalping and a five-minute chart to catch the one or two reversals that set up on any given day. For swing trades, I will use both 60-minute and
daily charts. I like to use this primarily on the stock index futures and the major currency pairs, but it works just the same in any market, in any time frame. It is
simple, and it is based solely on the price action. I will also use this signal for individual stocks that I am following.

Why Are Tick Charts Best for Scalping?
For tick charts (not to be confused with the NYSE $TICK play I discussed earlier), I like to use Fibonacci sequencing numbers. If you Google that phrase, it will bring
up a list of numbers that looks like this: 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987, 1,597, 2,584, and 4,181 (and so on). Of course, the list keeps going, but we
don’t need them all. There is no need to test the 144-tick chart vs. the 143-tick chart to see which is better. Why tick charts? A 377-tick chart forms a new bar every
377 trades. When the volume is slow (especially in the overnight session), this chart crawls along. When the volume and trading are fast and furious, this chart will
develop at a much faster rate. In sum, when the market is slow, so is the chart. It’s not pressured to form a new bar every two minutes (as is the case with a twominute chart), regardless of the volume, thus firing off false signals when low-volume conditions exist. When the trading is fast, so are the signals. Tick charts adapt to
the market, and I find them especially useful for day trading. How do we know which tick chart to use? There isn’t an exact science, but the rule of thumb is this: the
higher the volume, the higher the tick chart. While I use a 987-tick chart for the ES, I’ll use a 144-tick chart for the YM . The only difference is volume. As a general rule
of thumb, the 377-tick chart is good for day-trading most commodities, as well as individual, high-volume stocks.
Let’s quickly review what a 233-tick chart is for anyone who hasn’t used one before. Remember, this type of chart forms a new bar every time there are 233 trades
executed. It doesn’t matter what the size of any of the trades is, just that 233 trades have crossed the tape. I like to use these charts when I’m scalping for two reasons.
First, they are faster than regular time charts when it really matters—when the trade frequency accelerates. In comparison, a two-minute chart is going to form a bar
every two minutes, regardless of how fast or slow the trading is. With a tick chart, when the trade frequency slows down, so do the signals that are firing off in this
time frame; thus, these charts naturally keep a trader out of the market when there is nothing going on. Second, traders in the pit have no concept of time with respect
to a two-minute or a five-minute chart. They are focusing on the actual frequency of trades, and a breakout on a two-minute chart means nothing to them. Although I
prefer the 987-tick chart on the ES for intraday swing trades, meaning trades that I could be in for half an hour or more, I will at times use the 233-tick chart for faster
scalping. A couple of example plays with tick charts are shown here.

What Are the Trading Rules for Buys (Sells Are Reversed)?
1. Set up a 24-hour chart on intraday charts so that the overnight activity can be accounted for in this indicator setup. This can be used in all time frames. The larger the
time frame, the larger the parameters and the potential move. For daily charts, I will use the regular session hours.
2. After three consecutive higher closes, I go long at the market at the close of the third bar in the sequence.
3. The trade is valid until three consecutive lower closes occur, at which point I exit the trade. If the market is still open for an intraday trade, I will simultaneously exit
a long and establish a new short position. I don’t use a stop loss on this for intraday chart trades because the reversal signal is my exit strategy, whether it is a loss
or a gain. For daily charts, I will place a stop at the low of the bar that caused the signal to fire off, which is the first of three in the sequence of closes.
4. If I’m in an intraday trade (a 15-minute chart or smaller) and the market closes before giving an exit signal, I will exit at the market at 4:10 p.m. eastern.
282

5. For time frames that are 60 minutes or longer, I will stay in them overnight and exit at the next signal. This could be the next day for a 60-minute chart, and it could
be a month later for a daily chart.

Specific Examples of Scalper Alert Buy and Sell Setups
E-mini S&P—December 2004 Contract, October 3, 2004
1. Figure 14.1 is a 233-tick chart of the E-mini S&Ps, which is one of my favorite time frames for taking quick scalp trades in the market. The spot marked 1 on the
chart is a little to the right of the painted bar in question. The “paint” is added by TradeStation, and it is the thick black mark that covers the bar. This bar is
painted because it is the first bar in a series of three with consecutive higher closes.
2. When I see the painted bar signal, I go long at the market. I am filled at 1133.25, which is where we closed at point 2, which is the close of the third bar of this series
of higher closes. (This will get easier, I swear.)

Figure 14.1

3. I am now in the trade until I get a signal that a reversal has developed. Later in the trading session, I get the next painted bar signal, which indicates that a series of
three lower closes in a row has taken place. I place an order to sell my long position at the market. Note that the next signal will not show unless it is a reversal.
There is a series of many higher closes during this rally, but none of them constitutes a reversal, so they are ignored because the original signal has already fired off.
4. I am out at 1138.50, which is the close of the third bar in the series of lower lows at point 4 on the chart. The gain on the trade was +5.25 S&P points, or $262 per
contract. It is interesting to note that during this trade, all the oscillators were measuring overbought near the 1135.00 level, which would have gotten some traders
out and caused other traders to start going short. Using this setup, the only thing that matters is the price, which, in reality, is the only thing that matters.

E-mini S&P—December 2004 Contract, October 5, 2004
1. On October 5, 2004, I get a short reversal signal near 1:00 p.m. eastern on the 15-minute ES chart, and I enter at the market right after the signal fires off (see Figure
14.2).

283

Figure 14.2

2. I am filled at 1137.00. I’m now waiting for the next reversal signal to cover my short and go long.
3. As we approach 3:00 p.m. eastern, we get a signal, and I cover my short and also go long at the same time.
4. M y fill is 1134.00. I’m out for +3.00 points on the S&P play, and I have established a new long position.
5. There isn’t another reversal signal until near 8:00 p.m. eastern. However, because this is off an intraday chart (15 minutes or less), I exited this position at the market
at 4:10 p.m. eastern, and I was filled at 1133.75 for a loss of 0.25 point.
6. Some traders I know like to watch the action 24 hours a day, and they would stay in the trade until point 6. They would have gotten out at 1136.50 for a gain of
2.50. I don’t recommend this. The market action in the stock index futures after hours is slow and irritating, and there are many other things I’d rather do with my
time. If you want to trade actively after 4:00 p.m. eastern, then by far the best liquidity and opportunities are in the currency markets. I prefer the forex cash
markets in this regard because there is more liquidity in the various currency pairs during this post-4:00 p.m. time frame. When markets are active and liquid, they
are tradable. When they are quiet, let them be.

E-mini S&P—December 2004 Contract, September 30, 2004
1. At 12:30 p.m. on September 30, 2004, I get a signal on the 60-minute ES chart, indicating that a reversal is in place (see Figure 14.3). The bar that is painted is the
10:30 a.m. bar. Remember, even though the 10:30 a.m. bar is painted, the signal didn’t actually fire off until the close of the third bar at 12:30 p.m. (the 10:30 bar is
the first bar, the 11:30 bar is the second bar, and the 12:30 bar is the third bar).

284

Figure 14.3

2. At 12:30 p.m., I go long at the market, and I’m filled at 1114.75. I am now awaiting the next reversal signal in order to exit my position.
3. I get my next signal a few days later, on October 4.
4. I exit at 1136.50, for a gain of 21.75 S&P points, or $1,087.50 per contract. The 60-minute chart is great for catching swings that last anywhere from two to five
days. This is a great setup for people who are holding down a full-time job and don’t have time to stare at the markets all day. In addition, this is a great setup for
people who are day trading and are currently losing money. This 60-minute setup forces discipline and prevents a trader from overtrading, which is by far the
number one reason why most traders fail to make money in this profession.

E-mini S&P—September 2004 Contract, June 28, 2004
1. On this daily chart of the S&Ps, a signal fires off on June 28, 2004, which paints the June 24 daily bar (see Figure 14.4). (June 26 and 27 were the weekend.)
2. I go short at the close of the third day, which is what triggered the signal. I’m in the trade at 1132.50. I will now stay in the trade until I get a reversal signal. For a
stop, I use 1153.50, which is the high of the June 24 bar. In my experience, the actual stop is rarely hit because a reversal signal will fire off before the markets
reach that level.

285

Figure 14.4

3. On July 28, a month later, I get a reversal signal that paints the July 24 bar.
4. I exit at the market on July 28 at the close. I’m out at 1096.00, for a gain of 36.50 S&P points, or $1,825 per contract. Again, this setup is great for people who are
working and don’t have time to stare at the markets all day. I also think it is important for full-time traders to have two accounts, one for day trading and one for
swing trading. During a period when a trader’s day trading isn’t going well, it is possible to catch a good move in the swing-trading account using setups like this.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2004 Contract, August 10, 2004
1. On this daily chart of the mini-sized Dow futures, a long signal occurs on August 10, 2004, which paints the August 6 bar (see Figure 14.5).

286

Figure 14.5

2. I go long at the close of August 10, and I’m filled at 9916. I’m now waiting for the next reversal signal in order to exit the trade. The low of August 6 is 9809, which
is where I place my stop.
3. The next signal hits on September 7, nearly a month later.
4. I’m out at 10,278, for a gain of 362 YM points, or $1,810 per contract. One of the things I like about these swing trades is that they tend to take care of themselves.
Compared to the active and sometimes frantic pace of intraday trading, it’s almost like buying a rental property and turning the maintenance over to a management
company. The type of trading a person chooses to do is really a reflection of her personality. Someone who is inherently a swing trader will have a tough time at
day trading.

KLAC (KLA-Tencor Corp.), April 5, 2004
1. On this daily chart of KLAC, a reversal signal sets up on April 5, 2004 (see Figure 14.6).
2. I take a short at the close and get in at 52.51. M y plan is to stay in the trade until I get the next reversal signal. M y stop is the high of the signal bar, which is 53.97.

287

Figure 14.6

3. About a month later, on M ay 3, I get a reversal signal.
4. I cover my short at 42.96 for a gain of 9.55. For traders who just focus on stocks, this is a great setup to use on the daily charts to catch reversals.

Light, Sweet Crude Oil—September 2004 Contract, September 9, 2004
1. It is important to note that this setup is based purely on price action, and therefore works in all markets (see Figure 14.7). On September 9, 2004, a reversal signal is
painted on crude oil.

288

Figure 14.7

2. The resulting long is entered at 43.60.
3. On September 28, the reversal painted bar is in.
4. I’m out of the trade at 49.50, for a gain of 5.90. Note that this exit bar also became an entry signal to get back into the trade long, as the market reversed right away
and made three higher closes. If you are not familiar with crude oil, a one-dollar move is worth $1,000 on the big contract and $500 on the mini-contract, so a move
of 5.90 equates to $5,900 per contract on the big contract (symbol = CL) and $2,950 per contract on the mini-contract (symbol = QM ). The quote feed a person
needs to get live crude oil prices is NYM EX. There is an option for this in eSignal and TradeStation, and it’s also available through most of the other robust quote
vendors.

Mini-Sized Dow—December 2004 Contract, October 6, 2004
1. I wanted to use this example to show how I flow into and out of positions intraday, going both long and short (see Figure 14.8). This is best done on lower-value
intraday charts, such as five-minute charts or a tick chart like 233. The first signal on October 6, 2004, in the YM is painted at 10:35 a.m. eastern.

289

Figure 14.8

2. This means, of course, that I am going short at the close of the last bar in the sequence of three bars, which is 10,176.
3. The next reversal is noted on the chart at point 3.
4. I cover at 10,169 and simultaneously go long. The easy way to do this is to double the number of contracts you are trading on your exit order. So, if you are long 10
