
rocks, which will themselves turn into sand and then dust.
However, the main point here is that implied within this concept of
evolution (where we are in a state of imperfect knowledge) is the view that
mistakes don't exist. Mistakes just point the way to something that we
haven't learned yet and obviously need to know. What exactly is a mistake
anyway? We certainly weren't born with a concept or definition of what a
mistake is. If left alone, all children will naturally keep on interacting with
the environment to satisfy their own inner needs to learn and grow until
they start to learn that what they are doing isn't quite up to the standards set
by the people who are watching them. And all children just loved to be
watched.
The criteria that we use for how we define a mistake is something that we
had to learn from someone. In other words, our parents and teachers passed
their definitions on to us. These definitions would represent the mental
framework for their unresolved painful experiences and what they
themselves haven't learned about as being available from the environment
beyond their pain. In other words, we pass on our ignorance, as well as our
wisdom, without knowing at the time the difference between the two. And
what was passed on that was dysfunctional will be regarded as the truth just
the same as the wisdom.
When we as adults instill in our children our rigid definitions of what
constitutes a mistake (thinking that what we are going to do is save them),
all we are really doing is perpetuating our pain in the next generation. A
mistake isn't resolved until we evolve in our understanding to the point
where we can garner the insight that is available from the experience.
When that point is reached, what we experienced is no longer a mistake or
painful because of what we have learned. However, until that point is
reached, if ever, we will feel compelled to save others from the painful
lessons of our mistakes, even to the point of beating it into them—for their
own good, of course. By using pain, either emotional or physical as a means
to save others from our mistakes, in effect what we are really doing is
creating a cycle of fear. We ensure that our limited level of understanding
and insight will be maintained in them because fear is a contracting force
that stifles the learning process. In a very real way, we inflict the pain of our
unresolved mistakes on our children just as our parents inflicted the pain of
their unresolved mistakes on us. And it goes on generation after generation until
someone decides to use their creative powers to break the cycle.
To operate out of this belief in evolution so that we can naturally learn
from the choices that we make, we have to first change our definitions of
what constitutes a mistake. It is precisely these kinds of beliefs that act as
mental blocks to perceive a more satisfying way of living. Mistakes are
virtually synonymous with pain. We can find any number of ways to avoid
acknowledging a mistake so we don't have to confront the pain, and in the
process we cut ourselves off from what we need to know to grow, expand,
and improve our lives. Even when we make a mistake where we supposedly
136

knew better, if we really knew better, then we wouldn't have made the
choices that we did that resulted in an outcome we define as a mistake. So
we can assume that there is something inside of us that conflicts with our
"better judgment" that has more power to influence our behavior.
It isn't any less possible to change our definition of what constitutes a
mistake than it is to intensify the emotional energy behind an insult as in the
example. To change these definitions requires learning some techniques in
mental energy management to de-energize or draw the negatively charged
energy out of them. By doing so we will allow ourselves to learn from all
our experiences instead of hiding from them, feeling pain, or punishing
ourselves in some way. "Without the effects of these self-defeating
definitions of mistakes, it is much easier to objectively monitor our
progress toward the fulfillment of some goal. If we find our behavior
inconsistent with the steps to achieving our goals it would tell us that our
beliefs are not in harmony with those steps or the goal itself or that we don't
have the appropriate resources. In any case, it is much easier to identify
what we need to learn to accomplish our objective.

THE BENEFITS OF LEARNING
HOW TO MANAGE MENTAL ENERGY
Increased Sense of Security and Confidence
You will develop a sense of security and confidence knowing that you can
confront conditions as they exist, identify what you need to learn to operate
most effectively, and learn it. What better way to develop a sense of
security than by learning how to develop the ability to adapt to the
prevailing conditions to fulfill your needs satisfactorily.
In the mental environment the memories of our experiences don't
change over time, but the physical environment where our goals are
fulfilled does. It is constantly moving forward, offering us new conditions,
which, in turn, offer us different possibilities and opportunities, if we are
open to being able to perceive them. What better form of goal
achievement than to be able to change our mental perspective "at will" to
be able to perceive these new conditions and use our imaginations
creatively to determine the most appropriate set of steps to fulfill our needs
or achieve our goals, even if we have never actually taken those steps
before?
For a truly successful trader, this form of thinking is essential. The
possibilities of the type of movement the markets can display are almost
endless because of the diverse number of forces affecting it. All of us have
this tendency to mentally lock ourselves into only a very limited number of
those ways. And when the market doesn't conform to our preconceived
137

mental image, we make up the difference with distortions and illusions
and suffer the consequences later. Trading doesn't have to be painful and
devoid of fun. We make it that way for ourselves because of our mental
inflexibility and inability to adapt.
Increased Levels of Satisfaction
As long as we are alive, we will have needs, and as long as we have needs,
we are not whole the way we are. Our needs compel us to interact with the
environment to achieve this state of wholeness. Growing into this state of
wholeness requires that we keep on learning. To keep on learning we need
to adapt. Learning is a primary function of our existence. When we fulfill
this function, we are rewarded with feelings of happiness, well-being and
satisfaction, all of which are by-products of the quality of our experiences
with the outer environment and a function of how much we have learned.
The antithesis of learning is resistance. When we resist what is being
offered by the environment in the way of lessons, learning, and change we
experience stress. Stress is the opposite of the sense of well-being,
happiness, and excitement that we feel when we are learning. If we refuse
to adapt, we shut down the learning process. The quality of our experiences
deteriorates because our relationship with the outer environment
deteriorates. The outer environment keeps on changing, while we remain
unchanged, resulting in less of a correspondence between what is out there
and what we know. Ultimately, we end up punishing ourselves for our
resistance to adapt because what we experience is pain, disappointment,
stress, anxiety, and dissatisfaction, which are all by-products of our lack of
insight, understanding, and what we won't allow ourselves to do because of
fear.
Increased Intuition
As you gain in your confidence to change the inside to experience a
different outside, you will also increase your ability to confront difficult
issues that all of us would have a tendency to avoid. Instead of confronting,
we learn a number of avoidance techniques like alcohol, drugs, distortions,
rationalizations, or even wishing and hoping, all of which can result in
painful forced awarenesses. We eventually have to confront these issues
anyway because they rarely if ever (just) go away. The longer we wait, the
worse the conditions usually get, making it increasingly more difficult to
resolve.
However, there is another less obvious problem with avoidance,
especially with respect to wishing and hoping. A true intuitive impulse—a
deeper level of knowledge and wisdom that will indicate the next most
appropriate step to take—that will always be in our best interests feels
very much like wishing and hoping. In other words, it is very difficult to
distinguish between the two, making it very easy to mix them up, which is
138

one of the reasons why we find it so difficult to trust our intuition. The way
you can know for sure that you are getting a true intuitive impulse is to
clear out of your mental environment anything that would cause you to
wish and hope that something will happen instead of confronting the issue
head on to find out what needs to be done. You can wish and hope that the
market will come back, or you can cut your loss and make yourself ready
to take the next opportunity. To be able to cut your loss and be ready to
take the next opportunity requires that you change anything in your
mental environment that would cause you to avoid confrontation and
consequently wish and hope. The less cause you have for wishing and
hoping that something will happen, the more you will know that when you
get that certain feeling, it is a true intuitive impulse, and the more
confidence you will have to follow it. Intuition will always guide you in the
most appropriate way to fulfill your needs.
Just so there is no misunderstanding here, I am not stating that there is
anything inherently wrong with wishing and hoping. There are some ways
in which wishing and hoping can be very useful. As traders, however, we
cannot afford the luxury of wishing and hoping because it puts us in a
passive relationship with the markets. When we wish and hope, we are
shifting responsibility on to the markets for making something happen
instead of confronting the conditions and doing something about it
ourselves. If we find ourselves wishing and hoping, it is an excellent
indication that we don't know what is going on and as a result need to get
out of the markets until we do.
Wisdom
When we step through our fears to break some cycle of frustration and
dissatisfaction or change the polarity of a painful memory to break a cycle
of pain, we gain in wisdom because we learn all sides of an issue. Wisdom is
not afraid, angry, intolerant, or prejudiced because there is a deep level of
understanding, confidence, and trust, all coming from having experienced
the full range of possibilities from extreme negative to increasingly greater
degrees of positive. If we have experienced only the negative side of a
certain type of experience, we feel fear. If we have experienced only the
positive (never having had a painful experience in certain area), we won't
have that particular fear, but we do develop an intolerance or even a disdain
for anyone who has had a negative experience.
This intolerance stems from our own underlying fear of vulnerability.
For instance, it is clear that the negative exists in the environment as a
possibility, but since it has never happened to us, we either don't
understand "their fear" or don't want to confront any information that
would indicate the same possibilities for a painful experience also exist for
us. Anyone who has truly transcended a fear doesn't look down upon those
who haven't because they don't have anything to fear. When we step
through some fear to experience other possibilities, not only do we give
139

ourselves more choices, we also gain in wisdom. Wisdom is the by-product
that results when we retain a distinction about the nature of the
environment without the negative energy or fear associated with that
distinction. Wisdom is ultimately the silver lining in every dark cloud.
However, to gain this wisdom we have to actively change our negatives into
positives, because if we are offered a positive experience in an area where we
have only experienced the negative, we wouldn't believe it. Actually we
couldn't believe it, because we wouldn't have the mental framework to
accept it for what it is. The environment will be as we perceive it, and the
way we perceive information and events is controlled by the energy already
inside of us, unless it is a first-time experience. When we don't actively
work at turning our negatives into positives, we just stay angry and afraid.
It's our choice. We were all given the gift of creativity and the free will to
think any way in which we choose, and we can use our thoughts to change
the quality of our lives, if we want to.

140

CHAPTER 14

Techniques for
Effecting Change

This chapter offers various techniques for effecting change. Also included are
various exercises to implement these changes.
DIRECTING A CONSCIOUS SHIFT IN
BELIEF SYSTEMS
The conscious mind (that part of us that is aware of the our surroundings and
what we are thinking at any given moment) can generate thoughts outside of the
framework of our beliefs or belief systems. In other words, we can ask questions
about the validity or usefulness of any belief and purposefully direct our attention
to any area where we might discover something more useful or better suited to
the conditions. Any new knowledge comes from those who question the status
quo and have a willingness to go beyond and a willingness to accept the next
answer.
I know this is probably going to sound overly simplistic to most readers, and
it is also something everybody already knows, but not everybody knows it
within the context of changing beliefs: The wanting to is the how. To identify
or change anything in the mental environment requires that you want to,
because to want something you have to think about it, and when we think
about something, we are generating thought energy. This is the same energy
that our beliefs, memories, and associations are composed of, and, as such,
thoughts have the power to change, reorganize, add to, detract from, or
change the polarity of anything in the mental environment. In essence you
can use our thoughts to create a new identity because we want to.
141

Each choice we make on a conscious level, even just to choose to redirect
our thoughts from an inappropriate belief (relative to our needs now), will
start to make a neurological change in the electrical circuitry of our brain. If
you go as far as to make a choice that is inconsistent with a belief you want
to decharge and then act out of that belief, it will eventually lose its power
and consequently lose its potential to affect our behavior.
It is important for you to understand that beliefs cannot be destroyed;
once we have formed one, it will be with us for the rest of our lives.
However, we can draw all the energy out of them. For example, a pile of
wood set on fire will release the energy of the wood into the atmosphere as
heat. The wood will be transformed into ashes. The ashes do not have the
potential to produce any heat and, thus, will have little if any effect on the
environment. Yet the ashes still exist. De-energized beliefs work the same
way. They will always exist but no longer have any effect on our perception
of information or our behavior. Many of us once believed in the tooth fairy
and the bogeyman in the closet. Eventually these beliefs just naturally
collapsed as we learned more about the nature of the environment. Up to
that point, however, they definitely had an effect on our perception of
information and behavior. Now, we can say I remember when I used to
believe that. To remember that we used to believe something means that the
belief still exists; it just no longer has any power in our mental system.
Each belief you identify will form a comfort zone. The boundaries of this
comfort zone are set by the limitations inherent within any belief that
make up the zone. All definitions set boundary tines and make
distinctions. Each belief is our truth about reality. Beliefs define not only
our environment, but also who we are in relation to that environment.
These definitions establish the amount of tolerance for awareness that we
have for what exists in both the internal and external environment. For
example, do you have a belief that would allow for the possibility of the
market doing anything at any given moment? If not, what do you believe
can't happen? If what you believe can't happen did happen, how long would
it take you to be able to recognize it, if at all? Notice the boundary lines in
awareness created by the structure of the belief.
There is one thing you should keep in mind as you learn to change
your beliefs to be more reflective of your intents and goals. With all change
there is struggle. Volcanos, childbirth, social revolution, wind, rain, and
waves are all examples of the violent nature of the forces of change. That is
why so many people find it difficult to be creative. We are attracted and
compelled toward creativity, on the one hand, because it is an inherent part
of our nature. However, on the other hand, we don't want to confront the
conflict and ensuing struggle between the old and the new. It is essentially
the same when you change a belief. There will be some conflict or some
degree of uncomfortableness as you move from one set of beliefs to
another. However, the uncomfortableness does pass, and just like anything
else, the more you do it, the easier it gets, until it becomes a learned skill
142

that you can use just like any other that is a part of who you are.

EXERCISE TO IDENTIFY
CONFLICTING BELIEFS
Set a timer for 10 minutes.
Write a series of statements that begin with "I am."
Write as fast as you can and let every thought come to your conscious
attention. It is extremely important that you do not censor any
statements, especially the contradictory ones.
At the end of the 10 minutes, look at the list and cross out everything
that is a fact. For example, you would cross out statements such as I am a
man/woman, I am blue-eyed, I am brown-haired.
All the statements that remain are the beliefs you are looking for. The
beliefs that contradict each other are of particular importance.
Contradictory beliefs cancel your energy because you have a built-in mental
conflict between the validity of one belief expressing itself only at the
direct expense of another belief.
What are some examples of conflicting or contradictory beliefs?
I have to win./I may be undeserving.
I am a winner./I am a loser.
I am successful./I've missed my chance to be successful.
I deserve more./I am guilty.
I am a perfectionist./I believe humans are inherently imperfect.
I am trusting./I am untrustworthy or people are generally
untrustworthy.
I believe there is no middle ground of satisfaction between winning and
failure./I am pleased with myself and my progress.
I am honest./I am dishonest or people are generally dishonest.
I believe working is the honest way of making money./I believe trading
is easy money, not work.

Asking Yourself Questions
Here are some questions you can ask yourself that will help you to identify
some beliefs that may argue against your giving yourself more money.
What do you believe about guilt? How do you know when to feel
143

guilty?
Under what conditions would you not feel guilty, even if someone else
wanted you to?
Is it possible to transfer those same standards to areas where you
would feel guilty?
What would stop you?
Who or what out of your past says it is wrong and you can't do that?
Is their assessment of reality any more valid than yours? If so, why?
Do you find these beliefs useful? If so, in what ways? Do you find them
limiting? If so, in what ways?
If you could identify and change the experience that created the
belief, how would you change it?
What would stop you from changing it?
For the following questions you can substitute the words "is true" for the
words "do you believe."
What do you believe about competition?
What do you believe about taking money from other people as a result
of your superior trading skills?
What do you believe about losses? What do you believe about other
people's opinions? When are they valid? When aren't they valid? What
do you believe about being wrong?
By answering these questions, you will begin to gain a sense of your own
particular behavior and the range of choices you allow for yourself, or do
not allow for yourself, as a result of your beliefs.
Sometimes it is easier to identify a belief by trying to notice what you
specifically believe is not true. You could also look at your beliefs as if
they belonged to someone else. If they did belong to someone else, think of
an experience in which this other person responded to certain life situations
in very typical ways (because of your beliefs). Then think of ways he or
she could respond if he or she had different beliefs.
When you discover some beliefs that aren't particularly useful or are
inconsistent with your goals, then use an affirmation or collapsing technique
to decharge the energy out of it.

WRITING AS A TECHNIQUE TO
EFFECT CHANGE
Every movement we make alters the physical landscape in some way. The
144

more dramatic or expressive our movements, the greater the alterations. By
the same token, every thought alters the mental landscape in some way. The
more expressive our thoughts, in other words, the more energy we generate
in our willingness to think, the greater the potential to effect some change.
The change comes from what we are willing to think. Wanting to direct
your conscious thought process toward a specific intent is what effects this
change. I have found writing is one of the most powerful tools available to
focus my thinking and effect some change I desire.
When we write it is a physicalized version of what is going on inside of
our mental environment. Your willingness to write about certain issues
directs your attention and gives the rest of the parts of your mental
environment instructions. What flows up or out of your consciousness is
what is there. Once you find out what is there, you can then direct any
changes by writing back instructions into the mental environment. This
can be a very powerful technique, depending on how much power you put
into it.
If I were to do a schematic of the process it would look something like
this:
Consciousness à to à Mental environment (instructions for certain
information).
The information flows to consciousness (maybe not right away).
Consciousness physicalizes the information by writing it; this makes it real
and tangible. Consciousness becomes aware of the information (selfdiscovery). Consciousness makes the connections between the nature of the
information and the life conditions one has been experiencing.
Consciousness assesses the current structure of the mental environment for
its usefulness. Consciousness wants to create new conditions.
Consciousness asks, "What beliefs do I need as resources to be more
effective or create the conditions I desire?" This is the beauty and essence
of the creative process—to ask yourself a question and wait for the answer
to pop into your consciousness or allow yourself to be directed to the
answer. Consciousness will know when it has found the most appropriate
answer because it will ring true in your mind or you will feel the truth of it
in your body. Consciousness then formulates these new awarenesses into
instructions for change. Then consciousness writes these changes back into
the mental environment, giving yourself instructions to accept these new
awarenesses as truth. The act of writing forces us to focus our thoughts in
a manner that is consistent with what we want to create, and those
thoughts alter the mental landscape.
AN EXERCISE TO DEVELOP
