
Appendixes

539

had engaged in a similar exercise, the results would be much
the same—215 egotistical orangutans with 20 straight winning
flips.
I would argue, however, that there are some important differences in the examples I am going to present. For one thing, if (a)
you had taken 225 million orangutans distributed roughly as the
U.S. population is; if (b) 215 winners were left after 20 days; and if
(c) you found that 40 came from a particular zoo in Omaha, you
would be pretty sure you were on to something. So you would
probably go out and ask the zookeeper about what he’s feeding
them, whether they had special exercises, what books they read,
and who knows what else. That is, if you found any really extraordinary concentrations of success, you might want to see if you
could identify concentrations of unusual characteristics that might
be causal factors.
Scientific inquiry naturally follows such a pattern. If you were
trying to analyze possible causes of a rare type of cancer—with,
say, 1,500 cases a year in the United States—and you found that 400
of them occurred in some little mining town in Montana, you
would get very interested in the water there, or the occupation of
those afflicted, or other variables. You know that it’s not random
chance that 400 come from a small area. You would not necessarily
know the causal factors, but you would know where to search.
I submit to you that there are ways of defining an origin other
than geography. In addition to geographical origins, there can be
what I call an intellectual origin. I think you will find that a disproportionate number of successful coin-flippers in the investment
world came from a very small intellectual village that could be
called Graham-and-Doddsville. A concentration of winners that
simply cannot be explained by chance can be traced to this particular intellectual village.
Conditions could exist that would make even that concentration
unimportant. Perhaps 100 people were simply imitating the coinflipping call of some terribly persuasive personality. When he
called heads, 100 followers automatically called that coin the same
way. If the leader was part of the 215 left at the end, the fact that
100 came from the same intellectual origin would mean nothing.
You would simply be identifying one case as a hundred cases. Similarly, let’s assume that you lived in a strongly patriarchal society

540

Appendixes

and every family in the United States conveniently consisted of ten
members. Further assume that the patriarchal culture was so
strong that, when the 225 million people went out the first day,
every member of the family identified with the father’s call. Now,
at the end of the 20-day period, you would have 215 winners, and
you would find that they came from only 21.5 families. Some naive
types might say that this indicates an enormous hereditary factor
as an explanation of successful coin-flipping. But, of course, it
would have no significance at all because it would simply mean
that you didn’t have 215 individual winners, but rather 21.5 randomly distributed families who were winners.
In this group of successful investors that I want to consider,
there has been a common intellectual patriarch, Ben Graham. But
the children who left the house of this intellectual patriarch have
called their “flips” in very different ways. They have gone to different places and bought and sold different stocks and companies, yet
they have had a combined record that simply can’t be explained by
random chance. It certainly cannot be explained by the fact that
they are all calling flips identically because a leader is signaling the
calls to make. The patriarch has merely set forth the intellectual
theory for making coin-calling decisions, but each student has
decided on his own manner of applying the theory.
The common intellectual theme of the investors from Grahamand-Doddsville is this: they search for discrepancies between the
value of a business and the price of small pieces of that business in
the market. Essentially, they exploit those discrepancies without
the efficient market theorist’s concern as to whether the stocks are
bought on Monday or Thursday, or whether it is January or July,
etc. Incidentally, when businessmen buy businesses—which is just
what our Graham & Dodd investors are doing through the
medium of marketable stocks—I doubt that many are cranking
into their purchase decision the day of the week or the month in
which the transaction is going to occur. If it doesn’t make any difference whether all of a business is being bought on a Monday or a
Friday, I am baffled why academicians invest extensive time and
effort to see whether it makes a difference when buying small
pieces of those same businesses. Our Graham & Dodd investors,
needless to say, do not discuss beta, the capital asset pricing model,
or covariance in returns among securities. These are not subjects of

Appendixes

541

any interest to them. In fact, most of them would have difficulty
defining those terms. The investors simply focus on two variables:
price and value.
I always find it extraordinary that so many studies are made of
price and volume behavior, the stuff of chartists. Can you imagine
buying an entire business simply because the price of the business
had been marked up substantially last week and the week before?
Of course, the reason a lot of studies are made of these price and
volume variables is that now, in the age of computers, there are
almost endless data available about them. It isn’t necessarily
because such studies have any utility; it’s simply that the data are
there and academicians have worked hard to learn the mathematical skills needed to manipulate them. Once these skills are
acquired, it seems sinful not to use them, even if the usage has no
utility or negative utility. As a friend said, to a man with a hammer,
everything looks like a nail.
I think the group that we have identified by a common intellectual home is worthy of study. Incidentally, despite all the academic
studies of the influence of such variables as price, volume, seasonality, capitalization size, etc., upon stock performance, no interest
has been evidenced in studying the methods of this unusual concentration of value-oriented winners.
I begin this study of results by going back to a group of four of
us who worked at Graham-Newman Corporation from 1954
through 1956. There were only four—I have not selected these
names from among thousands. I offered to go to work at GrahamNewman for nothing after I took Ben Graham’s class, but he turned
me down as overvalued. He took this value stuff very seriously!
After much pestering he finally hired me. There were three partners and four of us at the “peasant” level. All four left between
1955 and 1957 when the firm was wound up, and it’s possible to
trace the record of three.
The first example (see Table 1, pages 549–550) is that of Walter
Schloss. Walter never went to college, but took a course from Ben
Graham at night at the New York Institute of Finance. Walter left
Graham-Newman in 1955 and achieved the record shown here
over 28 years.
Here is what “Adam Smith”—after I told him about Walter—
wrote about him in Supermoney (1972):

542

Appendixes

He has no connections or access to useful information. Practically no one in Wall Street knows him and he is not fed any ideas.
He looks up the numbers in the manuals and sends for the annual
reports, and that’s about it.
In introducing me to [Schloss] Warren had also, to my mind,
described himself. “He never forgets that he is handling other
people’s money and this reinforces his normal strong aversion to
loss.” He has total integrity and a realistic picture of himself.
Money is real to him and stocks are real—and from this flows an
attraction to the “margin of safety” principle.

Walter has diversified enormously, owning well over 100 stocks
currently. He knows how to identify securities that sell at considerably less than their value to a private owner. And that’s all he does.
He doesn’t worry about whether it’s January, he doesn’t worry
about whether it’s Monday, he doesn’t worry about whether it’s an
election year. He simply says, if a business is worth a dollar and I
can buy it for 40 cents, something good may happen to me. And he
does it over and over and over again. He owns many more stocks
than I do—and is far less interested in the underlying nature of the
business: I don’t seem to have very much influence on Walter.
That’s one of his strengths; no one has much influence on him.
The second case is Tom Knapp, who also worked at GrahamNewman with me. Tom was a chemistry major at Princeton before
the war; when he came back from the war, he was a beach bum.
And then one day he read that Dave Dodd was giving a night
course in investments at Columbia. Tom took it on a noncredit
basis, and he got so interested in the subject from taking that
course that he came up and enrolled at Columbia Business School,
where he got the MBA degree. He took Dodd’s course again, and
took Ben Graham’s course. Incidentally, 35 years later I called Tom
to ascertain some of the facts involved here and I found him on the
beach again. The only difference is that now he owns the beach!
In 1968 Tom Knapp and Ed Anderson, also a Graham disciple,
along with one or two other fellows of similar persuasion, formed
Tweedy, Browne Partners, and their investment results appear in
Table 2. Tweedy, Browne built that record with very wide diversification. They occasionally bought control of businesses, but the
record of the passive investments is equal to the record of the control investments.

Appendixes

543

Table 3 describes the third member of the group who formed
Buffett Partnership in 1957. The best thing he did was to quit in
1969. Since then, in a sense, Berkshire Hathaway has been a continuation of the partnership in some respects. There is no single index
I can give you that I would feel would be a fair test of investment
management at Berkshire. But I think that any way you figure it, it
has been satisfactory.
Table 4 shows the record of the Sequoia Fund, which is managed
by a man whom I met in 1951 in Ben Graham’s class, Bill Ruane.
After getting out of Harvard Business School, he went to Wall
Street. Then he realized that he needed to get a real business education so he came up to take Ben’s course at Columbia, where we met
in early 1951. Bill’s record from 1951 to 1970, working with relatively small sums, was far better than average. When I wound up
Buffett Partnership I asked Bill if he would set up a fund to handle
all our partners, so he set up the Sequoia Fund. He set it up at a terrible time, just when I was quitting. He went right into the two-tier
market and all the difficulties that made for comparative performance for value-oriented investors. I am happy to say that my
partners, to an amazing degree, not only stayed with him but
added money, with the happy result shown.
There’s no hindsight involved here. Bill was the only person I
recommended to my partners, and I said at the time that if he
achieved a four-point-per-annum advantage over the Standard &
Poor’s, that would be solid performance. Bill has achieved well
over that, working with progressively larger sums of money. That
makes things much more difficult. Size is the anchor of performance. There is no question about it. It doesn’t mean you can’t do
better than average when you get larger, but the margin shrinks.
And if you ever get so you’re managing two trillion dollars, and
that happens to be the amount of the total equity evaluation in the
economy, don’t think that you’ll do better than average!
I should add that in the records we’ve looked at so far, throughout this whole period there was practically no duplication in these
portfolios. These are men who select securities based on discrepancies between price and value, but they make their selections very
differently. Walter’s largest holdings have been such stalwarts as
Hudson Pulp & Paper and Jeddo Highland Coal and New York
Trap Rock Company and all those other names that come instantly
to mind to even a casual reader of the business pages. Tweedy

544

Appendixes

Browne’s selections have sunk even well below that level in terms
of name recognition. On the other hand, Bill has worked with big
companies. The overlap among these portfolios has been very, very
low. These records do not reflect one guy calling the flip and fifty
people yelling out the same thing after him.
Table 5 is the record of a friend of mine who is a Harvard Law
graduate, who set up a major law firm. I ran into him in about 1960
and told him that law was fine as a hobby but he could do better.
He set up a partnership quite the opposite of Walter’s. His portfolio was concentrated in very few securities and therefore his record
was much more volatile but it was based on the same discountfrom-value approach. He was willing to accept greater peaks and
valleys of performance, and he happens to be a fellow whose
whole psyche goes toward concentration, with the results shown.
Incidentally, this record belongs to Charlie Munger, my partner
for a long time in the operation of Berkshire Hathaway. When he
ran his partnership, however, his portfolio holdings were almost
completely different from mine and the other fellows mentioned
earlier.
Table 6 is the record of a fellow who was a pal of Charlie
Munger’s—another non–business school type—who was a math
major at USC. He went to work for IBM after graduation and was
an IBM salesman for a while. After I got to Charlie, Charlie got to
him. This happens to be the record of Rick Guerin. Rick, from 1965
to 1983, against a compounded gain of 316 percent for the S&P,
came off with 22,200 percent, which, probably because he lacks a
business school education, he regards as statistically significant.
One sidelight here: it is extraordinary to me that the idea of buying dollar bills for 40 cents takes immediately with people or it
doesn’t take at all. It’s like an inoculation. If it doesn’t grab a person right away, I find that you can talk to him for years and show
him records, and it doesn’t make any difference. They just don’t
seem able to grasp the concept, simple as it is. A fellow like Rick
Guerin, who had no formal education in business, understands
immediately the value approach to investing and he’s applying it
five minutes later. I’ve never seen anyone who became a gradual
convert over a ten-year period to this approach. It doesn’t seem to
be a matter of IQ or academic training. It’s instant recognition, or it
is nothing.

Appendixes

545

Table 7 is the record of Stan Perlmeter. Stan was a liberal arts
major at the University of Michigan who was a partner in the
advertising agency of Bozell & Jacobs. We happened to be in the
same building in Omaha. In 1965 he figured out I had a better business than he did, so he left advertising. Again, it took five minutes
for Stan to embrace the value approach.
Perlmeter does not own what Walter Schloss owns. He does not
own what Bill Ruane owns. These are records made independently.
But every time Perlmeter buys a stock it’s because he’s getting
more for his money than he’s paying. That’s the only thing he’s
thinking about. He’s not looking at quarterly earnings projections,
he’s not looking at next year’s earnings, he’s not thinking about
what day of the week it is, he doesn’t care what investment
research from any place says, he’s not interested in price momentum, volume, or anything. He’s simply asking: What is the business worth?
Table 8 and Table 9 are the records of two pension funds I’ve been
involved in. They are not selected from dozens of pension funds with
which I have had involvement; they are the only two I have influenced. In both cases I have steered them toward value-oriented managers. Very, very few pension funds are managed from a value
standpoint. Table 8 is the Washington Post Company’s Pension
Fund. It was with a large bank some years ago, and I suggested that
they would do well to select managers who had a value orientation.
As you can see, overall they have been in the top percentile ever
since they made the change. The Post told the managers to keep at
least 25 percent of these funds in bonds, which would not have
been necessarily the choice of these managers. So I’ve included the
bond performance simply to illustrate that this group has no particular expertise about bonds. They wouldn’t have said they did.
Even with this drag of 25 percent of their fund in an area that was
not their game, they were in the top percentile of fund management. The Washington Post experience does not cover a terribly
long period but it does represent many investment decisions by
three managers who were not identified retroactively.
Table 9 is the record of the FMC Corporation fund. I don’t manage a dime of it myself but I did, in 1974, influence their decision to
select value-oriented managers. Prior to that time they had selected
managers much the same way as most larger companies. They now

546

Appendixes

rank number one in the Becker survey of pension funds for their
size over the period of time subsequent to this “conversion” to the
value approach. Last year they had eight equity managers of any
duration beyond a year. Seven of them had a cumulative record
better than the S&P. All eight had a better record last year than the
S&P. The net difference now between a median performance and
the actual performance of the FMC fund over this period is $243
million. FMC attributes this to the mindset given to them about the
selection of managers. Those managers are not the managers I
would necessarily select but they have the common denominator
of selecting securities based on value.
So these are nine records of “coin-flippers” from Graham-andDoddsville. I haven’t selected them with hindsight from among
thousands. It’s not like I am reciting to you the names of a bunch of
lottery winners—people I had never heard of before they won the
lottery. I selected these men years ago based upon their framework
for investment decision-making. I knew what they had been taught
and additionally I had some personal knowledge of their intellect,
character, and temperament. It’s very important to understand that
this group has assumed far less risk than average; note their record
in years when the general market was weak. While they differ
greatly in style, these investors are, mentally, always buying the
business, not buying the stock. A few of them sometimes buy whole
businesses. Far more often they simply buy small pieces of businesses. Their attitude, whether buying all or a tiny piece of a business, is the same. Some of them hold portfolios with dozens of
stocks; others concentrate on a handful. But all exploit the difference between the market price of a business and its intrinsic value.
I’m convinced that there is much inefficiency in the market.
These Graham-and-Doddsville investors have successfully exploited gaps between price and value. When the price of a stock
can be influenced by a “herd” on Wall Street with prices set at the
margin by the most emotional person, or the greediest person, or
the most depressed person, it is hard to argue that the market
always prices rationally. In fact, market prices are frequently nonsensical.
I would like to say one important thing about risk and reward.
Sometimes risk and reward are correlated in a positive fashion. If
someone were to say to me, “I have here a six-shooter and I have

Appendixes

547

slipped one cartridge into it. Why don’t you just spin it and pull it
once? If you survive, I will give you $1 million.” I would decline—
perhaps stating that $1 million is not enough. Then he might offer
me $5 million to pull the trigger twice—now that would be a positive correlation between risk and reward!
The exact opposite is true with value investing. If you buy a dollar bill for 60 cents, it’s riskier than if you buy a dollar bill for
40 cents, but the expectation of reward is greater in the latter case.
The greater the potential for reward in the value portfolio, the less
risk there is.
One quick example: The Washington Post Company in 1973 was
selling for $80 million in the market. At the time, that day, you
could have sold the assets to any one of ten buyers for not less than
$400 million, probably appreciably more. The company owned the
Post, Newsweek, plus several television stations in major markets.
Those same properties are worth $2 billion now, so the person who
would have paid $400 million would not have been crazy.
Now, if the stock had declined even further to a price that made
the valuation $40 million instead of $80 million, its beta would
have been greater. And to people who think beta measures risk, the
cheaper price would have made it look riskier. This is truly Alice in
Wonderland. I have never been able to figure out why it’s riskier to
buy $400 million worth of properties for $40 million than $80 million. And, as a matter of fact, if you buy a group of such securities
and you know anything at all about business valuation, there is
essentially no risk in buying $400 million for $80 million, particularly if you do it by buying ten $40 million piles for $8 million each.
Since you don’t have your hands on the $400 million, you want to
be sure you are in with honest and reasonably competent people,
but that’s not a difficult job.
You also have to have the knowledge to enable you to make a
very general estimate about the value of the underlying businesses.
But you do not cut it close. That is what Ben Graham meant by
having a margin of safety. You don’t try and buy businesses worth
$83 million for $80 million. You leave yourself an enormous margin. When you build a bridge, you insist it can carry 30,000
pounds, but you only drive 10,000-pound trucks across it. And that
same principle works in investing.
In conclusion, some of the more commercially minded among

548

Appendixes

you may wonder why I am writing this article. Adding many converts to the value approach will perforce narrow the spreads
between price and value. I can only tell you that the secret has been
out for 50 years, ever since Ben Graham and Dave Dodd wrote
Security Analysis, yet I have seen no trend toward value investing
in the 35 years that I’ve practiced it. There seems to be some perverse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult.
The academic world, if anything, has actually backed away from
the teaching of value investing over the last 30 years. It’s likely to
continue that way. Ships will sail around the world but the Flat
Earth Society will flourish. There will continue to be wide discrepancies between price and value in the marketplace, and those who
read their Graham & Dodd will continue to prosper.
Tables 1–9 follow:
