
r PPP provides a useful medium- to long-term perspective of currency valuation
r If PPP holds, the real exchange rate remains stable over the long term

Fundamental Analysis

25

r There can however be substantial short-term divergences from PPP
r PPP may thus be particularly useful in currency forecasting for corporations, long-term
investors and also leveraged investors, but much less so for short-term traders

1.2 THE MONETARY APPROACH
Linked in with the concept of Purchasing Power Parity is the second type of long-term equilibrium model we will look at, the Monetary Approach to determining or forecasting exchange
rates. In this, there are two transmission mechanisms, the ﬁrst through the price, the second
through interest rates.
According to classical theory, a country’s price level is a function of the quantity of money.
However, according to PPP, exchange rates adjust to equalize domestic tradable goods prices
between countries. Thus, if monetary factors determine prices, they also play a part in determining exchange rates. The transmission mechanism for this would be as follows:
(i) Change in money supply → Change in price → Change in exchange rate
(ii) Change in money supply → Change in interest rate → Change in exchange rate
For instance, if money supply was rising, one would presume this was due to relatively loose
monetary policy from the central bank. That rising money supply would in time lead to rising
prices as too much money chases too few goods. PPP suggests that under the law of one price,
the price of freely tradable goods must be the same everywhere over time and that the exchange
rate must adjust to achieve that. Hence, as prices rise in a country relative to prices for the
same goods elsewhere, so the currency must depreciate to restore equilibrium.
Similarly, a rise in money supply should lead to a reduction in interest rates. Money supply
is presumed to be known and a function of central bank activity. Money demand is somewhat
more complex and is determined by interest rates, real income and prices. A decrease in interest
rates should logically cause an investor to increase their portfolio weighting in money/cash
and decrease it in interest-bearing securities.
The basic premise behind this is that a change in money supply will eventually be offset by a
similar change in money demand to restore balance. Within this, the point at which real money
supply is equal to real money demand should logically equate to an “equilibrium” interest rate.
Given that the Monetary Approach is focused on determining exchange rates, this point should
simultaneously reﬂect the equilibrium exchange rate. However, it should come as no surprise
that this point where money supply and demand equate is rarely if ever achieved. Indeed, like
any “equilibrium” level, it is a moving target, which is why central banks can get monetary
policy “wrong”, and the fact that it can change is clearly a factor in interest rate and currency
market volatility.
Looking at it logically, it is all about incentive. As interest rates rise above this supposed
equilibrium level at which real money supply and demand equate, money demand should fall
as the incentive to hold interest rate-bearing securities should rise relative to the incentive to
hold non-interest-bearing money. Here, “money” refers to cash, which is assumed to have no
interest-bearing component. Thus, reduced money demand should eventually reduce money
supply. Equally, as interest rates fall below the equilibrium level, so the incentive to hold
interest-bearing securities falls and the incentive to hold money rises. Rising money demand
therefore should eventually cause rising money supply.
@Team-FLY

26

Currency Strategy

Within this premise however, and indeed within the Monetary Approach as a whole, is the
idea that the transmission mechanism from monetary impulse through prices to the exchange
rate is perfect and immediate. In the real world, this is simply not the case. There can be
signiﬁcant lags between the monetary impulse and the change in the exchange rate, not least
because the prices of tradable goods do not necessarily respond immediately to changes in the
dynamics that affect them. This is the idea of prices being “sticky”, which is the economists’
response to the apparent disparity between what should happen according to the standard
monetary ﬂexible price model and what actually does happen. Thus, instead of the theoretical
transmission mechanism, we get something more akin to:
Change in money supply → Delayed price change → Delayed exchange rate change
Eventually, the same transmission mechanism takes place, but the model by itself does not
tell us when the exchange rate changes in response to a change in money supply or to what
extent. In an attempt to deal with these practical issues, there have been a signiﬁcant number
of variations on the original Monetary Approach to exchange rates, most of them involving a
blizzard of formulae. Given this book’s practical emphasis, we do not go through these here.
This effort to determine exchange rates using the Monetary Approach owes much to the brilliant
work of Rudiger Dornbusch, Jeffrey Frankel and Paul Krugman.1 However, despite this effort,
the Monetary Approach is far from a complete predictor of exchange rates. This failure to be
able to predict accurately short-term exchange rate moves can logically be ascribed to one of
two things, either that the transmission mechanism is signiﬁcantly delayed and allowing for
such delays improves the results, or rather the Monetary Approach does not predict exchange
rates because exchange rates do not respond to monetary impulses in the way economists
believe — in other words that the theory does not work.
While the results of the Monetary Approach to trying to predict exchange rates have been
far from satisfactory, we cannot reject it out of hand, not least because we know that most
of the building blocks of the theory are correct. Rising supply will eventually meet rising
demand of any commodity. The key lies in the transmission mechanism. We know that there
are delays, but why is that so? The usual component of the model which is blamed is PPP,
which makes sense given that we know that PPP itself involves delays. However, this is not
the whole story. After all, if none other than the Federal Reserve accepts that recent changes
within the ﬁnancial system, notably the much greater public involvement in the equity market,
mean that money supply data can no longer be relied on as an inﬂationary indicator, then why
should we suppose that changes in money supply can be used to predict exchange rates? In
2001, money supply growth exploded, with no adverse impact on the US dollar, which in
fact had another stellar year in the face of the worst recession in the US for at least 30 years.
At present, the best answer we can come up with is that the transmission mechanism will
work, but it takes time. Whatever such changes, rising money supply (of a currency) should
eventually lead to a depreciation of that currency until such time as that rising money supply
creates rising money demand, at which point the currency should stabilize and recover lost
ground.
1
Readers who are interested in delving deeper into their work on exchange rates may care to read some or all of Rudiger Dornbusch,
Exchange Rates and Inﬂation, MIT, 1992; Jeffrey Frankel, On Exchange Rates, MIT, 1993; Paul Krugman, Currencies and Crises,
MIT, 1992.

Fundamental Analysis

27

As with any market, an exchange rate is a function of supply and demand. In a freely ﬂoating
exchange rate regime, the market sets both the prevailing and the equilibrium exchange rate
levels. In a ﬁxed exchange rate regime, however, a central bank determines the prevailing level
of the exchange rate. In committing to a ﬁxed exchange rate regime, the central bank most
likely would seek to commit to an exchange rate value which mirrors the equilibrium level
at which exchange rate supply and demand meet. However, we know that equilibrium levels
themselves can and do ﬂuctuate. Therefore, it should be safe to assume that at some point
the prevailing exchange rate level and the equilibrium level will not match. Indeed, this is
likely to be the case the majority of the time. As a result, one should also assume an excess
of demand or supply for the local currency to be the norm. The central bank has to offset that
excess supply or demand by buying or selling its own currency. If there is excess demand for
the currency within a ﬁxed exchange rate regime, this forces market interest rates higher than
they otherwise would be, obliging the central bank to “sterilize” the effect of excess money
demand by injecting money supply into the system. Equally, if there is excess supply of the
local currency, the authorities must drain that excess. The ability of a central bank to achieve
either of these goals is limited. In the ﬁrst case, if there is excess local currency demand,
its ability to sell local currency is limited by its willingness to print that local currency. To
do so could be inﬂationary, which might necessitate higher interest rates, yet higher interest
rates might result in even higher levels of local currency demand. Thus, maybe it should cut
interest rates in order to reduce the attractiveness of its currency? Yet, if it does that, it might
spark inﬂation. The ability to cope with massive capital inﬂows — excess demand for the local
currency — is an issue which is very familiar to many emerging market countries.
Equally, if there is an excess supply of local currency within a ﬁxed exchange rate regime,
this forces market interest rates lower than they otherwise should be, obliging the central bank to drain that excess local currency supply and force interest rates back up — in
other words to conduct unsterilized intervention. This time, its ability to achieve this is limited by the extent of its foreign exchange reserves and its willingness to tolerate sharply
higher interest rates. When a central bank runs out of reserves in its attempt to offset excess local currency supply, de-pegging and ﬂotation (devaluation) become inevitable. The
general rule for this is that the longer the central bank tries to defend a ﬁxed exchange
rate regime that is experiencing an excess supply of local currency, the greater the degree
of local currency devaluation and “overshooting” relative to that equilibrium once it is depegged and ﬂoated. This is one of the reasons why emerging market currencies such as the
Indonesian rupiah, Thai baht, Korean won, Russian rouble and Brazilian real substantially
overshot any approximation of their equilibrium level using a monetary approach before
ﬁnally recovering some ground. Thus, while the Monetary Approach may not be able to
make accurate short-term exchange rate forecasts, it should be able to provide insight into
future exchange rate “events”, such as the de-pegging and devaluation of a ﬁxed exchange rate
regime.
1.2.1 Mundell–Fleming
Thanks to the work of Robert Mundell and J. Marcus Fleming we know that certain combinations of monetary and ﬁscal policy create speciﬁc exchange rate conditions. The Mundell–
Fleming model illustrates how speciﬁc combinations of monetary and ﬁscal policy changes
can cause temporary changes in the balance of payments relative to an equilibrium level. The
exchange rate therefore becomes the transmission mechanism by which equilibrium is restored

28

Currency Strategy

to the balance of payments. It must be noted within this that the degree of capital mobility is
crucially important.
In an economy with high capital mobility, suppose that a central bank decides to loosen
monetary policy by cutting interest rates. One must assume that it does this because of weak
growth conditions and benign inﬂation. As we saw before when looking at money demand,
lowering interest rates reduces the incentive to hold interest-bearing securities, thus on a relative
basis increasing the incentive to hold money or cash. This increase in money demand can be
put to work buying goods and should reﬂect a future rise in national income and growth. The
standard monetary model thinks of this in terms of rising demand causing price increases,
which in turn causes the exchange rate to depreciate via the concept of PPP. Looking at it
another way, rising domestic demand will cause rising import demand, which should mean
deterioration in the trade balance. This in turn should eventually lead to depreciation in the
exchange rate to allow the trade balance to revert back towards an equilibrium level. Another
way of expressing the same thing is that lower interest rates cause capital outﬂows, which in
turn cause depreciation in the exchange rate. Conversely, the basic assumption is that tighter
monetary policy through higher interest rates should lead either to weaker domestic demand
and a positive swing in the trade balance, or capital inﬂows, both of which should cause
exchange rate appreciation.
On the ﬁscal side, much depends on whether trade or capital ﬂows dominate. On the one
hand, looser ﬁscal policy, either through tax cuts or spending increases, should cause rising
domestic demand, which in turn should cause deterioration in the trade balance. On the other
hand, looser ﬁscal policy causes higher domestic interest rates, which in turn attract capital
inﬂows. If trade ﬂows dominate, then the exchange rate should depreciate. However, if capital
ﬂows dominate, then the exchange rate should appreciate.
Conversely, tighter ﬁscal policy should, according to Mundell–Fleming, lead to weaker
domestic demand. On the trade ﬂow side, this should result in reduced import demand, causing
a positive swing in the trade balance. On the capital ﬂow side, tighter ﬁscal policy should lead
to lower interest rates, which in turn lead to capital outﬂows. Here, if trade ﬂows dominate, the
exchange rate should appreciate, whereas if capital ﬂows dominate, the exchange rate should
depreciate. In a world of perfect or at least high capital mobility, it is assumed that capital ﬂows
dominate over trade ﬂows. Therefore, we can express the likely impact on exchange rates via
speciﬁc combinations of monetary and ﬁscal policies through Table 1.2.
This model can be used for developed economies and the leading emerging market economies
which have deregulated and liberalized barriers to trade and more importantly capital. The
classic example of this used in text books is that of the US dollar in 1980–1985, when it appreciated dramatically as the Reagan administration’s military spending programme dramatically
boosted the budget deﬁcit, while the Volcker-led Federal Reserve waged war against inﬂation
(caused at least in part by those budget deﬁcits). The Plaza Accord of 1985, which helped to
Table 1.2 The policy mix impact on exchange rates in an economy with high
capital mobility

Loose ﬁscal policy
Tight ﬁscal policy

Loose monetary policy

Tight monetary policy

Offsetting impact
Exchange rate depreciation

Exchange rate appreciation
Offsetting impact

Fundamental Analysis

29

Table 1.3 The policy mix impact on exchange rates in an economy with low
capital mobility

Loose ﬁscal policy
Tight ﬁscal policy

Loose monetary policy

Tight monetary policy

Exchange rate depreciation
Offsetting impact

Offsetting impact
Exchange rate appreciation

bring down the value of the US dollar, worked only because it was accompanied by signiﬁcant
policy changes. In the 1993–1995 period, the US had a somewhat different problem to 1980–
1985. While the new US government was moving towards the idea of balancing the budget,
and thus tightening ﬁscal policy, the Federal Reserve was in 1993 keeping a relatively loose
monetary policy. Indeed, one could argue that the Fed maintained an inappropriately loose
monetary policy for much of 1994 up until its tightening of November 1994, before policy was
seen as appropriately tight. Perhaps not coincidentally, in 1994 the US Treasury market had its
worst year on record. In line with this, the US dollar weakened up until November of that year.
The above model and examples assume either perfect or high capital mobility. However,
not all economies are like this. While the move towards liberalization of trade and capital has
broadly increased capital mobility, there remain speciﬁc countries in the emerging markets
where capital mobility remains low (e.g. China). In this case, therefore, one must assume that
trade ﬂows dominate over capital ﬂows. Thus, the results are altered as in Table 1.3.
The Mundell–Fleming model has done much to explain how combinations of monetary and
ﬁscal policy should affect exchange rates. Indeed, their model is the standard for this kind of
work.
1.2.2 Theory vs. Practice
However, as ever with exchange rate models, in an open economy with high capital mobility
there remains the issue of delay in the transmission mechanism. Monetary models suggest that
an increase in interest rates should lead to an increase in the investor’s weighting of interestbearing securities and a corresponding reduction in the weighting of money/cash. This in turn
should lead to a reduction in the demand for and therefore the price of goods, which according
to PPP should result in an offsetting appreciation of the nominal exchange rate in order to
restore equilibrium.
In practice, it may not take place exactly like this, at least in the short term. Say you are
an investor in US Treasuries and the Federal Reserve tightens monetary policy by increasing
interest rates. Depending on what were market expectations for Fed policy prior to that and
also depending on where you were positioned on the US yield curve, you may be facing losses
on your position due to the simple inverse relationship between bond yields and bond prices.
Eventually, the incentive to hold interest-bearing securities will rise as interest rates rise, but
only at the point where the investor believes interest rates have stopped rising. Until that time,
the investor may in practice do the opposite of what the model suggests, by reducing their
position in interest-bearing securities and reverting to money/cash in order to preserve capital.
Theoretically, the investor will have more money/cash to spend on goods and this should
push up prices, which in turn should lead to depreciation — rather than appreciation — of the
exchange rate according to PPP to restore equilibrium.

30

Currency Strategy

Equally, the natural reaction of our US Treasury investor to a fall in interest rates is not
necessarily to reduce the position, given that falling yields equal rising prices. Eventually, the
reduction in income will not be offset by the capital gain, at which point the investor will
indeed reduce the position in favour of other assets such as money/cash. Before that, they may
well maintain or even increase the position in interest-bearing securities in order to reap the
capital gains impact. Thus, a reduction of interest rates may at least initially lead to an actual
reduction in money/cash within portfolios, in turn causing money demand and prices to fall
and the currency to appreciate according to PPP to restore equilibrium.
I suspect that the very suggestion that a reduction in interest rates may lead to a reduction
rather than an increase in money/cash may cause one or two economists reading this to foam
at the mouth. The point is a serious one however, and it is this — the assumption that a change
in monetary policy leads directly and automatically to a parallel change in the exchange rate
is ﬂawed for the following reasons:

r There may be a delay in the transmission mechanism
r The initial exchange rate reaction may be the exact opposite of what standard models assume

This is not in any way to reduce the importance of the original work. Rather, it is to bring it into
the context of modern-day trading and investing conditions. Over the medium to long term,
the Mundell–Fleming model of policy combinations is an invaluable guide to future exchange
rate direction. In the short term, however, as I have tried to show, there may be delays and
distortions, which at least put off the anticipated results.
1.2.3 A Multi-Polar rather than a Bi-Polar Investment World
The results we have looked at so far with regard to this model assume a bi-polar world of
money/cash or interest-bearing securities. Suppose however that our investment world is much
more complex than that, involving equities, ﬁxed income securities, money market funds and
money/cash. As a central bank cuts interest rates, the effect of this should be spread across
these asset classes, which in turn react in different ways. If a central bank cuts interest rates, this
should cause the investor to cut their portfolio weighting in money market funds and increase it
in equities. In the short term, it should also cause an increase in the weighting for ﬁxed income
securities as the capital gain should offset the lost income. Eventually, however, we should
assume that it causes a reduction in the weighting for ﬁxed income securities. Finally, a rate
cut should also lead to an increase in the weighting of money/cash. The reduction in money
market funds and ﬁxed income securities should logically equal the sum of the increase in
weighting in equities and money/cash. Since money/cash has to share its gains with equities,
one should assume that the effect on money demand and therefore prices is reduced. Prices
should rise less than they would otherwise do without the inﬂuence of equities. Consequently,
as prices rise by less, the exchange rate should also depreciate by less than one would otherwise
expect. In the same way, an interest rate increase should in this multi-polar investment world
lead to less of an exchange rate appreciation than would be expected in a bi-polar investment
world.
1.2.4 Two Legs but not Three
The ﬁnal word on the Monetary Approach and the exchange rate impact from policy combinations concerns the idea from the Mundell–Fleming model that a central bank can in a world
@Team-FLY

Fundamental Analysis

31

of high capital mobility target the exchange rate or the interest rate but not both. Another way
of expressing this is that you can have two of the following but not all three:
