
3 64

,

t

Epilogue

individual and society. It is a mistake to think that there are two
separate entities involved: the relationship is between a part and
a whole. We have seen the cognitive difficulties that such a relationship gives rise to: neither the individual nor society can be
defined without reference to the other. Given the structure of our
language it is extremely difficult to recognize the contingent nature of the two entities, and as a matter of historical fact most
discourses on the subject have taken either the whole or the part
as their starting point. The choice of the starting point tends to
infuse the rest of the discussion with a bias. The famous speech
of Agrippa in which he compares society with an organism epitomizes one extreme, and Rousseau's social contract the other.
In order to avoid the bias inherent in these extremes new categories of speech need to be established. An appropriate language
is beginning to emerge in the context of computer science and
systems analysis, but it will take time to permeate general discourse.* Even if we learn to think in terms of reflexive and recursive relations, we are confronted with a substantive choice:
should society take a predetermined shape or should its members
be allowed to determine the form of society in which they live?
The former kind of society has been described by Karl Popper as
closed, the latter as open.
I have just come back from China where the issue is of vital
significance. The country has passed through a horrendous period
during which the collective terrorized the individual on a massive scale. It is now run by a group of people who had been on
the receiving end of the terror. These people have ample reason
to be passionately devoted to the cause of individual freedom; but
they are up against a long tradition of feudalism, an all-pervasive
bureaucracy, and the constraints of Marxist ideology.
I was surprised to find an avid interest in the concept of reflexivity. As I have noted in the book, reflexivity could also be described as a kind of dialectics, but I have eschewed using the word
because of the heavy intellectual baggage it carries. It is exa$ly
these connotations that make the concept so fascinating for the
Chinese because it allows them to modify Marxist ideology without breaking with it. Hegel propounded a dialectic of ideas; Marx
* I have been much taken by Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind (New
York: Ballantine, 1975), and Douglas R. Hofstadter, Godel, Escher, Bach: An
Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Basic Books, 1979).

Epilogue

365

turned the idea on it$ head and espoused dialectic materialism;
now there is a new dialectic that connects the participants' thinking with the events in which they participate-that is, it operates
between ideas and material conditions. If Hegel's concept was the
thesis and Marxism the antithesis, reflexivity is the synthesis.
But there is a fundamental difference between Marxism and the
new dialectic. Marx lpbored under the misapprehension that, in
order to be scientific, a theory has to determine the future course
of history. The new dialectic is emphatically not deterministic.
Since the shape of society cannot be "scientifically" determined,
it must be left to the participants to decide their own form of
organization. Since nt, participant has a monopoiy on truth, the
best arrangement allows for a critical process in which conflicting
views can be freely debated and eventually tested against reality.
Democratic elections provide such a forum in politics, and the
market mechanism provides one in economics. Neither markets
nor elections constitute an objective criterion, only an expression
of the prevailing bias; but that is the best available in an imperfect
world. Thus, the concept of reflexivity leads directly to the concept of an open society-hence its "charm" in contemporary
China. As far as I am concerned, it completes what Hofstadter
would call a "recursive loop" between my concept of reflexivity,
my interest in financial markets, and my devotion to the ideal of
an open society.
m-

NOTES

Introduction
1. Karl R. Popper, The Poverty of Historicism (London: Routledge &

Kegan Paul, 1957), p. 130.
Chapter 3
1. George Stigler, Theory of Price (New York: Macmillan, 1966).
2. Lionel C. Robbins, An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Eco-

nomic Science, 3d. ed. (New York: New York University Press,1984).
3. Karl R. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (New York: Basic
Books, 1959), and Conjectures and Refutations (London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1963).
4. Karl R. Popper, The Poverty of Historicism (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1957), p. 130.
Chapter 3
1. Ragnar Nurske, International Currency Experience: Lessons of the

Interwar Period (Geneva: League of Nations, Secretariat; Economic,
Financial, and Transit Department, 1944).
2. Henry Kaufman, "Comments on Credit," May 3, 1985 (New Pork:
Salomon Brothers Inc.).
Chapter 5
1. The New York Times (April 21, 1985).
2. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the

United States, 1867-1960 (Princeton: Princeton University Press,

Notes

367

1963), and Monetary Statistics of the United States (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1970).
Chapter 6
I. George Soros, "The ~kternationalDebt Problem, Diagnosis and Prog-

nosis," July 1983; ':The International Debt Problem Revisited,"
March 1984 (New Yotk: Morgan Stanley).
2. Anatole Kaletsky, The Costs of Default (New York: Twentieth
Century Fund, 1985).
Chapter 7
1. Henry Kaufman, loc. cit., passim.

2. For example, Paul Volcker's testimony before the Senate Banking
Committee, February 20,1986.
Chapter 8
I. International Monetafy Fund, World Economic Outlook (September
1, 1986).
2. Jonathan E. Gray, "Financial Corporation of America: Strategic Analysis # Forecast," Bernstein Research, Dec. 28,1983 (New York: Sanford C. Bernstein & CQ.).

Chapter 18

x
.
-

1. The International Parliamentary Working Round Table on Exchange
Rates and Coordination, Zurich, Switzerland; June 28, 29, and 30,

1986.
2. The U.S. Congressicnal Summit on Debt and Trade, New York, N.Y.;
Dec. 3,4, and 5, 1986.

APPENDIX

PROSPECT FOR
EUROPEAN DISINTEGRATION

I am very grateful to the Aspen Institute for giving me this opportunity to address an audience in Germany, and I have chosen a
topic which ought to be of particular interest to people in Germany.
My topic is the prospect of European disintegration.
It is a subject that engages me in three different ways. First, I am
passionately devoted to the idea of Europe as an open society. Second, I have developed a theory of history which casts light on the
process of European integration and disintegration. Third, I am a
participant in the process.
Open society means a society based on the idea that nobody has a
monopoly on truth; a society which is not dominated by the state or
by any particular ideology, where minorities and minority opinions
an
is a
are respected. Using these criteria, the ~ u r o ~ e Community
highly desirable form of organization. Indeed, in some ways it is
ideal, because it has a very interesting feature: all the participating
states are in a minority. Respect for the minority is the basis of its
construction. The unresolved question is: how much power should
be delegated to the majority? How far should Europe be integrated?
The way Europe evolves will have a profound influence on what
happens to the east of Europe, the region that was formerly under
the sway of Communist ideology. Communism built a universal
closed society, but Communism as an ideology is now well and
truly dead. The line of least resistance leads to the break-up of the
universal closed system into particular closed societies, based on

Appendix

369

the principle of national or ethnic identity. We can see the principle
well advanced in the former Yugoslavia. The only possible escape
from this fate is to make the transition from closed to open society.
But that is not so easy. It requires time and effort to establish the
rule of law, the institutians of civil society, and the critical way of
thinking which are characteristic of an open society. Societies devastated by Communism Gannot make the transition on their own.
They need a Europe that is open and receptive and supportive of
their effort. East Germany got too much help, the rest of Eastern
Europe too little. I am deeply engaged in helping the rest of Eastern
Europe. As you may knoiv, I have set up a network of foundations
devoted to this cause, and that is the bias that I bring to the subject
of Europe.
My second involvement is that I have developed a theory of history which has guided me both in my activities in the financial markets and in setting up the foundation network. The key to my theory
is the role that mistakes and misconceptions play in shaping the
course of events. Thereis,always a divergence between the participants' thinking and the actual state of affairs, but sometimes the
divergence is relatively small and self-correcting-I call this "nearequilibrium"; and, at other times, the divergence is large, with no
tendency to correct itself-I call this "far-from-equilibrium." The
course of events has quite a different character in near-equilibrium
and in far-from-equilibrium conditions. This point is not generally
und&stood. My theory relates to far-from-equilibriuG conditions.
I have made a particular study of what I call the "boom/bust sequence," which can be observed from time to time in financial markets; and I think it is also applicable to the integration and
disintegration of the European Community. Since the revolution of
1989 and the reunification of Germany, Europe has been in a condition of dynamic disequilibrium. Therefore it presents a very interesting case study for my theory of history.
And, finally, I am myself a participant in this process of dynamic
disequilibrium because I am an international investor. I used to call
myself a speculator and I used to joke that an investment is a speculation that has gone wrong but, in view of the campaign against
speculators, I am no longer amused. International investors did
play an important role in the breakdown of the Exchange Rate
Mechanism, but it is impossible to have a common market without
international capital movements. To blame speculators is like
shooting the messenger.

370
I

4

Appendix

I shall deal with my subject on the basis of my theory of history.
The fact that I am also a participant does not interfere with my ability to apply the theory. On the contrary, it has allowed me to test it
in practice. Nor does it matter that I bring a particular bias to the
subject because it is part of my theory that participants in a historical process always act on the basis of a bias. And, of course, the
same rule applies to the proponents of theories.
But I must confess that my particular bias-namely, that I want
to see a united, prosperous and open Europe--does interfere with
my activities as a participant in financial markets. I had no problem
as long as I was an anonymous participant. Sterling would have left
the ERM whether or not I speculated against it. But, after sterling
left the ERM, I received a lot of publicity and I ceased to be an
anonymous participant. I became a guru. I could actually influence
the behavior of markets, and it would be dishonest of me to pretend
otherwise. This has created opportunities and imposed responsibilities. Given my bias, I did not want to be responsible for the
French franc being pushed out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. I
decided to abstain from speculating against the franc in order to be
able to put forward a constructive solution; but nobody thanked me
for it. Indeed, my public utterances seemed to annoy the monetary
authorities even more than my activities in the financial markets,
so I can't say I am doing well in my newfound role of guru. Nevertheless, given my bias, I must say what I am going to say, even if it
is inconvenient for me as a participant.
The important point about my boom/bust theory is that there is
nothing inevitable about it. The typical boom/bust sequence is initially self-reinforcing and, eventually, self-defeating, but it can be
aborted or diverted at any point. It is in the light of this theory that
I shall comment on the boom/bust process of European integration. I shall pay particular attention to the Exchange Rate Mechanism, which is playing such a crucial role in the process. It had
worked perfectly well in near-equilibrium conditions, until the reunification of Germany. But the reunification has created conditions of dynamic disequilibrium. Since that time, the course of
events has been shaped by mistakes and misunderstandings. The
most tangible result is the disintegration of the Exchange Rate
Mechanism which, in turn, is an important factor in the possible
disintegration of the European Community.
Let me start at the point where near-equilibrium conditions were
replaced by a condition of dynamic disequilibrium. This point can

Appendix

371

be fixed in time with great precision: it was the fall of the Berlin
Wall. This opened the hay to German reunification. Chancellor
Kohl rose to the historic occasion. He decided that reunification
must be complete, immediate and achieved in a European context.
Actually, he had no choice in the matter, since the German constitution gave East ~ e r m a n scitizenship of Germany and Germany
was a member of the European Community. But it makes all the
difference whether youitake charge of events or merely react to
them. Chancellor Kohl exhibited real leadership. He went to President Mitterand and said to him, in effect, "I need your support and
the support of Europe to achieve immediate and complete reunification." The French replied, in effect, "Let's create a stronger Europe in which the reunified Germany can be fully embedded." This
gave a tremendous impulse towards integration. It set into motion
the "boom" part of the boom/bust process. The British were opposed to the creation of a strong central authority; you will recall
Margaret Thatcher's speech at Bruges. Tough negotiations ensued,
but there was a sense of urgency, a self-imposed deadline. The result was the Treaty of ~aastricht,the two main goals of which were
to establish a common currency and a common foreign policy. It
had a number of other provisions, but they were less important
and, when the British objected, .they were allowed to opt out of
some of them. All in all, the Treaty was a giant step forward towards integfation, a valiant attempt to create a Europe strong
enough to cope with the revolutionary changes resu-ECting from the
collapse of the Soviet empire. It went, perhaps, further and faster
than public opinion was prepared for; but that was a chance that
theleaders took in order to cope with the revolutionary situation.
r'iightly so, in my opinion, because that is what leadership entails.
The trouble lay elsewhere. I shall not dwell on a side deal in
which Germany got the agreement of the European Community to
recognize Croatia and Slovenia as independent states. It was little
discussed and little noticed at the time, but it had horrendous consequences. I want to focus on the internal disequilibrium in Germany which was generated by the reunification because it was that
disequilibrium which has turned the boom into a bust.
The German government seriously underestimated the cost of
reunification and was, in any case, unwilling to pay the full cost
through higher taxation or a reduction of other government expenditures. This created tensions between the Bundesbank and the
government on two levels: one was that the government acted

372
t

I

Appendix

against the express advice of the Bundesbank; the other was that a
very loose fiscal policy-that is to say, a huge budget deficitrequired a very tight monetary policy in order to reestablish monetary equilibrium. The injection of purchasing power through the
exchange of East German currency at par created an inflationary
boom, and the fiscal deficit added fuel to the fire. The Bundesbank
was charged, by law, with the mission of maintaining the value of
the Deutschmark and it acted with alacrity. It raised the rep0 rate
to 9.70 percent. But that policy was very harmful to the other member countries of the European Monetary System. In other words,
the monetary policy which was designed to reestablish equilibrium
at home created a disequilibrium within the European Monetary
System. It took some time for the disequilibrium to develop but,
with the passage of time, the tight monetary policy imposed by the
Bundesbank pushed all of Europe into the deepest recession it has
experienced since the Second World War. The Bundesbank plays a
dual role: it is the guardian of sound money at home and it is the
anchor of the EMS. It acted as the transmission mechanism for
turning the internal disequilibrium of the German economy into a
force for the disintegration of $he EMS.
There was also a third and deeper level of conflict between the
Bundesbank and the German government. Chancellor Kohl, in order to obtain French support for German reunification, entered
into the Treaty of Maastricht. That Treaty posed a profound threat
to the institutional dominance, indeed, institutional survival, of
the Bundesbank as the arbiter of European monetary policy. In
the EMS, the German mark serves as the anchor. But, under the
Maastricht Treaty, the role of the Bundesbank was to be replaced by
a European central bank in which the Bundesbank v ~ ~ uonly
l d have
one vote out of twelve. Admittedly, the European Central Bank was
based on the German model; but it makes all the difference in the
world whether you serve as the model or whether you are actually
in charge. The Bundesbank never openly acknowledged that it was
opposed to this institutional change, and it remains unclear to
what extent its actions were designed to prevent it. All4 can tell
you is that, as a market participant, I acted on the hypothesis that it
was the Bundesbank's underlying motivation. I cannot prove to you
that my hypothesis was correct; all I can say is that it worked.
For instance, I listened to Helmut Schlesinger warn that the markets are mistaken when they think that the ECU consists of a fixed
basket of currencies. I asked him what he thought of the ECU as the

Appendix

373

future common currency of Europe. He said he would like it better
if it were called the mark. 1 was guided accordingly. Shortly thereafter, the lira was forced out of the ERM.
1 don't want to get ,into a blow-by-blow account of what happened because I want ,to establish a broad historical perspective.
From that perspective,1the salient features are that the Maastricht
referendum was defeated in Denmark; it passed with a very narrow margin in France;'and it barely squeaked through Parliament
in Britain. The European Exchange Rate Mechanism has, for all
intents and purposes, broken down and it has done so in several
installments, of which#thelast one, namely, the broadening of the
band in August, was the most far-reaching because it loosened the
strongest tie within the European Community, the one which ties
Germany and France together. What is in the long run even more
important, Europe is in the midst of a deep recession from which
there is no immediate prospect of recovery. Unemployment is a serious and still-growing problem which continues to be aggravated
by monetary policies which are far too restrictive for this stage of
the cycle. From these observations, 1 conclude that the trend towards the integration of Europe has passed its peak and has now
been reversed.
The exact moment of reversal can be identified as the defeat in the
Danish referendum. It 'could have brought forth a groundswell of
support >or the Maastricht Treaty; in that case, there would have
been no reversal. Instead, it generated the b r e a k h n of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. Europe is now in a process of disintegration. Since we are dealing with a boom/bust process, it is impossible
to say how far it will go. But it may go much further than people are
currently willing or able to envisage because a boomibust process is
self-reinforcing in both directions.
1 can identify at least five elements which are mutually selfreinforcing. First and foremost is the recession; 11.7 percent unemployment in France, 14.1 percent in Belgium, and 22.25 percent
in Spain, are simply not acceptable. They generate social and
political unrest which is easily channeled in an anti-European direction. Second, there is the progressive disintegration of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. This is very dangerous because in the
medium to long term the Common Market cannot survive without stability in exchange rates.
The ERM functioned perfectly well in near-equilibrium conditions for more than a decade. But the reunification of Germany has

374
I

I

Appendix

revealed a fundamental flaw in the mechanism, namely, that the
Bundesbank plays a dual role: guardian of domestic monetary stability and anchor of the EMS. As long as the two roles are in harmony, there is no problem. But when there was a conflict, the
Bundesbank gave precedence to domestic considerations to the
detriment of its international obligations. This was clearly demonstrated, for instance, on Thursday, July 29th, when it refused to
lower the discount rate in order to relieve the pressure on the
French franc. It can be argued that the Bundesbank has no choice
in the matter: it is obliged by law, the Grundgesetz, to give absolute
priority to the preservation of the value of the German currency.
In that case, there is an irreconcil251e cordlief between the ERM
and the Grundgesetz.
This episode revealed another fundamental flaw in the ERM,
namely, that there is an asymmetry between the obligations of the
anchor currency and the currency which is under pressure. All the
obligations fall on the weak currency. It will be recalled that, at the
time of the Bretton Woods agreement, John Maynard Keynes emphasized the need for symmetry between the strong and the weak.
He based his arguments on the experiences of the inter-war period.
The current situation is increasingly reminiscent of that period and
sometimes it seems as if Keynes had not lived.
This brings me to the third element, namely, mistaken economic
and monetary policies. Here it is not so much the Bundesbank that
is to blame but those who have opposed it, like the German government, or those who have been the victims of its policy, like the
United Kingdom and France. The German government is, of
course, responsible for creating the internal disequilibrium in the
first place. The British committed an egregious error in jviiiifig the
Exchange Rate Mechanism on October Bth, 1990 after the reunification of Germany. They did so on the basis of arguments which had
been developed in 1985, but were strenuously resisted by Margaret
Thatcher. When her position weakened, she finally gave in, but by
that time, the arguments which had been valid in 1985 were no
longer applicable. So the British made two mistakes--o~_lein 1985
and one in 1990.
They were particularly hard hit by the high interest rate regime
imposed on them by the Bundesbank because they were already in
a recession when they went into the ERM. Being pushed out of the
ERM brought them much-needed relief. They ought to have welcomed it, but they were too dazed to react. They did the right thing
