
retracement. And always rely on the chart in the next-smaller time frame to pinpoint low-risk
execution levels.

SIGNPOSTS
Trends evolve according to cyclic buying and selling behavior that the chart bottles into price bars.
Market crowds act through predictable herd instinct at key moments within price development.
Signposts identify where this mass crowd behavior should exert itself. Divergent market forces
emit nothing but noise the vast majority of the time. Patience requires waiting for major impulses to
intersect. Noise reduces and signal emits strongly within these small crossroads. When more
impulses enter this convergent zone, signal gets even louder and noise can cease completely. That
ringing bell is the sound of profitable opportunity for the swing trader.
The market tea leaves often require great skill to interpret. Fortunately, the swing trader can quickly
evaluate each new setup by combining the right elements of trend and time. Signposts point to
opportunity within the charting landscape. Double tops, gaps, and stage analysis join other 3D tools
to awaken a complex world of market action. But it takes great skill to pick the right tools for each
individual analysis.
This challenge can intimidate novices, but the market never reveals its secrets the same way twice.
While an arithmetic chart shows a weak trendline, the log version may support the trade with strong
price channels. Volume study may provide the important key to one execution but be safely ignored
on many others. Rising price may say rally when the Bollinger Bands say selloff. Swing traders
must learn the specific applications of each individual resource and develop the intuition to examine
the most promising setups with the right ones at precisely the right time.
This vital process may appear complicated or confusing. Use the analogy of the traders’ toolbox.
Just as a woodworker relies on many different saws to build a cabinet, swing traders must apply the
right set of tools to build successful positions. While the woodworker uses some items daily, others
fulfill a special purpose that arises infrequently. The swing trader looks at similar chart features
each day but must pull up special resources to answer difficult questions. In the end both skilled
craftsman know when and how to use each individual tool to create their final work of art.
The charting landscape uncovers signposts through the convergence of two or more elements. This
cross-verification (CV) process offers an objective method to determine the odds of success for any
trade entry. CV power lies in this linear mechanism: the more intersecting points in a trade setup,
the higher the trade probability. Study the landscape using the right tools to locate intersecting
points within the evolving Pattern Cycle. At its core, this simple workflow sums up all the
preparation and analysis required before the execution of a trade.
The novice typically misses many signposts, while a skilled trader may only require price to
uncover that market’s mysteries. Newer participants should rely upon checklists to ensure that their
charts receive complete attention. Many software programs and online charting modules allow
extensive customization. Use these tools to flip through many examination modes to find that
needle in the trading haystack.
Price gaps mark powerful single-point signposts. They expose hidden S/R barriers when properly
placed within a trend. Gaps come in many varieties, and swing traders must drill themselves in
their various incarnations to avoid bad decision-making when it matters most. For example,
intraday traders use opening breakout gaps to pinpoint momentum entry and exhaustion gaps to sell
short when price retraces to test them. Mixing the two leads to unfortunate results.

FIGURE 3.14
Signposts align through different charts to predict important price action. As Conexant undergoes a change of
character, gaps from two time frames signal the swing trader’s attention. The large hole-in-the-wall on the daily
chart ends the powerful rally and sets up reversal conditions. Price retraces 50% to the gap wall and rolls into a
long decline. Note the small breakout gap and double top on the 60-minute chart. Declining price violates the top
support and fills this gap. This signals the end of the larger bear bounce. A pullback to the broken gap then allows
a low-risk short sale before CNXT drops another 13 points.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

VOLUME AND THE PATTERN CYCLE
Crowd action-reaction emits volume benchmarks at key price levels. Measure this unique past
participation against current activity to determine the relative importance of fresh events.
Regardless of holding period, watch these primary reference points when price returns to test key
levels. But always examine volume within the proper context. A single bar’s narrow impact may
lead to poor interpretation of that market’s underlying direction. Use volume history analysis to
place the recent action into proper perspective within the recent trend.
The intermediate daily time frame provides a common basis for volume moving average
computation. The 50- or 60-day VMA contrasts prior crowd participation with the current action for
all liquid stocks through all exchanges. Use this simple measurement as a central tendency tool that
gauges the crowd’s emotional intensity in real-time. The crowd sends a significant signal when

volume exceeds 150% of the daily average. If daily volume falls below 50% of the average, look
for dull and directionless trading to characterize that market.
Volume peaks and valleys occur naturally within normal price evolution. They also tend to alternate
in a cyclical pattern that parallels trend-range axis phases. Compare price placement within that axis
against volume’s central tendency deviation to identify impending feedback shifts. For example,
expect lower than normal participation within extended range formations. When volume suddenly
peaks well above average within these constricted zones, it often signals an imminent breakout into
a new trend.
Don’t be fooled by seasonal volume aberrations. January draws significant new cash into the
markets as investors replenish mutual fund coffers. Summer trading limps through the lowest
participation of the year. Insiders and institutions take off for the beaches during holiday markets
throughout the year, leaving few movers and shakers on the scene. And options expiration triggers
heavy position shifts the middle Friday of each month.

ACCUMULATION-DISTRIBUTION
Price movement generates through a value exchange between interested parties. As markets cycle
through buying and selling pressure, transactions slowly reflect the willingness of participants to
own stock at higher prices or dispose of it at lower prices. This poorly understood evolution defines
an issue’s accumulation-distribution (acc-dis). Acc-dis evolves continuously and often travels a
different path than price development. For this reason, avoid the tendency to expect volume spikes
to translate immediately into sustainable momentum.
Shareholders buy and sell stocks for many different reasons. Short-term crowds tend to focus much
more on current price than long-term investors. They can also flip stocks very quickly. Institutions
lack this retail liquidity and must build or eliminate large positions over a longer time frame. As the
largest fish in the pond, their slow movement inhibits the sentiment evolution that drives other
participants. This induces backfilling and testing of new trend movement. For example, watch how
price swings back and forth repeatedly through a key emotional barrier (such as the 200-day
moving average) while undergoing a long-term recovery from a bear market.
Acc-dis may lead or lag price rate of change. Often one measure will pull sharply ahead and then
wait patiently for the other to catch up before proceeding on another leg. Swing traders build
predictive indicators to capture this mechanism and track divergence between these two primary
forces. As the slower element, acc-dis tends to pull price toward it rather than the other way around.
In these divergent conditions, look for reversals just after price strikes overbought or oversold
levels.
This tension assists trade analysis near tests of old highs and lows. These important zones respond
better to acc-dis than other price levels. Both breakouts and breakdowns need crowd support to
proceed. When a stock hits a new high, only significant participation will carry it higher. When a
stock hits a new low, a fearful supply of sellers will generate further decline. For this reason, swing
traders measure divergence near these extremes to choose whether to fade price or go with a
momentum break. Expect a reversal as price barriers exert their influence if acc-dis indicators
suggest weak participation.
Avoid decision-making based on very short-term acc-dis readings. The true nature of accumulation
or distribution often remains hidden from all but the insiders. Large players, such as institutions and
mutual funds, don’t want to broadcast their intentions, for fear that the news will move the market
before they complete their strategies. So they slowly unwind positions into strength or build them

during weakness. This significant contrary activity clouds the interpretation and true meaning of
short-term volume surges.
FIGURE 3.15
On Balance Volume presents a classic accumulation-distribution tool to examine new highs and lows. Over a month
before Yahoo ejects into an astounding millennium rally, OBV pushes into uncharted territory and waits for its
companion. By the time that price breaks through its old high, the strong accumulation allows an immediate burst to
higher prices without further consolidation.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The trading flow may align with neither accumulation nor distribution during quieter phases. In a
mixed fashion, bulls and bears evenly disperse the lower daily volume. Stocks rise or fall on
broader market conditions in this environment. Mundane events can sharply affect trend without the
shareholder’s common voice. Try to avoid this noisy midrange between enthusiastic accumulation
and fearful distribution when choosing short-term positions.
The best swing trading stocks have a float over 10-million shares and daily volume over 2-million.
Volume-based indicators work extremely well with this broad participation. But be aware that
Nasdaq double counts transactions, once on the buy and once on the sell. This can distort elements
of crowd behavior. And always avoid acc-dis in the analysis of thin issues. Large holders try to
manipulate the public view of such stocks to build a rosy picture that benefits their own
pocketbooks.

TRENDS AND VOLUME
Expect volume to increase in the direction of the primary trend. Look for higher volume on up bars
than down bars as prices rise during rallies. Reverse this during selloffs. In uptrends, more volume
on sell-offs than rallies generates divergence that may foretell an impending change in trend. In
downtrends, divergence again signals when volume shrinks on sell-offs and rises on rallies.
Volume can flash an early signal for an impending reversal when it deviates sharply from the VMA
during an active trend. Declining directional volume suggests a loss of crowd interest. After awhile
the stock may fall of its own weight. Alternatively, when volume peaks too sharply or quickly, it
can short circuit and blow off movement in the prevailing price direction. These high-volume
climax events wash out both buyers and sellers as efficiently as lack of interest. They often mark
major tops or bottoms.
Moderate volume supports underlying trends for long periods of time. It often reflects participation
very close to the VMA with few spikes or valleys. The flow of enthusiasm or discouragement
generates price change that feeds on itself and allows one group after another to toss coins into the
wishing well. Look for this phasing action on log charts that print rhythmic 45° patterns with
repeated pullbacks to short-term moving averages.
New trends awaken with price or volume leading the emerging directional force. Better trading
opportunities with fewer whipsaws appear if volume builds first. When crowd enthusiasm leads
price, acc-dis should exert a strong pull on its twin. Like a coiled spring, price eventually snaps
forward to relieve the tension. For obvious reasons, swing traders want to enter positions just before
this happens. But precise timing can frustrate the most promising volume-based strategies. Acc-dis
price divergence can persist for long periods without quick release.
New breakouts depend on volume support. Subsequent trend survival requires that price and
volume move into convergence very early after the move. As price thrusts into all-time highs or
pretraveled TMs, current acc-dis must support the next move. Fresh price levels place hidden
demands on volume. New high breakouts require ample participation as well as alignment between
acc-dis and price. Breakouts into TM levels force volume to digest past supply and emotional scars.
Divergence builds quickly and triggers sharp whipsaws when new participation at these levels can’t
absorb the resistance.
Volume often spikes well above short-term VMAs during major breakouts. Greed and fear drive
participation as the crowd recognizes the active trend. Volume can quickly exceed historical levels
and surge for many bars at new highs or lows.
Both strong uptrends and downtrends display similar volume signatures. High participation prints
sharp gaps at emotional trend peaks, while short pullbacks exhibit declining interest. Few wish to
exit trend-following positions in this active environment.
Swing traders watch closely for signs of a blow-off as trend advances. This important reversal
reveals itself through volume that spikes well above recent action while related price bars expand
and turn in failure. This climax event flags the end of the current trend and beginning for a new
range period. Use candlestick patterns to quickly uncover these major reversals. Dark cloud cover,
shooting star, and doji patterns all print frequently during blow-offs.
FIGURE 3.16
3Com collapses after a vertical high-volume blow-off event. Crowd frenzy reaches a peak as the technology
behemoth spins off the Palm Pilot division. The new IPO starts to trade and no one remains to carry COMS

higher. It falls quickly from its own weight and traps an overhead supply of bag holders that ensures a bumpy ride
for months to come.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The trend’s last phase reflects the most active crowd participation in a bull-bear cycle. This frantic
action corresponds with Elliott’s fifth-wave parabolic activity and sets the stage for the ensuing
climax burnout. Once the event occurs, volume again surges when price approaches these levels
from above or below. Extremes that print during blow-offs take great participation to violate. For
this reason, fade early pullbacks to these climax bars through classic swing tactics. The reversal
odds remain very strong as long as volume dries up on the move back toward the high or low.

CONGESTION AND VOLUME
New students of technical analysis expect to memorize well-known patterns and book quick profits
when they locate them on their favorite stock charts. But flag and triangle formations don’t fill
wallets without considerable effort. Successful swing traders must study the chaotic swings within
each congestion pattern to predict both direction and timing for the eventual breakout.
Volume characteristics change as markets swing between negative and positive feedback. Negative
feedback generates much less interest from the crowd. These rangebound periods absorb recent
price change volatility and prepare for new thrusting movement. Investors and traders take profits

during these quiet conditions in an orderly manner that lowers the emotional fire that induces
volume spikes.
Study histograms to reveal whether bulls or bears win small battles within a developing pattern.
Profitable breakouts depend on accurate interpretation of these shifting crowd emotions. Short-term
bursts of acc-dis within the confines of a constricted range often expose the underlying market
tendency and required time for positive feedback to appear. Compare the small peaks of buying and
selling pressure within the swings of the congestion pattern. When volume increases on short rallies
and declines on dips, expect the bull’s successful outcome. Alternatively, a series of lower bars with
increasing volume reveals fear and often signals an eventual breakdown. But regardless of
direction, expect volume to decline overall as a new pattern draws to a conclusion.
Volume should taper off and dry up as negative feedback builds. A trendline drawn above the
volume histogram will downslope to reflect this declining con dition. Near the end of range
development, price and volume synchronize at the empty zone, that quiet terminus between
negative and positive feedback. Participation reaches its nadir as the crowd turns away in boredom
within this neutral interface. Watch closely from this center of apathy for evidence of the awakening
trend. Use subsequent volume as one measure to locate an impending setup. When properly
identified, participation on subsequent bars provides valuable feedback on the direction and strength
for the impending move. For example, false breakout odds increase if price surges out of an apex
without sufficient volume.
The crowd builds trend through volume. Hidden battles take place during negative feedback that
impact the eventual market direction. Positions square out and a bias emerges that supports or
diverges from the recent trend. Swing traders seek to uncover this prejudice through analysis of
rangebound price bars. Begin by asking several important questions, as given in Table 3.2.

INTRADAY TRADING VOLUME
Avoid over-interpretation of intraday volume trends. Sixty percent or more of total daily
participation occurs during the first and last hours. Swing traders design signals to trigger during
favorable volume, but this intraday bias distorts output that applies to very short time frames. Limit
most intraday examination to histograms. Also consider eliminating lower-pane volume indicators
to focus attention on the time and sales ticker. This real-time oscillator provides all the crowd
information needed to execute successfully within very short-term holding periods.
TABLE 3.2
Uncovering Market Bias through Volume
Does volume increase or decrease at relative highs or lows?
Range conditions generate small-scale trading patterns. Evaluate volume spikes as a stock
swings back and forth to reveal small bursts of greed or fear within the crowd. One of
these emotional forces will eventually ignite to ramp price toward the next level.
Is there a failed rally just outside congestion on higher volume than the rest of the range?
Insiders often gun the buy stops to take out that side of the market. This reveals a bias
toward taking the market down.
Is there a failed breakdown just outside congestion on higher volume than the rest of the
range?
Insiders often gun the sell stops to take out that side of the market. This reveals a bias
toward taking the market up.
Do higher-volume days occur on narrow range or wide range bars and do bull or bears
win these days?

Higher volume on wide bars suggests the market being pushed to generate transactions.
Higher volume on narrow bars suggests accumulation or distribution that depends on the
outcome of the bar.
Does a silent alarm signal appear?
Certain volume events within ranges overcome all prior activity. Market character
immediately changes when a massive volume day shows up.
Routine intraday volume consistently displays a high noise-to-signal ratio for all but the most liquid
stocks. Intermittent peaks and valleys on 5-minute histograms contain few predictive properties and
fail badly when block trades pass through the system. These institutional blocks distort the trading
picture since large transactions often scroll well after the actual execution takes place.
Noise decreases as liquidity increases. For example, the technology behemoths generate unique
intraday volume properties as a massive crowd generates a virtual index market. Sufficient
participation within each tick allows fluid data measurement and accurate price forecasting. The
best volume signals in this liquid environment come at short-term tops or bottoms. Histogram
spikes that converge with clear reversal bars trade as reliably as those that print on a daily or weekly
chart.
Effective intraday trading studies the short-term impact of volume characteristics on the daily chart.
This data identifies markets that are ripe for new opportunities as well as those best avoided. As
current market price approaches past high-volume battle zones, intraday traders can expect a repeat
performance. This advance warning allows them to watch specific markets for signs of increased
volatility. Daily histograms also pinpoint developing breakouts and runaway trend moves that mark
the most profitable of all intraday setups.
Many stocks become good intraday trading vehicles under the right circumstances. Sudden news
events, warnings, or alliances can evoke several days of high-volume activity on relatively thin
issues. Spreads narrow sharply as participants jump in and out of these temporary profit vehicles.
Use watch list filters or online stock sites nightly to uncover and capitalize upon these temporary
gems.

SILENT ALARM
A hidden market hotspot triggers the silent alarm (SA). This unusual zone reflects intense
crossroads of buying and selling pressure. Emotional participation swells volume in a single bar,
but a painful standoff develops between bulls and bears. Price sits still as friction reaches a boiling
point. Swing traders who recognize the developing SA stand aside but then take positions in
whatever direction that price finally ejects out of that bar’s range.
Short-term volume may issue a powerful signal under special circumstances. The SA rarely occurs
but flags a significant profit opportunity. The alarm sounds when price action meets three
conditions:
•
•
•

Volume exceeds 3 times to 5 times the average 50–60 bar VMA.
Price bar range measures below the average of the last 7 bars.
The price bar sits within congestion not broken by the volume event.
