ProphetCharts which literally flips it upside down so people with “bear
on the brain” like me can view charts more objectively.
Kirk: That’s very interesting, Tim. I have often recommended others to flip
the chart upside down to discover any bias. Frankly, I’m surprised that
more charting software doesn’t enable this feature. So, good for you
for recognizing the importance of understanding yourself in relation to
your analysis of the charts.
Also, I have to tell you that I really love it when traders like you have
provided their trading rules especially when they are concise and to
the point as you have done.
So, here’s my first question—how do you set your stops?
Tim Knight: A lot of people ask me this, and my answer—it depends on
the chart—is surely very unsatisfying. But it really does depend on the
chart, and I am very specific about where I place stops; I’ve never used
trailing stops or anything else automatic like that.
The whole purpose of a stop is, once crossed, to tell me that my
analysis is wrong; in other words, it tells me that the rationale I used
to get into a given position is no longer valid, and thus the trade should
no longer be held. It’s as simple as that.
Kirk: Fair enough, Tim. You’ve also said that “partial exits are preferable to
outright closes.” Can you take us through a trade you’ve made recently
in order to show how a partial exit was the best approach?
Tim Knight: I can’t think of a recent one which springs to mind, but I’ll
give you a very simplistic hypothetical. Let’s say you bought 1,000
shares of a stock at $5, and you’re fortunate enough to see it move
up to $10. You aren’t certain if it’s going to go any higher, so you sell
half your position, 500 shares, and recapture your entire initial investment. You are now in a very powerful place, psychologically, because
all of your risk capital has been eliminated: in other words, you can
let the position trade more freely (in spite of your uncertainty of its
direction) without being concerned about taking any kind of hit on
the position; added to which, it’s virtually impossible the stock will
find its way down to $0, so you are virtually guaranteed a profit. The
point is that if the stock eventually gets up to $25, you’ve got a wonderful profit without having had to second-guess the position on the
way up.
Kirk: As the saying goes—when in doubt, sell half—because if it keeps going up, you still are right because you have a position on. Likewise, if
the stock goes down at least you sold some.
So, do you believe in scaling into a new trading position? Why or
why not?

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

497

Tim Knight: Scaling into a position makes sense for a couple of reasons:
first, it reduces your risk. If you are wrong, then the loss you take is
going to be more modest, and if you are right, then “averaging up” into
a winning trade is just as smart as “averaging down” a losing trade
is dumb. And second, I think it’s rare that a person enters a trade at
exactly the perfect time, so scaling into it allows some forgiveness (and
less stress) as the position hopefully starts to move in your direction.
Kirk: Do you ever average down into a losing trade?
Tim Knight: I really try to avoid this, and I’m pretty good about it, mainly
because my stops do the work for me. I never use a “mental stop”—my
stop prices are real, and if something is not going my way, I’ll simply
be taken out.
Kirk: As outlined by your trading rules, your trend analysis is both simple
and straightforward—that is, the trend of the market is defined by the
13-week EWA and 52-week EWA of the $SPX. Based on the relative
position of the 13-week EWA, the market is either Up-Trending (13week EWA above the 52-week) or Down-Trending, and no more than
20 percent of the value of all your positions may be positioned against
that trend at any one time. Where can traders track the EWA online
based on this simple trend system?
Tim Knight: Well, it probably comes as no surprise that I use
ProphetCharts, and I use that product more than any computer product I’ve ever touched. There are, of course, other good sites on the
Internet, and quite a few folks on my blog use StockCharts.com, which
is a site I’ve always respected.
Kirk: I like that you’ve placed a restriction that says that 20 percent of your
positions must not be positioned against the trend. How did you arrive
at that number and why do you think that’s important?
Tim Knight: It isn’t a number derived from any scientific method; it just
seemed right to not be 100 percent in one particular direction. During
bear markets, some extraordinary stocks push higher, and during bull
markets, some stocks are prone to falling. So I came up with that 80/20
split to give myself some latitude to “hedge” a portfolio instead of being
utterly bullish or bearish.
Kirk: To be clear, do you think that it is a good idea to always have 20
percent of your assets positioned against the prevailing trend? Why or
why not?
Tim Knight: I suppose there are a couple of good reasons. One of them
is that I believe in any given market, there are opportunities in both
directions, and it keeps you sharper as a trader to be able to play positions both ways. Secondly, let’s face it, all trends eventually end, and

498

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

being able to capture a portion of a trend change will help soften the
blow to your other positions. In other words, if you’re 80 percent long
and 20 percent short, and the market starts to turn down in earnest,
the 20 percent shorts are going to be a helpful save (and a good signal)
for the losing longs.
Kirk: Another rule says that positions should be regularly updated for the
sake of updated stops. How do you recommend traders do this?
Tim Knight: It’s a lot of work, but it doesn’t have to be a daily exercise. I
typically do a “clean sweep” of all my stops whenever the indexes have
moved in my direction some meaningful amount. For instance, if I have
a bunch of short positions, and the Dow 30 has moved down, say, 500
points since I entered them, then it’s high time I get in there and review
those charts, one by one, and tighten up those stops. This allows me
to at least lock in some partial profits if I’m stopped out, and it lets me
sleep easier at night knowing that I’m not going to expose myself to,
in this case, a subsequent 700 point rise in the Dow and see all those
profits turn into losses.
Kirk: You also have a rule against trading within the first 30 minutes of the
trading day. Are there any other times you try to avoid and when are
you typically most active?
Tim Knight: The first 30 minutes are the only “hands off” time for me.
Sometimes people ask if I permit my stops to do their work during that
half hour; absolutely! The point is for me not to be trading, but by all
means my stops have to be there doing their job.
These days, the last 90 minutes of the trading day have become their
own alternative universe, although that may change at some point. But
the “end of day run-up” has become almost a cliché in this market. I
also tend to back off during Fed days (FOMC announcements), since
the markets typically go completely spastic after the Fed announcement, and it takes at least an hour for them to figure out which direction they want to go.
Kirk: Emotions are a large component of trading. Your rule is first to “be
aware” of your emotions and the importance of keeping fear and hubris
in control in order to have a “carefree and fearless” state of mind. This
is easier said than done. In your view, how do traders learn the level of
emotional control to trade well?
Tim Knight: The area of emotional control is something I think a person
can only partly handle, because some of us are simply more emotional
than others. Making money can be euphoric, and losing money can
be devastating, and swaying between those two feelings can be very
challenging for most individuals. My own “self-improvement course”

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

499

in this area is to read good books on the topic. I really like Trading In
the Zone, and I’m currently reading Enhancing Trading Performance
by Dr. Brett Steenbarger.
Kirk: Your last rule speaks of position sizing and that it must “be consistent
among instrument types irrespective of anticipated opportunity.”
Can you provide an example of a recent trade and explain your method
for determining the size relative to your own trading portfolio?
Tim Knight: Well, I really try to keep things simple. Given my current
portfolio size, I try to keep individual equity positions at $10,000, options positions at $5,000, and ETF positions at anywhere from $100,000
to $250,000, depending on how strongly I feel about its potential direction. That’s probably about the least sophisticated portfolio management system on the planet, but it at least assures me that no
single equity’s surprise move is going to severely affect my overall
portfolio.
Kirk: What mistakes do you think most traders make concerning position
sizing?
Tim Knight: Probably looking for home runs—maybe they put all their
eggs into one basket. To be honest, I don’t really have exposure to the
portfolios of others, so this is just speculation on my part.
Kirk: As you’ve said, creating rules is great, but it isn’t easy to follow them.
In your experience, which is the most difficult rule to follow and why?
Tim Knight: The most difficult rule to follow is to let your profits run. That
one, for me, has been atrociously difficult. I can’t tell you how many
times I’ve taken a profit, patted myself on the back, and watched the
same position continue to move dramatically higher (or lower, in the
case of shorts).
Kirk: Are there any techniques that you are using to let winners run?
Tim Knight: The core technique I use for letting my winners run is to keep
my stop prices fresh. Assuming a position is moving in my direction,
I will periodically ratchet the stop price up (or down, as the case may
be) to a technically significant level so that I can at least preserve a
portion of my profits if things move against me. This has been for me
the only reliable way to fight the urge to take all my profits. I have found
this to be much easier on bearish positions than bullish ones, since it
is sometimes hard to accept the possibility that something on the long
side can move up hundreds—or even thousands—of percent.
Kirk: Now that we’ve talked about your trading rules, what are some of the
key rules or factors that you consider before selecting any potential
trading opportunity?

500

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Tim Knight: I really want the risk/reward to be in my favor, so the most important thing to me is that the stop price is relatively close and the potential profit is relatively far away (in other words, the potential profit
dwarfs the potential loss, because I like operating from the assumption that the trade will probably go wrong). One really great position
can make up for a lot of trading “sins” in the past.
Kirk: Please explain the process of how you go about finding your trades.
Can you take us through a relatively new trade of yours from the very
beginning starting with how you discovered the idea to the first position through the final sell?
Tim Knight: It’s all about organization. I’m a pretty organized person
by nature, and I’m pretty manic when it comes to my watch lists.
In ProphetCharts, I’ve got a series of watch lists set up, and stocks
move from place to place depending on my disposition toward each of
them.
First, I’ve got my “Core List,” which is the general holding bin for
stocks. If something looks like it’s starting to “gel” as a good short opportunity, I’ll move it to a watch list I call Bear Pen, and if it’s starting
to look good on the long side, it goes into the Bull Pen. That way, I can
really focus on those two holding pens.
If and when an item in those pens actually looks ready to trade, I’ll
move it to either Candidate Longs or Candidate Shorts, and once the
trade is actually in place, the symbol will move to whatever portfolio is
appropriate (I manage several personal portfolios). So my watch lists
are in a constant migratory state.
As for actually looking for trading ideas, I follow about 800 stocks,
and that gives me all the ideas I need. I virtually never do a scan or use
any of the other services on the Web to smoke out trading ideas, simply
because I’ve already got a very good universe of tradable instruments
that I already follow.
Kirk: What would you say are your favorite kinds of technical setups?
Tim Knight: The classic head and shoulders—both normal and
inverted—is probably my favorite. It’s pretty easy to identify, has a
good risk/reward ratio, and it has worked out well for me historically.
I also like upside breakouts with strong volume for bullish positions,
for obvious reasons.
Kirk: In recent years, have you discovered any new patterns that have been
helping you achieve more success?
Tim Knight: It isn’t a pattern, per se, but there’s a service called Retracement Levels that was created by a regular reader on my blog which I
like quite a lot. These are simply horizontal levels on various markets

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

501

which represent meaningful support and resistance levels. During the
insanity of autumn 2008, I found them to be indispensible, particularly
since the market was so volatile.
Kirk: I know you utilize Fibonacci in your analysis. In your experience,
what is the strength and weakness from this type of analysis?
Tim Knight: The principal weakness is they have to be applied correctly,
and that takes a certain amount of experience and an “eye” for the
chart. Of the four Fibonacci studies in ProphetCharts—retracements,
fan lines, arcs, and time series—I’ve found retracements to be by far
the most useful. Fans work from time to time, but frankly I hardly ever
have found utility from the other two.
Kirk: In your book Chart Your Way to Profits, you talk about essential
indicators like moving averages, Bollinger bands, the parabolic stop
and reversal (PSAR), and moving average convergence divergence
(MACD). Among all of these methods, which are your favorites and
why?
Tim Knight: Some people may find this surprising, but I don’t use any of
them. It’s not because I’ve tried them and they don’t work; it’s simply
that my style of charting is quite vanilla, and I haven’t found the use of
derived information to be helpful for me personally.
Kirk: Very interesting. So, do you use different time frames in your technical analysis? If so, what time frames do you like to use and why?
Tim Knight: I’m pretty consistent these days using a 10-year daily chart.
That might seem like a lot, but it captures the past two bear markets
and the big bull run in between. I like to keep an eye on the 10-day
minute bar chart for indexes during the trading day, but otherwise the
10-year daily is my reference.
Kirk: All good traders dedicate a lot of time and effort to improvement
and to reducing mistakes. How has your trading method evolved and
improved over the years?
Tim Knight: I think my organization skills and my psychological discipline
have improved the most. If anything, I’ve simplified my method and
approach.
Kirk: Can you provide an example of something you thought was true when
trading early in your career and now believe is just dead wrong?
Tim Knight: I used to think individual stocks could have minds of their
own and act independently of the market, but I now know that a huge
part of what any stock does depends on what the market as a whole
is doing. There are always exceptions—I remember that, for whatever
reason, Krispy Kreme’s stock did fantastically well during the bursting

502

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

of the tech bubble—but on the whole it’s really, really tough to fight
the general trend.
Kirk: How much time and attention do you pay attention to others’ opinions
about the market and/or stocks you are trading?
Tim Knight: I’m not especially interested in other opinions about individual stocks, but there are a few places I respect for opinions on the market in general. I enjoy Elliott Wave International’s publications, particularly their Short-Term Update, and of course I draw a lot of knowledge
and perspective from the comments section of Slope, since there are
tens of thousands of readers on a regular basis.
Kirk: I know you’ve said you like to do “hand-chart analysis.” In fact, you
shared a very interesting chart some time ago about the future of the
market. What can traders accomplish by charting stocks and the markets in this manner and, by the way, how did you create that chart?
Tim Knight: I created the chart by comparing the 1937–1941 market to our
own market, since I felt it was the closest historical “template.” So far,
it’s proved remarkably prescient, but we’ll have to see how the next
few years pan out. I have hardly ever done something like this before,
but I felt inspired on that particular day about the future direction of
the market. I only wish I had paid closer attention to my own work,
since I missed a good chunk of the run-up from March through August
of 2009, even though my own chart totally nailed it.
Kirk: It is human nature to think the markets must conform to our view of
reality, but as we’ve both seen, the market is not rational but emotional.
Over the years and, especially recently, I’ve witnessed many traders
suffer performance anxiety because of their negative views about the
economy and the skepticism over the bailouts and from just fighting
the short-term trends. In your view, how do traders learn to separate
their opinions and bias and still profit from the market while having a
large amount of skepticism? I’m asking this question of you particularly
because I think this is one of your strengths.
Tim Knight: I’m appreciative that you think it’s one of my strengths, although my bias about what’s been going on with all the government
bailouts is tough for me to shake. My point of view, the more tunnel
vision you can have with respect to the charts, the better. If you can
focus on your own analysis—in my case, purely charts—and filter out
all the other noise, it’s bound to help. And I never, ever flick on the
television to hear what the financial news networks are talking about.
Kirk: Please describe a typical trading day for you. How do you organize
and dedicate your time?

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

503

Tim Knight: I live on the West Coast, so my day starts early. I am usually up
at about 5:30 or 6 A . M . to catch up on e-mails, check out the overnight
markets, and look at comments on my blog. I’ll typically do a quick
post before the market opens. The first half hour of the day, I’m simply
watching what’s going on and going through my key watch lists. Once
the first half hour is done, I’m usually ready to execute some ideas.
I spend the trading day doing blog posts, answering e-mails, working
on new product features, and managing trades. I like to do an end-ofday wrap-up after the markets have closed, and then I’ll catch up on
other work in general. The 6:30 A . M . to 1:00 P . M . time block is precious
to me, because that’s when I’m really focused on trading and writing.
Kirk: Can you give us some idea of what tools you use to monitor the markets (i.e. your trading platform, software, websites, etc.)?
Tim Knight: It’s actually very simple. I’ve got two computers—a high-end
Dell laptop and a Mac PowerBook. Each of them drives two monitors,
my favorite of which is my honkin’ big 30-inch Apple monitor whose
sole purpose in life is to show me the S&P e-mini future bob along.
I am very loyal to Prophet’s own products, so I use MarketMatrix to
track my portfolios and ProphetCharts—of course!—to make my trading decisions and keep my watch lists in order.
Kirk: What would you say are the biggest changes in the markets and trading in general you’ve seen during your career both good and bad?
Tim Knight: Recently the biggest change has been the huge influence of
the government and investment banks in trying to turn the economy
around. The government has never, at least in my lifetime, intervened
so radically in the markets, and that has caused a lot of methods and
systems that used to work very reliably to be set aside as useless until
this whole thing blows over and we can all return to a semblance of
normalcy.
Kirk: Do you think it is easier or more challenging to trade for a living now
than in the past?
Tim Knight: I think it’s somewhat easier, but only because there is such
a better selection of trading vehicles. Traders have an amazing set of
tools to work with in the form of all the new ETFs that have come out,
in addition to the e-mini futures, and the product selection just keeps
getting better. It wasn’t long ago that the biggest innovation around
were the inverse mutual funds which set their prices just twice a day,
and you had to place the order something like 30 minutes in advance.
Kirk: What kind of advice would you give a person just now beginning in
trading the markets?

504

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Tim Knight: I would spend a lot of time hanging out in a quality online community. Slope of Hope comes to mind, naturally, but there are plenty
of other good blogs and forums out there where people can either lurk
and learn or actually get in there and participate. Continuing the learning once you start trading is even more important.
Kirk: A number of people who read my web site desire to trade for a living.
Like you, I receive a lot of questions concerning capital requirements
needed to start and how to make the transition to trade full-time. Do
you have any words of wisdom or rules of thumb to share along these
lines?
Tim Knight: I’m sorry, I really don’t. Some people have taken small sums
and made fortunes, and some people have done just the opposite. It’s
like the old joke—“How do you make a small fortune trading commodities? Start with a large one.” So I don’t know of any magic number, and
there certainly isn’t any dollar figure that will guarantee you are immune to being badly damaged if you don’t trade well.
Kirk: What are the things you like best about the trading business?
Tim Knight: The fact that I and I alone am responsible for the results. To
some people, that might be a negative, since it’s always more comforting to say that such-and-so caused a bad thing to happen to you. But
to be able to look in the mirror and know that you are the only person
who is going to create a result, whether for good or bad, can be very
empowering.
Kirk: What are the downsides to trading for a living?
Tim Knight: The uncertainty—you have absolutely no control of the market, and even though it’s very easy for a person to say “just trade what
you see,” that advice is about as useful as telling a newly married couple, “Don’t ever have a fight.” People and markets are complex creatures, and things aren’t always going to go as you plan.
Kirk: How does a person know it is the right time and the right decision for
them to trade for a living?
Tim Knight: I think most of us would agree that it’s important to have
the basics in place for core living expenses. You don’t want to
be trading the children’s tuition or the family grocery money. No matter how unlikely you may think it is, you have to be in a position to lose
100 percent of your trading capital and not have it affect your lifestyle.
