
RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Price action uncovers an unusual phenomenon when these gaps remount support. It often reveals a
continuation gap in one time frame that overlays an exhaustion gap in the next shorter trend. The
swing trader can pick out this odd event with candlesticks and informal wave analysis. Two classic
candle patterns that reveal these powerful 3D gaps are dark cloud cover and counterattack
sequences.
Buy the first test of a prior consolidation pattern when it lines up with Fibonacci support. Look for
reversals to climax at the horizontal top of an ascending triangle or the apex of a symmetrical one.
Each congestion zone has unique architecture that supports descending price and encourages an
equilibrium point that will reverse the trend. Look at price violations at range extremes to evaluate
how deeply bars may penetrate the pattern before they emerge. Pullbacks easily enter thin violation
levels but should not pass through more solid support.
FIGURE 8.4
Ciena follows natural Fibonacci proportion during this five-wave rally on the 60-minute chart. Note the reversals right
at the eventual 38% and 62% levels. Dip trips provide excellent intraday opportunities but try to focus on the 60-minute

rather than 1-minute or 5-minute chart. Noise increases dramatically in very short time frames, and dip trades at these
intervals rely more on skilled tape reading than chart interpretation.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Dip trips risk major trend relativity errors. An active bounce within a small trend will disappear
quickly as large-scale corrective movement begins. Fortunately, these poor entries often permit
several safe exit opportunities. When in doubt, get out first and ask questions later. Risk-averse
participants can wait for extreme retracement numbers to print before any dip entry. They will miss
many good trades, but those that execute may book dramatic profits. Odds shift dramatically in the
swing trader’s favor, and few poor entries exist at extended prices.

APPLICATIONS
The best dip trips combine Fibonacci, the charting landscape and common sense to locate natural
reversal levels. Always consider lesser-known S/R in preliminary trade analysis. Whole numbers
and Elliott Wave make great companions when searching for fresh profit. Remember that the
perfect setup rarely prints and many great patterns require execution with limited information.

THE 38-62
Fib grids that overlay two or more adjacent trends often reveal hidden reversals. Look for the 62%
retracement of a shorter trend to align with the 38% pullback of a longer one (that includes the
shorter leg within its boundaries). Dynamic trends should not retrace more than 62% of their
primary rally before they bounce strongly at least once. The convergence between these waves
signals a strong multi-time frame event.
Description

The setup begins with a completed major rally.
The last rally leg starts from the eventual 62% retracement level.
Draw 2 Fib grids: the first across the entire rally and the second from the last rally leg inception
point to the extreme high.
Look for multiple types of support at the 38–62% intersection through prior highs, moving
averages, and other classic S/R.
The bounce faces resistance as it approaches the smaller 38% retracement.
This setup occurs in all time frames. The swing trader first sees the natural proportion between two
trends and then places Fib grids to confirm how well they align. Scans fail when they try to uncover
this exact scenario and yield poor results. Instead, rely on the skilled eye to find it when it occurs.
Similar setups work at the 50–62% intersection but do not trigger the same powerful results. Watch
for three or more trend lengths to align and produce excellent profit opportunities.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 8.5)
•
•
•
•
•
•

A selloff begins at (1) and marks the eventual 50% level for the subsequent rally. The
pattern also draws a Big W reversal that completes first rise at the same level.
A small 2B bottom marks the end of the selloff and natural inception for the new uptrend.
The W center prints between (2) and (3) but offers few simple entry points.
Congestion at the center of the rally builds a small triangle pattern between 38% and 62%.
The pattern low (4) starts the final trend wave at the eventual 62% level.
The double bottom test (7) aligns the new trendline (3).
The trendline break (6) signals the completed rally and allows Fib grids over the price
action.
The 38-62 lines up at (5). This level also cross-verifies with the whole number 20 and top
of the center triangle.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 8.6)
•

•
•

Line from (1) to (2) marks the trendline. The hammer at (1) shows a stop gun low that
represents the 38% resistance. Any bounce will need to mount this resistance after a
successful reversal.
Bull flag (4) builds from the descending lows. The lower channel adds another support zone
on the drop.
A small doji at 20 (3) and a tall candle signal the reversal. With 4× cross-verification,
aggressive traders can execute a blind entry right at 20. Place a stop loss just under 19 3/4,
below the real bodies on the two-candle reversal.

•

•
•

The bounce reverses off the 38% resistance (8). Less aggressive traders can execute the
small pullback on the black reversal bar (7). Drop down to a lower time frame and use
whatever support is available just below 21.
The flag top and hammer resistance (5) align at 22 3/4. The high odds play takes an exit
close to 23.
The trade rewards longer holding periods because the bounce quickly mounts resistance and
moves higher (6).
FIGURE 8.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
The setup could collapse and force the smaller trend into a first failure down to 16 1/2. But the stop
should prevent a major loss from this outcome. Consider that an entry at 20 carries a 3:1 reward:risk
on an issue with limited volatility. Combine that with 4× cross-verification and the result offers an
excellent short-term setup.

CONTINUATION DIP

The first test of a continuation gap marks a high-odds dip trip play. The test comes in many
varieties. The trade always appears within the context of a strong rally just like the 38-62. It may
follow completion of a third wave but more often appears after the entire rally completes. A
continuation gap should not fill and reverse on the first test.
FIGURE 8.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Description

Visualize the continuation gap by its appearance at the midpoint of a strong trend.
The setup usually begins with a complete five-wave rally but works with any test of the gap.
Draw a Fib grid across the rally structure. Start with the double bottom test rather than the first
low.
The gap should appear right at 50% but can also print anywhere within the 38% to 62%
boundaries.
Look for gaps hidden in reversal candles at the middle levels when no obvious gap appears.

Locate other types of support at the same level as the continuation gap.
Trade potency increases substantially when the setup occurs on the first pullback after a new
high rather than the C wave of an extended ABC correction.
Retracement levels can’t be drawn until a rally completes. This requires that a reversal signal tell
the swing trader that the change has occurred. Topping patterns, broken trendlines and reversal
candles all meet this requirement. Levels can always be redrawn if they don’t line up when more
information becomes available. Many gap trades work well without Fib cross-verification. When
one appears within a limited time window, apply defensive strategy on the pullback and save the
calculations for another setup.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 8.7)
•
•

•
•

A selloff begins at (1) and marks the eventual 50% level for the subsequent rally. The
pattern also draws a modified Big W reversal that completes first rise at the same level.
A long hammer (2) marks a 2B bottom that rises into a double bottom test at (3). This
second low provides a better terminus for the Fib grid because the retracement often
measures a five-wave rally that embeds itself within the third wave of a larger dimension.
Vertical five-wave rally (5) prints a continuation gap (6) right at the 50% level.
Hole-in-the-wall (7) signals the end of the rally. This allows the Fib (4) grid to be drawn
across the five-wave trend.
FIGURE 8.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 8.8)
•
•

Level (1) identifies the last intermediate high before the selloff. This cross-verifies with the
gap (2) and improves odds for the trade.
A barrier forms when price action violates the double top (4) near the 38% retracement.

FIGURE 8.8

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Strong reversal follows the long black expansion candle (3). Note how the gap fills briefly
during the intraday price action. Drop down to a smaller time frame if possible to lower
execution risk.
Take first aggressive entry just as the gap fills. Use congestion at 63-64 for stop loss.
Take second aggressive entry as price recovers above the low of the prior bar. This signals a 2B
reversal in the smaller time frame. Place stop loss under this prior low.
Draw a new Fib grid (5) across the ABC correction. This adds guidance on resistance for the
bounce.
Price pierces double top resistance (4) (7) quickly but stalls at the 62% bounce retracement. Exit
trades here due to stronger resistance at (6). Many participants fall into a trap because the
tight congestion below 80 marks the first pullback after the dip trip reversal, so they enter
new long positions.
Resistance (6) obstructs a move to new highs. The hole-in-the-wall gap and double top failure
gap both reduce odds of further gains.

Reward:Risk

This setup works best with execution within or close to the continuation gap. The vertical rise after
the reversal offers few pullbacks until the high 70s. The resistance overhang from the broken
double top increases risk substantially through the rise. The setup occurs as a C wave of an A-B-C
correction. This improves reward but requires that price first remount the A low before it can go
higher.
FIGURE 8.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIRST PULLBACK
The first countertrend after a breakout to an intermediate high offers a low-risk entry as long as the
original move fulfills certain characteristics. Price should thrust away from prior resistance on good
participation. The pullback should meet fresh buying at each step down. New gaps or expansion
candles should hold together and support price as it falls.
Description

•
•
•
•
•

Locate a 3rd watch, channel break, or other high-tension breakout event.
Find multiple types of support at the breakout level.
Watch for reversal bars and place a Fib grid from the last intermediate low to the
intermediate high. Major retracement should align with the breakout level.
The first pullback has greater odds of moving quickly to new highs than any other dip trip
setup.
The pattern offers an excellent intraday trade after a tall expansion bar. Buy the first-hour
selloff as long as price opens near the high of the prior candle and does not gap down into
the open.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 8.9)
•
•
•
•

Checkpoint Software draws a 2-month rising parallel price channel (1) on the 60-minute
chart.
Whole number resistance sets up at 200 (2).
Price gaps strongly (3) through the upper channel-whole number interface.
A hole-in-the-wall prints after a tall expansion bar (4) and signals the end of the rally.
FIGURE 8.10

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 8.10)

Hole-in-the-wall (3) marks strong resistance for rising price at 230.
Place a Fib grid over the rally extension. Note that the 38% level lines up with the gap (2),
upper channel line (1) and whole number support.
4× cross-verification sets up a high-odds entry at 200, but price never reaches it. The upper
channel violates but the market reverses at about 201.
The two 60-minute candles (4) point to a double bottom test with a small 2B reversal within the
5-minute time frame. Aggressive traders can enter this formation if possible, but stop loss
must be well under 200 and perhaps as low as 198.
The next entry signals as price mounts the channel line and recrosses the gap. This also
completes a five-bar first rise pattern (8). This forces execution around 205 with a stop loss
under the old low at 201.
Pullback forms near 210 (6) and permits several good entries. Reward:risk deteriorates, but the
tall candle out of the 201 low and first rise (8) offer new support.
The rally off the bounce forms an embedded five-wave structure (7).
Tall candles between 201–215 and 211–222 offer profitable exits. They also provide new
pullback entry.
Price prints a gap echo (5) right over the hole-in-the-wall. The breakthrough also extinguishes
the rally with an exhaustion gap that quickly fills.
Reward:Risk

Many swing traders have difficulty measuring reward:risk in high-priced issues. Stop loss 5 points
or more away from an entry makes perfect sense for a volatile $200+ stock. Control risk by
reducing position size to a manageable level. Avoid deep pullbacks that rob profits and consider
reentry as long as momentum stays intact. Drop down and study the 60-minute patterns in detail.
Major congestion at 212 and 224 both offer low-risk execution on the 5-minute chart.

9 CHAPTER
COILED SPRING

CHARACTERISTICS
Markets cycle continuously between bursts of intense activity and periods of relative calm. This
natural pulse of inhalation and exhalation allows price to step to a new level, thoroughly test its
boundaries, and thrust forward (or reverse) after it marks territory. As this cycle evolves toward a
fresh impulse, telltale signs appear on the charting landscape. Swing traders read this unique
signature and capitalize on the awakening trend while the crowd waits for later signals.
FIGURE 9.1
Adept Technology prints a series of coiled spring signals over a 5-month period. Narrow-range days trigger setups that
offer quiet prediction of impending price movement. Some bars quickly lead to major rallies, while others precede
single-day events against the prevailing trend. Always place narrow-range events in context with the ongoing trendrange axis and evolving price pattern before taking a position.

TRADE MECHANICS

Markets change character as participants lose confidence about price direction. Negative feedback
awakens and builds the constricted ranges found in many popular chart patterns. Triangles, flags,
and wedges all exhibit this directionless swing between known boundaries. The declining volatility
also initiates the crowd psychology and price mechanics that trigger the coiled spring signal.
Many predictive ranges never fit into the narrow definition of a classic pattern, so swing traders
must look elsewhere to decide if a profit opportunity exists. One of the best methods examines bar
congestion rather than the range itself. This empty zone interface should flag new trends and mark
low-risk entry. The coiled spring setup seeks this elusive interface through NR7 analysis.
This tiny signal represents the narrowest range bar of the last seven bars. The bar that immediately
follows a NR7 often triggers a major price expansion. When price fails to eject immediately, the
breakout may still appear one to three bars later. Sometimes the appearance of another NR7 on the
next bar (NR7-2) rings a louder bell as odds increase for an immediate breakout event.
New trends begin after congestion absorbs the prior trend’s instability. This fresh impulse continues
or reverses the last one. A single expansion bar may flag the start of these active conditions. The
coiled spring setup attempts to execute a position just as a market begins this active phase. The
opportunity depends on the lower volatility and narrow bar range that characterize the end of
congestion. But trade success also requires accurate prediction of price direction and very good
timing.
Recognize range conditions early and wait for volatility to dissipate. Constricted price bounces back
and forth between extremes while gathering force for the next move. Most participants miss the
transition to a more active state because the event gathers no crowd until it passes. Volatility, bar
width, and volume all decline as a rangebound market nears this cyclical change. Skilled eyes can
recognize this empty zone as it approaches, but detailed analysis must filter marginal events to
permit a sharp focus on the best candidates.
The most profitable coiled spring signals arise from continuation of the prior trend. The relative
power of the last rally predicts the force of the subsequent price thrust. Sharp vertical movement out
of congestion signals a powerful new leg. Past rallies assist profit targets and trade planning. Odds
for a strong trend improve when the chart shows two prior waves at the same angle but decrease
after three or more.

SPRING STRATEGIES
Pure NR7 bars have a reputation for sharp expansion in either direction without much preference.
The coiled spring requires high relative strength to filter opportunities toward long side breakouts.
Alternatively, the bear hug (see Chapter 13) filters NR7 bars through low relative strength to locate
those candidates that should elicit profitable short sales. Keep in mind that pattern failure occurs
frequently on strong candidates and represents a good opportunity in the opposite direction. The
most effective strategy invokes bilateral tactics that enter setups in whatever direction price moves
out of the NR7 range. This takes advantage of whatever the market offers.
Swing trading requires a high degree of directional certainty before execution, so choose only the
strongest relative strength stocks as coiled spring candidates. Look for price action near
intermediate highs or the top of congestive patterns. Find stocks in bull markets through their 20bar, 50-bar, and 200-bar moving averages. Examine congestion in detail to confirm that the bulls
remain in control. And keep in mind that this pattern rarely registers on technical indicators, so
don’t rely on them for signals.

Trade preparation requires close visual inspection of the congestion. Look for overall narrowing
range over time rather than an isolated NR7 print. Check proportionality of the current range to the
preceding trend. As the old wisdom states, the bigger the move, the broader the base. If RSI or
Stochastics just begins to roll off the overbought state, the congestion likely has a long way to go
before it can absorb the last rally. Remember that the most promising patterns slowly narrow toward
a natural apex or ejection point before a major breakout.
Volume must trend downward as congestion progresses. The lower-pane histogram should show
declining interest with few jagged upticks. Intervening volume spikes that do not trigger immediate
expansion reduce the odds of a clean breakout. General price direction should counter the prevailing
trend but not accelerate to the downside. The most powerful trends will erupt after a correction that
does not violate any significant S/R. Use Fibonacci and moving averages to cross-verify the
terminus of this countertrend extreme.
FIGURE 9.2
Congestion builds visual tension that predicts its ultimate outcome. The most dynamic price action erupts when a range
moves sharply against the prevailing trend or flatlines right through the middle of a pattern. Note how Ross Stores
alternates rapid price change with countertrend movement that pulls the coiled spring tightly before it releases.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Patterns within the next-lower time frame reveal effective trade entry points. Congestion between
powerful rallies frequently prints an ABC wave against the trend. Cautious participants also review

the next time frame above the one that flags the setup. Broad S/R may limit or defeat momentum if
the large-scale trend counters the current trade. Alternatively, coordination through several time
frames improves odds and suggests a very dynamic result.
Utilize narrow-range bars on intraday charts as conditions permit. Trading volume must show good
liquidity within each tick to consider this setup. This rules out all but the highest volume stocks on
any given day. Since short-term action requires real-time analysis, watch congestion closely for the
coiled spring event rather than run complex scans. Valid setups will appear on both the 5-minute
and 60-minute charts, but avoid them on 1-minute views. Insist that their appearance coincide with
TICK, index swing, or meaningful price levels. Then shift to a longer view before entry to confirm
favorable trading conditions.
False signals increase as holding period decreases. The best short-term coiled spring strategy avoids
5-minute bars completely and trades NR7s off the 60-minute chart or longer. But if other factors
converge, NR7s will provide valuable cross-verification for very short-term intraday setups. Trade
coiled springs wherever they appear in massive liquidity events. Major Nasdaq 100 stocks
occasionally print over 50 million shares per day. Individual issues take on index characteristics in
which each tick offers opportunity at this participation level.

MORE ON RANGE BAR ANALYSIS
The futures markets apply range bar analysis to numerous trading strategies. Toby Crabel
popularized these short-term tactics in his classic Day Trading with Short Term Price Patterns and
Opening Range Breakouts. Using extensive research, he investigated how expanding candle and bar
patterns predict price change through many commodities and indices. Bar range typically stretches
in the direction of a prevailing trend as price breaks out. Through the fuel of the emotional crowd,
price surges forward in a series of leaps until climax bars print a high-volume reversal.
Stochastics and other relative strength tools measure bar range indirectly, but simple visual
examination of the bars themselves yields an excellent leading indicator. Range analysis cannot
accurately examine all markets. For example, low-volume stocks carry high spreads that will distort
signals. Limit bar analysis to highly liquid markets with low spreads and high average daily
movement. Avoid range signals that appear early in new congestion when volatility remains high
and price movement becomes erratic.
Movement out of a NR7 should continue in the direction of the original violation. Place an entry
stop just outside both range extremes at the same time and cancel one after the other order executes.
This directional tendency permits a tight exit stop just beyond the opposite range extreme. Place this
order at the level of the cancelled stop. This strategy takes advantage of price bar expansion
regardless of market direction. Risk remains low because the NR7 range allows a very small loss
when the trade fails.
Target a coiled spring exit through examination of expansion-contraction tendencies. When the
breakout hits first S/R, odds increase that price movement will pause as the next few bars contract.
For this reason, wide-range bars themselves signal caution as well as profit. Make sure to identify
all obstacles before taking the trade. The initial breakout often needs to mount intervening levels
before momentum will escalate. Decide before entry whether or not to hold the position through this
testing. The odds favor pullbacks that will draw down profit considerably before breaking into
another primary wave. Take a quick exit on the first expansion bar if time does not permit price to
pass through these obstacles.
