
piano do not materialize overnight; rather, students develop the skills over time through continuous
practice and learning. It is no different in learning how to play the market effectively.
With practice, you will be able to see bull flags, head and shoulders patterns, divergences, bullish
engulfing candles, range breakouts, new momentum lows, and many other chart components that you
never knew existed. You will then progress from learning the names of these components to the next
phase of incorporating them within the context of a broader trading strategy and day-to-day game plan.
Like the piano student who first learns the names of the keys, terms used in rhythm, dynamics (when to
play softly or when to play loudly), and all sorts of musical notation required to be able to convert
knowledge into the skill of playing sheet music, you will begin learning trading terms and then
progress to finding opportunities for key turning points in the price structure as you learn to read the
rhythm of price swings.
Trade setups guide your analysis into concrete opportunities of favorable outcomes for a price
move in one direction instead of the other. The logic of trade setups is to find a point where price has
hit a wall and cannot stand against the wall forever. The price either must inflect and bounce back
from that wall, or break through the wall as price travels through the destroyed wall. Such is the logic
of retracement and breakout trades: either price will find support and rally higher in an uptrend, or it
will break through support and fall to a lower level. When price is in an established trading range,
either price will hold at the prior upper horizontal resistance line and travel lower, or it will break
upward through the resistance line in a breakout mode of positive feedback. Your trade is a
calculated bet that price will do one thing and not the other; either that price will support at an
expected price level and then rally higher as you expect, or it will break through the support line and
stop you out with a smaller loss than the profit you would have achieved had price rallied upward off
support as you assessed.
With that logic in mind, there are two distinct camps of trading opportunities: Mean reversion
strategies and mean departure strategies. Within those, there are four specific types of trade setups
from which to build more complex strategies, though you need not stray beyond the basic concepts of
these setups. As we will soon see, the four basic trade setups include breakouts, retracements,
reversals, and fades.

MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
If we think of price behavior as a distribution, price is either moving toward or away from the
average price over time, also called the mean. You may view the mean as any of the moving averages
we have discussed, as price is either moving toward or away from its respective short and
intermediate term moving averages. Thus, if price moved a reasonable distance away from its shortterm average to the upside, then odds favor a downward move in price to return back to the mean or
average price. Once price has moved back to the average price, odds then may favor a rally within
the context of a continuing uptrend to take price higher from the average price in a range expansion
move.
The first two setups we will discuss build on the concept that price, once stretched away from its
average, will return to the average as the next likely immediate move in price structure. The easiest
way to describe this class of setups is to use the term Fade Trades, where our trade opportunity is to
take the opposite action of what has just happened in price. We thus fade rallies in price away from
the mean by short-selling them, and then fade declines in price away from the mean by buying

oversold conditions in expectation that price will rally back to the mean. Such fade trading strategies
tend to work best within the context of a range consolidation, negative feedback move during the
accumulation phase when price establishes clear trading range boundaries. As you might suspect,
mean reversion strategies perform the worst during periods of a market in a range breakout mode
(positive feedback loop) after price has broken out of a known trading range.

Fade Trades
Fade Trades are often simple setups that capitalize on overbought and oversold conditions in price
within an established trading range. The goal of a fade trade is to find the point at which price is
stretched too far above or beneath the average price and must snap back like a rubber band.
Alternately, we expect a past resistance or support level to hold price again as it tests this level and
rises up off of it.
It is important to underscore the two separate types of fade trade logic: first, within the context of a
stable rising uptrend, we want to find areas where price has rallied up too far above the mean and is
likely to fall back down toward the rising moving average rather than continue to rally in a further
overbought condition. Second, fade trades take advantage of clear support and resistance levels
during a range contraction phase in price, as we short sell a move that rallies up to the upper
resistance line and then buy moves that decline to test the lower support line. Figure 9.1 illustrates
these two concepts.
FIGURE 9.1 Fade Trades in the Context of a Trend or Trading Range

The left side of the figure shows price in the context of a stable uptrend or downtrend, where the
setup is to fade the rally in an uptrend or buy the downswing in a downtrend. In the context of a trend,
the short-term moving average, usually the 20-period exponential average, represents the visual
average price to serve as a reference. In addition to stable moving averages, traders can use rising or
falling hand-drawn trendlines to substitute for the average or mean price from which to define price
as stretched from the mean.
These fade trades within the context of an established trend are more risky than their fade trade
counterparts when price is within the context of an established trading range, because shorting price
in the context of an uptrend or buying price in the context of a downtrend fights the established trend
in place by the very nature of the setup. While it is certainly possible to profit from mean reversion
retracements within the context of a trend, this strategy is recommended only for advanced or
experienced traders, as new traders should never fade or trade against an established trend.
In terms of probability, once a trend is established in the market, odds favor that the trend will
continue rather than reverse. Also, within the context of an uptrend, price rallies in the direction of the
primary trend will by definition be larger and last longer than retracements against the prevailing
trend, which makes your profit potential and time in the trade much smaller. As a result, you must be
extremely precise with these types of opportunities, and more times than not, you will find it best to
pass on these opportunities and wait for the market to return to the average or trendline so you can
establish a retracement trade with higher probabilities of success.
While fading established trends is not a recommended strategy, fading price moves within the

context of an established trading range is a good strategy for active traders who are aware of the risks
in such opportunities. In Chapter 3 we discussed the Price Alternation Principle and how it
determines the structure not just of the recent action, but the expectations of the future move in price.
While price is in the context of a trading range consolidation environment, we look to hand-drawn
trendlines to define the upper resistance line and the lower support line for reference.
Quite simply, a trader looks to buy shares as price returns to test the lower support line and places
a stop just beneath that support line and plays for an upper price target at the higher resistance price.
If price rallies to the upper resistance price, the trader will then take profits on the long position and
then might decide to sell shares short in an expectation that price will return to test the lower support
line again and the range will continue. If so, then the trader profits from the setup and the established
trading range.
The risk in the setup stems from the second half of the Price Alternation Principle, which states that
price alternates between periods of range expansion and range contraction. Eventually, price will
break out of the boundaries, either with an upside break or a downside break. In the event that the
trader established a short-sale position at the upper resistance line and price gaps higher above the
line and begins to rally, the trader must close the position quickly or suffer potentially devastating
losses by being caught short in a rapidly expanding breakout move where other traders are purchasing
shares in expectation of further highs in a breakout mode. Alternately, a trader who purchased shares
as price tested the lower support line only to see price break sharply under the support zone will be
caught in a position that loses money rapidly as price breaks in a range expansion mode to the
downside.
You can see the logic behind these trading range fades on the two right-hand images of Figure 9.1.
A trading range environment need not always be horizontal; instead, a trading range may take the form
of a gently sloping range higher or lower. If so, then you will need to reference the angled trendlines
as both the expected entries and targets in the price structure.

Bollinger Bands and Fade Trades
To increase the odds of a successful fade trade, look for price to be at the upper or lower Bollinger
Band. The lines of the Bollinger Bands represent two standard deviations from the mean or the 20period moving average, which gives you an instant glimpse into where price rests in terms of its
standard deviation. Many trading strategies take advantage of short-selling price at the upper
Bollinger Band or buying price at the lower Bollinger Band.
In addition to using Bollinger Bands for reference points of overbought or oversold levels, look for
price to form a basic reversal candle at either the upper or lower Bollinger Band or prior trendline.
Specifically, look for engulfing candles, doji candles, spinning tops, bullish hammers, or bearish
shooting stars. You will enhance the probabilities of a successful fade trade if you can first identify a
reversal candle at the upper or lower Bollinger Band extremes before entering your position. You
may also choose to wait until price breaks under the low of the reversal candle before putting on your
position.
While you do have a reference price for an overhead resistance level in the context of a trading
range, you do not have this reference in the context of a steady rising trend where price has rallied
higher from the moving average or rising trendline. You will need to rely on Bollinger Bands and
reversal candles to have the confidence that odds favor a move back down to return to the mean or

moving average as opposed to continuing the rally higher in a perpetual range breakout that would
stop you out if you tried to short the uptrend.

Divergences and Fade Trades
Finally, look for any type of clear divergence on any fade trade you consider entering. For example, if
price rallies to a higher high but you find that the 3/10 MACD momentum oscillator, Rate of Change,
volume, breadth, or other momentum oscillator formed a lower high than the indicator achieved on the
prior rally, then you increase the odds of a successful fade trade. Refer to the discussion on
momentum divergences from Chapter 2 for more details.
In summary, be sure to distinguish first whether a trend exists or not. The odds of a successful fade
trade increase when fading a move within the context of a range contraction environment with clear
boundaries than when fading a rally in the context of a price uptrend. In either case, you can increase
your odds of a successful trade outcome by demanding that price be at the upper or lower Bollinger
Band before entering, demanding that a reversal candle form at or near the Bollinger Band extreme, or
observing some sort of divergence as price extends beyond the mean.
While the best scenario would be a price move up into a known resistance area that happens to
coincide with price forming a reversal candle at the upper Bollinger Band as a negative momentum
divergence forms, you cannot demand absolute perfection in fade trade setups. The more chart
evidence you can put in your favor, the better the odds of a successful outcome will be. Despite
overwhelming evidence you still need to place your stop appropriately and honor your preestablished stop-loss price in the event that the market continues its rally in the context of an
established uptrend despite divergences, or breaks out suddenly from an established trading range and
moves into a range expansion mode that leaves you with sudden losses.

Mean Reversion in Johnson and Johnson
Figure 9.2 shows us JNJ's 30-minute chart in the context of a prevailing downtrend on the timeframe,
as evidenced by the series of lower lows and lower highs, as well as the negative moving average
orientation (the 20 EMA is steadily under the 50 EMA). We also see the default Bollinger Bands
indicator and the 3/10 MACD Momentum Oscillator.
FIGURE 9.2 A Quick Fade Trade Opportunity in Johnson and Johnson on the 30-minute Chart in late
May 2010

The fade trade comes from an extension $1.50 downward from the 20 period moving average at the
$61.00-per-share level on the gap down on May 21, 2010, to the $59.50 area. Price formed a bullish
bar on the first 30 minutes then formed a doji candle that closed just above $60.00 per share by the
first hour. An aggressive trader would enter once the doji formed and price rallied above the close of
the doji at $60.10. The trader would place the stop either just under $60.00 per share, or under the
opening low of $59.50 and play for an upper price target back to the $61.00 level which was the
declining short-term 20-period exponential average on the session.
A conservative trader might have demanded that price break above the high of the doji at the $60.50
area before entering, which would increase the odds of a successful trade, but decrease the distance
to the target at $61.00 and increase the logical price at which to locate a stop, under $60.00. Thus, a
conservative trader would risk 50 cents to profit 50 cents, which does not enhance the monetary or
reward-to-risk edge, while an aggressive trader would enter near $60.00, place a stop 10 to 20 cents
under $60.00 per share, and play for an upper target of $61.00 per share, giving both an accuracy
edge (odds favor but do not guarantee a mean reversion swing in price back to the 20 EMA at $61.00
because of the positive divergence, doji reversal candle, and lower Bollinger Band indicator) and the
monetary edge (the trader risks 10 to 20 cents to play for an upside target 90 to 80 cents higher).
Price rallied upward in a mean reversion play with four successive up bars in the morning of May
21 to fall just shy of the overhead target at $61.00 per share. Price formed a spinning top and then a
bearish engulfing candle to trigger an earlier than expected exit. Keep in mind that a fade trade targets
a return to the short-term moving average only, and not beyond. The opportunity plays upon the
action/reaction cycle in the context of a prevailing trend, where the 20 period EMA becomes a
reference point for traders to establish new short-sale positions in the context of the prevailing
downtrend.

Such strategies give rise to mean expansion strategies such as retracements, which aim to short sell
rallies into EMA or trendline resistance in the context of downtrends or buy downward retracements
into the support of rising moving averages or trendlines in the context of prevailing uptrends. As you
can see from this example, retracement trading strategies in the context of a trending environment are
not only simpler strategies than fade strategies, which require absolute precision in entry and exit,
retracement strategies are often more profitable as well.
Before we discuss the more popular retracement strategies, let us now discuss the reversal trade
setup, which also falls under the mean reversion heading.

Reversal Trades
As you progress through different stages as a trader, you will likely gravitate toward certain strategies
over others. Reversal strategies often appeal to new traders who want to be heroes by buying at the
exact bottom and then selling at the exact top, but it only takes a series of failed reversal trades to
teach these new traders that alternate, more profitable strategies exist with less risk and better
outcomes. Like a child who burns a hand on the stove and learns never to touch a hot stove again,
many new traders attempt reversal strategies with high hopes of quick riches, only to find the outcome
to be a much larger-than-expected loss, or a series of frustrating small losses as the trader incorrectly
shorts a rising trend or buys consistently into a perpetually falling trend.
Reversal trading strategies can be described as catching a falling knife, or at least attempting to do
so. If you visualize that statement, you will see that there is certainly more risk in trying to catch a
falling knife than in stepping out of its way. After all, why not wait until the knife has hit the floor and
then bounced off the floor before picking it up? As you progress as a trader, you will likely want to
avoid these high-risk, high-reward strategies that appeal to the risk-seeking traders in the market.
However, it is important to understand these strategies and when playing for a reversal in a trend is
appropriate, and when it is not.
Let us return to the same 30-min intraday chart of Johnson and Johnson in Figure 9.2 and expand the
chart to see the larger picture of the prevailing intraday downtrend. Let us also assume that we want
to employ a basic reversal strategy of trying to call a bottom in the stock by buying new lows that
touch the lower Bollinger Band.
Keep in mind that reversal strategies differ from fade strategies, in that reversal strategies seek to
play not just a return to the mean, but a pure reversal in the prevailing trend and thus achieve a larger
target. While buying the absolute low can be very lucrative to a trader, Figure 9.3 shows us why the
strategy is not for new traders, as they attempt to buy new lows hoping for a reversal in trend.
FIGURE 9.3 Failed Reversal Trades in Johnson and Johnson 30-minute Intraday Downtrend

In Figure 9.3, we see the larger picture of Johnson and Johnson's prevailing intraday downtrend in
which we captured a very small profit earlier from a Fade Trade mean reversion setup on May 21,
2010. Assuming a trader bets on a reversal occurring each time price hits a new low and touches the
lower Bollinger Band, we see the fruitless outcome of his trades in the chart.
Every single time price hit a new low, price rallied but then fell within days to a new price low,
stopping out our eager trader with a new loss. Undeterred, the trader continued buying new price
lows, but Johnson and Johnson never seemed to reverse. After a series of seven consecutive painful
losses, our trader gave up the search for a bottom in JNJ, the account much smaller from the effort.
If you desire to trade reversal strategies, you need a lot of patience, a focus on the edge and
probabilities (and not on your losses), fortitude, and sometimes luck. However, you can avoid a lot of
frustration by trading alternate strategies such as breakout or retracement trades.
Reversal strategies build on the friction between the two major principles that trends established,
have greater odds of reversing than of continuing, and the momentum principle in regard to lengthy
momentum divergences that often precede trend reversals. We know that trends cannot persist
forever, and they must reverse at some point just as price must eventually break out of an established
trading range. However, entering at the exact low or high of a move requires a great deal of advanced
charting skills, experience, and patience. Most professionals avoid trying to buy the exact high or
low, and new traders benefit from avoiding this as well.
While you will certainly do best to avoid attempts to find the absolute low or high of a move, you
can do well to incorporate reversal strategies into your trading plan if you think of reversals in a
slightly different light. Let us return to Martin Pring's definition of technical analysis as the art of
identifying a trend reversal at the earliest stages and then riding that trend until the weight of the
evidence proves it has reversed. This is the definition you should adopt when trading reversal
strategies: employ the weight of the evidence criterion before trying to bet your capital on a trend

reversal. This means that you will never (or at least very, very rarely) enter at the absolute high or
low of the move, sacrificing instead to play a reversal strategy once certain pre-determined chart
conditions occur.

The Sequence of Events that Precedes Trend Reversals
Watch first for a multi-swing divergence to form. Multi-swing divergences, as opposed to singleswing divergences, increase the odds of a trend reversal. Trends often slow down before they fully
reverse, just as a freight train must slow down and stop before reversing course. Also, look for
lengthy divergences to form on multiple timeframes, from the weekly chart down to the intraday
charts. Momentum is a leading indicator of price, and momentum divergences often signal trend
reversals as likely outcomes. In the absence of lengthy divergences, odds tend to default to favor trend
continuity.
Second, watch for structure to change in the short-term and intermediate-term moving averages. If
you are watching a daily chart, watch for the 20-day EMA to cross under the 50-day EMA. That's
certainly not enough evidence to expect a trend reversal, but all trend reversals will have this
structure occur before reversing. Look also for price to cross under the 200-day simple moving
average. Some investors will declare price to be in a downtrend once price crosses under this key
average. The bearish cross under the 200-day average will occur after a sustained down-move in
price, but it is part of the criterion for establishing the weight of the evidence.
Third, look for price to make lower lows, lower highs, and break key support areas on the charts of
multiple timeframes. Recall our discussion in Chapter 1 on the Trend Continuity Principle that uptrends are a series of higher price swing highs and higher price swing lows, just as downtrends are a
series of lower price swing lows and lower price swing highs. That is the purest definition of a price
trend possible. When price begins to break these progressions of higher highs and higher lows, look
for a potential reversal in trend as a likely outcome. You can never declare an uptrend reversed from
an objective price standpoint unless price has formed a lower low, lower high, then swung down to
take out the support of the prior low. Alternately, price can first form a lower high then swing down
to take out the support from a prior price low. Either way, price must reverse course and progress
through this series of observable lower lows and lower highs to change course. Many traders use this
definition as a trend reversal, and will wait to establish a new position in the direction of the
potential newly forming trend only after this sequence has formed; you will do well to adopt this
strategy.
Finally, in addition to monitoring momentum divergences, moving average structure, and price
highs/lows, you can look for a Kickoff in the momentum oscillator, volume, or breadth to increase the
odds further of a trend reversal. Kickoffs occur when a momentum oscillator, breadth, or volume
forms a clear higher high on a price swing up after price has been in a sustained downtrend, but price
is a far distance away from forming a higher high. You can often see this Kickoff occur at the same
time price crosses above the 20- or 50-period EMA or breaks above a key long-term trendline.
Envision the Kickoff as the initial sign of strength (momentum burst) that sends the price surging
higher in a new uptrend, or falling lower in a new downtrend. In physics terms, think of the Kickoff as
the force that overcomes the inertia of an object either at rest (trading range) or in motion (established
trend). When you throw a ball into the air, the ball has the most acceleration the moment it leaves your
hand. Acceleration declines as the ball continues to rise, but eventually the ball will stop rising
(negative divergences) and then fall back to earth. Think of this as the life cycle of a stock (Chapter 7)
