
Notes
1. Because we generally prefer to trade only the most liquid pairs, there are only 8 to 9 really liquid
pairs, the EURUSD, USDJPY, GBPUSD, AUDUSD, USDCAD, USDCHF, EURJPY, and EURGBP,
NZDUSD. Throw in some of the more popular EUR, JPY, and GBP crosses (like the EURCAD,
EURCHF, AUDJPY), and you're up to ∼12. Then maybe add the SEK, NOK, HDK, and SGD
combined with some of the others for some added exposure to hard money (low debt/GDP
economy) currencies, and you have around 12 to 20 pairs at most for almost all of your trading.
2. Cliff Wachtel, “Lessons From Last Week's Market Movers: Faith, Hope and Charity to the
Rescue” (September 2011), http://seekingalpha.com/article/294253-lessons-from-last-week-smarket-movers-faith-hope-and-charity-to-the-rescue.
3. John C. Abell, “Apple Co-Founder Ron Wayne's Long, Strange—and Sad—Trip,” Wired (June
2010), www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/06/apple-co-founder-ron-waynes-long-strange-and-sadtrip/.

CHAPTER 8
Technical Analysis
Basic Momentum Indicators
In the prior chapter you saw how to use the basic tools that we've taught thus far. If you'd like to
practice applying them, visit thesensibleguidetoforex.com, and search for the trade simulations
exercises or trade diaries. That's where we'll post trade scenarios, give you the chance to play them,
then provide suggested solutions.
Now it's time to add a new and different set of technical tools to your arsenal—momentum
indicators. They are useful in helping to answer the following common trader dilemmas.
What do you do if a currency pair (or any asset) is making historic highs or lows, so there isn't
enough, or any, support or resistance to guide you in making entry and exit decisions?
How do you know you're not buying at the top, or selling short at the bottom, just before the trend
ends? Ideally in either case you'd wait for a pullback of some kind, but meanwhile you risk
missing out on the trend!
If you're in a winning trade and it approaches your planned exit, how do you know if you should
take your planned exit, or leave at least some of the position in hopes of letting profits run with a
trailing stop?
For example, look what happened to gold from May 2009 to August 2011 (see Figure 8.1).
FIGURE 8.1 Gold Monthly Chart, July 2005 to December 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

From May 2009 to August 2011 it kept hitting new all-time highs, and had only eight down months

out of 27, rarely pulling back to anything more than very near-term support levels.
Gold hit four new all-time highs from 2008 to 2011, breaking over $1,000, then $1,220, then
$1,265, then over $1,350, $1,400, and $1,500. Those waiting for significant pullbacks often never got
in and missed the biggest trend of the year.
The basic problem traders and investors face is that we get paid for being right about what happens
in the future, yet most of the popular indicators we've covered thus far are more lagging than leading
indicators. They tell us about the past, and from that information all we can do at best is to form some
hypotheses about the future.
What's a trader to do? Use momentum indicators. They're leading indicators because:
They can tell you whether a trend is strengthening or weakening.
They can tell you if an asset is overbought or oversold relative to past activity over a given
period, and so indicate if the trend is more likely to reverse direction.
Knowing these can help you forecast changes and be more profitable.
Momentum indicators can give you additional clues to put the odds of being correct even more in
your favor. There are many momentum inticators, but for now we will introduce just a few of the most
effective and easiest ones to use:
Double Bollinger Bands.
Moving average (MA) crossovers.
Three kinds of basic oscillators: Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD), Relative
Strength Index (RSI), and Stochastics.
As with any indicator, you can use these without fully understanding how they work, though if you
do, you'll be able to use them more effectively and know how to adapt them to specific situations.

DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS (DBBS)—USE AS
MOMENTUM INDICATORS
We noted in Chapter 4 that while standard single Bollinger Bands can provide a degree of support or
resistance (s/r) in flat or gently trending markets, Bollinger Bands don't provide reliable support and
resistance in strongly trending markets, because they widen with increasing volatility, so a strong
trend can continue to climb the upper or lower band for extended periods.
There's lots of material written about standard single Bollinger Bands (much of it free online), so
we'll focus on their newer, less covered but far more useful variant, Double Bollinger Bands.
Kathy Lien, one of the most famous rock-star forex analysts around (books, major website, regular
TV appearances), devised a brilliant modification. In addition to the standard bands set at two
standard deviations' distance from a 20-period simple moving average (SMA) at the center, she
added a second set of bands only one standard deviation away from that SMA.
By using Double Bollinger Bands (DBBs), we get a much better indication of:
Whether a trend is strong enough to continue riding or to enter new positions even if it has been
going on for a long time.
Whether it's time to take profits or to get ready to trade the reversal.
That sounds helpful. Just how useful are DBBs?

In her latest book, The Little Book of Currency Trading, Kathy Lien writes:
Of the hundreds of technical indicators out there, the Double Bollinger Bands are hands down
my favorite …they provide a wealth of actionable information. They tell me whether a currency
pair is in a trend or range, the direction of the trend, and when the trend has exhausted. More
importantly, Bollinger Bands also identify entry points and proper places to put a stop.1
As we'll describe later, they are indeed at least as useful as any indicator I've encountered.
To create them on your chart, just insert a second set of Bollinger bands at one standard deviation
on your moving average. Consult your charting platform's help menu. We'll clarify standard
deviations later. For now just know that they are units of distance from the 20-period simple moving
average (SMA), which is both the center of the DBBs and the baseline for determining the location of
the other Bollinger bands.
Figure 8.2 is an example of what DBBs look like, applied to the same chart shown in Figure 8.1.
A1: The upper BB line that is two standard deviations away from line C, the 20-period simple
moving average (SMA).
B1: The upper BB line that is one standard deviation from the 20-period SMA.
C: The 20-period SMA. Figure 8.2 is a weekly chart, so this is a 20-week SMA. Again, this is
both the center of the DBBs and baseline for determining the location of the other bands.
B2: The lower BB line that is one standard deviation from the 20-period SMA.
A2: The lower BB line that is two standard deviations from the 20-period SMA.
FIGURE 8.2 Gold Monthly Chart, July 2005 to December 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Notice how these bands form four separate zones. It's these zones that provide the added
information about the strength of a trend, whether it still has the momentum to continue, and where we
might attempt to enter trades, even if there is no other s/r to serve as a reference point, as was the case
with gold in Figure 8.2.

DBB Basics

The DBB Buy zone: When price is within this upper zone (between the two topmost lines, A1
and B1), that means the uptrend is strong and has a higher probability of continuing. As long as
candles continue to close in this uppermost zone, the odds favor entering or maintaining long
positions, and closing or avoiding short positions.
The DBB Sell zone: When price is in the bottom zone (between the two lowest lines, A2 and
B2), the downtrend is likely to continue. That suggests that as long as the candles close in this
lowest zone, one should enter or maintain short positions and close or avoid long positions.
The DBB Neutral zone: When price is within the area bounded by the one standard deviation
bands (B1 and B2), there is no strong trend. The 20-day simple moving average (C) that serves
as the baseline for the Bollinger Bands is in the center of this zone. Typically one to three
candles closing in this area are your signal to exit your trade because the trend is showing
weakness.
In other words, DBBs tell us whether we should be trading a trend or a trading range.
When the pair is in the buy or sell zone (above the top one standard deviation line or below the
bottom one standard deviation line), we have a trend that is strong enough to continue trading; it's
probably not too late to get in, though you may want to wait for the trend to retreat to the first
standard deviation line, and ideally wait for it to begin to rebound back in the direction of the
trend.
When the pair is within the neutral zone (between the one standard deviation lines), it's in a
trading range. If there's any trend, it lacks the momentum needed to be tradable. You may be able
to trade bounces off the upper and lower channels, but the trend itself lacks enough strength to
assume that it will continue without excessive risk of a reversal that hits our stop loss.
As with most technical indicators, the longer the time frame of the chart on which they're viewed,
the stronger the momentum indicator that DBBs provide.

The Four Rules for Using Double Bollinger Bands
Here's a short summary of how to use Double Bollinger Bands (DBBs). The rules are a combination
of what I've gleaned from Kathy Lien, other sources, and my own experience. This short version
focuses on just the rules for how to actually use DBBs. Search online for further details.
We'll be referring to Figure 8.3.
FIGURE 8.3 S&P 500 Weekly Chart, July 18, 2008, to April 3, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Rule 1: Go Short When Price Is Within or Below the Double BB Sell
Zone (Bounded by the Lower Two Bollinger Bands)
As long as price remains within or below the lower two BBs, the downward momentum is strong
enough so that there is a high probability that the trend will continue lower. This is the time to enter
new short positions. Exit and take profits when price moves above this zone.
For example, looking at the S&P 500 index weekly chart in Figure 8.4, if we zoom in on Q3 of
2008, from the week of September 7 (down arrow) until the week of December 14 (up arrow), the
odds favored maintaining short positions for those trading off weekly charts.
FIGURE 8.4 S&P 500 Weekly Chart, July 18, 2008, to February 15, 2009
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Rule 2: Go Long When Price Is Within or Above the Double BB Buy
Zone (Bounded by the Upper Two Bollinger Bands)
As long as price remains within or above the upper two BBs, the upward momentum is strong enough
so that there is a high probability that the trend will continue higher. This is the time to enter new long
positions. Exit and take profits when price moves below this zone.
For example, looking at the S&P 500 index weekly chart in Figure 8.5, if we zoom in on July 27 to
September 27, 2009, bounded by the arrows, the odds favored maintaining long positions for those
trading off weekly charts. If we look at the previous chart for the period of July 2008 to mid-March
2011, it's clear that this indicator would have kept you in for most of the multiyear uptrend and gotten
you out before most of the major sell-offs played out.
FIGURE 8.5 S&P 500 Weekly Chart, Highlighting the Week of July 27 to September 27, 2009
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Rule 3: Trade the Range, Not the Trend, When Price Is between the Buy
and Sell Zones
When price is in the middle zone of the one standard deviation Bollinger Bands, the trend isn't strong
enough to trust, so don't trade it unless you have enough fundamental evidence or signals from your
other technical indicators that suggest the trend will continue. Otherwise, shift your thinking into
range-trading mode and start looking for lows and highs that can serve as potential entry and exit
points if the channel is wide enough.
See Figure 8.6 for examples of when this did and didn't work during the EU debt crisis (Greek
stage) of 2010.
FIGURE 8.6 S&P 500 Weekly Chart—Greek Stage of EU Debt Crisis, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

For example, in late April 2010, according to this Rule 3, I should not have been short until the
week of May 16, highlighted by the left-hand up arrow.
However, there was a growing chance that the EU might not bail out Greece in time to avoid a
market collapse, so I didn't wait to start taking at least some short positions—the fundamentals (and
other technical signals I was watching) were enough to justify ignoring Rule 3.
My fundamental thesis: If the collapse of just one major bank (Lehman Brothers) crashed markets in
September 2008, imagine what a national default (and wave of defaults that would follow as no one
would lend to the other weak EU economies) could do.
So that was a classic case of when to ignore Rule 3, and of the need to find that balance between
using too little evidence to see the full picture and using so much that it paralyzes you and prevents
you from taking action. In the spring of 2010, DBBs were just not enough.
However, Rule 3 would have worked well in keeping you out of the choppy range-bound action
into the spring and early summer of 2010, highlighted by the two up arrows in Figure 8.6. It's harder
to trade profitably when there is no clear trend.

Rule 4: Minimize Risk by Waiting Until Price Retraces to the Cheaper
End of the Buy or Sell Zone, or Take Partial Positions
This rule attempts to reduce the risk of buying at the top or selling at the bottom that comes when
chasing a strong trend.

This rule is not easy to implement. Your success depends on how well you read the other technical
and fundamental evidence, and how well you are able to understand whether you're catching a bargain
or a falling knife.
Thus the key qualification to Rule 4: There should be no major contradictions from other technical
indicators or fundamental data that suggest the trend is in fact exhausted. If there are, stand aside, and
don't trade until the situation clarifies.
For example, look at Figure 8.7.
FIGURE 8.7 S&P 500 Weekly Chart, Week of September 27, 2009, to April 25, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The rule worked well if you bought at the cheap end of the buy zone during the week of September
27, 2009 (first down arrow); there you caught a bargain. However, if you bought at the close of the
week of April 25, 2010, you caught a falling knife, as a threatened Greek default set off a sharp fourweek pullback. The key was to recognize that the fundamentals were so bad at that point that they
outweighed the suggested bargain of Rule 4.
What would have saved you? In addition to reasonable stop losses (which we always use, right?),
Rule 4 also suggests taking partial positions when entering strong trends, like one-third of your total
planned position if you can't wait for the retracement to the cheaper end of your buy or sell zone,
another one-third if or when you get the retracement, and the final one-third when or if you get a
bounce back into the buy or sell zone.
See the Appendix on Binary Options at www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com for examples of how we
use Double Bollinger Bands to time entries and exits.

Combine DBBs with a Leading Indicator
Because the downtrend needs time to build up the strong momentum to enter the buy or sell zones,

Double Bollinger Bands are distinctly lagging indicators and thus not suited for catching less
sustained though perfectly tradable trends. For example, if you had solely relied on DBBs during the
Greek stage of the EU debt crisis that occurred in the spring of 2010, you would not have gone short
the index until the trend was mostly finished. (See Figure 8.8.)
FIGURE 8.8 S&P 500 Weekly Chart, Week of April 25, 2010, to August 1, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

So as good as DBBs are, like any other indicator they need to be used in combination with other
technical and fundamental evidence. They're much more effective when used in combination with a
leading indicator like moving average crossovers or oscillators like MACD, both covered later in
this chapter. These additional indicators can provide earlier signals to open partial positions as a
nascent trend forms. Then when the trend is confirmed as it enters the DBB buy or sell zone, you open
the rest of the position.

DBBs: Conclusion and Summary
Double Bollinger Bands are incredibly useful, but, like any other technical indicator, they must be
used in combination with other evidence, the precise nature of which depends on your style of trading
and time frame.

Use DBBs with a Leading Indicator
To avoid missing much of the trend while it works its way into the buy or sell zone, use DBBs in
combination with a leading indicator that signals you to begin taking partial positions if you're willing
to accept the risk that the trend might fail, in exchange for the greater profits of establishing part of
your position at a better price.

MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVERS
Like Bollinger Bands, moving averages can also be adapted to be leading momentum indicators. By
placing multiple moving averages with different durations on our charts, we create a useful
momentum indicator, the moving average crossover.
There are two common types of moving average crossovers used to signal possible trend reversals.
1. Price itself crosses over or under a moving average.
2. Shorter-duration moving averages cross over or under longer, slower-moving averages.
Each type signals changing momentum that could be the start of a new trend.

Price Crosses Over or Under a Moving Average
The first type of MA crossover is when the price moves through an important moving average. For
example, see Figure 8.9. When price moves below its 50-period simple moving average, or SMA
(candle A), it's a sign the trend may be moving lower. When price moves above its 50-period SMA,
(candles B and C) it's a sign that the trend may be reversing higher.
FIGURE 8.9 Gold Daily Chart, June 10 to September 30, 2010
This chart has two sets of BBs, one and two standard deviations from the 20-day SMA baseline in the
middle. Here we've added a 50-day SMA, which price crosses at points A and B. Thus we can use a
combination of both Bollinger Bands and moving average crossovers of the 20- and 50-day SMAs.
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Traders who exited long positions on July 1 (A) when price closed below the 50-day SMA avoided
a month of losses (and the risk that the pullback could have turned into something far worse). If they
entered new long positions when price closed above the 50-day SMA on August 6 (B) or August 11
(C), they caught the beginning of the next move higher.
Note also that there was another sign on August 6 (B) that the trend had resumed. Gold closed the
day in its upper Bollinger Band buy zone, providing additional confirmation that the uptrend had
resumed.
As noted earlier, moving average crossovers and DBBs make a potent combination for timing
entries and exits. The moving average crossovers provide an earlier advanced warning of a trend
change, and the DBBs confirm it. More conservative traders or investors might choose not to enter
positions until price enters the DBB buy or sell zone. More aggressive ones will enter at least partial
positions when they get the moving average crossover. Regardless of your risk tolerance, the
fundamental context should be considered before deciding to take a more conservative or aggressive
approach.
Two points to remember:
1. Adjust your risk appetite to market conditions. If your analysis makes you confident in the
trend, you should be more inclined to open partial positions based on whatever moving average
crossover tends to signal the start of a trend. If the evidence is equivocal, you might want to wait
until price enters the DBB buy or sell zone, or have some other further confirmation of the move.
2. Which moving average should price cross over to give you a signal for a new trend? While we
used the 50-period SMA in the example, that will depend on which one(s) you find provide(s) the
best results: that is, those MAs that provide signals early enough to catch most of the move, but
not so early that you get more false signals than you're willing to accept. You can learn this from:
Trading experience, as recorded in your trade journal.
Back testing: This can be as simple as just scrolling the chart backward and observing which
moving averages price had to cross before the trends tended to last long enough for a
profitable trade, or doing more sophisticated testing via specialized software. We'll do more
on back testing in Chapter 9.

The More Indicators in Our Favor, the Better
Note that in Figure 8.9 there was dual confirmation of the new uptrend at points B and C by both:
Price crossing above the 50-day SMA.
Price entering the DBB buy zone.
This was a classic case of what we want to see when we enter or exit trades: multiple kinds of
indicators confirming each other without any contradicting ones.

How Many Indicators Should You Use?
This is ultimately a judgment call, but the consensus appears to be to use about five (which can mean
anything from three to seven) indicators, carefully chosen to complement each other as a mix of trend
following, momentum, lagging, leading indicators, and timing or cycle indicators. We've provided
enough from which to choose those indicators in order to put the odds in your favor without

overloading you with too much information. Combine these technical tools with a solid understanding
of:
The fundamental analysis context, which will help you decide if the underlying fundamentals
support or contradict the technical picture.
Risk and money management (RAMM) techniques, including trade planning and monitoring via
your trading journal.
Do all this and you'll be far beyond the typical lay trader. We'll offer some more concrete ideas and
examples of combinations of indicators to use as part of your normal toolbox later at the beginning of
Chapter 9.

But RAMM Is Key
Beware, however, that indicators are only tools, not crystal balls. That's the reason why we focus so
much on risk and money management (RAMM). Assume you'll be wrong a lot. If you've any doubts,
please review the quotes at the beginning of Chapter 5 on RAMM from some of the most successful
money managers of our generation.
Look at Figure 8.10 to see what happened from late January to March 2010.
FIGURE 8.10 Gold Daily Chart, January 7 to April 1, 2010
This chart has two sets of BBs, one and two standard deviations from the 20-day SMA baseline in the
middle. Again we've added a 50-day SMA. Thus we can use a combination of both Bollinger Bands
and moving average crossovers of the 20- and 50-day SMAs.
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
