
Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk

market. A few will do tremendously well,
and a few will do tremendously poorly.

the end can be violent. (Yes, I’m trying to
scare you.)

To rise to the top of your game, you need to
allow those superstar positions to run as
much as possible and stop as quickly as
possible a position that’s a drag on your
portfolio. The quicker you exit, the sooner
you’re able to move on and find a new position that may be a home run (too many
sports analogies for one sidebar?).

Consider shares of Akamai Technology Inc.
(symbol: AKAM). In mid-2007, shares made
a strong move upward to $50 (remember
what I said about round numbers acting as
resistance?). You may have bought on a
breakout above $50 per share, expecting
the trend to continue. However, shares
began to falter and fell back to the $46–$47
price range. Note that this was right below
the prior swing low — a level that may’ve
been specified as point of exit. During this
period, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
was at a new all-time high. So why worry
about a short-term decline? Why not wait it
out for a rally back to the $50 level? As it
happened, shares of Akamai fell 46 percent
following that small initial decline. A swing
trader who exited quickly when the prior
swing low was violated would’ve left with
a small loss. A swing trader who waited
to see what happened would’ve been
wallowing in misery.

 Failure to act can be disastrous. Okay, I’ve
hammered this point home, but there’s good
reason for it. Many swing traders start out
using stop loss orders but become lazy after
a string of successes. But as surely as night
follows day, losses will follow profits.
When markets are in a strong trend — up
or down — they invite risk taking and carelessness. Investors and traders are lulled
into a sense of safety. Small losses often
turn into big gains if given enough time, but
these are temporary illusions. Good times
and easy money eventually end — and

229

230 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan

Chapter 11

Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits
In This Chapter
 Getting to know how the market works
 Identifying key entry and exit orders for your swing trades
 Figuring out how to place orders whether swing trading is your hobby or your living

T

rade execution is the home stretch of swing trading. If you’ve dotted
your i’s and crossed your t’s, then how you execute your swing trade is
unlikely to spell the difference between success and failure. Still, you should
perfect entering your orders as much as possible so that you aren’t burned
by a security that’s in the process of reversing direction. Perfecting your
order entry largely means knowing what type of order to enter, a factor that’s
mainly dependent on whether you’re a full- or part-time swing trader. If
you’ve done your homework, though, your execution strategy should emphasize entry with the flow of the market.
If you’re a full-time swing trader or you execute trades during market hours,
you have more order types at your disposal than if you’re trading part-time.
You also have the opportunity to use a couple of helpful tools to refine your
trades: intraday charting and Nasdaq Level II quotes. In this chapter, I outline
the major order types and tell you which ones you should use most, depending on your situation. I also explain how to make the most of intraday tools to
refine your swing trading.
If you’re a part-time swing trader, you should follow a different entry strategy
than your full-time counterparts. But never fear! This chapter outlines the
unique considerations you face when entering and exiting positions.

Understanding Market Mechanics
Understanding the mechanics of the underlying markets is essential to
knowing when to enter or exit an order. On a basic level, I’m guessing you
understand that securities have bid prices (where you can sell) and ask
prices (where you can buy). Both the bid and ask have a number of shares

232 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
associated with them. For example, the bid may have 100 shares associated
with it, indicating you can sell 100 shares at that price. But who’s buying and
selling these securities to you?
Dealers who make markets in certain securities are called market makers.
Market makers are often decried as evil geniuses who control security prices.
In all honesty, they aren’t geniuses . . . or evil creatures. They’re just ordinary
folks who can push prices to clear your limit orders or stop orders aggregated around a certain price.
From the market maker’s perspective, a bid is where he or she is willing to
buy the security, and an ask is his or her offer to sell the security at that
price. Market makers offer a certain amount of stock on the buy and sell
sides. So if a market maker is offering 2,000 shares of Danaher at $75.23 and
you enter a market order for 2,500 shares, your first 2,000 will be executed at
$75.23. However, the remaining 500 shares may be executed at a higher price.
A thinly traded stock may have 2,000 shares available at $75 per share and
500 shares available at $76. A 2,500 share market order in such a stock would
fill at $75 and $76.
When a security has great market depth (many orders on the buy and sell
side), plenty of shares are available for buying or selling. When a security has
little depth, few shares are available. Certain order types (such as a market
order; see “Living life in the fast lane: Market orders,” later in this chapter for
more on this type) in a security with little depth may move it significantly —
at least for a little while.
Because certain order types can move prices significantly in thinly traded
securities, you want to stick to actively traded securities. You don’t want to
expose yourself to significant liquidity risk. Swing traders normally generate
alpha, or outperformance, in the quality of their buys and sells, not in their
ability to correctly estimate the mispricing of liquidity risk.
If a security has a wide spread, you can enter a certain order type (specifically a limit order, explained later in this chapter) to buy or sell at a price
between the bid and the ask. When market makers receive your order, they
have two options: They can execute the trade at the specified price (or a
better one), or they can place your order as the best bid or offer.
Suppose you want to buy shares of fictitious company Wide Spreads Inc., and
the bid/ask spread is $17.50/$19.25. (For now, ignore the fact that as a shrewd
swing trader, you’d never transact in a security with such a wide spread.) If
you enter a buy limit order for $18.25 ($1 less than the current asking price),
the company’s market maker must either execute your order or make your

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits
order the new bid. So either you’ll receive an execution or the new bid/ask
spread will be $18.25 to $19.25. Someone entering a market sell order will be
executed at your bid, and your buy order will be filled.
When I first learned that I could affect bid/ask spreads, I entered orders left
and right just to see my order come up on top. I don’t recommend this tactic,
because your orders may actually be executed.

Surveying the Major Order Types
In order to efficiently enter or exit a long or short position on a security you
want to swing trade, you need to get acquainted with the major types of
orders. These order types are available to anyone buying securities —
whether you’re a long-term investor, day trader, or swing trader. But swing
traders may use certain order types more than other kinds of traders or
investors do.
Orders can be good until cancelled (GTC), which means the orders stay open
until you execute or cancel them, or good until the day (GTD), which means
the orders remain open until the market closes.
The following sections describe the four major types of orders and when you
want to use them.

Living life in the fast lane: Market orders
Get me in and get me in now. That’s the mantra of the market order, an order
that instructs your broker to buy or sell a security immediately, regardless of
price. Market orders are useful when urgency to enter a security based on a
particular chart pattern or technical indicator abounds (turn to Chapters 4
and 5 for a refresher on how to read charts and indicator signals). You may
also want to use them when a security is very liquid, and there are so many
shares on the bid and ask sides that you’re unlikely to receive an execution
price starkly different than where the security’s currently trading.
I caution you against using market orders when entering a position. I’m more
likely to use one to exit a position instead. Never, ever enter a market order
when the markets are closed, because a security may gap higher or lower at
the next day’s open and result in an execution you don’t want.
Market orders should only be used by full-time swing traders.

233

234 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Knowing your boundaries: Limit orders
Limit orders instruct your broker to buy, sell, or short a security at a specific
price or a better one. Better, of course, depends on the direction of the trade.
The better price is lower when you’re buying and higher when you’re selling.
I’m a big proponent of limit orders. Even when the current price of a
security is agreeable to you, and a market order may make sense, a limit
order protects you from being on the receiving end of a price execution
that’s significantly above or below the current market price.
Part-time traders can analyze markets after the close and enter limit orders
for the following day. After you receive confirmation that the limit order has
been executed, you should enter a stop loss order.

Calling a halt: Stop orders
A stop order specifies that you enter or exit a position after the security’s
price reaches a predefined level. Two types of stop orders exist:
 Sell stop orders: This type of order instructs your broker to sell shares
of a security at a preset price if the security reaches that price or a
lower one. Sell stop orders are useful to protect your capital or enter a
short position.
 Buy stop orders: A buy stop order instructs the broker to buy a security
if its shares trade at or above a predefined price level. Consider employing buy stop orders when entering a position on the long side or
attempting to protect your capital on a short position.
Both types of stop orders become market orders when the price in question
is reached. Note, however, that because they become market orders (which
instruct a broker to execute a trade immediately), you may receive a price
that’s worse or better than the price you specify.

Mixing the best of both worlds:
Stop limit orders
Think of a stop limit order as a combination of a stop order and a limit order.
When your predefined price is reached, the stop limit order becomes a limit
order to ensure you don’t execute at a price that’s significantly different
than what you expected. You shouldn’t mind not getting filled if you haven’t
entered the security yet or if you’re simply trying to maximize profit. But when
matters are growing ugly, you can’t afford for an order not to execute because
it became a limit order.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits

Only go on green lights
When I first started trading, I often sized up
charts based on my limited knowledge. I had no
formal trading plan. Instead, I brought up a
security price chart that I’d identified as being
undervalued on some fundamental basis and
looked for chart patterns I recognized while
applying technical indicators. If I saw that
the Moving Average Convergence/Divergence
indicator was officially on a buy, I’d take
the plunge.
I later discovered that this method is suboptimal
trading. Why? Because such an approach often
leads to entering a trade well after a signal was
generated. If you wait until a signal is generated
and then enter your order shortly thereafter,
you’re less likely to enter a trend late.
A better swing trading approach is to only execute when you see clear-cut signals in a security’s price movement and only execute on the
day (or the day after) that signal appears. For

this method to work, you need to make sure you
don’t have multiple signals firing off every
second. If you go through 50 securities, only
a few should have conditions that meet your
entry criteria. Otherwise, your criteria may be
too loose.
Suppose your trading plan calls for entering a
security when its nine-day moving average
turns positive. Does that allow you to enter any
time the moving average is rising? The answer
depends on whether the nine-day moving average has just turned up or has been rising for
several days.
This chart shows a late entry on December 19,
when the nine-day moving average was rising
(and had been rising for nine days). Entering
late in a case like this is riskier and allows you
to take less profit than you could have if the
execution were timed to the day the actual
signal appeared.

You should only use a stop limit order when entering a security or for entering
an order to take profits. Don’t use a stop limit order as a stop loss order,
because the limit part of the order may prevent a timely exit when things are
turning sour.

235

236 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Just for kicks, say you decide to buy shares of THQ Inc. that have been in a
range between $15 and $20. Suppose you enter a buy stop order of 1,000
shares at $20.29 — so you can enter a position after shares break above their
trading range. If THQ reports blockbuster earnings one day and shares open
at $30 per share, you’ll own 1,000 shares at $30 or so. However, you’ll have
increased your position size by 50 percent because of the gap. The original
order would’ve bought $20,290 worth of stock. The actual order buys $30,000
worth of stock.
The solution to this conundrum is a stop limit order. Had you entered a stop
limit order of $20.29, the stop order would’ve become a limit order after
shares traded at or above $20.29. A buy limit order at $20.29 wouldn’t have
been executed if shares were trading at $30.

Placing Orders as a Part-Time
Swing Trader
Having a full-time job doesn’t preclude you from swing trading. You just need
to carefully craft your order-entry system to account for the uncertainty of
how security prices will perform when the market opens the following day.
One of the keys to mastering order entries and exits is to execute only on the
day after a trading signal — likely a chart pattern of some kind or a technical
indicator. Never initiate just because an entry signal exists today but was generated a few days or weeks back. If your entry method calls for buying stocks
when the nine-day moving average turns up, don’t buy a security with a nineday moving average that turned up last week.
The next two sections break down how you can enter and exit a security as a
part-time swing trader.

Entering the fray
A limit order is your primary entry weapon as a part-time swing trader. If a
buy signal appears on a particular day, you can review the day’s price behavior and determine where to place a reasonable limit buy order. Be choosy. If
your limit order isn’t filled, no big deal. There are plenty of fish in the sea —
just wait for the next one. By not desperately chasing after the security, you
can enter trades on your terms when prices come to you.
You don’t want to trade the opening of a market. This is a chaotic time when
news that emerged after the market closed the previous day is reflected in
opening share prices. There can be major swings, both positive and negative.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits
Never, never, never — did I say never? — enter a market order when the
market is closed. Doing so can only cause grief and heartache. A market order
entered after the market closes is executed at the following day’s opening
price — regardless of what that price is. Because movements can be fierce
at the opening, you can’t enter market orders the previous day due to the
uncertainty of where the price executions will occur. Even if you want to buy
shares at the price they closed at the prior day, a market order may be executed significantly above or below that price, depending on prevailing market conditions (that is, how many market orders exist, the distribution of buys
and sells, and the market maker’s own share inventory). Always keep in mind
the ol’ Wall Street saying concerning order entry when the market opens
versus when the market closes: “Amateurs trade the open. Professionals
trade the close.”

Exiting to cut your losses
(or make a profit)
Exiting a swing trade is another matter. Unlike entering, where patience can
pay dividends, exiting should be done quickly and judiciously. Why? Because
you usually exit a position for one of two reasons — either your profit target
was hit or an indicator flashed an exit signal. When either of these scenarios
occurs, don’t sit around to see what other traders will do.
When you exit for a loss, you want out at the available price. That’s why I recommend that part-time swing traders use stop loss orders, which automatically convert into a market order when the specified price level is reached.
As a part-time swing trader, you should also use trailing stop loss orders.
These are stop loss orders that are raised or lowered (depending on whether
you’re long or short the security) over time as the trade goes in your favor.
Raising these orders protects your profits (unless the security gaps through
the stop loss area).

Placing Orders if Swing Trading’s
Your Full-Time Gig
If you’re a full-time swing trader, you have more tools at your disposal.
Because you can watch the market during the day, you can enter market
orders when appropriate and monitor short-term buying and selling activity.
The following sections lay out how to set up your trading system as a
full-time swing trader and how to put various tools to use to make your
job easier.

237

238 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Considering the best order types for you
Like your part-time counterparts, you can plan to rely on limit orders for
entries and stop loss orders for exits if you’re a full-time swing trader.
However, because you spend more time swing trading, you have the luxury of
choosing how you enter trades depending on the overall market environment. Rarely is a security so hot that you absolutely need to execute a
market order. More often than not, you can size up the market and enter a
limit order near a recent intraday support or resistance level.
You want to execute an order entry or exit only on the day of a trading signal,
which pops out at you with the help of chart patterns or technical indicators.
Always react to current trading signals, not signals that first appeared on your
radar a while back.

Taking advantage of intraday charting
to time your entries and exits
As a full-time swing trader, you can improve your trading results by applying
an intraday trading overlay, which is a system of entry based on intraday
charting, to your existing entry plan. After a trading signal is generated on a
daily chart, you can zoom in on a 30-minute or 1-hour chart and time your
entry based on some technical indicator (see more on that later in this chapter). Sometimes, this trading overlay can help you avoid buying or shorting
securities that are about to reverse course. Other times, the intraday trading
overlay helps you receive better prices on your trades. Of course, it’s also
possible that the trading overlay could result in paying worse prices if a
security is in a strong trend. There are no free lunches in trading.
For example, you may enter securities on the day (or the day after) their
nine-day moving average turns higher, provided that certain intraday
charting signals are also met. This second step filters out securities that
may be showing strength on a daily chart but weakness on an hourly or
30-minute chart.
I don’t think an intraday trading overlay is absolutely essential to swing
trade successfully, but it can improve your returns if used intelligently. The
system’s intention is to improve your entry or exit price by analyzing the prior
days’ support and resistance levels and reading the signals generated by the
technical indicators. If a buy signal is generated on a daily chart but you see
weakness in the intraday chart, then the prudent course of action is to wait for
the intraday chart to stabilize and rebound before entering. Occasionally, the
intraday trading overlay keeps you out of a security that’s in the process of
tanking or rising, depending on whether you’re buying or shorting.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits

Intraday trading overlay saved the day
Want some proof as to how using intraday trading overlay can help improve your swing trading
results? Consider the following figure that

provides an example of a daily chart buy signal
that wasn’t confirmed by the intraday chart.

This figure shows Toll Brothers in April 2008
(with a daily chart on the top and an hourly
chart on the bottom). A swing trader entering a
short position based on the nine-day moving
average’s slope could’ve avoided a whipsaw
(when shares rallied shortly after falling) by
using an hourly chart. The nine-day moving
average turned negative on April 11. However,
the hourly chart showed an MACD indicator
divergence: As prices moved lower, the MACD
histogram traced higher troughs. (See Chapter

5 for more on this and other technical indicators.) This movement preceded a rally in shares
of Toll Brothers and a reversal of the nine-day
moving average slope.
So although the daily chart generated a sell
signal based on that moving average, the hourly
chart showed the bulls gaining strength —
knowledge that helped save the swing trader
using this system some heartache and loss.

239

240 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Selecting the appropriate time frame
Most real-time charting programs allow you to analyze 1-minute, 5-minute,
10-minute, 30-minute, and 1-hour charts. That’s an awful lot of time frames.
If a technical indicator looks negative on one intraday time frame, a naïve
swing trader may turn to a different intraday time frame to see whether that
indicator gives the signal he or she wants. After all, charts, like statistics, can
be tortured into telling you what you want to hear.
Always be consistent in the time frames you use (such as daily and hourly,
or daily and 30 minutes). I recommend sticking to one intraday time frame
because doing so simplifies matters and avoids the temptation of flipping
through time frames to see which one is giving you the signals you want
to see.
Personally, I prefer a 30-minute or hourly chart. I feel that charts covering
shorter periods of time belong in the day trader’s arena, because the shorter
the time period, the noisier the market. You want to trade short but powerful
trends that are driven by some fundamental reason — not by the fact that
some pension fund’s liquidating shares to deliver a retiree a lump-sum
payment.
