
Trading Tip: Charting Economic Surprises
A good tip for traders is to stack up economic data surprises against price
action to help explain and forecast the future movement in currencies.
Figure 3.2 presents a sample of what can be done. The bar graph shows
the percentages of surprise that economic indicators have compared to
consensus forecasts, while the dark line traces price action for the period
during which the data was released; the white line is a simple price regression line. This charting can be done for all of the major currency pairs,
providing a visual guide to understanding whether price action has been in
line with economic fundamentals and helping to forecast future price action. This data is provided on a monthly basis on www.dailyfx.com, listed
under Charting Economic Fundamentals.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

43

FIGURE 3.2 Charting Economic Surprises

According to the chart in Figure 3.2, in November 2004, there were 12
out of 15 positive economic surprises and yet the dollar sold off against the
euro during the month of December, which was the month during which
the economic data was released. Although this methodology is inexact, the
analysis is simple and past charts have yielded some extremely useful clues
to future price action. Figure 3.3 shows how the EUR/USD moved in the following month. As you can see, the EUR/USD quickly corrected itself during
the month of January, indicating that the fundamental divergence of price
action that occurred in December proved to be quite useful to dollar longs,
who harvested almost 600 pips as the euro quickly retracted a large part of
its gains in January. This method of analysis, called “variant perception,”
was invented by the legendary hedge fund manager Michael Steinhardt,
who produced 24 percent average rates of return for 30 consecutive years.
While these charts rarely offer such clear-cut signals, their analytical
value may also lie in spotting and interpreting the outlier data. Very large
positive and negative surprises of particular economic statistics can often
yield clues to future price action. If you go back and look at the EUR/USD
charts, you will see that the dollar plunged between October and December. This was triggered by a widening of the current account deficit to a

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

44

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 3.3 EUR/USD Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

record high in October 2004. Economic fundamentals matter perhaps more
in the foreign exchange market than in any other market, and charts such
as these could provide valuable clues to price direction. Generally, the
15 most important economic indicators are chosen for each region and
then a price regression line is superimposed over the past 20 days of
price data.

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Prior to the mid-1980s, the FX market was primarily dominated by fundamental traders. However, with the rising popularity of technical analysis
and the advent of new technologies, the influence of technical trading on
the FX market has increased significantly. The availability of high leverage has led to an increased number of momentum or model funds, which
have become important participants in the FX market with the ability to
influence currency prices.
Technical analysis focuses on the study of price movements. Technical analysts use historical currency data to forecast the direction of future
prices. The premise of technical analysis is that all current market information is already reflected in the price of each currency; therefore, studying

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

45

price action is all that is required to make informed trading decisions. In
addition, technical analysis works under the assumption that history tends
to repeat itself.
Technical analysis is a very popular tool for short-term to medium-term
traders. It works especially well in the currency markets because shortterm currency price fluctuations are primarily driven by human emotions
or market perceptions. The primary tool in technical analysis is charts.
Charts are used to identify trends and patterns in order to find profit opportunities. The most basic concept of technical analysis is that markets
have a tendency to trend. Being able to identify trends in their earliest
stage of development is the key to technical analysis. Technical analysis
integrates price action and momentum to construct a pictorial representation of past currency price action to predict future performance. Technical analysis tools such as Fibonacci retracement levels, moving averages,
oscillators, candlestick charts, and Bollinger bands provide further information on the value of emotional extremes of buyers and sellers to direct
traders to levels where greed and fear are the strongest. There are basically
two types of markets, trending and range-bound; in the trade parameters
section (Chapter 8), we attempt to identify rules that would help traders
determine what type of market they are currently trading in and what sort
of trading opportunities they should be looking for.

Is Technical Analysis or Fundamental
Analysis Better?
Technical versus fundamental analysis is a longtime battle, and after many
years there is still no winner or loser. Most traders abide by technical analysis because it does not require as many hours of study. Technical analysts
can follow many currencies at one time. Fundamental analysts, in contrast,
tend to specialize due to the overwhelming amount of data in the market.
Technical analysis works well because the currency market tends to develop strong trends. Once technical analysis is mastered, it can be applied
with equal ease to any time frame or currency traded.
However, it is important to take into consideration both strategies, as
fundamentals can trigger technical movements such as breakouts or trend
reversals, while technical analysis can explain moves that fundamentals
cannot, especially in quiet markets, such as resistance in trends. For example, as you can see in Figure 3.4, in the days leading up to September
11, 2001, USD/JPY had just broken out of a triangle formation and looked
poised to head higher. However, as the chart indicates, instead of breaking
higher as technicians may have expected, USD/JPY broke down following
the terrorist attacks and ended up hitting a low of 115.81 from a high of
121.88 on September 10.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

46

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 3.4 USD/JPY September 11, 2001, Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

CURRENCY FORECASTING—WHAT
BOOKWORMS AND ECONOMISTS
LOOK AT
For more avid students of foreign exchange who want to learn more about
fundamental analysis and valuing currencies, this section examines the
different models of currency forecasting employed by the analysts of the
major investment banks. There are seven major models for forecasting currencies: the balance of payments (BOP) theory, purchasing power parity
(PPP), interest rate parity, the monetary model, the real interest rate differential model, the asset market model, and the currency substitution model.

Balance of Payments Theory
The balance of payments theory states that exchange rates should be at
their equilibrium level, which is the rate that produces a stable current
account balance. Countries with trade deficits experience a run on their
foreign exchange reserves due to the fact that exporters to that nation
must sell that nation’s currency in order to receive payment. The cheaper
currency makes the nation’s exports less expensive abroad, which in turn
fuels exports and brings the currency into balance.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

47

What Is the Balance of Payments? The balance of payments account is divided into two parts: the current account and the capital account. The current account measures trade in tangible, visible items such
as cars and manufactured goods; the surplus or deficit between exports
and imports is called the trade balance. The capital account measures flows
of money, such as investments for stocks or bonds. Balance of payments
data can be found on the web site of the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(www.bea.gov).
Trade Flows The trade balance of a country shows the net difference
over a period of time between a nation’s exports and imports. When a country imports more than it exports the trade balance is negative or is in a
deficit. If the country exports more than it imports the trade balance is
positive or is in a surplus. The trade balance indicates the redistribution of
wealth among countries and is a major channel through which the macroeconomic policies of a country may affect another country.
In general, it is considered to be unfavorable for a country to have a
trade deficit, in that it negatively impacts the value of the nation’s currency.
For example, if U.S. trade figures show greater imports than exports, more
dollars flow out of the United States and the value of the U.S. currency
depreciates. A positive trade balance, in comparison, will affect the dollar
by causing it to appreciate against the other currencies.
Capital Flows In addition to trade flows, there are also capital flows
that occur among countries. They record a nation’s incoming and outgoing
investment flows such as payments for entire (or for parts of) companies,
stocks, bonds, bank accounts, real estate, and factories. The capital flows
are influenced by many factors, including the financial and economic climate of other countries. Capital flows can be in the form of physical or
portfolio investments. In general, in developing countries, the composition
of capital flows tends to be skewed toward foreign direct investment (FDI)
and bank loans. For developed countries, due to the strength of the equity
and fixed income markets, stocks and bonds appear to be more important
than bank loans and FDI.
Equity Markets Equity markets have a significant impact on exchange
rate movements because they are a major place for high-volume currency movements. Their importance is considerable for the currencies
of countries with developed capital markets where great amounts of
capital inflows and outflows occur, and where foreign investors are major
participants. The amount of the foreign investment flows in the equity
markets is dependent on the general health and growth of the market, reflecting the well-being of companies and particular sectors. Movements of

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

48

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

currencies occur when foreign investors move their money to a particular
equity market. Thus they convert their capital in a domestic currency and
push the demand for it higher, making the currency appreciate. When the
equity markets are experiencing recessions, however, foreign investors
tend to flee, thus converting back to their home currency and pushing the
domestic currency down.
Fixed Income (Bond) Markets The effect the fixed income markets
have on currencies is similar to that of the equity markets and is a result
of capital movements. The investor’s interest in the fixed income market
depends on the company’s specifics and credit rating, as well as on the general health of the economy and the country’s interest rates. The movement
of foreign capital into and out of fixed income markets leads to change
in the demand and supply for currencies, hence impacting the currencies’
exchange rates.
Summary of Trade and Capital Flows Determining and understanding a country’s balance of payments is perhaps the most important and
useful tool for those interested in fundamental analysis. Any international
transaction gives rise to two offsetting entries, trade flow balance (current
account) and capital flow balance (capital account). If the trade flow balance is a negative outflow, the country is buying more from foreigners than
it sells (imports exceed exports). When it is a positive inflow, the country
is selling more than it buys (exports exceed imports). The capital flow balance is positive when foreign inflows of physical or portfolio investments
into a country exceed that country’s outflows. A capital flow is negative
when a country buys more physical or portfolio investments than are sold
to foreign investors.
These two entries, trade and capital flow, when added together signify
a country’s balance of payments. In theory, the two entries should balance
and add up to zero in order to provide for the maintenance of the status
quo in a nation’s economy and currency rates.
In general, countries might experience positive or negative trade, as
well as positive or negative capital flow balances. In order to minimize the
net effect of the two on the exchange rates, a country should try to maintain
a balance between the two. For example, in the United States there is a
substantial trade deficit, as more is imported than is exported. When the
trade balance is negative, the country is buying more from foreigners than
it sells and therefore it needs to finance its deficit. This negative trade flow
might be offset by a positive capital flow into the country, as foreigners buy
either physical or portfolio investments. Therefore, the United States seeks
to minimize its trade deficit and maximize its capital inflows to the extent
that the two balance out.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

49

A change in this balance is extremely significant and carries ramifications that run deep into economic policy and currency exchange levels.
The net result of the difference between the trade and capital flows, positive or negative, will impact the direction in which the nation’s currency
will move. If the overall trade and capital balance is negative it will result
in a depreciation of the nation’s currency, and if positive it will lead to an
appreciation of the currency.
Clearly a change in the balance of payments carries a direct effect for
currency levels. It is therefore possible for any investor to observe economic data relating to this balance and interpret the results that will occur.
Data relating to capital and trade flows should be followed most closely.
For instance, if an analyst observes an increase in the U.S. trade deficit and
a decrease in the capital flows, a balance of payments deficit would occur
and as a result an investor may anticipate a depreciation of the dollar.
Limitations of Balance of Payments Model The BOP model focuses on traded goods and services while ignoring international capital
flows. Indeed, international capital flows often dwarfed trade flows in the
currency markets toward the end of the 1990s, though, and this often balanced the current accounts of debtor nations like the United States.
For example, in 1999, 2000, and 2001 the United States maintained a
large current account deficit while the Japanese ran a large current account
surplus. However, during this same period the U.S. dollar rose against the
yen even though trade flows were running against the dollar. The reason
was that capital flows balanced trade flows, thus defying the BOP’s forecasting model for a period of time. Indeed, the increase in capital flows has
given rise to the asset market model.
Note: It is probably a misnomer to call this approach the balance of
payments theory since it takes into account only the current account balance, not the actual balance of payments. However, until the 1990s capital
flows played a very small role in the world economy so the trade balance
made up the bulk of the balance of payments for most nations.

Purchasing Power Parity
The purchasing power parity theory is based on the belief that foreign exchange rates should be determined by the relative prices of a similar basket of goods between two countries. Any change in a nation’s inflation rate
should be balanced by an opposite change in that nation’s exchange rate.
Therefore, according to this theory, when a country’s prices are rising due
to inflation, that country’s exchange rate should depreciate in order to return to parity.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

50

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

PPP’s Basket of Goods The basket of goods and services priced
for the PPP exercise is a sample of all goods and services covered by
gross domestic product (GDP). It includes consumer goods and services,
government services, equipment goods, and construction projects. More
specifically, consumer items include food, beverages, tobacco, clothing,
footwear, rents, water supply, gas, electricity, medical goods and services,
furniture and furnishings, household appliances, personal transport equipment, fuel, transport services, recreational equipment, recreational and
cultural services, telephone services, education services, goods and services for personal care and household operation, and repair and maintenance services.
Big Mac Index One of the most famous examples of PPP is the
Economist’s Big Mac Index. The Big Mac PPP is the exchange rate that
would leave hamburgers costing the same in the United States as elsewhere, comparing these with actual rates signals if a currency is underor overvalued. For example, in April 2002 the exchange rate between the
United States and Canada was 1.57. In the United States a Big Mac cost
$2.49. In Canada, a Big Mac cost $3.33 in local Canadian dollars (CAD),
which works out to only $2.12 in U.S. dollars. Therefore, the exchange rate
for USD/CAD is overvalued by 15 percent using this theory and should be
only 1.34.
OECD Purchasing Power Parity Index A more formal index is put
out by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Under a joint OECD-Eurostat PPP program, the OECD and Eurostat share
the responsibility for calculating PPPs. This latest information on which
currencies are under- or overvalued against the U.S. dollar can be found
on the OECD’s web site at www.oecd.org. The OECD publishes a table
that shows the price levels for the major industrialized countries. Each
column states the number of specified monetary units needed in each of
the countries listed to buy the same representative basket of consumer
goods and services. In each case the representative basket costs 100 units
in the country whose currency is specified. The chart that is then created
compares the PPP of a currency with its actual exchange rate. The chart
is updated weekly to reflect the current exchange rate. It is also updated
about twice a year to reflect new estimates of PPP. The PPP estimates are
taken from studies carried out by the OECD; however, they should not be
taken as definitive. Different methods of calculation will arrive at different
PPP rates.
According to the OECD information for September 2002, the exchange
rate between the United States and Canada was 1.58 while the price
level for the United States versus Canada was 122, which translates to an

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

51

exchange rate of 1.22. Using this PPP model, the USD/CAD is once again
greatly overvalued (by over 25 percent, not that far away from the Big Mac
Index after all).
Limitations to Using Purchasing Power Parity PPP theory should
be used only for long-term fundamental analysis. The economic forces
behind PPP will eventually equalize the purchasing power of currencies.
However, this can take many years. A time horizon of 5 to 10 years is
typical.
PPP’s major weakness is that it assumes goods can be traded easily,
without regard to such things as tariffs, quotas, or taxes. For example,
when the United States announces new tariffs on imports the cost of domestic manufactured goods goes up; but those increases will not be reflected in the U.S. PPP tables.
There are other factors that must also be considered when weighing
PPP: inflation, interest rate differentials, economic releases/reports, asset
markets, trade flows, and political developments. Indeed, PPP is just one
of several theories traders should use when determining exchange rates.

Interest Rate Parity
The interest rate parity theory states that if two different currencies have
different interest rates then that difference will be reflected in the premium or discount for the forward exchange rate in order to prevent riskless
arbitrage.
For example, if U.S. interest rates are 3 percent and Japanese interest rates are 1 percent, then the U.S. dollar should depreciate against the
Japanese yen by 2 percent in order to prevent riskless arbitrage. This future
exchange rate is reflected into the forward exchange rate stated today. In
our example, the forward exchange rate of the dollar is said to be at discount because it buys fewer Japanese yen in the forward rate than it does
in the spot rate. The yen is said to be at a premium.
Interest rate parity has shown very little proof of working in recent
years. Often currencies with higher interest rates rise due to the determination of central bankers trying to slow down a booming economy by hiking
rates and have nothing to do with riskless arbitrage.

Monetary Model
The monetary model holds that exchange rates are determined by a nation’s monetary policy. Countries that follow a stable monetary policy
over time usually have appreciating currencies according to the monetary
model. Countries that have erratic monetary policies or excessively expansionist policies should see the value of their currency depreciate.

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

52

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

How to Use the Monetary Model There are several factors that influence exchange rates under this theory:
1. A nation’s money supply.
2. Expected future levels of a nation’s money supply.
3. The growth rate of a nation’s money supply.

All of these factors are key to understanding and spotting a monetary
trend that may force a change in exchange rates. For example, the Japanese
economy has been slipping in and out of recession for over a decade. Interest rates are near zero, and annual budget deficits prevent the Japanese
from spending their way out of recession, which leaves only one tool left
at the disposal of Japanese officials determined to revive their economy:
printing more money. By buying stocks and bonds, the Bank of Japan is increasing the nation’s money supply, which produces inflation, which forces
a change in the exchange rate. The example in Figure 3.5 illustrates the effect of money supply changes using the monetary model.
Indeed, it is in the area of excessive expansionary monetary policy that
the monetary model is most successful. One of the few ways a country can
keep its currency from sharply devaluing is by pursuing a tight monetary
policy. For example, during the Asian currency crisis the Hong Kong dollar
came under attack from speculators. Hong Kong officials raised interest
rates to 300 percent to halt the Hong Kong dollar from being dislodged
from its peg to the U.S. dollar. The tactic worked perfectly as speculators
were cleared out by such sky-high interest rates. The downside was the
danger that the Hong Kong economy would slide into recession. But in the
end the peg held and the monetary model worked.
Limitations of Monetary Model Very few economists solely stand by
this model anymore since it does not take into account trade flows and capital flows. For example, throughout 2002 the United Kingdom had higher
interest rates, growth rates, and inflation rates than both the United States
and the European Union, yet the pound appreciated in value against both
