
Starting with the left side of the chart, we observe higher highs and higher lows all the way up to the
final peak above 14,000 in October 2007. Using the Pure Price Method, we see an ‘all-clear’ signal
to continue expecting the uptrend to continue. In fact, as price swung to a higher low in November
2007 we still had an all-clear signal as price formed a higher low and began to rally.
The first warning sign from the Pure Price Method developed as price peaked near 13,750 in
December 2007 and then turned quickly lower to take out the newly established higher low from
November at the 12,750 level. Trend reversals that occur so suddenly can feel like a sudden bolt of
lightning in that one moment we see no warning sign on the chart, but a few bars later, an early trend
reversal signal develops suddenly. Markets that form an about-face by forming a lower high first and
then swing violently to take out the higher low can leave traders confused about what to do next, as
opposed to the alternate, safer trend reversal method where a lower low forms first then price calmly
forms a higher high and then falls cleanly lower to take out the lower low.
In this case, the Dow Jones formed its lower swing high and then suddenly turned down, giving an
early trend reversal signal at Spot 1 which officially puts the price in a “lower high, lower low” trend
reversal. Price then rallies to form a second lower high at the 13,000 level in May 2008 which locked
in the lower high. The final signal, for those waiting for it, came when price broke the lower low
established in early 2008 (labeled “First Lower Low”) which placed us in a downtrend beyond a
shadow of a doubt. For reference, price continued making lower lows and lower highs until
bottoming in March 2009.
Using the Pure Price Method, you had an early trend reversal signal in January 2008 at the 12,750
level with a final, official signal as price broke the first lower low (after forming two lower highs) in
June 2008 at the 11,750 index level.
While no method will consistently alert you to peaks and bottoms in all stocks at all times, it pays to
use Martin Pring's Weight of the Evidence model for analyzing potential trend reversals. Now that we
have established the foundation using price itself, let's move to a similar method that uses a short-term

and an intermediate term moving average as either a stand-alone or confirming method for spotting
trend reversals in stocks and indexes.

The Moving Average Method
Many traders use some sort of moving average on their charts to define trends and reveal price
structure. Even investors who use fundamental analysis in selecting stocks to buy might glance at a
price chart to see if the current price is above or beneath the 200-day simple moving average, which
is a widely watched average even by those who don't often follow price charts. Such investors will
define price as being in an uptrend simply if the current price remains steadily above the 200-day
simple moving average (SMA) or being in a downtrend if price is beneath it. That's certainly an
oversimplification of how to define a trend, but it's better than not looking at a chart at all!
You can add sophistication along with a consistent analytical method to your trading plan by using
moving averages to help you define trends, either as a stand-alone method, or preferably in
conjunction with the Pure Price Method. The Moving Average Method uses a short-term, intermediate
term, and long-term moving average to assess the developing trend structure in price.
For the short-term moving average, consider using a 20-period average which would be 20 trading
days or roughly one full month on a daily chart, or 20 full weeks on a weekly chart, which would
track price over five months. The 20-period average is a popular choice because it averages or
smoothes the price changes over the course of a single month, and many traders react to retracements
to the 20-period average. For the intermediate term moving average, consider using a 50-period
moving average which would track 50 trading days on a daily chart, or 50 full weeks, which would
be roughly equivalent to the 52 weeks in a full calendar year.
For the long-term moving average use the popular 200-day simple moving average on your daily
charts to study the relationship of price being above or beneath this popularly followed average.
There are roughly 252 trading days in a calendar year, so the 200-day simple moving average
approximates price over the course of a year. To be more exact, you can use a 250-day simple
moving average if you so choose, but the 200-day average is a far more popular and effective choice.
Comparing the relationship of price to these short, intermediate, and long-term moving averages
reveals the Moving Average Orientation.

THE MOST BULLISH OR BEARISH ORIENTATION
POSSIBLE
When assessing trends using moving averages, it is important to understand the chart image of the strongest confirmed
uptrend.
The most bullish orientation consists of price being above the 20-period moving average, the 20-period moving average
being greater than the 50-period moving average, and both the 20- and 50-period moving averages being greater than the
200-period moving average.
Using the same logic, the most bearish orientation would show price beneath the 20 period moving average, the 20-period
moving average beneath the 50-period moving average, and both the 20- and 50-period moving averages being beneath the
200-period moving average.

Figure 1.5 shows us the transition from the Most Bullish Orientation possible to the Most Bearish
Orientation from July 2007 to February 2008. Starting in July, we see price above the 20-day
exponential moving average (20 EMA), the 20-day EMA above the 50 day-exponential moving

average (50 EMA), and both of these averages being above the 200-day simple moving average (200
SMA). Price then takes a sudden dip from 14,000 to 12,600 into August 2007 as the 20-day EMA
crosses briefly under the 50-day EMA yet price bounces (fails to close) above the 200-day SMA.
FIGURE 1.5 Dow Jones Daily Chart: Transition from Uptrend to Downtrend using the 20-, 50-, and
200-day Moving Averages

The uptrend then continues as price makes one final higher high in October 2007, peaking above
14,000 before reversing, breaking back under the 20 and 50 EMA but this time closing under the 200day SMA in November 2007 at the same time the 20-day moving average crossed bearishly under the
50-day moving average (the short term average crossed under the intermediate term average). Moving
Average crossovers are precursors to trend reversals, but like the Pure Price Method, need
confirmation that price has officially reversed trend.
Price rallied back to 13,600 in December 2007 (though the 20-day average remained bearishly
under the 50-day moving average) and then fell sharply down through the triple-convergence of the
20-, 50-, and 200-day moving averages at the 13,300 level as the new year dawned in January 2008.
This time, both the 20 and 50 period moving averages crossed under the rising 200-day moving
averages, heralding an official trend reversal in early January as the chart adopted the Most Bearish
Orientation possible.
Recall that the Pure Price Method called for an early trend reversal at the exact time when price
formed a lower swing low (November's 12,800 low), rallied to form a lower swing high
(December's 13,800 peak), and then declined to take out the prior low from November, creating a
succession of a lower high followed by breaking to a new low. In this example at the peak of 2007,
both the Pure Price Method and the Moving Average Method (at least on the daily chart) gave a longterm sell signal simultaneously.
Neither one of these methods in isolation are magic and neither one will give you a perfect buy or
sell signal at the absolute top. However, both methods satisfy the weight of the evidence requirement

when making trading and investment decisions regarding trend reversals. You will find your results
improve when you use the two methods in conjunction, rather than in isolation. The goal is to assess
the chart evidence in an unbiased fashion and identify objective rather than subjective turning points
that can be classified at exact prices. You can identify the exact price when an uptrend officially shifts
into a downtrend (or vice versa) using either method.

Simple versus Exponential Moving Averages
There is a difference in what type of moving average you use on your chart. While most traders use
simple moving averages, other traders prefer to use exponential averages when assessing trend
structure. Simple moving averages weight each day equally, making the price 50 days ago equal to
yesterday's price in the calculation of a 50-day moving average. Simple moving averages tend to be
smoother and reflect a true average of price changes over time. As a result, simple moving averages
are slower to respond to swift recent changes in price and have a longer lag time as a result.
In contrast to a simple moving average, an exponential moving average places more emphasis on
the recent bars and a lesser importance on the past. In fact, exponential averages can also be
described as exponential weighted moving averages, which take into account recent price changes
faster than simple, equal-weighted moving averages. As a result, EMAs tend to react quicker to
sudden recent price changes; furthermore, traders often value EMAs due to their quicker reactivity
and reduced lag than simple moving averages. This is another compromise you must make as a trader:
Exponential averages react quicker to recent changes but may result in more whipsaws than simple
averages, which react slower to recent changes but are less prone to false signals.
While there is little difference between a 20 period EMA or SMA, the difference is magnified the
longer the period you use. Experiment for yourself to find the right combination for you. In most
charting examples, unless specified, I will be using the 20 EMA, 50 EMA, and 200 SMA. On my
charts, I always color the 20 EMA green, the 50 EMA blue, and the 200 SMA red. I use the 200 SMA
instead of the 200 EMA because most traders watch and react to the 200 simple moving average,
which tends to have more importance than a 200 EMA, but this is still a matter of personal preference
and experience.

Trend Reversals
Like the Pure Price Method, we are looking for objective evidence and an exact price (or date) to
identify a trend reversal, which will always be signaled shortly after an absolute top or bottom has
formed. Using the Moving Average Method, the following must take place for a market to shift from
an uptrend to a downtrend on a daily chart:
Price must first break under the 20-day then the 50-day moving average
The 20-day average must cross under the 50-day moving average
Price must cross under the 200-day moving average
The 20- and 50-day averages must then cross under the 200-day average
Price officially shifts to a downtrend when all criteria have been fulfilled.
Figure 1.5 shows the usual progression from uptrend to downtrend using the moving average

method as a guide. These steps need not be sequential, as a trend reversal is signaled when all
criteria have been met.
To confirm a trend reversal on the weekly chart, it is often only necessary to watch for a bearish
cross of the 20-week average under the 50-week average while price remains under these averages.
You will often wait far too long if you wait for price and the shorter term averages to cross under the
200-week moving average, so give greater importance to the crossover of the 20- and 50-week
moving average, rather than waiting for price to cross under the 200-week average for final
confirmation.
Let's view one more example of the Weekly Chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average as it peaks
in October 2007. Compare Figure 1.6 with Figure 1.4, both of which are identical charts that highlight
the two main methods of trend classification.
FIGURE 1.6 Dow Jones Weekly Chart: Transition from Uptrend to Downtrend Using the 20- and 50week Exponential Moving Averages

Unlike the daily chart which uses three moving averages, the weekly chart trend reversals are best
identified with the 20- and 50-week moving averages. You may find yourself waiting too long for
price and the shorter term averages to cross under the 200-week moving averages, especially after a
powerful uptrend has completed. Notice how the 20-week EMA crosses under the 50-week EMA in
February 2008, one month after the daily moving average chart confirmed a downtrend.
While the classifications of price swings will not differ greatly using the Pure Price Method on
daily or weekly charts (swing highs and lows should be similar), you can get a lead or a lag using the
Moving Average Method on daily versus weekly charts, but the lag usually is only a few months. The
same logic is true when a market transitions from a downtrend into an uptrend, as seen in the reversal
in 2003 in Figure 1.7.
FIGURE 1.7 Dow Jones Industrial Average Showing a Transition from Down to Up in Mid-2003

After peaking in January 2000 above 11,600, the Dow Jones Average fell steadily into a downtrend
until bottoming officially (triple bottom) in March 2003 at 7,400. However, when did the Moving
Average Method on the daily chart officially signal the end of the downtrend?
The official change is labeled Most Bullish Orientation (MBO) to represent the official trend
reversal which fulfilled all requirements: the 20-day EMA crossed above the 50-day EMA in April
2003 while price broke and closed above the 200-day SMA shortly after in late April. To complete
the reversal, both the 20- and 50-day EMAs crossed bullishly above the 200-day SMA in May 2003
while price traded at the 8,600 level.
How did the Pure Price Method signal a reversal? The index was in a steady progression of
forming lower swing lows and lower swing highs until it formed a higher swing low for the first time
in March 2003 off the 7,400 level. Price then rallied in a single swing to take out the high established
in December 2002 at the 9,000 level, which then created both a higher low and official higher high,
flipping the trend to the upside by breaking back above 9,000 to a new swing high in June 2003.
Notice that the Moving Average Method had a slight lead to calling an official bottom, but again this
is not always the case.
Using the ‘weight of the evidence’ model, both the Pure Price and Moving Average Methods
signaled an official trend reversal together in May 2003. Price formed a higher low then took out a
recent higher high (an uptrend is defined as a series of higher highs and higher lows) and the daily
triple-moving averages crossed bullishly while price remained above them all, creating the Most
Bullish Orientation possible.
With both methods signaling a trend reversal, the objective evidence called for a bullish investment
and trading posture going forward as a new trend emerged. Traders who remained short after May
2003 did so squarely against the odds. Using the Pure Price and Moving Average Methods, you'll no
longer have to guess when a trend has reversed. Instead, you'll know the point of maximum
probability using simple, objective evidence that a trend has reversed. The methods are not perfect,

but certainly work better than gut feelings, intuition, or trying to catch falling knives (that is trader
speak for trying to buy every single new low in hopes of a trend reversal, which often leads to large
losses and unfortunately the end of some trading careers).

PINPOINTING THE TREND REVERSAL IN 2009
Can you spot the objective trend reversal, using both the Pure Price and Moving Average Methods as
the market transitioned from downtrend to uptrend off the March 2009 bottom? Study the chart in
Figure 1.8 before reading the answer.
FIGURE 1.8 Dow Jones Daily Chart: Identify the Exact Point of a Trend Reversal

At what exact index level did the trend officially reverse from down to up? Let's take a look. The
20- and 50-day EMAs crossed bullishly in April 2009 but because of the severity of the recent selloff and downtrend in 2008, it took three more months for price and both moving averages to cross
back above the 200-day average, doing so in mid-July 2009 to signal an official trend reversal (using
the Moving Average Method) at 8,500. That signified a potential turn in trend, but a 20/50 moving
average crossover does not officially reverse a trend in play, though it is a required precursor for any
trend to reverse.
The Pure Price Method signaled an official trend reversal shortly thereafter when price crested
above the June 2009 swing high just shy of 9,000. We can label the two-month correction phase from
May to July as a down-swing, which formed a higher low at the 8,000 level as price swung back to
take out the most recent high (creating a new swing high) at the 9,000 level which also broke above
the January 2009 high for extra measure. The new series of higher lows and higher highs confirmed an
official trend reversal just after the Moving Averages crossed to the Most Bullish Orientation
possible—the first time since we saw them cross negatively in a downside trend reversal as seen on
the daily chart in Figure 1.5. Do we thus call the downtrend reversed officially in mid-July 2009

when price rose above the 200-day SMA and above the June swing high at 8,700? Officially, yes, but
let us see one final component that places the weight of the evidence so convincingly in favor of the
bulls as to be objectively impossible to refer to price above 9,000 as remaining in a downtrend.
Price rose to the 9,000 index level in January 2009 to form a key swing high prior to the final low
in March. Thus, the 9,000 level represents a past swing high that would be further, or perhaps final,
bullish evidence of a reversal if buyers pushed through this level. The powerful swing off the July
2009 low did just that, with price breaking above not only the most recent swing high at 8,700 in June
2009, but the prior high six months in January at 9,000. To be absolutely sure that price had
completed all requirements from the Pure Price Method and the Moving Average Method, the
objective and final declaration from a change in trend from down to up triggered on July 30, 2009
when price broke and closed above the January 2009 high of 9,088.
As of July 30, 2009, price formed a series of higher highs and higher lows, crossed above the 200day simple moving average, rose after the bullish crossing of the 20- and 50-day EMA, and finally
closed above the past swing high from January 2009. This example reveals the logical and objective
chart analysis you should use when classifying trends, which reveals to you the type of trading
strategies to use for the highest probability, lowest risk set-ups.
Now that you know where to begin by assessing the trend structure when you first look at a chart,
let's add an extra dimension to your analysis: assessing the strength or weakness of a confirmed trend
in place. To do this, we will study the momentum principle, which helps us assess the probabilities of
a confirmed trend continuing, or setting up for a potential future reversal. In other words, learning
how to interpret price momentum can clue you in early for a potential trend reversal ahead of waiting
for the official price and moving average method to give you a pure signal, and thus you will identify
early warning signs of potential reversal ahead of the official signal from price alone.

CHAPTER 2
Momentum's Leading Edge
To recap, the first thing you should assess when studying a price chart initially is the trend structure.
This can be done objectively via the Pure Price Method or the Moving Average Method, preferably in
conjunction. Once you establish that price is in a rising or falling trend, the second step is to assess
the magnitude or power of that trend. To do this, you'll need the leading edge that momentum can give
you, both to identify confirmations in the early stages of a trend and non-confirmations in the form of
momentum divergences as the trend matures in its latter stages. In this way, momentum provides two
benefits to your analysis, first in confirming the health of a new trend in development, and second in
assessing the likely end of a mature trend via divergences in advance of the official but delayed signal
the Pure Price and Moving Average methods reveal to you.
That's not all momentum can do for you—the momentum helps you set specific trades, namely the
impulse-related trade setups like flags and Impulse Buy setups we discuss in Chapters 9 and 10. In
this chapter, you will learn how to interpret the momentum conditions of a price move, identify
momentum bursts as confirmations of early trends, and locate divergences as early warning signals
that a mature trend is showing signs of a potential future reversal.

THE SCIENCE OF MOMENTUM
Before we examine how to apply the concept of momentum to our price charts, we first need to define
momentum and how it reveals itself on the price charts in any market or timeframe.
Think back to high school or college physics when you studied Newton's Laws of Motion. If it's
been too long since you've had your last course in physics, here is a basic summary of these three
principles as we understand them today:
Law 1 (Inertia): Objects at rest remain at rest (stationary) until another force acts upon
them. Similarly, objects in motion tend to stay in motion until some other force acts upon
them.
Law 2 (Momentum): An object will accelerate proportional to the force that acts upon it
(as in, the stronger the force, the more momentum and thus motion generated). Force equals
mass times acceleration or f = m(a).
Law 3 (Action/Reaction): Every action has an equal and opposite reaction.
These are certainly oversimplified definitions to these important concepts, but for trading purposes,
we only need to understand the main ideas of these principles and apply them to the charts. For
traders seriously interested in a deeper discussion of how the worlds of physics and finance interact, I
recommend two works: The Physics of Finance by Kirill Ilinski or the easier to understand My Life

as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance by Emanuel Derman.
We will define objects as prices and forces as the buying or selling pressure that investors and
traders place on the price of stocks in terms of supply and demand for limited shares (or contracts in
the futures markets).
For example, a rush of buy orders after a positive earnings announcement in a stock serves as a
force that moves the object—the price—higher in relation to how aggressively the buyers purchase
shares, when combined with those who are short (short sellers) being stopped out of their positions
and forced to buy shares to cover their short positions (the basis of short-squeezes). These initial
bursts of momentum, in the form of a buying/selling or supply/demand imbalance, move price forward
in trends. Price tends to stay either stationary (range-bound) or moving higher or lower in a stable
trend until some outside force, which reveals itself as a supply/demand imbalance, disrupts the
equilibrium or balance.
Stated in stock market terms, prices tend to remain range-bound (trendless) until a news event or
other form of momentum via a supply/demand imbalance propels the price forward in an impulse and
trend motion. We will discuss the Price Alternation Principle, which addresses Newton's Third Law,
appropriately in Chapter 3.
