
126

VOLUME AND TIME

The proper way to analyze any market is to review at least two neighboring timeframes. You must always start with the longer timeframe for a strategic view and
then switch to the shorter timeframe for tactical timing. If you like using daily charts,
you must first examine weekly charts, and if you want to day-trade using 10-minute
charts, you first need to analyze hourly charts. This is one of the key principles of the
Triple Screen trading system (see Chapter 39).

■■33. Trading Timeframes
How long do you plan to hold your next trade? Do you think it’ll be a year, a week,
or an hour? A serious trader plans the expected duration of every trade. Various
timeframes offer different opportunities and carry different risks. We can roughly
divide all trades into three groups:
1. Long-term trading or investing—The expected duration of a position is
measured in months, sometimes years.
Advantages: requires little day-to-day attention and may lead to spectacular gains.
Disadvantage: drawdowns can be intolerably severe.
2. Swing trading—The expected duration of a trade is measured in days, sometimes weeks.
Advantages: a wealth of trading opportunities, fairly tight risk control.
Disadvantage: will miss major trends.
3. Day-trading—The expected duration of a trade is measured in minutes, rarely
hours.
Advantages: great many opportunities, no overnight risk.
Disadvantages: demands instant reflexes; transaction costs become a factor.
If you decide to operate in more than one timeframe, consider making those
trades in different accounts.This will allow you to evaluate your performance in each
timeframe rather than lump together apples and oranges.

Investing
The decision to invest or trade for the long term is almost always based on some fundamental idea. You may recognize a new technological trend or an exciting product
that can greatly increase the value of a company. Investing demands a firm conviction
and a great supply of patience if you are to hold that position through the inevitable
pullbacks and periods of flat prices.These tough challenges make successful investing
extremely hard.
Major trends that are easily seen on long-term charts appear uncertain and foggy
in real time, especially when a stock enters a drawdown. When your investment
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

127

33. TRADING TIMEFRAMES

drops 50% or more, wiping out the bulk of paper profits—a common development
for long-term positions—few of us have enough conviction and fortitude to continue to hold. Let me illustrate this using an example of Apple Inc. (AAPL), a darling
of several bull markets (Figure 33.1).
AAPL survived its near-death experience in 2003, when its battered stock was
rumored to be a takeover candidate, and grew to become the highest-capitalized,
publicly traded company in the world, before collapsing from that top in 2012. Its
uptrend looks grand in retrospect, but ask yourself, honestly, would you have been
able to hold though multiple drawdowns, some of them exceeding 50%. Remember
that such drawdowns often mark the ends of uptrends.
A sensible way to deal with the challenge of investing is to implement your fundamental idea with the help of technical trading tools. When you decide to buy, check
out technical signals to ensure you’re getting a relative bargain rather than paying full
price. If your investment soars, use technical tools to identify overvalued zones; take
your profits there and be ready to repurchase during the inevitable pullbacks. This
plan demands a high degree of attention, focus, and perseverance. Figure 33.2 is an
example that was taken from my trading diary.

1
2

3

4

FIGURE 33.1â•… AAPL weekly. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Investing
The tremendous challenges of holding an investment, even a market leader like Apple Inc.
(AAPL), can be seen on this 10-year chart:
1. 2003—AAPL collapses below $10. Company’s survival in question. Would you buy?
2. 2006—AAPL rallies to $86, then sinks to $51. If you had a thousand shares, would you
hold? Would you sell when it got back above $80 and appeared to stall?
3. 2008—AAPL rallies to $202, drops to $115. If you had a thousand shares, showing an
$87,000 drawdown, would you hold or sell?
4. 2009—AAPL recovers to $192, sinks to $78, below its previous low. Your drawdown is
over 50%. Are you holding or cashing out?

128

VOLUME AND TIME

2

1

3

FIGURE 33.2â•… F monthly, 26- and 13-months EMA with the Impulse system, Autoenvelope, MACD
Lines and MACD-Histogram (12-26-9), and Force Index 13-months EMA with ATR channels. (Chart by
Tradestation)

Technical Analysis with Fundamentals
1. 2007—Ford was on the ropes when the new CEO arrived—the man who earlier spearheaded saving Boeing. In the heady atmosphere of a bull market, Ford seemed to have
a shot at recapturing its $30 high. I saw a false downside breakout coupled with a bullish divergence and bought. I then grimly held through the bear market.
2. 2011—Ford spiked above its monthly channel, which was narrower at that time, tracing a kangaroo tail, while monthly MACD weakened. I took profits.
3. 2011—as monthly prices stabilized in their value zone, I repurchased my position.

Fundamental analysis can help you find a stock that may be worth buying. Use
technical analysis to time your entries and exits. Be prepared to buy and sell more
than once during a major uptrend.

Swing Trading
While major trends and trading ranges can last for years, all are punctuated by
short-term upswings and downswings. Those moves create multiple trading opportunities, which we can exploit. Many charting examples in this book feature
swing trades.
I especially recommend swing trading for beginning and intermediate traders.The
more trades you make, the more you learn, provided you manage risk and keep good
records. Swing trading teaches you faster than long-term investing, whose lessons
take years to complete. Swing trading gives you time to think, unlike day-trading,
which demands instant reactions. Day-trading is too fast for beginners.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

129

33. TRADING TIMEFRAMES

Short-term swings can be substantial enough to generate meaningful profits,
without the gut-wrenching drawdowns of position trades. Swing trades don’t require watching the screen all day. In SpikeTrade.com, where hundreds of traders
compete, most trades last a few days. Some members carry their trades for weeks
and even months, while others hop in and out within hours—but the holding period
for most members is measured in days. Swing trading hits the sweet spot among time
horizons.
I piggyback one or more of the Spiketrade group’s picks almost every week. The
chart of HES in Figure 33.3 comes from my diary of one of those trades.
My profit in the HES trade was $1.92 per share. You can calibrate the amount of
risk you accept and the size of potential profit by deciding how many shares to trade.
We’ll address this essential question in chapter 50, in the section on the Iron Triangle
of risk control.

Short 75.22

Cover 73.32

FIGURE 33.3â•… HES daily, 26- and 13-day EMA with 4% envelope, MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram
(12-26-9), the Impulse system, and 2-day Force Index. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

A Swing Trade
Professional traders are just as comfortable selling short as buying. The signals are similar
but the action quicker—stocks fall twice as fast as they rise.
This chart shows where I shorted the stock of Hess Corporation (HES) as it was tracing a short-term double top, with bearish divergences in all indicators. I covered and took
profits, as prices appeared to stall just below the value zone between the two EMAs, while
the indicators became oversold.

130

VOLUME AND TIME

One of the best learning techniques involves returning to your closed-out trades
two months later and replotting their charts. Trading signals that looked foggy when
you saw them at the right edge of the screen become clear when you see them in the
middle of your chart. Now, with the passage of time, you can easily see what worked
and what mistakes you may have made. Creating these follow-up charts teaches you
what to repeat and what to avoid in the future. Updating the charts of closed trades
turns you into your own instructor.
The chart and text in Figure 33.4 come from SpikeTrade.com. Each week the
Spiker who won that week’s competition posts a diary of his trade. Different people
use different indicators and parameters.
Peter’s trade gained almost 11% in three days. Of course, we can’t allow ourselves to get intoxicated by such numbers. A beginner looks at them, multiplies them

Sell $3.35

Buy $3.02

FIGURE 33.4â•… TRQ daily, 22- and 12-day EMA with 11% envelope, MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram
(12-26-9), and 20-day RSI. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

A Swing Trade near the Bottom
This trade was submitted by Peter D., a long-term Spiker from the Netherlands. His post
was headlined “Fishing near the Lows.”
“Weekly conditions: Indicators don’t show much movement. MACD very shallow but
positive and RSI slowly improving. Daily: MACD was about to confirm a positive divergence, and so was RSI. Prices dove last week but stopped near support.
“I set the initial entry at $3.02, in line with recent lows. It was hit on Monday morning,
which turned out to be one cent above the low for the day and the week. Price closed near
the high of the day and continued surging on Tuesday and Wednesday. My target was hit
on Wednesday, on the way up. The rest of the day saw some pulling back, but price kept
in range to close the week on a relatively high note.”
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

131

33. TRADING TIMEFRAMES

by the number of weeks in a year, and goes crazy throwing his money at the markets.
Such spectacular gains are inevitably interspersed with losses. A professional trader
carefully manages his money, quickly cuts losing trades and protects his capital to
allow his equity to grow.
If investing is like hunting the big game, swing trading is like rabbit hunting. If your
livelihood depends on hunting, shooting rabbits is a much more reliable way of putting meals on the table. Carefully entering and exiting swing trades, while cautiously
managing money, is a realistic way of surviving and prospering in the markets.

Day-Trading
Day-trading means entering and exiting trades within a single market session. Rapid
buying and selling in front of a flashing screen demands the highest levels of concentration and discipline. Paradoxically, it attracts the most impulsive and gamblingprone people.
Day-trading appears deceptively easy. Brokerage firms hide customer statistics
from the public, but in 2000, state regulators in Massachusetts subpoenaed brokerage house records, which showed that after six months only 16% of day-traders
made money.
Whatever gaps you may have in your knowledge or discipline, day-trading will find
them fast and hit you hard in your weak spots. In swing trading, you have the luxury
of being able to stop and think, but not in day-trading.
The person who is learning to trade is much better off using end-of-day charts.
After you grow into a consistently profitable swing trader, you may wish to explore
day-trading. You’ll use your already developed skills and will only need to adjust to
a faster game. A market newbie who stumbles into day-trading is a gift to the pros.
Make sure to write down your action plan for day-trading: what will prompt you
to enter or exit, to hold or cut. Be prepared to invest plenty of time: day-trading
chews up long hours in front of multiple screens.
Another difficulty of day-trading is that you shoot at much smaller targets. This is
reflected in the height of price channels. Elsewhere in this book, you’ll read that a
good measure of a trader’s performance is the percentage of the channel or an envelope he captures in a trade. Taking 30% or more of a channel’s height earns you an
A grade, while capturing 10% of that channel earns you a C (see Chapter 55). Let’s
apply these ratings to several stocks that are popular with day traders. The exact
figures will change by the time you read this book, but today I get the following
numbers for channel heights on the daily and 5-minute charts:
Daily Channel
AAPL 55
AMZN 27
MON 7

“A” Trader
16.5
8.1
2.1

“C” Trader
5.5
2.7
0.7

5-Min Channel
2.5
2.2
0.6

“A” Trader
0.75
0.66
0.18

“C” Trader
0.25
0.22
0.06

A swing trader who uses daily charts can do very well in these active stocks. He
can really clean up if he is an A level trader, but even if he is a C trader, taking only

132

VOLUME AND TIME

10% out of a channel, he can stay comfortably ahead of the game while learning to
trade. On the other hand, a person who day-trades the very same stocks must be a
straight A trader in order to survive. Anything less and his account will be ground up
by slippage, commissions, and expenses.
If, after developing a successful track record as a swing trader, you decide to daytrade, you’ll be able to use most of the tools and techniques you’ve already learned.
You’ll find an example of using Triple Screen in day-trading in Chapter 39.
When a friend who is an Olympic rowing coach taught me to row, he focused on
developing the correct stroke. A competent rower always moves his oars exactly the
same way, whether it’s a leisurely weekend row or the final stretch of a race. What
changes are power and speed. The same with day-trading: the technique is the same,
but the speed is different. If you learn to swing trade, you can apply your technique
to day-trading. And then you can go in reverse, and apply day-trading techniques to
swing-trade entries and exits.
Day-trading can be a profitable pursuit, but keep in mind that it’s a highly demanding professional game and most definitely not a casual activity for beginners.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

P A R T 64

General Market
Indicators
Y

ou can use technical indicators reviewed in previous chapters to analyze any
trading vehicle: a stock, a future, an index, etc. Such tools as moving averages,
MACD, Force index, and others, can provide signals for any ticker in any timeframe.
Now we turn to a different group of tools: general market indicators, which analyze
the entire market rather than any specific stock. They are worth following because
general market trends are responsible for as much as half the movement in individual
stocks.
While there are dozens of general market indicators, this is not an encyclopedic
review—I’ll simply share the tools that help me trade.You may use the same or different tools—select those that appeal to you and test them on your market data. We
can trust only those indicators that we have tested.

■■34. The New High–New Low Index
Stocks that reach their highest level in a year on any given day are the leaders in
strength. Stocks that fall to their lowest point for that year on the same day are the
leaders in weakness. The New High–New Low Index (NH-NL) tracks the behavior
of market leaders by subtracting the number of New Lows from the New Highs. In
my experience, NH-NL is the best leading indicator of the stock market.1
1

In 2012, I wrote an e-book with Kerry Lovvorn on the New High–New Low Index. We publish
nightly updates on its signals on SpikeTrade.com.

133

134

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

How to Construct NH-NL
The New High–New Low Index is easy to calculate, using information that appears
in many online sources and in major newspapers.
NH-NL = New Highs − New Lows
Most data services in the United States report the daily numbers of New Highs
and New Lows, but it is shocking how loosely they define their data. Some are too
narrow and track only the NYSE stocks, ignoring other exchanges. Others are
too broad and track everything, including interest rate ETFs. My favorite source of
reliable data is www.barchart.com. I take their data, subtract New Lows from New
Highs, and plot the result underneath the daily chart of the S&P 500.
The task of constructing NH-NL is harder for traders outside the United States, in
countries where such data isn’t reported. There you’ll need to do a bit of programming. First, run a daily scan of the database of all stocks in your country to find those
that have reached the highest high and the lowest low for the year during the day.
Once you have those two lists, take the above formula and apply it to the numbers
you found.
On the days when there are more new highs than new lows, NH-NL is positive
and plotted above the centerline. On the days when there are more new lows than
new highs, NH-NL is negative and plotted below the centerline. If the numbers of
new highs and new lows are equal, NH-NL is zero.We normally plot the New High–
New Low Index as a line, with a horizontal reference line at a zero level.
While I plot NH-NL underneath the S&P 500, keep in mind that it has a much
broader reach than the S&P—NH-NL includes data from the NYSE, AMEX, and
NASDAQ, excluding only ETFs, unit investment trusts, closed-end funds, warrant stocks, and preferred securities. The chart of the S&P 500 is there simply for
a comparison.

Crowd Psychology
A stock appears on the list of new highs when it’s the strongest it’s been in a year. It
means that a herd of eager bulls is chasing its shares. A stock appears on the list of
new lows when it’s the weakest it’s been in a year, showing that a crowd of aggressive
bears is selling its shares.
The New High–New Low Index compares the numbers of the strongest and the
weakest stocks on the exchange. It reveals the balance of power between the leaders
in strength and the leaders in weakness.
You can visualize all stocks on the New York Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, or
any other exchange as soldiers in a regiment. The new highs and new lows are their
officers. The new highs are the officers who lead an attack uphill. The new lows are
the officers who are deserting and running downhill.
The quality of leadership is a key factor in any conflict.When I was in officer training, they kept telling us that there are no bad soldiers, only bad officers. The New
High–New Low Index shows whether more officers are leading an attack uphill or
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

34. THE NEW HIGH–NEW LOW INDEX

135

deserting downhill. Where the officers lead, soldiers follow. The broad indexes, such
as the S&P 500, tend to follow the trend of NH-NL (Figure 34.1).
When NH-NL rises above its centerline, it shows that the bullish leadership is
dominant. When NH-NL falls below its centerline, it shows that bearish leadership
is in charge. If the market rallies to a new high and NH-NL climbs to a new peak, it
shows that bullish leadership is growing and the uptrend is likely to continue. If the
market rallies but NH-NL shrinks, it shows that the leadership is becoming weak and
the uptrend is in danger. A regiment whose officers are starting to desert is likely to
retreat.
A new low in NH-NL shows that the downtrend is well led and likely to persist. If
officers are running faster than the men, the regiment is likely to be routed. If stocks
fall but NH-NL turns up, it shows that officers are no longer running. When officers
regain their morale, the whole regiment is likely to rally.

Trading Rules for NH-NL
Traders need to pay attention to three aspects of NH-NL: the level of NH-NL above
or below its centerline, the trend of NH-NL, and divergences between the patterns
of NH-NL and prices.

FIGURE 34.1â•… S&P 500 daily, 26- and 13-day EMAs, Autoenvelope, NH-NL daily. (Chart by TradeStation)

NH-NL—Daily Chart, Yearly Look-Back
This chart tracks daily NH-NL during a mostly bullish year in the stock market. Still, every bullish trend gets interrupted by pullbacks. Bearish deterioration patterns of NH-NL,
marked here by diagonal red arrows, warn you of coming declines. These signals emerge
because officers start shifting towards the rear before the soldiers retreat.
Declines end and rallies begin when NH-NL rallies from negative into positive territory,
marked here by purple circles. Those signals work especially well when the S&P is oversold, i.e., near its lower channel line. As always, trading messages are especially strong
when independent signals confirm each other.

136

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

NH-NL Zero Line

The position of NH-NL in relation to its centerline shows whether bulls or bears are
in control. When NH-NL is above its centerline, it shows that more market leaders
are bullish than bearish and it is better to trade from the long side. When NH-NL
is below its centerline, it shows that bearish leadership is stronger, and it’s better to
trade from the short side. NH-NL can stay above its centerline for months at a time
in bull markets and below its centerline for months in bear markets.
If NH-NL stays negative for several months but then rallies above its centerline, it
signals that a bull move is likely to begin. It is time to look for buying opportunities,
using oscillators for precise timing. If NH-NL stays positive for several months but
then falls below its centerline, it shows that a bear move is likely to begin. It is time
to look for shorting opportunities using oscillators for precise timing.
NH-NL Trends

When the market rallies and NH-NL rises, it confirms uptrends. When NH-NL declines together with the market, it confirms downtrends.
1. A rise in NH-NL shows that it’s safe to hold long positions and add to them. If
NH-NL declines while the broad market stays flat or rallies, it is time to take
profits on long trades. When NH-NL falls below zero, it shows that bearish leadership is strong and it’s safe to hold short positions and even add to them. If the
market continues to fall but NH-NL rises, it shows that the downtrend is not
well led—it’s time to cover shorts.
2. If NH-NL rises on a flat day, it flashes a bullish message and gives a buy signal. It
shows that officers are going over the top while the soldiers are still crouching
in their foxholes. When NH-NL falls on a flat day, it gives a signal to sell short.
It shows that officers are deserting while the troops are still holding their positions. Soldiers aren’t stupid—if their officers start running away, they will not
stay and fight.
NH-NL Divergences

If the latest market peak is confirmed by a new high of NH-NL, that rally is likely to
continue, even if punctuated by a decline.When a new market low is accompanied by
a new low in NH-NL, it shows that bears are well led and the downtrend is likely to
persist. On the other hand, divergences between the patterns of NH-NL and broad
market indexes show that leaders are deserting and the trends are likely to reverse.
1. If NH-NL traces a lower peak while the market rallies to a new high, it creates
