The second group of currency speculators is that of the “proprietary dealer”. This individual
is usually among the most experienced currency dealers in the dealing room. He or she plays
no part in providing liquidity for client orders, but instead uses a designated amount of the
bank’s balance sheet for the speciﬁc purpose of position taking in the currency markets. A
“prop” dealer may take these positions based on any combination of fundamental, technical,
ﬂow or quantitative considerations. He or she has the luxury of not having to quote or make
markets for others. On the other hand, their value to a bank comes in the form of one number
alone, their P&L at the end of the year. They get all the kudos and all the blame depending on
what that number is. They are a bit like racing drivers — and many would be happy with that
analogy. There are old prop dealers and bold prop dealers, but no old, bold prop dealers! The
analogy is meant in light-hearted fashion. Good prop dealers are extremely hard to ﬁnd. Most
that I have met are in complete contrast to the image of a ﬁnancial market dealer as loud and
brash. On the contrary, many are relatively quiet, analytical and extremely bright.

182

Currency Strategy

9.4.3 “Hedge” Funds
The very term may for some conjure up the devil incarnate. There is little question that the
image of the hedge fund has changed over time. Before we get onto that image, let us ﬁrst deal
with what they do. The ﬁrst thing to say is that there are hundreds, if not thousands, of different
types of hedge fund. The term “hedge fund” is in fact an extremely vague one, encompassing
the activity of a very wide variety of funds that trade in currency and asset markets. Certain
speciﬁc hedge funds may seem particularly synonymous with the term, but while their funds
are some of the largest they are in fact the tip of the proverbial iceberg in terms of reﬂecting
this section of the ﬁnancial community.
For a start, most of them unlike their name do not hedge. Indeed, their aim is to take
asset market or currency views, to increase risk albeit selectively rather than to hedge risk.
Rather than tie up balance sheet capital through spot positions, they frequently use derivatives
to express a view, using leverage. The amount of leverage that hedge funds are allowed to
use has decreased signiﬁcantly since the failure of LTCM in 1998. Hedge funds are still
active participants in the currency markets, though their involvement has in fact diminished
substantially for a number of reasons. Firstly, the LTCM failure caused the counterparties
of hedge funds — the banks they dealt with — to take a broadly more conservative approach
with regard to credit and leverage given to the hedge funds. This in turn reduced the ability
of hedge funds to take on the large, leveraged positions they had in the past. Secondly, the
global equity rally (i.e. bubble) in 1999–2000 represented a competitive threat to this sector
of the ﬁnancial community. Hedge funds achieve popularity with investors precisely because
of their outperformance to “the market”, that is to the traditional equity and ﬁxed income
markets. Thus, when equity markets were exploding higher in 1999, it became extremely
difﬁcult for some to achieve that outperformance, particularly when this took place at a time
of deterioration in the relationship between hedge funds and the rest of the ﬁnancial markets
in the wake of LTCM. Thirdly, the larger a fund becomes the more unwieldy it can become in
terms of its market positioning. Benchmarks have to be outperformed and that can be achieved
only with size when traditional markets are performing well. Yet, to do that may lead to market
disruption, both on the way in and on the way out, reducing the attractiveness of taking the
original position. In the end many hedge funds became trend followers in 1999, buying the
NASDAQ and running with the crowd, more with the aim of defending returns than generating
greater returns. Currency speculation is generally less attractive during times when traditional
asset markets are trending so clearly, given that a fundamental part of currency speculation is
to ﬁnd economic imbalances — positive or negative — that the markets are not pricing in and
trade on those in the expectation that the markets will eventually realize such imbalances and
trade their way. Several hedge funds reduced their currency speculating operations in 1999.
This decision may have been somewhat premature. The bursting of the equity bubble in 2000
has brought hedge funds the opportunity to add value once more, including doing so by means
of currency speculation. Indeed, it would not have been difﬁcult to beat the NASDAQ’s return
in 2000 and the ﬁrst half of 2001! Equally, while there may have been a reassessment of hedge
funds in the US, both from within and without, the hedge fund community has blossomed and
ﬂourished in Europe subsequently, particularly in several countries in continental Europe.
The umbrella term of “hedge funds”, even those that focus on the same asset or currency or
have the same trading style, can reﬂect a variety of different types of organization. Recently, a
number of total return or leveraged funds have been created. These may have not have a strict
mutual fund structure, which helps at least to give some deﬁnition to the traditional hedge

Managing Currency Risk III

183

funds one thinks of, but they do have a very similar trading approach. In addition, banks can
have internal hedge funds for speciﬁc client products. In sum, there are a very large number
of hedge funds that “speculate” in a large number of assets and currencies. The performance
of speculative currency funds is measured by a number of organizations, including the MAR
(Manager Accounts Report) Trading Adviser data (available at: www.marhedge.com), Parker
Global (www.parkerglobal.com) and the Ferrell FX Manager Universe. The irony with regards
to their critics is that most base their trades either on inconsistencies in market pricing, which
can instantly be arbitraged, or on sound macroeconomic principles. This latter group, known
as the “macro” hedge funds, make up by far the largest group of funds that are publicly known.
They are speculating according to fundamental principles. Thus, one could argue they are not
speculating at all.
While many may seek to make a clear distinction between speculative and non-speculative
activity, any such line of distinction is frequently uncomfortably blurred. At its most basic level,
there is the idea that corporations take currency positions purely for transactional or hedging
purposes, while hedge funds or prop dealers take currency positions for directional gain, with
no underlying asset. The idea that there is such a clear distinction between the two sides is a
ﬁction. Over the last decade, several major corporations have experienced painful losses and
some have even collapsed as a result of taking on ﬁnancial market positions that subsequently
went sour. In this regard, problems tend to start when ﬁnancial speculation overtakes the
underlying business in importance.
Whatever the case, there are therefore other currency market participants we need to examine,
which can at times be considered as currency speculators. Though many would no doubt bristle
at the term, that is what they are if the individual transaction they are conducting has no related,
underlying asset.
9.4.4 Corporate Treasurers
I realize fully the reaction that may be caused by labelling some corporate Treasurers as
speculators, but frankly that is what some of them are according to my deﬁnition of currency
speculation. This is in no way whatsoever a criticism. It is however a reﬂection of the realization
that while most corporate Treasuries see their main goal as management and reduction of risk,
a (not small) minority see the Treasury as a proﬁt centre in addition to the underlying business.
These deliberately take asset and currency market positions for the speciﬁc purpose of adding
to the company’s bottom line. There is no deﬁnitive answer as to whether this is “right” or
“wrong” in very simplistic terms. It goes without saying that one had better know what one
is doing if conducting such speculative activity. While adding to the company’s bottom line
is clearly a good thing — both for the company and for the Treasurer — ﬁnancial markets
charge a risk premium for P&L or balance sheet volatility. This should be a consideration
when deciding whether or not to allow active speculative activity within the Treasury, using
that balance sheet.
The other and decidedly more frequent kind of speculation that corporate Treasurers go in
for is in not hedging out currency risk. We looked at this in Chapter 7 in substantially more
detail and it is certainly not for here to go through that again. However, within the overall
topic of this chapter, it is important to reiterate and make clear the point that not hedging
currency speculation equates to taking a currency view, and that in turn equates to currency
speculation. Granted, it is a stretch to ﬁt this type of currency “speculation” within the narrow
deﬁnition chosen for this book. There is after all an underlying asset. That said, not hedging

184

Currency Strategy

means leaving that underlying asset exposed to ﬁnancial market volatility. Such a decision
would seem to be speculative under most broad deﬁnitions of speculation. This is in no way
to suggest corporate treasuries should hedge currency risk each and every time they have an
underlying exposure. The aim here is not to counter one extreme with another. Rather, it is to
seek to challenge an idea, an ideology almost.
The idea and the ideology is that currency hedging represents a cost, while losses due to not
hedging are simply the result of unpredictable market volatility. To me, the latter represents
an abandoning, a shirking of responsibility. It is part and parcel of the job of a Treasurer or
ﬁnance director to predict their business needs. Should it not be also to predict the context
within which those business needs exist, the context being of course the global ﬁnancial markets
that speciﬁcally affect the risk proﬁle of their business? A corporate Treasurer may say that
they have to explain the cost of a currency hedge to the company’s board, particularly if it had
a notable impact on the company’s ﬁgures. They should equally have to explain when they do
not hedge, and subsequently the company’s unhedged currency exposure leads to extraordinary
losses and balance sheet pain. It is sloppy thinking to just leave it to the market to blame. If
markets were completely unpredictable, strategists or analysts would not exist. Granted, some
are better than others, but the very existence of the profession suggests that at least some are
getting it right part of the time. That in turn suggests that a corporate Treasurer or ﬁnance
director, who is far more senior in both experience and rank to a bank’s strategist, should be at
least as well informed as the latter. Companies exist within the market context their businesses
operate in. The two cannot be separated. Some need to do a better job of understanding that
context.
9.4.5 Currency Overlay
Again, it is probable that most currency overlay managers might not appreciate being labelled
as speculators. Here however, the deﬁnition we have used in this book for currency speculation
appears to work well. After all, the very job of a currency overlay manager is to differentiate
currency risk from underlying asset risk within the overall risk proﬁle. Active currency overlay
requires that currency risk be managed separately and independently from the underlying.
Therefore de facto, it falls within our deﬁnition of currency speculation. This does not mean
that a currency overlay manager is of necessity anything like a prop dealer or a hedge fund.
The job of a currency overlay manager may be either to ensure the total return of the portfolio
by reducing risk as much as possible, or alternatively it may be to add alpha.
Either way, currency overlay managers use currency hedging benchmarks, as we saw in
Chapter 8. They can manage the currency risk passively by maintaining the currency risk
according to the benchmark. Alternatively, they can manage the currency risk actively by
trading around the currency benchmark to add to the total return of the portfolio. The former are
clearly not currency speculators in that they are hedging currency risk related to an underlying
asset and moreover they are doing so passively. They are not “taking a view”. The latter group,
who trade actively around the currency benchmark, are indeed currency speculators in that
they are taking positions not speciﬁcally related to the underlying asset.
Corporate Treasurers and currency overlay managers may think their world is as far away
as one can get from those of the prop dealer or hedge funds, but there are times when the
distinction between the two sides becomes decidedly less clear than many might like to think.
In turn, this should mean one takes a more balanced and measured view of the very topic of
currency speculation.

Managing Currency Risk III

185

9.5 THE SPECULATORS — WHY THEY DO IT
The obvious answer is of course simply to make money. At a slightly more sophisticated level,
market participants undertake currency speculation for the reason that they think they can earn
excess returns by doing so. In turn, the reason they think that is because they or others have
done so in the past.
Just as fashions and retail trends change over time, so does the idea of “conventional wisdom”
within ﬁnancial markets. In the 1970s, despite the break-up of the Bretton Woods ﬁnancial system, the conventional wisdom was to have pegged currency regimes and maintain a signiﬁcant
degree of government control over the economy. In the 1980s, the US and the UK underwent
substantial ﬁnancial reform, opening up their economies and capital markets to the idea of
free trade of goods, services and capital. With regards to currency or exchange rate regimes,
the conventional wisdom has gone from governments trying to maintain control to allowing
freely ﬂoating exchange rates. A slight ﬁne tuning of this in the wake of the currency crises
of the 1990s is the idea of the “bi-polar” world so eruditely explained by Stanley, former First
Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, in speeches and written research notes. This argues
that in a world of open capital accounts and free trade, exchange rates have to be managed
according to either the hardest of pegs or the freest of free-ﬂoating principles, that anything
in between these two poles will eventually prove unsustainable. Whatever the merits of this
argument, there is little doubt that it has become the conventional exchange rate wisdom of
the day, notwithstanding the protests of a few dissident voices.
The conventional exchange rate wisdom of the time of necessity affects the way markets
operate, and thus how markets speculate for or against currencies. For instance, market participants who have been used to making good proﬁts by speculating against pegged exchange rates
may try to do so again, against a currency peg in a completely different part of the world. To a
very large extent this is self-fulﬁlling. For this reason, a currency board regime that gets attacked
in one part of the world can lead to markets attacking other currency boards on the other side
of the world. For this very reason, the currency boards of Argentina and Hong Kong are often
linked, although that link has been gradually reduced in the market’s mind as the Hong Kong
authorities have proved time and again their determination to maintain the currency board.
Currency speculators trade currencies to make money, pure and simple. They have a variety
of methods, which we will look at subsequently, but the incentive is always the same. The fact
that they can do so in the reasonable expectation of achieving their aim causes a problem with
standard economic theory, not least because the theory suggests it is impossible over time.
According to the theory, currency speculation is zero sum gain, which of necessity cannot
result in consistent excess returns given the unpredictability of currency markets. The fact that
excess returns can and have been achieved suggests this theory needs to be amended!

9.6 THE SPECULATORS — WHAT THEY DO
As noted previously, there are a wide variety of currency speculators and therefore it is no
easy task to explain their methods or techniques since they too vary widely. The techniques of
currency speculation vary widely, just as with stock market speculation. Indeed, the analogy
is a good one. Just as in equity investment where you have “top down”, “bottom up”, “value
investing”, “growth or income” investing, so in currency markets you have speculators or
investors — however one likes to term them — who focus on the macroeconomic “big picture”,
long-term currency valuation, microeconomic factors affecting currencies, money ﬂow and
@Team-FLY

186

Currency Strategy

technical analysis. The titles are perhaps different but the guiding principle is the same; what
separates and differentiates the framework within which they analyse the market. Below, we
attempt to summarize the types of techniques and strategies with which currency speculators
approach the currency markets.
9.6.1 Macro
This approach is for the most part identiﬁed with the so-called “macro hedge funds”. Broadly
speaking, “macro” or macroeconomic-based currency speculators look for market pricing
inconsistencies between the prevailing economic fundamentals and the long-term currency
valuation, with the current market pricing. Their raison d’être and their incentive is that current
market pricing is “wrong” relative to those fundamentals and valuation, and they can earn
excess returns by trading against that market pricing.
Here again, the line between the currency speculator and the “fundamental” market participant is blurred. After all, where is the difference in terms of incentive and action between the
asset manager who invests in a country’s equity or ﬁxed income markets and the macro-based
currency speculator who invests in a currency because they think it is undervalued relative to
fundamentals and valuation?
It is widely assumed that currency speculators only trade against currencies rather than in
their favour, but this is very far from the case. Indeed, during the Asian crisis itself, a number
of macro hedge funds bought Asian currencies such as the Indonesian rupiah on the view
that they had overshot their fundamental value — unwisely and prematurely as it turned out. It
has frequently been easier to make excess returns by trading against currencies rather than in
their favour during the 1990s, not for any malign reason but simply because it was discovered
that semi-pegged exchange rate regimes were incompatible with free and open capital markets.
Keeping on the Asian example, to focus on currency speculation for or against Asian currencies
is to ignore the fact that the Asian boom became a speculative bubble that was in any case
waiting to burst, a bubble which the authorities were seemingly unwilling or unable to stop.
Macro currency speculators are a stabilizing force against economic imbalance, an arbiter of
government economic policies. The disruption that currency markets might experience is not
caused by their activity. Whether they were capable of doing so in the past due to much greater
leverage, that is certainly not the case now. They can merely accelerate the process, but they
cannot cause it. The real cause is the government policy in the ﬁrst place, which triggered the
economic imbalance.
9.6.2 Momentum (and Fellow Travellers)
Momentum funds have a different trading approach as regards currency speculation. Rather
than focusing on apparent disparities between the economics and the price, they use so-called
momentum models to trigger buy or sell signals in currency pairs irrespective of the economics.
Granted, one could argue that since economics affects the price of the currency, so it also affects
their models and therefore their trading approach. However, it is fair to say that economics
is not their primary focus. Their aim is to be disciplined to the extent that they rigorously
follow the trading signals of their momentum models. As one might expect, the nature of these
models varies. For instance, one such momentum model relies on technical analysis indicators
to provide short-term moving averages. When a 5-day moving average crosses up through the
15-day moving average they buy and when the opposite happens they sell. Granted, this is a vast

Managing Currency Risk III

187

oversimpliﬁcation and there are many signiﬁcantly more sophisticated momentum models than
this. That said, the principle is surely the correct one. Momentum models, however complex
and whatever indicators they rely on, focus on changes in market prices as their key determinant
for providing signals rather than economic fundamentals. Therefore, it is probably a reasonable
generalization to say that they are more short term in their trading approach than macro-based
currency speculators might be, depending of course on how long the momentum signal lasts.
9.6.3 Flow
It is debatable whether or not momentum traders are trend-followers. There is no debate when
it comes to ﬂow-based currency speculators. The very act of using order ﬂow information for
the purpose of trading in the currency markets requires that the user is following the trend
suggested by that ﬂow data. Currency speculators who focus on ﬂow, use that information
to anticipate the continuation or end of a trend. Clearly, with ﬂow products, both the quality
and the relevance of the ﬂow data are crucial elements in deciding whether or not to use such
products as one’s primary information source for trading. There is no point in using a ﬂow
product where the order ﬂow is neither reﬂective of the currency market as a whole nor has
any impact on it. Flow-based currency speculators can certainly earn excess returns, but as
with other trading approaches discipline is needed. Unlike in the case of the momentum trader
where the model creates the signal irrespective of all other factors and therefore the trader’s
only job is to execute according to that signal, there is still a signiﬁcant degree of discretion
and interpretation in ﬂow-based currency speculation. For instance, temporary seasonal factors
can distort ﬂow. If the ﬂows model were passive, this would mean that a trading signal would
be triggered irrespective of this important consideration. That said, the aspect of discretion
automatically increases the possibility of misinterpretation and making mistakes. As with
most types of trading or currency speculation, experience counts.
9.6.4 Technical
