
Part I

Getting into the
Swing of Things

I

In this part . . .

f you’re just embarking on your swing trading journey,
then this is the part for you. In the next few chapters,
I help you figure out how much time you’re willing to
devote to swing trading and clue you in to the lingo you
need to know. I also introduce you to the rules of the
swing trading game, the steps you can take to get ready to
play, and some recommended strategies for growing your
portfolio into a swing trading success story.

Chapter 1

Swing Trading from A to Z
In This Chapter
 Contrasting swing trading with other types of trading
 Deciding how much time you want to devote to swing trading
 Getting strategic by preparing your trading plan
 Avoiding the mistakes that many swing traders make

Y

ou can earn a living in this world in many different ways. The most
common way is by mastering some skill — such as medicine in the case
of physicians, or computers in the case of information technology experts —
and exchanging your time for money. The more skilled you are, the higher
your compensation. The upside of mastering a skill is clear: You’re relatively
safe with regard to income. Of course, there are no guarantees. Your skill
may become outdated (I don’t believe that many horse carriage manufacturers are operating today), or your job may be shipped overseas. You also have
a maximum earning potential given the maximum hours you can work without exhausting yourself.
But there’s another way to make a living. Swing trading offers you the prospect of earning income based not on the hours you put in but on the quality
of your trades. The better you are at trading, the higher your potential profits. Swing trading takes advantage of short-term price movements and seeks
to earn a healthy return on money over a short time period.
Swing trading is a good fit for a minority of the population. It involves tremendous amounts of responsibility. You must rely on yourself and can’t be reckless or prone to gambling. If you’re not disciplined, you may end up with no
income (or worse).
This book is a guide for those of you interested in swing trading. To understand swing trading, you should understand what it is and what it isn’t.

10

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things

What Is Swing Trading?
Swing trading is the art and science of profiting from securities’ short-term
price movements spanning a few days to a few weeks — one or two months,
max. Swing traders can be individuals or institutions such as hedge funds.
They’re rarely 100 percent invested in the market at any time. Rather, they
wait for low-risk opportunities and attempt to take the lion’s share of a significant move up or down. When the overall market is riding high, they go long
(or buy) more often than they go short. When the overall market is weak,
they short more often than they buy. And if the market isn’t doing all that
much, they sit patiently on the sidelines.

Uncle Sam differentiates between
trading time frames
What would a discussion of swing trading be
without mentioning our good old friend Uncle
Sam? He has a say in your profits and losses
because you presumably pay taxes. And he
treats profits and losses differently depending
on whether you’re a day/swing trader or the
buy-and-hold variety.
The factor that determines how you’re taxed is
based on your holding period. If you hold a position for 366 days (one year and one day) and then
sell it, any profits from that position are taxed at
a lower rate than your ordinary income tax rate
(which can be as high as 35 percent). Presently,
this rate is 15 percent for most people (5 percent
for lower-income individuals, as defined by the
federal government). However, this rate can
change due to tax law changes. The 15 percent
tax rate is set to expire at the end of 2010.
Swing traders, of course, are unlikely to qualify
for this lower tax rate on positions. Holding periods for swing traders are measured in days, not
years. Short-term profits are likely to be taxed
at an individual’s ordinary income tax rate.
But there’s an exception. The government provides special tax treatment to people it considers pattern day traders. Pattern day traders must
trade four or more round-trip day trades in five

consecutive business days. Pattern day traders
must also maintain a brokerage account with at
least $25,000 worth of equity (cash and stock).
The government allows pattern day traders to
treat profits and losses as costs of doing business. This means you can categorize home-office
expenses as business expenses (and lower your
overall tax rate). More important, you can convert
capital gains and losses into ordinary gains and
losses under the IRS accounting rules.
A swing trader who trades part time may have
difficulty convincing the IRS that he or she is a
pattern day trader. But if you’re a full-time swing
trader, you should be able to take advantage of
the special treatment of pattern day traders.
Otherwise, expect to pay taxes on profits at
your ordinary income tax rate.
However, swing trading in tax-deferred
accounts — like in an Individual Retirement
Account (IRA) or a 401(k) Plan — takes care of
the tax issue. Gains and profits in such accounts
aren’t paid until the account holder withdraws
the assets (usually at retirement). Because
taxes change often and depend on an individual’s situation, I strongly recommend consulting
an accountant or tax professional to understand
how swing trading will affect your taxes.

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
Swing trading is different from day trading or buy-and-hold investing. Those
types of investors approach the markets differently, trade at different frequencies, and pay attention to different data sources. You must understand these
differences so you don’t focus on aspects that are only relevant to long-term
investors.

The differences between swing trading
and buy-and-hold investing
If you’re a buy-and-hold investor in the mold of Warren Buffett, you care
little for price swings. You don’t short because the overall market trend has
generally been up. You study, study, and study some more to identify promising candidates that will appreciate over the coming years. Short-term price
movements are merely opportunities to pick up securities (or exit them) at
prices not reflective of their true value. In fact, buy-and-hold investors tend
to have a portfolio turnover rate (the rate at which their entire portfolio is
bought and sold in a year) below 30 percent.
Buy-and-hold investing is an admirable practice, and many investors should
follow this approach, because it’s not as time-intensive as swing trading and
not as difficult (in my opinion). But if you have the work ethic, discipline,
and interest in swing trading, you can take advantage of its opportunities to
 Generate an income stream: Buy-and-hold investors are generally concerned with wealth preservation or growth. They don’t invest for current income because they sometimes have to wait a long time for an idea
to prove correct. Swing trading, on the other hand, can lead to current
income.
 Time your buys and sells and hold a basket of positions to diversify
your risk: The majority of people aren’t interested in closely following
their finances and are best served by investing in a basket of domestic and international mutual funds covering stocks, commodities, and
other asset classes. Swing traders can hold a few securities across asset
classes or sectors and generate higher profits than those who invest
passively.
 Profit from price declines and excessive euphoria through shorting,
which buy-and-hold investors simply can’t replicate: The essence of
shorting is that it allows traders to profit from price declines as opposed
to price increases. But shorting involves risks not inherent in buying.
When you buy a stock, your loss is limited to the amount you trade.
Your potential profit is unlimited, but you can only lose what you put

11

12

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
into the security. Shorting carries the exact opposite payoff. A stock
can go up over 100 percent, but the theoretical maximum amount of
profit a short position can make is 100 percent if the security’s price
falls to $0.
Although shorting allows you to profit from the decline of a security, the
potential losses from shorting are theoretically unlimited, and the potential gains are limited to the amount you short. So if a security jumps up
in price by 30 or 40 percent or more, you may end up owing your broker
a tremendous amount of dough.

The differences between swing
trading and day trading
Opposite the buy-and-hold investor on the trading continuum is the day
trader. Day traders don’t hold any positions overnight. Doing so would
expose them to the risk of a gap up or down in a security’s price that could
wipe out a large part of their account. Instead, they monitor price movements
on a minute-by-minute basis and time entries and exits that span hours.
Day traders have the advantage of riding security price movements that can
be quite volatile. This requires time-intensive devotion on their part. Nearterm price movements can be driven by a major seller or buyer in the market
and not by a company’s fundamentals. Hence, day traders concern themselves with investor psychology more than they do with fundamental data.
They’re tracking the noise of the market — they want to know whether the
noise is getting louder or quieter.
But it’s not all cake and tea for day traders. They trade so often they rack up
major commission charges, which makes it that much more difficult to beat
the overall market. A $5,000 profit generated from hundreds of trades may
net a day trader a significantly reduced amount after commissions and taxes
are taken out. This doesn’t include additional costs the day trader must sustain to support his or her activities.
Swing traders also face stiff commissions (versus the buy-and-hold investor), but nothing as severe as the day trader. Because price movements span
several days to several weeks, a company’s fundamentals can come into play
to a larger degree than they do for the day trader (day-to-day movements
are due less to fundamentals and more to short-term supply and demand of
shares). Also, the swing trader can generate higher potential profits on single
trades because the holding period is longer than the day trader’s holding
period.

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z

What Swing Trading Is to You:
Determining Your Time Commitment
Getting started in swing trading requires some reflection. Before you rush
out to buy that slick PC or set up that brokerage account, you need to think
about what kind of swing trader you want to be. (Yes, swing traders come in
different shapes and sizes.)
Your first step is to determine just how much time you can commit to swing
trading. You may be a full-time trader for a firm, in which case you should
consider yourself as trading for a living. Or you may be doing this part time
for income with the intention (and hope) of becoming a full-time trader.
Many swing traders have full-time jobs and have little time to devote to
trading, so they trade primarily to improve the returns of their investment
accounts. Or perhaps they’re already in retirement and swing trade to grow
their assets over time. These swing traders watch the market during the day
but rely on orders placed outside market hours to enter or exit their positions. And if they trade in tax-deferred accounts, like an Individual Retirement
Account, they can ignore the tax issue.
The point is, you can swing trade whether you have a full-time job or not, but
you need to make adjustments depending on whether you’re able to watch the
market all day. And by the way, watching the market all day long doesn’t necessarily improve your returns. In fact, doing so can lower them if it causes you
to overtrade or react to market gyrations.

Swing trading as your primary
source of income
If you intend to swing trade as your primary means of generating income,
be prepared to spend several months — if not years — gaining experience
before you’re able to give up your job and trade from home full time. Swing
traders who trade full time devote several hours a day to trading. They
research possible trades before, during, and after market hours. And they
handle pressure well.
Many traders find that they can’t handle the stress of trading full time. After
all, if swing trading is your main source of income, you face a lot of pressure
to generate consistent profits. And you may be more tempted to gamble if
you encounter a string of losses. What many traders fail to realize is that the
correct response to a series of losses isn’t more trading but less trading. Take
a step back and evaluate the situation.

13

14

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
Swing trading for a living isn’t difficult in the sense that to excel at it requires
some kind of amazing IQ level or insane work ethic. Rather, it requires an
incredible amount of self-restraint, discipline, and calm. A swing trader who
trades for income must always be unemotional. When things don’t work out,
he or she doesn’t try to get even but moves on to another opportunity.
So don’t quit your day job just because you generate impressive profits for a
few months. The name of this game is to always have enough capital to come
back and play again. If you plan on living off of $5,000 per month, for example,
you can’t expect to generate that kind of profit on $30,000 of capital. That would
require a monthly gain of 16.67 percent! Some of the best all-time traders in the
world topped out at returns of 20 to 25 percent annually over 20 or 30 years.

Swing trading to supplement income
or improve investment returns
This category likely applies to the lion’s share of swing traders. Swing trading
with an eye on earning additional income or improving the returns on your
portfolio is less stressful than swing trading for a living. You still have something to fall back on if you make a mistake, and you can swing trade while
holding down a full-time job.
Part-time swing traders often do their analysis when they get home from
work and then implement trades the following day. Even though they may
not be able to watch the market all the time, they can enter stop loss orders
to protect their capital.
If you want to eventually swing trade full time, you should go through this
phase first. Over time, you’ll be able to determine how well you’ve done. And
if you follow the other recommendations in this book (like keeping a trading journal, which I cover in Chapter 3), you’ll learn from your mistakes and
improve your techniques.
Swing trading part time is suitable for those individuals who
 Have a full-time job
 Can devote a few hours a week to analyzing markets and securities
 Have a passion for financial markets and short-term trading
 Have the discipline to consistently place stop loss orders
 Are achieving subpar returns in their current investment portfolios from
a financial advisor or third party
 Don’t gamble with their own money and are unlikely to fall prey to doubling down or taking major risks

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
If you fit these criteria, then part-time swing trading may be for you. When
you first start out, I recommend swing trading with just a small portion of
your portfolio so any early mistakes don’t prove too costly. Although paper
trading can be beneficial, it can’t compare to the emotions you’ll be battling
as a swing trader when you put your own money on the line.

Swing trading just for fun
Some swing traders get a rush from buying and selling securities, sometimes
profiting and sometimes losing. Their motivation isn’t to provide or supplement
current income. Rather, these swing traders do it for the excitement that comes
from watching positions they buy and sell move up and down. Of course, this
can lead to significant losses if they abandon the rules designed to protect their
capital — rules that I outline throughout this book (specifically in Chapter 10).
If you want to swing trade solely for fun, my advice is: don’t. I recommend that
you get your kicks at a bowling alley or basketball court. The danger of trading
for fun is that you’re using real money with real consequences. You may begin
to risk more of your capital to satisfy your need for excitement. If you lose, you
may take extreme action to prove yourself right in the end, like putting all your
money into one or two securities. By then you’re really in the realm of gambling.
If you insist on trading for fun, at least restrict yourself to a small amount of
your assets and never touch your retirement nest egg. Remember that you’re
competing with traders who are motivated by profit, not just excitement.
That gives them an advantage over someone who just enjoys the game.

Sneaking a Peek at the Swing
Trader’s Strategic Plan
Plan your trade and trade your plan.
Fail to plan and you plan to fail.
Countless clichés address the importance of a trading plan. A trading plan is
the business plan of your trading business. Without the plan, you’re likely to
fall into the trap of making things up as you go. Your trading will be erratic.
You won’t improve because you won’t have the records on your past trading.
You may think your trading plan is in your head, but if you haven’t written it
down, for all intents and purposes it doesn’t exist.

15

16

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
Throughout this book I cover all the important parts of swing trading strategy in
detail. In the following sections, I preview the critical parts of the strategy, trimming them all down into one neat little package. (For more on your trading plan,
see Chapter 10.)

The “what”: Determining which
securities you’ll trade
Your trading plan should identify the securities you trade. As a swing trader,
you can choose from a variety of securities:
 Public equity (stock): This category is perhaps what you’re most familiar with. Common stocks, American Depository Receipts, and exchange
traded funds fall under this rubric. Swing traders often trade stocks
exclusively because of the variety, ease, and familiarity of trading corporate stocks. Most stocks listed in the United States trade every day,
but stocks in foreign markets may trade infrequently (perhaps once a
week). To make your entries and exits as painless as possible, you must
focus only on those stocks that meet a specified level of volume. Trying
to sell 1,000 shares of a stock that trades 5,000 shares in a day can be
extremely costly. I recommend you use stocks due to the abundant
information on firms domestically and even internationally.
One of the beauties of stocks is how efficient they are to trade, partly
because they offer exposure to other asset classes. For example, you
can gain exposure to the commodity gold by trading an exchanged
traded fund with underlying assets in gold bullion. I stick to stocks
myself because that’s my area of expertise, and I recommend them
because of this exposure to other asset classes and because of the variety of positions you can choose from. But you may wish to trade other
asset classes as well — that’s your call.
• American Depository Receipts (ADRs): ADRs have become
increasingly important in today’s globalized world. Simply put,
an ADR allows U.S. investors to buy shares of foreign companies.
ADRs are quoted in U.S. dollars and pay dividends in U.S. dollars.
Trading ADRs is much more cost efficient than setting up accounts
in several foreign countries, converting your dollars into foreign
currencies, and so on. And because the economic growth of emerging nations is outstripping the growth of developed countries,
ADRs can offer strong profit opportunities. ADRs of companies
based in emerging markets (like Brazil or China) are sometimes
highly leveraged to a particular commodity, making ADRs one way
to profit from commodity price strength.

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
• Exchange traded funds (ETFs): ETFs are pooled investments. The
most common ETFs mirror the movement of an index (such as
SPY, a popular ETF that tracks the S&P 500 Index) or a subsector
of an index. If you want to ride a coming tech bounce, you may be
better served trading a technology ETF than choosing a particular
tech company that may or may not follow the overall tech sector.
That’s because if you’re right on the move, you’ll profit from a
diversified technology ETF. However, a single technology security
may buck the trend. ETFs also offer you the ability to profit from
international indexes and commodities.
 Closed end funds: These funds are basically mutual funds that trade on
a secondary exchange. Traditional, open end mutual funds are priced
according to their net asset value — or the value left after subtracting
the fund’s liabilities from its assets. Closed end funds are different.
They’re priced according to the supply and demand for shares of that
particular fund. Sometimes, a closed end fund will trade for more than
its net asset value; other times, it will trade for less. Closed end funds
may be an efficient way to profit from international markets.
 Fixed-income markets: These markets include securities issued by governments on the federal, state, and local level, as well as those issued by
corporations. The value of fixed-income securities depends on interest
rates, inflation, the issuer’s credit worthiness, and other factors. Because
the fixed-income market tends to have less volatility than stocks and
other asset classes, many swing traders usually avoid trading it.
 Futures contracts: Standardized contracts to buy or sell an underlying asset on a certain date in the future at a certain price are known
as futures contracts. Futures are traded on commodities and financial
instruments, such as equity indexes. Technically, the buyer and seller
don’t exchange money until the contract’s expiration. However, futures
exchanges require traders to post a margin of 5 percent to 15 percent
of the contract’s value. This means that traders can employ extreme
leverage, if they choose, by putting down only a small amount of the
contract’s value.
I strongly recommend avoiding the use of such extreme leverage
because of the potential to lose most, if not all, of your assets due to an
unexpected move in a security. Newcomers in particular should avoid
using leverage. Even experienced swing traders can become careless or
arrogant before the market educates them.

17
