
analysis and extend holding period to manage risk. Avoid multiple positions and don’t be in a
hurry. Seek one decent profit at a time before moving on to the next trade.

WATCHING ACTIVE POSITIONS
The moment of truth arrives. Price pierces the EZ and favorable conditions signal a possible ET
entry. At that moment, swing traders must already know their position size and intended exit price if
proven wrong. The ET strikes and they pull the trigger through a phone call, limit order, Web entry,
or direct input. The fill report comes back and immediately forces a recalculation of setup
assumptions. If execution occurs more than a tick away from the ET, reconfirm risk tolerance and
recalculate the intended exit. Now the hard part begins.
Review the tape and chart to confirm that trade entry was the right choice. Set a physical stop if the
personal trading plan lists that as part of the execution strategy. If not, mentally target the price and
conditions under which the trade will be terminated. Update this instant analysis as each price bar
prints and modifies the charting landscape.
Get out immediately if price hits the level where the trade proves to be wrong. The failure could
turn out to be a whipsaw, but don’t delay the exit in an effort to learn the truth. If a later
performance review shows too many shakeout exits, revise the trading plan to give positions more
room or locate better-risk targets. Remember that a setup can always be reentered. But make sure
that each new entry stands on its own merits. This requires a fresh reward:risk calculation as well as
a new ET. Keep in mind that trade reentry tends to fail because an initial shakeout often signals a
pattern failure and change in trend.
Take losses manually whenever possible. This builds excellent discipline because the affirmative
action accepts responsibility for the trade. It also recognizes that stop loss represents an evolving
condition and not a fixed number. Each price bar, TICK reading, and time cycle affects the potential
profit or loss for the trade. Physical stop loss can rarely hit this moving target accurately.
Always consider mental time stops. The longer that it takes for a position to move into a profit,
the more likely that it never will. Target a predetermined holding period and dispose quickly of
nonperforming trades. Watch out for positions that just move sideways into low volatility and die.
Use the weak swing to get back transaction costs through a limit exit order if conditions permit.
And keep one eye on the closing bell if strategy requires going flat regardless of profit or loss.
Intraday charts sketch feedback in real time. Watch the action and try to anticipate how individual
candles will close. See how the buy and sell ticks affect the curvature of the surrounding Bollinger
Bands. Watch out for thrusting candles that break through the center of the bands and signal
shifting momentum. Look for small but significant gaps between candles at key price levels. Follow
price movement to key S/R or MA levels and visualize an appropriate response if it violates them.
Pick the point where the pattern says that the stock should eject into a profit. Anticipate the proper
reaction if time passes quietly with no expansion.
FIGURE 15.11
Things can go wrong even when a trading opportunity fires on all cylinders. A breakout on good volume carries
@Home above a 4-month down trendline. It then pulls back and surges above the 50-day EMA on even stronger
volume. Unfortunately, that ends the rally. Swing traders should exit as soon as the gap fills and price falls back
below the moving average. Waiting for further confirmation could lead to disaster. The trendline itself doesn’t fail
until the selloff carries down another 9 points.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Swing traders lose control when they overanalyze positions. Each entry must speak clearly for
itself. If it has little to say, get out and move on quickly. As trades evolve, different indicators, tools,
or times may assume leadership. Skill and experience pinpoint which one to follow for any given
position. This process eases when both sides of the brain contribute to active trade management. An
ominous feeling or a confident buzz represents a subconscious connection to the emotional crowd.
Combine this gut feeling with solid numbers knowledge and then take what the market gives.
Follow the tape closely after entry. If you are trading momentum, price should keep trending as
quickly as it did just prior to execution. Look for confirmation that selling pressure has eased after
buying a pullback. Measure pulse and volume through the time and sales ticker. Then compare that
to the associated price change. When a surge of participation does not move price, it can signal
hidden supply that will trigger a reversal. Tape reading also means interpreting the spread. Watch
how it expands and contracts as price searches for short-term boundaries.
Level II provides a comprehensive view of the major Nasdaq participants. But this information
screen may be inappropriate for some trading styles. For example, the NYSE offers no similar
information through its centralized specialist system. Many swing traders benefit when they can
interpret the much simpler Level I tape. This summary display prints the outcome for all of the
conflicting forces at work during the market day. Use Level I to measure narrowing spreads that
follow rallies or selloffs and signal that the move has ended. Or find a quiet tape with tightening

spreads and dull transaction levels. These can provide excellent scalps or low-risk entry in
anticipation of a breakout.
The 5-8-13 Bollinger Bands encase intraday candles in a continuous feedback mechanism.
Throughout the day, these settings measure the strength and direction of a stock’s short-term trend
with little effort. Dynamic moves hug the 5-bar, healthy pullbacks move to the 8-bar, and violation
of the 13-bar center band signals a possible change in trend. Keep in mind that this central axis
defines the interface between very short-term bull and bear markets. Use BBs, first-hour range, and
other charting landscape features to quickly locate danger points after entry. Always consider exit
as soon as price pushes into a new S/R barrier, such as a band extreme or major high.
Position size must reflect several strategies. First, it must match the odds that a particular setup will
succeed. More points of cross-verification naturally lead to larger positions while a lack of clear
signals encourages smaller bets. Second, size reflects the swing trader’s experience level and choice
of tactics. While seasoned participants tend to take larger positions, they may go the other way.
Drawdowns, longer holds, and higher-volatility markets all suggest smaller positions to manage
risk. Experienced participants respond to these environmental changes faster than most novices.
FIGURE 15.12
The 5-8-13 Bollinger Bands and a few well-placed lines build intraday trading profits. Technical themes focus price
action on specific ejection points. Locate these in advance with simple trendlines and time of day analysis. Then
manage open positions with a sharp focus on price movement through the bands and averages. Notice how the 5- and 8bar MAs support active trends while pullbacks to the 13-bar signal rangebound conditions.

Neophytes should take small positions to avoid trouble. Many inexperienced traders ignore sound
risk management and trade size well above their ability. Because they open margin accounts, they
believe that the total buying power must be committed for every trade. This is dangerous and
inaccurate. Strategy dictates that each position have a right share size, regardless of trading account
capital. During winning streaks, increase position size as performance suggests reduced risk. When
experiencing major drawdowns, lighten up significantly until the clouds pass. Newer participants
should concentrate on learning to trade well and not worry too much about making money.

EXIT
Swing traders exit positions to book profits, take losses, or terminate poor opportunities. How well
they accomplish these important tasks affects trading capital significantly. Graceful exits require
discipline just as peaking emotions cloud judgment. So take a deep breath and clear your mind
before attempting to close out a trade. A good exit is far more valuable than a great entry.
Get out immediately when proven wrong. Identify this trigger price before position entry. The
failure target (FT) signals that a setup has collapsed and the trade must be broken. S/R violations
point to natural FTs. Intraday traders see them when price crosses primary moving averages or
prints a pattern rollover. Position traders find them in first rise/first failure events and false
breakouts. Good reasons arise to alter FT values after execution, but many traders risk deceiving
themselves when they do so. Rely on the written plan and leave FTs intact until experience allows
greater flexibility.
Take profits when the market allows them. Try to exit as advancing price approaches a strong
barrier. Choose a profit target (PT) during the initial reward: risk evaluation, but reconsider that
location as each price bar offers new information. Pullbacks can begin at any time. Waiting through
a retracement will draw down good gains unless the strategy includes holding through several price
waves. The best exits come when the crowd leans the other way.
Good exit doors open and close throughout the trading day. After missing one, immediately
determine the next available course of action. Sometimes swing traders must take their medicine
and get out no matter where they are. This may hurt the bottom line but still present the best
strategy under the circumstances. Perhaps a long position pushes into a nice gain but then suddenly
catches a deep pullback. As it breaks back to even, end the trade right there, or risk a small loss and
wait for the new swing back up. The right choice often comes only with experience. Some
pullbacks will surely bounce while others drop into the pit of hell.
Become the deer and it’s bye-bye Bambi. Our antlered friends freeze in the headlights of oncoming
vehicles and pay a gruesome price. Swing traders face the same result when they don’t respond
quickly to danger. For example, a hot stock gaps up and a neophyte buys the opening rally. External
shock hits and the market starts to sell off. A few bad decisions during the next 15 minutes can
easily force the end of that new career.
The first natural reaction to shock is disbelief and denial. Unfortunately, this inhibits quick
defensive action. Prior visualization pays strong dividends at times like these. Swing traders that
mentally practice their fire drill over and over will act automatically when the right time comes.
Simply put, they get out first and ask questions later when their positions go into freefall. They
don’t wait for a bounce, a reason, or Mommy to come hold their hands. They grab the nearest exit
door they can find and run. Someone inside just screamed FIRE!
FIGURE 15.13
Two Ariba setups highlight the importance of well-chosen profit and failure targets. Enter the small 3rd watch on the
congestion bar before the breakout or as close to the trendline as possible. Use the low of the prior candle for the FT.

The initial PT targets a first surge over the top Bollinger Band because no other resistance appears on the landscape. A
dip trip follows a month later with execution right on the pullback test at 105. The FT stands just under the June 12 high
in the 3rd watch, and the PT reflects the increased risk as soon as price pulls back within the bottom Bollinger Band.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Big losses rarely come without warning. Technical analysis tools provide early clues to reversal
activity if the swing trader is willing to listen. Most well-defined patterns offer clean S/R lines that
signal trend change when broken. Gaps provide instant one-bar feedback on momentum shifts.
Overbought-oversold oscillators point to divergence between price and buying power. And a clearly
defined personal plan identifies risk tolerance and specific exit filters well in advance of trouble.
Locate, evaluate, enter, analyze, and exit. Within the 5-minute or daily charting landscape,
opportunities rise to the surface and trigger positions that will book profits or incur losses. Swing
traders don’t hold positions through adversity unless strategy targets two or more price waves and
uses at least 2 hours of the market day. The 90-minute alternation cycle encourages the single direct
move for positions under this time frame. Longer-term tactics benefit from position-oriented exit
styles, such as holding through minor retracements and whipsaws. Scalpers and short-term
opportunists don’t have this luxury. They must escape on the bar that expands into resistance or one
that violates a key moving average.
Swing traders throw away gains when they change their holding periods midstream or forget the
important numbers. When a position moves into a profit, greed exerts a strong emotional force that

can trigger violation of important personal rules. This makes no sense, since they were created to
manage situations just like this. The odds favor thoughtful rules. Don’t dwell on those times when
breaking them would have increased profits for an individual position. They are filters to build
longevity in the trading game.

BEATING THE GAME
The odds stand firmly against long-term trading success. Many novices set out on the path to
market knowledge each year. Most soon realize that swing trading presents the most difficult
challenge of their lives. This simple fact sends the majority to the locker room with their tails
between their legs. But a handful of serious aspirants stays in the game long enough to learn
successful execution skills. Will you be one of the winners or one of the losers?
FIGURE 15.14
Mortal danger can come at any time and with little warning. Intermedia Communications starts the day on a positive
note after a very strong rally during the prior session. It builds a bullish triangle through the lunch hour as many
speculators prepare for the rocket ship to take off again. But ICIX has other plans. It begins a slow afternoon decline
that suddenly accelerates into a total freefall. Those who stick around to find an explanation have no choice but to take
an exit in the mid 30s.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Trading styles change flavor according to the latest software or media spin. For example, Nasdaq
Level II took center stage when Net technology boomed in the late 1990s. But classic swing trading
techniques precede direct-entry systems by many decades. Over the years, technical analysis and
chart reading have spun off the vast majority of profitable market strategies. Technical trading
dominates the futures markets to this day. Of course, they don’t have much choice, as there are no
market makers to follow or Axes to grind in that volatile arena.
Consistent profits require standing against the restless crowd. This requires a level of courage that
most aspirants cannot achieve. Start to build this skill early and practice it at every opportunity.
Most market professionals quietly use the stock chart to locate and execute outstanding trade setups.
They learn the secrets of this classic art and set themselves apart from the uninformed herd. After
all, that’s the pocket they try to pick each day.
The markets offer a bipolar experience. Swing traders experience winning and losing on a regular
basis regardless of ultimate success. This emotional rollercoaster drives many hopeful participants
out of the game quickly. The testosterone culture instills an overwhelming desire to win throughout
the Western world. No matter how effectively participants take their losses, negative emotions will
always follow an unfruitful exit. Perhaps this is why the feminine principle (regardless of one’s
actual persuasion) offers valuable lessons for any trading style. Accept gain and loss
equally. Nurture and grow profits and skills. Bear the weight of bad positions with maturity and
good humor.
Build trader wisdom into your personal plan and internalize it. Old market clichés work because
truth rarely changes over time. Read classic technical books such as John Murphy’s Technical
Analysis of the Financial Markets, Edwards and Magee’s Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, and
Alexander Elder’s Trading for a Living. They permit far more focus on specific issues and
strategies than any website or weekend seminar. Broaden market knowledge every day and hone
that solid edge over your competition.
Cut losses quickly and learn from mental mistakes, bad decisions, and lousy executions. Don’t trade
when personal problems use up time and physical energy. Remember that a lack of discipline ends
trading careers far more efficiently than a lack of knowledge. Avoid overtrading. The slow bleed
will destroy capital and dull the mind to real opportunity. Find an experienced mentor or sit at a
guru’s feet, and ask about bad habits and losing strategies. But make sure your mentor really knows
how to play the game before the questions begin. Bad teachers yield very bad results.
Most new traders don’t want others to share in their errors. They avoid mentoring programs that
will contribute to success, just to avoid embarrassment. They’d rather commit their errors in private
and hope they learn their lessons anyway. This mistake costs many novices their trading careers.
Find that mentor before taking the very first execution. Confess all sins in detail and don’t lie about
gains or losses. The guidance you receive will save you a fortune in money and months of
frustration.
The current trading strategy won’t work in 6 months or a year from now. Write it down and make it
a living document of professional growth. Put it into a word processor, revise it often, and save the
old copies. Compare the current style to previous tactics frequently. This helpful exercise shocks
most traders. True market knowledge takes years to build, and most aspirants venture into many
dark corners before finding their natural bias.
The personal plan goes far beyond simple charts and setups. Successful trading exhibits grace in
action. This venerable practice closely aligns with the Eastern concepts of meditation and yoga.
Like a skilled musician, learn to play each note perfectly rather than considering the whole piece.

Remember the joke about the tourist who asks how to get to Carnegie Hall: the answer is practice,
practice, practice.
Don’t fall into the complexity trap. Some participants buy expensive chart systems to test, back-test,
smooth, and optimize complex trading systems. While this process works well with specific tactics,
it often reflects an inability to take personal responsibility for one’s results. The best opportunities
always sit right under the trader’s nose. They set up now the same way they did 50 years ago and
will likely book profits for our grandchildren in another 50 years. Just throw away the software and
trade when the perfect setup appears.
The market chase arises from the desire to free oneself from the rat race of the business world. The
media reinforce this noble pursuit when they characterize modern traders as rogues and renegades.
Who would turn down living the bandit’s life after spending 20 years at the company water cooler?
But the doors to wealth open only for those traders who play the game with great skill. Most will
eventually fail and be forced to search elsewhere for the golden goose.
A little Zen: Before enlightenment, chopping wood and carrying water. After enlightenment,
chopping wood and carrying water. Intelligent people learn many skills during their lives, and
trading mastery is like any other discipline, only far more difficult. Those who succeed find an
unexpected world. Their excitement fades and trading becomes like any other profession. This is
natural. The true masters of the game enjoy their market power but find new ways to explore life’s
goals.

MASTERING THE TAPE
Swing traders learn to read the ticker tape as effectively as the price chart. While this education may
take years, it requires little complexity. Just pick some favorite stocks and memorize key S/R levels.
Then watch the ticker until odd behavior catches your eye. Notice how participation often spikes
sharply as price approaches natural swing levels. Marvel at how the tape both hides and reveals the
next move all at the same time. Pay extra attention when price enters an execution zone. Observe
how the tape reacts and see whether key reversals can be predicted in advance.

ECNs AND DIRECT ACCESS
The direct-access environment forces swing traders to learn new skills. This high-tech interface
allows orders to cross directly between retail participants or be broadcast in real time to a variety of
commercial players. But it offers few guarantees and carries considerable risk in the wrong hands.
Complex order routing can induce substantial losses, while careless entries can produce repeated
partial fills. But direct-access benefits far outweigh the risks because it bypasses the expensive
market middleman. So most serious participants should eventually face the music and learn this
machine language for order execution.
Direct access is the playground of the ECN (electronic communications network). But many
participants who come from e-brokers have a poor understanding of how these systems work. They
become so dependent on the market middleman that they automatically expect ECNs to execute
their orders when placed at the inside market. Unfortunately no ECN order fills without a matching
customer order. Swing traders who play in markets with little ECN depth risk getting caught in
major downdrafts without any means to escape their positions.
Direct-access brokers charge higher average commissions than e-brokers. Swing traders must
overcome this disadvantage through execution technique. Work on placing orders that go slightly
against the short-term flow so that fills cross the spread a large percentage of the time. While some

discounters permit clients to buy at the bid or sell at the ask through limit orders, direct access
provides real-time fill reports and incredible speed. Participants can place orders or lift them in
seconds as conditions change. They can cross a newly placed ECN order instantly or execute in
pieces to obtain a better average price. Lethargic software and a series of middlemen make this
rapid response impossible through the typical discount broker.
The direct access trader must understand the Island book to manage liquidity issues. Island
currently has the greatest depth of any retail ECN and publishes its order book in real-time free of
charge. Always check there first for crowd participation before entering a new position. Look for
many order tiers and watch how they change as the stock moves. This simple exercise predicts
execution liquidity. Remember that the crowd has more discretion when it enters a position than
when it exits. Make sure the Island book shows plenty of warm bodies to hand over a stock when
it’s time to say goodbye.
Learn to execute efficiently against the Island book. Confirm liquidity and follow the ISLD ticker
on the Level II display. Retail traffic drives this ECN and orders that stack up on either side of the
market provide great feedback on current supply-demand imbalance. Realize that once the stack
appears, efficient fills in that direction become unlikely until the swing completes and shifts back in
the other direction. Try to wait for a pullback rather than chasing an execution. The Island crowd
includes many scalpers who run for the hills as soon as very short-term momentum fades.
Island tends to issue many partial fills. Avoid these by checking the book for very small orders
embedded between more active entries. Those stuck with these tiny positions often place limit
orders well away from the inside market to dump them at the first opportunity. This may take days.
So this game of hot potato goes on endlessly from one participant to the next. Fortunately, the book
displays most of these infuriating shares so that smart traders can stand aside or apply alternate
routing methods when they see them.
Trade through the oldest and largest ECN when strategy permits. Instinet offers commercial
customers anonymity and great depth. Retail traders will find Instinet expensive to access but a
necessary evil. INCA often stands at the inside market when no other player steps forward. Their
solo participation can represent institutions that buy or sell according to their own logic or market
makers that hide behind the ECN to mask their real intentions. In either case, INCA’s massive
liquidity lets swing traders in and out of positions when no other parties will touch the orders.
Consider standing aside when direct access offers no favorable execution price. The personal
trading plan needs to manage the additional risk of using this environment. New positions require
liquidity to enter and assume liquidity to exit. Fast-paced markets force instant analysis of these
changing conditions. Recalculate reward:risk quickly when a position will not fill according to
original planning. For obvious reasons, choose to enter the most promising setups at less
advantageous prices but require precision for all borderline opportunities.
Direct-access exits face more danger than entries. This interface requires that participants take an
available exit door before it disappears. Many selloffs and short-covering rallies erupt with little
warning. The sudden volatility dries up liquidity in one direction as the retail crowd quickly lifts
orders. The ensuing vacuum forces price up or down to the next S/R where the swing completes.
This induces major slippage unless the swing trader takes immediate action. Place an order slightly
above or below the current inside market to encourage a quick fill. If it doesn’t execute
immediately, pull the order and resubmit it further away from the current quote until it does. Also,
consider smart routing methods that may improve the odds for a quick exit in these volatile
conditions.
