
instruments: stocks, bonds, and so on. Then he says, "Now we come to the craziest market of all—
commodities. Thesepeople trade on only 5 percentmargin—and most of them borrow that." The
whole class laughed, except me. For some reason, the idea of trading on 5 percent margin made
perfect sense tome.
When did you first get involved in the financial markets?
Not until many years later. I was a rock promoter at the time, and on one weekend, there were three
separate shootings in clubs at which the groups I managed were working. I decided it was an
opportune time to change careers and pursue my true interest—the financial markets. Although I
was really interested in futures, I didn't have any idea how to look for a job in that field. So I
decided I would start out as a stockbroker.
My first interview was with a very old-line Wall Street firm, with offices that made you feel like
you should speak in hushed tones. The man who interviewed me was the kind of guy [he adopts a
pompously refined voice] who talks with his teeth together and lives in Connecticut. He tells me,
"We only buy blue chips for our clients."
Not having a financial background, I was unfamiliar with the term "blue chip," but it sounded odd
to me in the context of a staid investment firm. So after the interview, I looked up its derivation. I
found that the origin of the term could be traced to the color of the most expensive chip in Monte
Carlo. I said to myself, "Aha, now I know what this game is all about—gambling." I threw away
my copy of Graham and Dodd [Principles of Security Analysis, considered by many to be the
"bible" of stock market analysis] and bought a book called Beat the Dealer. I came away with the
idea that successful investment was really a matter of odds, and if you could compute the odds, you
could find and test methods that could beat the market.
What made you believe that you could develop methods to put the odds in your favor?
I don't know that I understood it all then, but over the years I came to realize that the markets are
inefficient. I have a friend who is an economist. He would try to explain to me, as if talking to a
child, why what I was trying to do was futile, because "the markets are efficient." I have noticed
that everyone who has ever told me that the markets are efficient is poor. He argued that if I could
develop a winning system on a computer, so could others, and we would all cancel each other out.
What is wrong with that argument?
Because people develop systems and people will make mistakes. Some will alter their system or
jump from system to system as each one has a losing period. Others will be unable to resist secondguessing the trading signals. Whenever I go to a money management conference and sit down with
a group to have some drinks at night, I always hear the same story. "My system worked great, but I
just didn't take the gold trade, and that would have been my biggest winner."
There is a very important message here: People don't change. That is why this whole game works.
In 1637, tulips in Holland traded for 5,500 florins and then crashed to 50, a 99 percent loss. Well,
you might say, "Trading was relatively new then; these people were primitive; capitalism was still
in its infancy. Today we are much more sophisticated." So you go to 1929 and find a stock like Air
Reduction which traded at a high of $233 and after the crash fell to $31, a decline of 87 percent.
OK, you might say, "The Roaring '20s were crazy times, but now things are surely different." Move
ahead to 1961 and you find a stock called Texas Instruments trading at $207. It eventually dropped
to $49, a decline of 77 percent. If you think we have gotten more sophisticated in the 1980s, all you
have to do is look at silver prices, which in 1980 reached a peak of $50 and subsequently fell to $5,
a 90 percent decline.
The point is that because people are the same, if you use sufficiently rigorous methods to avoid
hindsight, you can test a system and see how it would have done in the past and get a fairly good
idea of how that system will perform in the future. That is our edge.
Isn't it possible that the markets can change and the future will be very different from the
past?
The markets may change, but people won't. When we were still in the testing stage, before we
actually started managing any money, my partner Michael Delman came up with the concept of
using holding periods as a measure of system performance. Evaluating systems solely on a calendar
88

