15 pounds and her skin started glowing.
Finally, as a trader, I spend an inordinate amount of time in front of computers, and this isn’t the best thing for posture. I never though much about it until I started
tweaking my lower back on a regular basis at the gym. One of my older and wiser friends told me to “go see my chiropractor.” I said, “What? I don’t see chiropractors.
They’re whack jobs.” He just shook his head in disgust. To make a long story short, I started doing regular adjustments at a chiropractor who uses the “Gonstead
system,” and my lower back tweaks disappeared quickly. After that I kept going (and keep going) in for regular adjustments and tune-ups. M y mom sat in front of a
desk for years at her job, and she never saw a chiropractor. I had her visit mine and he took an x-ray, but at this point her spine has fused together and there is nothing
he can do, and she has to live with the pain. M ine was approaching being fused, but it has now been adjusted so that it’s closer to “normal.” I feel a lot better, and since
I started the adjustments more than two years ago, I haven’t been sick. Somehow it is also supposed to be good for your immune system.
There is one last thing I recently had done, and again this came about as a result of consulting with a nutritionist. I had my three amalgamated fillings that I’ve had in
my mouth for 20 years removed. The main component of dental amalgam is mercury, which is released from the filling into the body. M ercury in dental fillings is a
source of environmental exposure in humans, and mercury is incredibly toxic to the human body. The big dental associations continue to support almalgam because,
485

frankly, they don’t want to appear like they’ve been wrong all these years, despite all the well-documented risks. This also means that most dentists are not equipped
to remove these fillings and in fact will try to talk you out of it (mine did). Removing mercury is dangerous. It is critical to find a dentist who knows what he or she is
doing and is equipped to handle this procedure. There are new dentists sprouting up that can be found by doing an Internet search for “biological dentist.” These are
the ones specifically set up to do this. Ask and make sure they know what they are doing. They should have a specific system in place for extracting mercury safely. I
switched dentists. M y process took a few hours and my fillings were replaced with ceramics.
Anyway, that’s the health story. I’m stepping up my game in 2012 and doing more longer runs, biking, and yoga, and I’m going to start signing up for races to stay
motivated. After all, my kids are still young, and I’m going to have to be able to outrun them when they are teenagers.
For anyone who is interested in more information, a good place to start is a book called Alkalize or Die, by Theodore A. Baroody. Also, you can go on Google and
search for “acid and alkaline foods” or “high-pH foods,” and you will get all the information you need. If you are interested in the tests I took, feel free to contact me
and I can give you more information. M y own research has convinced me that by eliminating refined sugars and refined flours from our diet, significantly increasing our
intake of clean water, and doing some general exercise (300 minutes of vigorous exercise a week!), we are preventing more health issues than just about anything else we
could do. Good health and good trading go hand in hand. Bad health sneaks up on people; it’s under the hood and may not show up for 20 years. But when it does
show up, it can be very ugly.

Concluding Thoughts on My Plan
This is the plan. For me, the key here is complete and accurate daily records so that I can assess my trading, review my progress on a month-to-month basis, and make
changes in my strategies based on my performance. I also want to incorporate other areas of my life into my trading plan, since trading is a very central and important
part of my life.
I’ve shared my actual plan with a number of traders who have come up to the office to trade with me for a week. One of my goals in working with traders is to help
them identify the markets, setups, and time frames that best suit their personality, and then from there help them to put together a game plan. Once they leave, they
then e-mail their business plan to me, and I critique it for them and send it back. One of the traders who went through this process is Eric Grywalski. I’ve asked Eric if
he would be willing to share the plan he created, because it is very specific to the beginning trader.
In spending time with him, I could see right away that he was highly intelligent and highly perceptive. Unfortunately, after the first few hours of trading, I could also
see that he overanalyzed everything. Instead of jumping into a trade on a predetermined signal, Eric would continue to analyze the market to make sure that the trade
setup was really a winner. When he finally did get into a trade and was stopped out, his first statement was, “What am I doing wrong?” This tendency to overanalyze
the markets is a problem for a specific group of traders, especially analytical and logical thinkers who are looking to make sense out of the “chaos and randomness” of
the markets. To combat this, I had him focus on simple setups that required minimal analytics, and to formulate an exit plan with the same idea in mind—exits that
were mechanical or that met a specific set of simple criteria. Eric had had some trading experience on a swing basis before he came to visit me, so he’d already had some
experience with the market under his belt. However, he was very new to intraday trading, and this is what he wanted to focus on. His plan follows, and I’ll turn this
over to him. Items in italics in his plan are my notes from the initial feedback I gave him on his first draft.

A Sample Plan from a Beginning Trader
M y name is Erik Grywalski, and my trading plan was developed with the new trader in mind, using John’s plan as a model. Defining a handful of solid setups, creating
rules to govern my behavior in a limitless environment, and integrating proper trader psychology are key themes in my plan. As a beginning trader, I also wanted to
focus on keeping my expectations realistic by not focusing on “making a killing in the market.” Forming good habits early on and learning from my mistakes will be
critical for staying in the markets long term, which is every aspiring trader’s ultimate objective.
Overall, my plan lays out three high-probability setups that I learned from John Carter and Hubert Senters during the week I spent trading with them. Gap, pivot,
and squeeze plays allow traders to take advantage of market behavior that occurs on a fairly consistent basis throughout the trading day. Gap plays position a trader
for the contra move that often follows morning gaps, while pivot plays anticipate potential turning points in the markets that are identified before the trading day.
Squeeze plays allow traders to capitalize on the market’s tendency to fluctuate between low- and high-volatility states.
Last, more important than the actual trade setup is trader psychology. Without establishing and maintaining a proper trader’s mindset, consistent success in the
markets will be unachievable. I strongly believe that this is an area that new traders often overlook because of their obsession with instant profits and is therefore
briefly included in my plan. I would like to acknowledge M ark Douglas for his superb book, Trading in the Zone. All the core attitudes listed in my plan were taken
from M ark’s book, and all traders should put this book at the top of their reading list. Comments in italics are notes from John Carter that he inserted after reading the
first draft of my plan.

2005 Trading Plan, Eric Grywalski
WHY AM I T RADING?
I am trading because of my passion for the financial markets and my long-lived aspiration to become a profitable, full-time trader. Trading will allow me to actively
manage my money in all market situations, while having the freedom to work for myself in an area in which I have great interest. Being a student of the markets, I have
gained an appreciation for some of the things that are critical for success as a trader. Proper mindset, strict money management, and trading with a predefined plan are
just some of the more important areas to focus on when trading the markets.
Since I have limited intraday trading experience, I realize that the road ahead will be extremely challenging, and I have set expectations for my first year accordingly.
The most important, often overlooked area that will be critical for me will be to establish and maintain a trader’s mindset. The ability to internalize and master the
psychological aspects of trading is one of the most crucial skills that determine success. Indicators, charts, and the myriad other tools are helpful, but I must be careful
not to overanalyze the market, and I must realize that trading is 90 percent mental. In general, proper attitude will produce better overall results than analysis or
technique. With that said, my main goals during this first year are to learn how to execute trades well while achieving modest profitability. This means taking signals
when they occur and managing my positions to maximize profitability.

486

WHAT M ARKETS WILL I T RADE?

• M ain contract: mini-sized Dow futures contract (YM )
• Hedging contract: E-mini S&P 500 futures contract (ES)
Eric, the YM is a great contract to trade for newer traders. However, you need to have a backup plan. In situations where the eCBOT goes down or you have any
computer problems, you will want to be able to hedge any “trapped” YM positions with the ES using one of the following options:
1. Take an opposite position in the ES market to offset a YM position. As an example, if I am long two YM contracts, I will sell two ES contracts to hedge.
2. Use buy/sell stops in the ES market to hedge a YM position. As an example, if I am long two YM contracts and the eCBOT goes down, I will place a sell stop for two
ES contracts at a price level that is equivalent to my initial YM stop. This way, if the YM hits my stop and I can’t get out of my position, I am hedged at my stop in the
ES. However, if the market actually moves my way, I will still be able to participate in the move and liquidate my position once I am physically able to. —JC
WHY T HIS M ARKET? T RADING STRATEGIES
The mini-sized Dow will be used for the following intraday trading setups:

• Gap fades
• Pivot plays
• Volatility expansion/five-minute squeeze plays
The mini-sized Dow has a better spread than the S&P and Nasdaq futures, which gives the beginning trader more room (levels) to allow trades to play out.
Additionally, it is easier to track all 30 Dow stocks than the 500 that exist in the S&P.
ACCOUNT SIZE AND NUMBER OF CONTRACTS TO T RADE
An amount of $90,000 in start-up capital should be allocated in the following manner:

• $40,000 for trading capital
• $40,000 savings account
• $10,000 for first-year business expenses (home office, software, etc.)
GENERAL ACCOUNT RULES

• Withdraw 100 percent of any trading profits at the end of each month and place into savings account.
• Never add money to the trading account if the balance is below $40,000.
NUMBER OF CONTRACTS TO T RADE

• One YM contract per $20,000
• Equal number of ES for hedging purposes
T RADING STRATEGIES
Three strategies will be used for intraday trading of the YM contract. I will follow only one setup at a time:

• Gap fades
• Pivot trades
• Squeeze trades
Eric, if this is comfortable for you, simultaneous trades in the YM and ES markets may be considered. For example, if I am in a gap trade in the YM that hasn’t filled
and a five-minute squeeze play sets up in the ES, I will take the trade signal in ES using my standard squeeze execution procedure. This scenario is likely in a market
that gaps up in the morning and consolidates all day before selling off into the close. In this instance, it is okay to take both positions; just make sure you play them
487

separately with their own, distinct parameters.—JC
Each trading day will be broken down into two 2-hour trading periods:
• 6:30–8:30 a.m. Pacific
• 11:00 a.m.–1:00 p.m. Pacific
All trades must be initiated only during these two time frames with the following exceptions:
• M anagement of an existing trade that is still on from the morning
• Five-minute squeeze
A. GAP FADES The gap trade will be the first trade of the day that I will look for during the morning session. Gap trades are high-probability trades that often fill on the

same day. Intraday charts for this trade should be set with a 1:15 p.m. Pacific close and a 6:30 a.m. Pacific opening to account for any overnight/morning gaps in price.
Gap Trade Guidelines
1. Using two-year raw gap data, take gap trades only from Tuesday through Friday and take only those gaps that occur at or between R1 and S1 pivot levels.
Exceptions to this rule can be made if price opens near another significant level that has a high probability of providing support or resistance. As an example, the
market gaps down below S1, but prices open right on the weekly pivot, which also coincides with key daily chart support and/or a moving average (or fib level).
2. YM gaps should be at least 20 points and not more than 60 points.
3. Risk a maximum of 1.5 percent of total trading capital per trade.
4. Around 6:20 a.m. Pacific time, evaluate premarket volume in key institutional stocks to gauge the power of the gap. Specifically, review volume for M XIM , NVLS,
KLAC, and AM AT along with other stocks tracked in One Chicago’s single-stock futures listing. Use the underlying volume of the cash market, not the futures
market.
Volume Guidelines
• Light = < 30,000 shares
• M oderate = 30,000 to 80,000 shares
• Heavy = 80,000+ shares
Note: As a new trader, use a full position (two contracts) only on those gaps where there are less than 30,000 shares in premarket volume for the key stocks. These
trades have the highest probability of filling the same day. With moderate-volume openings, trade only one contract and use ½ gap fill as the target. Heavy-volume
openings are not to be faded.
1. Premarket volume takes precedence, but be alert during the gap trade if most of the sectors are moving in the direction of the gap. Ideally, look for at least five
sectors moving in the opposite direction from the gap. Consider closing the position before stop is hit if the five sectors reverse and start to trade in the direction
of the gap.
Eric, I would throw this idea about the sectors out—this will end up being an excuse to overanalyze the play, and you will end up getting out of the trades
that you should have stayed in. Just focus on the premarket volume, set your parameters, and leave it alone.—JC
2. If gap occurs with premarket volume over 80,000 shares and does not fill, look for the first buy/sell signal in the direction of the gap. This may be a pullback to a
pivot or squeeze play after a consolidation of the morning’s gap.
3. When the daily pivot precedes the prior day’s close, look to lock in any gap trade profits at the daily pivot.
4. Record unfilled gaps and keep price level handy, as the market will often fill open gaps within 5–10 days.
Avoid gaps on the following days:
• Options expiration Friday
• Rollover Thursday and the day after
• First trading day of a new month
• If after a narrow range day, the next day’s gap is larger than the previous day’s range
• Gaps where the opening price is outside the previous session’s high/low
Gap Trade Execution Procedure:

488

1. When taking gaps, enter opposite the market using an “all-in” market order and place stop from fill price.
2. Stop price will be determined from the gap’s size, as follows:

3. After setting parameters, stay in trade until the gap fills or stop is hit, but do not hold overnight and do not trail stops.
4. For two contracts and light volume gaps, the target is a complete gap fill. This price level should match the 1:15 p.m. Pacific closing price level from the previous
day and should be set upon entry of trade. Use ½ gap fill as a target for moderate volume gaps.
B. PIVOT LEVEL TRADES Daily, weekly, and monthly floor trader pivots will be a second strategy used for intraday trading of the YM market. Pivots are leading price-

489

based indicators that help anticipate market turns/points of consolidation and can be valuable entry points for both trending and choppy days. The basic strategy
utilizes preplanned (“anti-impulsive”) trades to either fade pivot levels on choppy days or buy/sell pullbacks to pivots on strong trend days. Daily pivots will be
calculated using the 24-hour time period, while weekly and monthly pivots will use the high, low. and close from each of the previous week/month’s trading range of
the continuous contract (@YM ).
Pivot Level Calculations
R3: R1 + (high – low)
R2: pivot + (high – low)
R1: 2 × pivot – low
Pivot: (high + low + close)/3
S 1: 2 × pivot – high
S 2: pivot – (high – low)
S 3: S1 – (high – low)
Daily, weekly, and monthly price levels will be drawn on the intraday chart each trading day.
Pivot Trade Guidelines
1. Use 144-tick chart for pivot strategy. Experimenting with other time frames (89- or 233-tick) is okay to see what works best.
2. Add in 8- and 21-period EM As for confirmation (after entry) and seven-period RSI to spot bullish/bearish divergences. This is fine, but make sure you are using this
for confirmation after the entry, and don’t use these to wait to get into the trade. — JC
3. Consider using pivot strategy as the first trade of the day if an opening gap is a runaway gap where the gap does not fill because of strong buy/sell interest. On these
days, look for price to pull back to a pivot level where an entry can take place before the market resumes in the direction of the opening gap.
4. Look to fade the first move to the daily pivot and stay in the trade until a scalper buy/sell signal is generated.
5. If the market opens above the daily pivot, look for short entries for a move down to test the pivot and vice versa for openings below the pivot. If the pivot isn’t
tested during the morning session, look for a test in the afternoon.
6. For levels that have multiple pivots, such as a daily and weekly, defer entry point to daily price level.
7. In general, for trend days, look to buy/sell pullbacks to pivot levels, and look to scale out at pivot levels above/below. How are you determining whether a day is
choppy or a potential trend day? This is another area where overanalysis can hurt a trader. For choppy days, it is okay to trade pivots, but remember you are
fading the initial move to the pivot on these days. Remember to look at the ES volume and see if it is greater than 10,000 contracts per five-minute bar over the first
six bars, which indicates a trend day, whereas volume of less than 10,000 contracts during the first six bars sets up a choppy day. —JC
8. Utilize market internals to decide what action to take at pivots. For example, if the trin is falling and most sectors are green, focus on buying pull-backs to pivots and
ignoring sell signals against pivots. In a choppy market, the internals are less critical, so look to fade rallies and declines to pivots.
9. Use midpoint pivots if the range between the seven daily pivots exceeds 40 points. M idpoints are not used with weekly and monthly price levels.
10. M oves to R3 or S3 are extreme, so keep emotions in check at these extended levels.
11. Daily R2/S2 will contain the market 90 percent of time, so be aware of these levels when trading intraday.
12. Look for convergence of daily, weekly, and monthly pivots (and fib clusters). These levels are strong support/resistance areas to be aware of when trading.
13. If five-minute squeeze fires off in conjunction with pivot, stay in trade until momentum runs out.
14. After two losses in a row, quit using pivot strategy for that day.
Pivot Trade Execution Procedure
1. Use “all-in” limit orders to enter the market. Limit orders should be placed at the targeted pivot level +/– 3 pts. If buying at daily midpoints, just use nominal value
for entry. If trading more than 10 lots, use MIT orders (market if touched) to eliminate partial fills for both entries and targets.—JC
2. Place an initial stop 20 points from the fill price. This represents a maximum drawdown of $100/contract or 0.25 percent of total equity.

490

3. Sell/buy one contract after a 10-point profit and use the next pivot level as the target for the final contract.
4. After closing out the first contract, move the stop to breakeven +/– 6 points.
5. Consider using scalper buy/sell signals on 233-tick chart of ES to confirm the trade in YM at pivot levels. Confirmation should occur within 15–20 minutes. If
confirmation doesn’t happen, close out your position.
C. FIVE-MINUTE SQ UEEZE TRADE Squeeze trades rely on the premise that stocks and indexes fluctuate between periods of high volatility followed by low volatility. The

squeeze indicator captures the moment when the market goes from a low-volatility to a high-volatility state. The squeeze trade is the only trade acceptable to take
during the 8:30–11:00 a.m. Pacific doldrums.
Squeeze Trade Guidelines
• Use the continuous contract (@YM ) symbol when charting. Focus on signals in the five-minute time frame for intraday trades.
• Red dots signify the contract is in a squeeze (Bollinger Bands are inside Keltner Channels).
• Blue dots signify that the Bollinger Bands have moved outside the Keltner Channels and volatility is increasing.
• Histogram measures move’s momentum. Green bars on blue dots are long signals, and red bars on blue dots are short signals.
Squeeze Trade Execution Procedure
1. M onitor a continuous five-minute YM chart for red dots. You should have at least two red dots before considering a potential squeeze.
2. Once a dot turns blue and closes blue for one five-minute period, use an “all-in” market order to go long (two contracts) if the histogram is green and short if the
histogram is red. Histogram appears above/below dots.
3. Set an initial stop of 20 points.
