
Buffett was downstairs eating lunch in the Kiewit Plaza cafeteria with an acquaintance, Al Sorenson, when
somebody came in with the news that Kennedy had been shot. He went back upstairs to his office and found
that the New York Stock Exchange floor was in a state of stupefaction; stocks were plunging on heavy
trading. With the Dow down twenty-one points in half an hour, the market had lost $11 billion.41 Then the
exchange closed, its first emergency closing during trading since the Great Depression.42 Shortly afterward,
the Federal Reserve made a statement of confidence that meant—after translation from Fedargot to
English—that international central banks would work together to thwart speculation against the dollar.43
As a stunned country erupted in sorrow, anger, and shame, schools were dismissed and businesses shut their
doors. Buffett went home to sit, along with the rest of the country, and watch the nonstop television coverage
throughout the weekend. He characteristically displayed no powerful surge of emotion, rather a detached
gravity. For the first time in history, a U.S. presidential assassination was being covered on television around
the globe. For the first time, shock and sorrow united the world through the medium of television. For a brief
while America stopped thinking about anything but the assassination.
The newspapers, of course, relegated the American Express scandal to their back inside pages for days as the
dramatic headlines took precedence.44 But Buffett went looking for it. The stock never recovered from the
blow it took on Friday when the market closed, and afterward it continued to slide downhill. Investors were
fleeing in droves from the stock of one of America’s most prestigious financial institutions. Its price had been
cut in half.45 Indeed, it wasn’t clear whether American Express would survive.
The company was an emerging financial powerhouse. Now that the average person could suddenly afford air
travel, half a billion dollars of the company’s Travelers Cheques floated around the world. Its credit card,
launched five years earlier, was a huge success. The company’s value was its brand name. American Express
sold trust. Had the taint to its reputation so leaked into customers’ consciousness that they no longer trusted
the name? Buffett started dropping in on Omaha restaurants and visiting places that took American Express
cards and Travelers Cheques.46 He put Henry Brandt on the case.
Brandt scouted Travelers Cheque users, bank tellers, bank officers, restaurants, hotels, and credit-card
holders to gauge how American Express was doing versus its competitors, and whether use of American
Express Travelers Cheques and cards had dropped off.47 Back came the usual foot-high stack of material.
Buffett’s verdict after sorting through it was that customers were still happy to be associated with the name
American Express. The tarnish on Wall Street had not spread to Main Street.48
During the months that Buffett was investigating American Express, his father’s health declined
precipitously. Despite having undergone several surgeries, Howard’s cancer had spread throughout his body.
In early 1964, Warren took charge as the de facto leader of the family. While time remained, he had Howard
remove him from his will to increase the share left to Doris and Bertie in a trust. The amount
—$180,000—was a fraction of his and Susie’s net worth; he felt it made no sense for him to share it when he
could so easily earn money himself. He set up another trust for his children so that Howard could leave them
the farm to which the Buffett family had planned to flee when the dollar became worthless. Warren would be
trustee of these trusts. Howard’s previous will had specified an ordinary wood casket and an economical
funeral, and the family convinced him to delete that part.49 One of the most difficult things Warren felt he
had to do was to level with his father that he was no longer a Republican at heart.50 The reason, he said, was
civil rights.51 Amazingly, however, he could not bring himself to change his voter registration as long as
Howard was alive.52
“I wouldn’t throw that in his face. In fact if he had lived, it would have really constrained my life. I would
not have come out against my father politically in public. I can envision his friends wondering why Warren
was behaving that way. I couldn’t have done it.”
Although the family did not talk about Howard’s impending death at home,53 Susie took over much of his
care from Leila. She also saw to it that the children took part in their own way. She arranged for them to

stand outside his hospital window with a sign that said, “We Love You, Grandpa.” At ten and nine years old,
Susie Jr. and Howie understood what was going on. Five-year-old Peter had a vaguer sense of his
grandfather’s illness. Susie also made sure that Warren—who had trouble facing illness under any
circumstances—went to the hospital every day to see his father.
As Howard worsened, Warren poured his attention into American Express. At the time, he had the largest
cache of money with which to work that the partnership had ever seen: Its huge profits in 1963 meant that on
January 1, 1964, $5 million of new money had come in, and the partnership was already enriched by $3
million of stock gains from the previous year. His own money had exploded: He was now worth $1.8 million.
BPL’s capital at the beginning of 1964 stood at just under $17.5 million. During Howard’s last weeks,
Warren began to invest in American Express at a hyperactive sprint, pouring money into stock as fast as he
could trade, working tirelessly and methodically to get as many shares as he could without running up the
price. Only five years before, he had had to scrape and scrounge to find a few tens of thousands for National
American. Never before had he invested like this. Never had he put to work anything approaching this much
money, and so fast, in his life.
Through most of Howard’s final few days, Susie was alone with him, often for hours at a time. She both
feared and understood pain, but she was unafraid of death and had the strength to sit with Howard even when
those around her were falling apart. Her gift for comforting the hopeless and those in misery blossomed, and
Leila, devastated, let her take charge. In such close proximity to death, Susie found that the boundaries
between herself and the other dissolved. “Many people kind of flee, but for me it was natural,” she said. “It
was a beautiful experience to be that physically and emotionally intimate with someone you loved, because I
knew exactly what his needs were. You know when they need to turn their head, or you know when they
need a little ice chip. You know. You feel it. I loved him very much. And he gave me that gift for myself of
knowing, of having that experience, and realizing how I felt about it.”54
Susie Jr., Howie, and Peter were sitting at the kitchen table one evening when their father came in, looking
more depressed than they had ever seen him. “I’m going to Grandma’s house,” he said. “Why?” they asked.
“Aren’t you going to the hospital?” “Grandpa died today,” Warren said, and walked out the back door
without another word.
“I thought, we don’t want to talk about this,” Susie Jr. recalls. “This was going to be so big that talking about
it was too painful.” Big Susie represented the family in planning the funeral, while Warren sat at home,
stunned into silence. Leila was distraught, but she anticipated her reunion with her husband in heaven. Susie
tried to get Warren to explore and express his feelings about his father’s death, but he literally could not think
about it, fending it off with anything else available. Falling back upon his core of financial conservatism, he
argued with Susie that she had been conned into spending too much money on Howard’s coffin.
On the day of the funeral, Warren sat in silence through the service as five hundred people mourned his
father. No matter how controversial Howard Buffett’s views had been during his life, people came out to
show respect for him in the end. Afterward, Warren stayed home for a few days.55 He parried unwelcome
thoughts with the distraction of watching Congress debate landmark civil rights legislation on television.
When he returned to the office, he continued buying American Express at a hectic pace. By the end of June
1964, two months after Howard’s death, he had put almost $3 million into the stock; it was now the
partnership’s largest investment. Although he never did show any visible sign of grief,56 eventually he placed
a large portrait of his father on the wall across from his desk. And one day, weeks after the funeral, two bald
patches appeared on the sides of his head. His hair had fallen out from the shock.

27
Folly

Omaha and New Bedford, Massachusetts • 1964–1966

Six weeks after Howard died, Warren did something unexpected. It was not just about money anymore.
American Express had done wrong, and he thought that the company should admit it and pay for the damage.
The company’s president, Howard Clark, had offered the banks $60 million to settle their demands, saying
the company felt morally bound. A group of shareholders sued, arguing that American Express should defend
itself rather than pay. Buffett offered to testify on behalf of the management’s plan to settle, at his own
expense.
“It is our feeling that three or four years from now, this problem may well have added to the stature of the
company in establishing standards for financial integrity and responsibility which are far beyond those of
the normal commercial enterprise.”
But American Express wasn’t offering the money to be an example; it just wanted to get the risk behind it of
losing a lawsuit that was shadowing its stock. Nor did its customers care; the salad-oil scandal hadn’t
registered with them in the first place.
Buffett wrote that two paths lay before the company, and that an American Express that took responsibility
and paid the $60 million to the banks would be “worth very substantially more than American Express
disclaiming responsibility for its subsidiary’s acts.”1 He described the $60 million payment as inconsequential
in the long run, like a dividend check that got “lost in the mail.”
Susie, who had thrown the dividend checks down the incinerator and had never had the nerve to tell her
husband about the incident, might have been shocked to hear him so cavalierly dismiss a $60 million dividend
check lost in the mail, had she known.2 And why should Buffett now be interested in whether American
Express had “standards for financial integrity and responsibility…beyond those of the normal commercial
enterprise”? From whence had come the notion that a reputation for integrity would translate into a business
“worth substantially more”? Why did Warren want to testify? While he had always shared his father’s
commitment to honesty, now he seemed to have inherited Howard’s penchant for pontificating on matters of
principle.
Buffett had always wanted to influence the managements of companies in which he invested. But in the past
he had not attempted to turn his investments into a church, where he could preach while passing around the
collection plate. Now he showed up at Howard Clark’s door unannounced to lobby him to remain resolute
despite the shareholder lawsuit.
“I had this habit of just sort of dropping in and talking to different people. There was one time that Howard
said to me that it’d be a little nicer if I paid more attention to the organization chart…. He was very nice
about it.”3
As if to confirm Buffett’s sense that moral rectitude had financial value, American Express paid the
settlement and worked through its travails, and the stock, which had plunged below $35, rose to more than
$49 per share. By November 1964, the partnership owned more than $4.3 million of American Express stock.
It had made other huge bets: $4.6 million in Texas Gulf Producing and another $3.5 million in Pure Oil, cigar
butts both. Together the three made up more than half the portfolio.4 By 1965, American Express alone was
almost one-third.
The entire partnership had stood at only $7.2 million at the beginning of 1962. Buffett, fearless in
concentrating his bets, would keep buying into 1966 until he had spent $13 million on American Express. He
felt the partners ought to know a new “ground rule”: “We diversify substantially less than most investment
operations. We might invest up to forty percent of our net worth in a single security under conditions
coupling an extremely high probability that our facts and our reasoning are correct with a very low
probability that anything could drastically change the underlying value of the investment.”5

Warren had ventured far from the worldview of his mentor, Ben Graham. The hard-nosed “quantitative”
approach espoused by Graham was the world of the speed handicapper, of the cigar-butt stooper who worked
from pure statistics. Come to work in the morning, flip through the Moody’s Manual or the Standard &
Poor’s weekly report, look for cheap stocks based on a handful of numbers, call Tom Knapp at Tweedy,
Browne & Knapp and buy them, go home when the market closed, and sleep well at night. As Buffett said of
this, his favorite approach, “The more sure money tends to be made on the obvious quantitative decisions.”
But the method had a couple of drawbacks. The number of statistical bargains had shrunk to virtually nil, and
since cigar butts tended to be small companies, it did not work when large sums of money were involved.
While still working this approach, Buffett had had what he would later call a “high-probability insight” about
American Express that confounded Ben Graham’s core idea. Unlike companies whose value came from cash,
equipment, real estate, and other assets that could be calculated and if necessary liquidated, American
Express had little more than its customers’ goodwill. He had bet his partners’ money—Alice’s inheritance;
Doc Thompson’s savings; Anne Gottschaldt’s and Catherine Elberfeld’s money; the Angles’ life savings; and
Estey Graham’s money—on that goodwill: the competitive advantage that Charlie Munger had been talking
about when he spoke of the “great businesses.” This was the method of the class handicapper, of Phil Fisher,
and it involved qualitative, as opposed to quantitative, assessments.
Buffett would later write to the partners that buying “the right company (with the right prospects, inherent
industry conditions, management, etc.)” means “the price will take care of itself…. This is what causes the
cash register to really sing. However, it is an infrequent occurrence, as insights usually are, and of course,
no insight is required on the quantitative side—the figures should hit you over the head with a baseball bat.
So the really big money tends to be made by investors who are right on qualitative decisions.”6
This new emphasis on a qualitative approach paid off in the stupendous results Buffett was able to announce
to his partners at the end of 1965. When Buffett made his annual report to them, he compared the huge gain
to an earlier prediction that he could beat the Dow by ten percent a year—and referred to the dazzling
performance by saying, “Naturally no writer likes to be publicly humiliated by such a mistake. It is unlikely
to be repeated.”7 Despite the irony, he had begun a tradition of hedging against his partners’ high
expectations. As his record of outstanding results lengthened, his letters also began to display a preoccupation
with measuring success and failure. He used terms like “guilt,” “embarrass,” “disappoint,” or “blame” with
unusual frequency, including to describe his so-called mistakes—for he remained obsessed with never letting
anyone down.8 As readers began to recognize this pattern, some assumed he was manipulating them, while
others accused him of false modesty. Hardly anybody knew how deep his sense of insecurity ran.
In the year following Howard’s death, Warren began to think of memorializing him in some way—for
example, through endowing a university chair. But he could never seem to find the perfect vehicle. He and
Susie did set up the Buffett Foundation, which made small grants to educational causes. But this wasn’t what
he had in mind for his father. And he had no intention of becoming a philanthropist; it was Susie who liked to
dispense money and she who ran the foundation. Instead, Warren worked with no slacking of intensity. After
his incredible home run on American Express, he hired John Harding from the Omaha National Bank trust
department in April 1965, to handle administration. And yet, when Harding took the job, Buffett warned him:
“I don’t know if I’ll necessarily be doing this forever, and if I quit, you’ll be out of a job.”9
But there was no sign of his quitting. Harding had hoped to learn investing, but that ambition was soon
destroyed. “Any idea that I wanted to handle investments on my own disappeared when I saw how good
Warren was,” he says. Instead, Harding simply put most of his money into the partnership.
Besides shoveling millions of dollars’ worth of American Express stock into BPL, Warren now chased bigger
deals that required travel and coordination, both giant cigar butts and “qualitative” class handicapping deals
that were a far cry from flipping through the Moody’s Manual in his bathrobe at home. His next target,
another cigar butt, lay far from Omaha.
Each of the Grahamites in Buffett’s network was always looking for ideas, and Dan Cowin had brought

