
80

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

downside breakout stops making new lows. Then they pounce - they fade
the breakout (trade against it) and place a protective stop at the latest
extreme point. It is a very tight stop, and their risk is low, while there is a big
profit potential from a pullback into the congestion zone. The riswreward
ratio is so good that professionals can afford to be wrong half the time and
still come out ahead of the game.
The best time to buy an upside breakout on a daily chart is when your
analysis of the weekly chart suggests that a new uptrend is developing. True
breakouts are confirmed by heavy volume, while false breakouts tend to
have light volume. True breakouts are confirmed when technical indicators
reach new extreme highs or lows in the direction of the trend, while false
breakouts are often marked by divergences between prices and indicators.

20. TREND A N D TRADING RANGE
Traders try to profit from changes in prices: Buy low and sell high, or sell
short high and cover low. Even a quick look at a chart reveals that markets
spend most of their time in trading ranges. They spend less time in trends.
A trend exists when prices keep rising or falling over time. In an
uptrend, each rally reaches a higher high than the preceding rally and each
decline stops at a higher level than the preceding decline. In a downtrend,
each decline falls to a lower low than the preceding decline and each rally
stops at a lower level than the preceding rally. In a trading range, most rallies stop at about the same high and declines peter out at about the same low.
A trader needs to identify trends and trading ranges. It is easier to trade
during trends (Figure 20-1). It is harder to make money when prices are flat
unless you write options, which requires a special skill.
Trading in trends and in trading ranges calls for different tactics. When
you go long in an uptrend or sell short in a downtrend, you have to give that
trend the benefit of the doubt and not be shaken out easily. It pays to buckle
your seat belt and hang on for as long as the trend continues. When you trade
in a trading range, you have to be nimble andclose out your position at the
slightest sign of a reversal.
Another difference in trading tactics between trends and trading ranges is
the handling of strength and weakness. You have to follow strength during
trends-buy in uptrends and sell short in downtrends. When prices are in a
trading range, you have to do the opposite - buy weakness and sell strength.

20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE

Soybeans

.
.
.

340

.
.

278

330
328
310

1

~lh,{h+@~d

2
T

Nou

Figure 20-1.

Dec

4

.Jan

Feb

Mar

AP~

y

260
258

Trend and Trading Range

A pattern of lower bottoms and lower tops defines downtrends.
Soybeans declined from November until the middle of January. Bdttom
4 was lower than bottom 2, and peak 3 lower than peak 1. The break of
the downtrendline at point 5 signaled the end of the downtrend. A broken downtrend can lead to either a trading range or an uptrend.
The November-Januarydowntrend has dissolved into a trading range,
defined by horizontal lines drawn through the low 4 and highs 3 and 6.
When the decline from high 6 stopped at a higher low 7 without reaching the bottom of the range, you could draw a preliminary uptrendline.
A breakout from the range at point 8 confirmed the beginning of a new
uptrend.
At the right edge of the chart, prices are hovering just above their
uptrendline. It i s a buying opportunity because the trend i s up. The
downside risk of a trade can be limited by placing a stop either below
the latest low or below the trendline. Notice that daily trading ranges
(the distances from highs to lows) are relatively narrow. This i s typical of
a healthy trend. Trends often end after several wide-range days-a sign of
blowoff action.

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Mass Psychology

An uptrend emerges when bulls are stronger than bears and their buying forces
prices up. If bears manage to push prices down, bulls return in force, break the
decline, and force prices to a new high. Downtrends occur when bears are
stronger and their selling pushes markets down. When a flurry of buying lifts
prices, bears sell short into that rally, stop it, and send prices to new lows.
When bulls and bears are equally strong or weak, prices stay in a trading
range. When bulls manage to push prices up, bears sell short into that rally
and prices fall. Bargain hunters step in and break the decline; bears cover
shorts, their buying fuels a minor rally, and the cycle repeats.
A trading range is like a fight between two equally strong gangs. They
push one another back and forth on a street comer but neither can control the
turf. A trend is like a fight where a stronger gang chases the weaker gang
down the street. Every once in a while the weaker gang stops and puts up a
fight but then is forced to turn and run again.
Prices in trading ranges go nowhere, just as crowds spend most of their
time in aimless milling. Markets spend more time in trading ranges than in
trends because aimlessness is more common among people than purposeful
action. When a crowd becomes agitated, it surges and creates a trend.
Crowds do not stay excited for long- they g o back to meandering.
Professionals tend to give the benefit of the doubt to trading ranges.
The Hard Right Edge

Identifying trends and trading ranges is one of the hardest tasks in technical
analysis. It is easy to find them in the middle of a chart, but the closer you
get to the right edge, the harder it gets.
Trends and trading ranges clearly stand out on old charts. Experts show
those charts at seminars and make it seem easy to catch trends. Trouble is,
your broker does not allow you to trade in the middle of the chart. He says
you must make your trading decisions at the hard right edge of the chart!
The past is fixed and easy to analyze. The future is fluid and uncertain. By
the time you identify a trend, a good chunk of it is gone. Nobody rings a bell
when a trend dissolves into a trading range. By the time you recognize that
change, you will lose some money trying to trade as if the market was still
trending.

20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE

83

Many chart patterns and indicator signals contradict one another at the
right edge of the chart. You have to base your decisions on probabilities in an
atmosphere of uncertainty.
Most people cannot accept uncertainty. They have a strong emotional
need to be right. They hang onto losing positions, waiting for the market to
turn and make them whole. Trying to be right in the market is very expensive. Professional traders get out of losing trades fast. When the market deviates from your analysis, you have to cut losses without fuss or emotions.
Methods and Techniques - )
'-.
- -There is no single magic method for identifying trends and trading ranges.
There are several methods, and it pays to combine them. When they confirm
one another, their message is reinforced. When they contradict one another,
it is better to pass up a trade.
1. Analyze the pattern of highs and lows. When rallies keep reaching
higher levels and declines keep stopping at higher levels, they identify
an uptrend. The pattern of lower lows and lower highs identifies a
downtrend, and the pattern of irregular highs and lows points to a trading range (Figure 20-1).
2. Draw an uptrendline connecting significant recent lows and a downtrendline connecting significant recent highs (see Section 21). The
slope of the latest trendline identifies the current trend (Figures 20-1,
20-2,21-1).
A significant high or low on a daily chart is the highest high or the lowest
low for at least a week. As you study charts, you become better at identifying those points. Technical analysis is partly a science and partly an art.
3. Plot a 13-day or longer exponential moving average (see Section 25).
The direction of its slope identifies the trend. If a moving average has
not reached a new high or low in a month, then the market is in a trading range.
4. Several market indicators, such as MACD (see Section 26) and the
Directional system (Section 27), help identify trends. The Directional
system is especially good at catching early stages of new trends.

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

84

Ikc
Figure 20-2.

Jan

Feb

Trendlines Identify Trends

The most important message of a trendline is the direction of its slope.
When the slope is up, trade that market from the long side. When the
slope is down, trade that market from the short side.
The uptrendline connecting bottoms 1 and 2 identifies an uptrend. It
tells you to trade heating oil only from the long side. Notice that sometimes prices break their uptrendline but later pull back to it from below
(3). This is a superb shorting opportunity. This happens again at point 7,
where prices rise to their old uptrendline after breaking it.
When you trade in the direction of the trendline, you are usually trading in the direction of the market tide. At the right edge of the chart, you
need to look for a shorting opportunity because the trend is down. Do
not sell short immediately, because prices are too far below their downtrendline and your stop would have to be too wide. It is essential to wait
for trades with a good riskheward ratio. Patience i s a virtue for a trader.
L

Trade or Wait
When you identify an uptrend and decide to buy, you have to decide whether
to buy immediately or wait for a dip. If you buy fast, you get i n gear with the
trend, but your stops are likely to be farther away and you risk more.
If you wait for a dip, you will risk less but will have four groups of com-

20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE

85

petitors: longs who want to add to their positions, shorts who want to get out
even, traders who never bought, and traders who sold too early but are eager
to buy. The waiting area for a pullback is very crowded! Markets are not
known for their charity, and a deep pullback may well signal the beginning
of a reversal. This reasoning also applies to downtrends. Waiting for pullbacks while a trend is gathering steam is an amateur's game.
If the market is in a trading range and you are waiting for a breakout, you
have to decide whether to buy in anticipation of a breakout, during a breakout, or on a pullback after a valid breakout. If you trade multiple positions,
you can buy a third in anticipation, a third on a breakout, and a third on a
pullback.
Whatever method you use, there is one money management rule that will
keep you out of the riskiest trades. The distance from the entry point to the
level of a protective stop should never be more than 2 percent of your
account equity (see Chapter 10). No matter how attractive a trade is, pass it
up if it requires a wider stop.
Money management tactics are different in trends and trading ranges. It
pays to put on a smaller position in a trend but use a wider stop. Then you will
be less likely to get shaken out by reactions while you keep risk under control.
You may put on a bigger position in a trading range but use a tighter stop.
Finding good entry points is extremely important in trading ranges. You
have to be very precise because the profit potential is so limited. A trend is
more forgiving of a sloppy entry, as long as you trade in the direction of the
trend. Old traders chuckle: "Do not confuse brains with a bull market."
When you cannot tell whether the market is in a trend or in a trading range,
remember that professionals give the benefit of the doubt to trading ranges.
If you are not sure, stand aside.
Professionals love trading ranges because they can slide in and out of
positions with little risk of being impaled on a trend. Since they pay low or
no commissions and suffer little slippage, it is profitable for them to trade in
gently fluctuating markets. Those of us who trade away from the floor are
better off trying to catch trends. You can trade less frequently during trends,
and your account suffers less from commissions and slippage.

Conflicting Timeframes

Most traders ignore the fact that markets usually are both in a trend and in a
trading range at the same time! They pick one timeframe such as daily or

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

86

:: Eurodollars-Weekly

.. 89
"

A

APP Jun Bug Oct Dec leb APP Jun Aug Gt Dee kb AR Jun Aug

:: Eurodollars- Daily

C

88

95
94
94
93
93
93
92
92

T

Figure 20-3.

92
Conflicting Trends i n Different Timeframes

The weekly chart of Eurodollars shows a perfect uptrend A-B. At the
same time, the daily chart shows that a downtrend X-Y i s beginning.
Which of them will you follow? Contradictory signals in different timeframes in the same market are among the most common and thorny
dilemmas in trading. You need to watch markets in more than one timeframe and know how to handle their conflicting signals. The Triple
Screen trading system helps you solve this problem (see Section 43).

hourly and look for trades on daily charts. With their attention fixed on daily
or hourly charts, trends from other timeframes, such as weekly or 10-minute
trends, keep sneaking up on them and wreaking havoc with their plans.
Markets exist in several timeframes simultaneously (see Section 36).
They exist on a 10-minute chart, an hourly chart, a daily chart, a weekly
chart, and any other chart. The market may look like a buy on a daily chart
but a sell on a weekly chart, and vice versa (Figure 20-3). The signals in different timeframes of the same market often contradict one another. Which of
them will you follow?
When you are in doubt about a trend, step back and examine the charts in
a timeframe that is larger than the one you are trying to trade. This search for
a greater perspective is one of the key principles of the Triple Screen trading
system (see Section 43).
A losing trader often thinks he would be better off if he had a real-time
quote machine on his desk. One of the universal fantasies of losers is that
they would be winners if they could get their data faster and focused on a
shorter timeframe. But they lose money even faster with a quote system!
When that happens, some losers say they would be better off trading right on
the exchange floor, without any delay for data transmission. But more than
half of floor traders wash out in their first year; being in the middle of the
action does not do losers any good.
The conflicting signals in different timeframes of the same market are one
of the great puzzles in market analysis. What looks like a trend on a daily
chart may show up as a blip on a flat weekly chart. What looks like a flat
trading range on a daily chart shows rich uptrends and downtrends on an
hourly chart, and so on. When professionals are in doubt, they look at the big
picture, but amateurs focus on the short-term charts.

Charts reveal the actions of bulls and bears. Bottoms of declines show where
bears stopped and bulls regained control of the market. Peaks of rallies show
where bulls ran out of steam and bears gained control. A line connecting two
nearby bottoms shows the lowest common denominator of bullish power. A
line that connects two nearby tops shows the lowest common denominator of
the power of bears. Those lines are called trendlines. Traders use them to
identify trends.

88

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

When prices rally, draw an uptrendline across the bottoms. When prices
decline, draw a downtrendline across the tops. Projecting those lines into the
future helps anticipate buying and selling points.
The most important feature of a trendline is its angle- it identifies the
dominant market force. When a trendline points cp, it shows that bulls are in
control. Then it pays to buy with a protective stop below the trendline. When
a trendline points down, it shows that bears are in control. Then it pays to
sell short and protect your position with a stop above the trendline.
Trendlines are among the oldest tools of traders. Modem computerized
tools for identifying trends include moving averages, the Directional system,
and MACD (Chapter 4).

How to Draw a Trendline

Most chartists draw a trendline through extreme high and low points, but it is
better to draw it through the edges of congestion areas (Figure 21-1). Those
edges show where the majority of traders have reversed direction. Technical
analysis is poll-taking- and polltakers want to track opinions of masses, not
of a few extremists. Drawing trendlines through the edges of congestion
areas is somewhat subjective. You have to watch out for the temptation to
slant your ruler.
Panic dumping by bulls at the bottoms and panic covering by bears at the
tops create extremes, which appear as long "tails" on the charts. You want to
base your trendlines on the edges of congestion areas and not on tails
because tails show little about the crowd other than its tendency to panic.
The extreme points are very important -but not for drawing trendlines.
Markets usually recoil from those tails, offering opportunities to short-term
traders (Figure 21-1). As Steidlmayer pointed out, a bar that looks like a finger sticking out of a tight chart pattern provides a valuable reference point
for short-term traders.
Markets constantly fluctuate, seeking an area that generates the highest
volume of trading. A tail shows that a certain price has been rejected by the
market. It usually leads to a swing in the opposite direction. As soon as you
recognize a tail, trade against it. Place your protective stop halfway through
the tail. If the market starts "chewing its tail," it is time to get out.
Victor Sperandeo described another method for drawing trendlines in his
book, Trader Kc. His technique helps identify reversals of well-established
trends (Figure 21-2).
Sperandeo draws an uptrendline from the lowest low of the move to the

Figure 21-1.

Trendlines and "Tails"

Draw trendlines through the edges of congestion areas and leave out the
extreme prices. Tails are long bars at the ends of trends-they spring outside of congestion areas. Markets recoil from tails, offering good trading
opportunities in the opposite direction.
Notice how the angles of uptrends tend to recur, month after month.
Knowing this can help you draw preliminary trendlines. At the right edge
of the chart, prices are touching their uptrendline-buy as soon as you
see a bar that fails to reach a new low.
7

highest minor low prior to the highest high. That line may not pass through
prices between those two points. When that trendline is broken, it gives the
first signal of a trend change. The second signal is given when prices retest
the recent high and back away from it. The third signal occurs when prices
break through the previous minor low. It confirms that the uptrend has
reversed. A mirror image of this method applies to downtrends.
Rating Trendlines

The single most important feature of a trendline is its slope. When a trendline slants up, bulls are in control and it pays to look for buying opportuni-

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

90

Figure 21-2.

1-2-3 Reversal Method

Draw a trendline from the highest high (A) to the highest minor high (B)
preceding the lowest low (C) so that it does not pass through prices
between A and B. The break of this trendline (1) is the first signal of a
trend change. A test of the recent low ( 2 ) gives the second signal of a
trend change. This is a good time to start buying. When prices break
through their minor high (3), they will confirm that the trend has
reversed. This method, described by Victor Sperandeo, helps catch
major reversals rather than shorter-term swings.

ties. When a trendline slants down, bears are in control and it pays to look
for shorting opportunities. You can rate the importance of any trendline by
examining five factors: the timeframe of the trendline, its length, the number
of times prices touch it, its angle, and volume.
The longer the timeframe, the more important the trendline. A trendline
on a weekly chart identifies a more important trend than a daily trendline. A
trendline on a daily chart identifies a more important trend than an hourly
trendline, and so on.
The longer the trendline, the more valid it is. A short trendline reflects
mass behavior over a short period. A longer trendline reflects .mass behavior
over a longer time. The longer a trend continues, the greater its inertia. A
major bull market may follow its trendline for several years.
The more contacts between prices and trendline, the more valid that line.

When the trend is up, a return to the trendline shows a rebellion among
bears. When the trend is down, a rally to the trendline shows a rebellion by
the bulls. When prices pull back to a trendline and then bounce away from it,
you know that the dominant market group has beaten the rebels.
A preliminary trendline is drawn across only two points. Three points of
contact make that line more valid. Four or five points of contact show that
the dominant market crowd is firmly in control.
The angle between a trendline and the horizontal axis reflects the emotional intensity of the dominant market crowd. A steep trendline shows that
the dominant crowd is moving rapidly. A relatively flat trendline shows that
the dominant crowd is moving slowly. A shallow trendline is likely to last
longer, like a turtle racing against a hare.
It pays to measure the angle of every trendline and write it down on your
chart (Figure 21-1). This can be done using a computer, a protractor, or a
Chinese Charting Tool. Comparing angles of trendlines shows whether the
dominant market crowd is becoming more bullish or bearish. It is uncanny
how often trendlines trace the same angle time and again in a given market.
It may be because the key players seldom change.
Sometimes prices accelerate away from their trendline. Then you can draw a
new, steeper trendline. It shows that a trend is speeding up, becoming unsustainable (Figure 21-3). When you draw a new, steeper trendline, tighten your stop,
place it immediately below the latest trendline, and adjust that stop at every new
bar. The breaking of a steep trendline is usually followed by a sharp reversal.
When the trend is up, volume normally expands when prices rally and
shrinks when they decline. This shows that rallies attract traders while
declines leave them cold. The opposite occurs in downtrends-volume
expands on declines and shrinks on rallies. A pullback on heavy volume
threatens a trendline because it shows that the rebellious crowd is growing.
If volume expands when prices move in the direction of a trendline, it confirms that trendline; if volume shrinks when prices pull back to a trendline, it
also confirms the trendline. If volume expands when prices return to a trendline, it warns of a potential break; if volume shrink when prices pull away
from a trendline, it warns that the trendline is in danger.
