
Probability

Outcome

Expectation

A
B

999/1000
1/1000

$1
-$10,000
Total

$.999
-$10.00
-$9,001

My expectation is a loss of close to $9 (obtained by multiplying the
probabilities by the corresponding outcomes). The frequency or
probability of the loss, in and by itself, is totally irrelevant; it needs to
be judged in connection with the magnitude of the outcome. Here A is

86

SOLON'S

WARNING

far more likely than B. Odds are that we would make money by betting
for event A, but it is not a good idea to do so.
This point is rather common and simple; it is understood by anyone
making a simple bet. Yet I had to struggle all my life with people in the
financial markets who do not seem to internalize it. I am not talking of
novices; I am talking of people with advanced degrees (albeit MBAs)
who cannot come to grips with the difference.
How could people miss such a point? Why do they confuse
probability and expectation, that is, probability and probability times
the payoff? Mainly because much of people's schooling comes from
examples in symmetric environments, like a coin-toss, where such a
difference does not matter. In fact the so-called "Bell Curve" that seems
to have found universal use in society is entirely symmetric. More on
that later.

Bull and Bear Zoology
The general press floods us with concepts like bullish and bearish as
these mean to refer to the effect of higher (bullish) or lower (bearish)
prices in the financial markets. But also we hear people saying "I am
bullish on Johnny" or "I am bearish on that guy Nassim in the back who
seems incomprehensible to me", to denote the belief in the likelihood of
someone's rise in life. I have to say that the notion bullish or bearish are
often hollow words with no application in a world of randomness particularly if such a world, like ours, presents asymmetric outcomes.
When I was in the employment of the New York office of a large
investment house, I was subjected on occasions to the harrying weekly
"discussion meeting", which gathered most professionals of the New York
trading room. I do not conceal that I was not fond of such gatherings, and
not only because they cut into my gym time. While the meetings included
traders, that is, people who are judged on their numerical performance, it
was mostly a forum for salespeople (people capable of charming
customers), and the category of entertainers called Wall Street
"economists" or "strategists" who make pronouncements on the fate of

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

87

the markets, but do not engage in any form of risk taking, thus having their
success dependent on rhetoric rather than actually testable facts. During
the discussion, people were supposed to present their opinions on the state
of the world. To me, the meeting was pure intellectual pollution. Everyone
had a story, a theory, and insights that they wanted others to share. I resent
the person who, without having done much homework in libraries, thinks
that he is onto something rather original and insightful on a given subject
matter (and respect people with scientific minds like my friend Stan Jonas
who feel compelled to spend their nights reading wholesale on a subject
matter, trying to figure out what was done on the subject by others before
emitting an opinion - would the reader listen to the opinion of a doctor
who does not read medical papers?).
I have to confess that my optimal strategy (to soothe my boredom
and allergy to confident platitudes) was to speak as much as I could,
while totally avoiding listening to other people's replies by trying to
solve equations in my head. Speaking too much would help me clarify
my mind, and, with a little bit of luck, I would not be "invited" back
(that is, forced to attend) the following week.
I was once asked in one of those meetings to express my views on the
stock market. I stated, not without a modicum of pomp, that I believed
that the market would go slightly up over the next week with a high
probability. How high? "About 70%". Clearly, that was a very strong
opinion. But then someone interjected "But, Nassim, you just boasted
being short a very large quantity of SP500 futures, making a bet that the
market would go down. What made you change your mind?". "I did not
change my mind! I have a lot of faith in my bet! (audience laughing). As
a matter of fact I now feel like selling even more!" The other employees
in the room seemed utterly confused. "Are you bullish or are you
bearish?" I was asked by the strategist. I replied that I could not
understand the words "bullish" and "bearish" outside of their purely
zoological consideration. Just as with events A and B in the preceding
example, my opinion was that the market was more likely to go up ("I
would be bullish"), but that it was preferable to short it ("I would be
bearish"), because, in the event of its going down, it could go down a
lot. Suddenly, the few traders in the room understood my opinion and
started voicing similar opinions. And I was not forced to come back to
the following discussion.

88

SOLON'S

WARNING

Let us assume that the reader shared my opinion, that the market
over the next week had a 70% probability of going up and 30%
probability of going down. However, let us say that it would_go up by
1% on average, while it could go down by an average of 10%. What
would the reader do? Is the reader bullish or is he bearish}
Table 6.2
Event

Probability

Outcome

Expectation

Market goes up

70%

Up 1 %

0.7

Market goes down

30%

Down 1 0 %

-3.00

Total

-2.3

Accordingly, bullish or bearish are terms used by people who do not
engage in practicing uncertainty, like the television commentators, or
those who have no experience in handling risk. Alas, investors and
businesses are not paid in probabilities, they are paid in dollars.
Accordingly, it is not how likely an event is to happen that matters, it is
how much is made when it happens that should be the consideration. How
frequent the profit is irrelevant; it is the magnitude of the outcome that
counts. It is a pure accounting fact that, aside from the commentators,
very few people take home a check linked to how often they are right or
wrong. What they get is a profit or loss. As to the commentators, their
success is linked to how often they are right or wrong. This category
includes the "chief strategists" of major investment banks the public can
see on T.V., who are'nothing better than entertainers. They are famous,
seem reasoned in their speech, plow you with numbers, but, functionally,
they are there to entertain - for their predictions to have any validity they
would need a statistical testing framework. Their fame is not the result of
some elaborate test but rather the result of their presentation skills.

an a r r o g a n t 29-year-old

son

Outside of the need for entertainment in these shallow meetings I have
resisted voicing a "market call" as a trader, which caused some personal

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

89

strain with some of my friends and relatives. One day a friend of my
father - of the rich and confident variety - called me during his New
York visit (to set the elements of pecking order straight, he hinted right
away during the call that he came by Concorde, with some derogatory
comment on the comfort of such method of transportation). He wanted
to pick my brain on the state of a collection of financial markets. I truly
had no opinion, nor had made the effort to formulate any, nor was I
remotely interested in markets. The gentleman kept plowing me with
questions on the state of economies, on the European central banks;
these were precise questions no doubt aiming to compare my opinion to
that of some other "expert" handling his account at one of the large
New York investment firms. I neither concealed that I had no clue, nor
did I seem sorry about it. I was not interested in markets ("yes, I am a
trader") and did not make predictions, period. I went on to explain to
him some of my ideas on the structure of randomness and the
verificability of market calls but he wanted a more precise statement
of what the European bond markets would do by the Christmas season.
He came under the impression that I was pulling his leg; it almost
damaged the relationship between my father and his rich and confident
friend. For the gentleman called him with the following grievance:
"When I ask a lawyer a legal question, he answers me with courtesy and
precision. When I ask a doctor a medical question, he gives me his
opinion. No specialist ever gives me disrespect. Your insolent and
conceited 29-year-old son is playing prima donna and refuses to answer
me about the direction of the market!"

rare

events

The best description of my lifelong business in the market is "skewed
bets", that is, I try to benefit from rare events, events that do not tend to
repeat themselves frequently, but, accordingly, present a large payoff
when they occur. I try to make money infrequently, as infrequently as
possible, simply because I believe that rare events are not fairly valued,
and that the rarer the event, the more undervalued it will be in price.
Why? Because of a psychological bias; people who surrounded me in
my career were too focused on memorizing section 2 of the Wall Street

90

SOLON'S

WARNING

Journal during their train ride to reflect properly on the attributes of
random events. Or perhaps they watched too many gurus on television.
Or perhaps they spent too much time upgrading their PalmPilot. Even
some experienced trading veterans do not seem to get the point that
frequencies do not matter. Jim Rogers, a "legendary" investor, made the
following statement:
I don't buy options. Buying options is another way to go to the poorhouse. Someone did a study for the SEC and discovered that 90 percent
of all options expire as losses. Well, I figured out that if 90 percent of all
long option positions lost money, that meant that 90 percent of all short
option positions make money. If I want to use options to be bearish, I
sell calls.
Visibly, the statistic that 90% of all option positions lost money is
meaningless, (i.e., the frequency) if we do not take into account how
much money is made on average during the remaining 10%. If we make
50 times our bet on average when the option is in the money, then I can
safely make the statement that buying options is another way to go to
the palazzo rather than the poorhouse. Mr Jim Rogers seems to have
gone very far in life for someone who does not distinguish between
probability and expectation (strangely, he was the partner of George
Soros, a complex man who thrived on rare events - more on him later).
One such rare event is the stock market crash of 1987, which made
me as a trader and allowed me the luxury of becoming involved in all
manner of scholarship. Nero of the smaller house in Chapter 1 aims to
get out of harm's way by avoiding exposure to rare events - a mostly
defensive approach. I am far more aggressive than Nero and go one step
further; I have organized my career and business in such a way as to be
able to benefit from them. In other words, I aim at profiting from the
rare event, with my asymmetric bets.

symmetry and

science

In most disciplines, such asymmetry does not matter. Unfortunately, the
techniques used in finance are often imported from other areas - finance

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

91

is still a young discipline (it is certainly not yet a "science"). People in
most fields outside of finance do not have problems eliminating extreme
values from their sample, when the difference in payoff between
different outcomes is not significant, which is generally the case in
education and medicine. A professor who computes the average of his
students' grades removes the highest and lowest observations, which he
would call outliers, and takes the average of the remaining ones,
without this being an unsound practice. A casual weather forecaster
does the same with extreme temperatures - an unusual occurrence might
be deemed to skew the overall result (though we will see that this may
turn out to be a mistake when it comes to forecasting future properties
of the ice cap). So people in finance borrow the technique and ignore
infrequent events, not noticing that the effect of a rare event can
bankrupt a company.
Many scientists in the physical world are also subject to such
foolishness, misreading statistics. One flagrant example is in the globalwarming debate. Many scientists failed to notice it in its early stages as
they removed from their sample the spikes in temperature, under the
belief that these were not likely to recur. It may be a good idea to take
out the extremes when computing the average temperatures for vacation
scheduling. But it does not work when we study the physical properties
of the weather. These scientists initially ignored the fact that these
spikes, although rare, had the effect of adding disproportionately to the
cumulative melting of the ice cap. Just as in finance, an event, although
rare, that brings large consequences cannot just be ignored.
Figure 6.1 shows a series of points starting with an initial level Wo
and ending at the period concerned W t . It can also be seen as the
performance, hypothetical or realized, of your favorite trading strategy,
the track record of an investment manager, the price of a foot of average
Palazzo real estate in Renaissance Florence, the price series of the
Mongolian stock market, or the difference between the U.S. and
Mongolian stock markets. It is composed of a given number of
sequential observations Wi, W 2 , etc., ordered in such a way that the one
to the right comes after the one to the left.
If we were dealing with a deterministic world - that is, a world
stripped of randomness (the right-column world in Table P.l on page 3),
and we knew with certainty that it was the case, things would be rather

92

SOLON'S

WARNING

Figure 6.1 A Primer on Time Series.
easy. The pattern of the series would reveal considerable and predictive
information. You could tell with precision what would happen one day
ahead, one year ahead, and perhaps even a decade ahead. We would not
even need a statistician; a second-rate engineer would do. He does not
even need to be armed with a modern degree; someone with nineteenthcentury training under Laplace would be able to solve the equations,
called differential equations, or, equivalently, equations of motion since we are studying the dynamics of an entity whose position depends
on time.
If we were dealing with a world where randomness is charted, things
would be easy as well, given that there is an entire field created for that
called Econometrics or Time Series Analysis. You would call a friendly
econometrician (my experience of econometricians is that they are
usually polite and friendly to practitioners). He would run the data in
his software, and prdvide you with diagnostics that would tell you if it is
worth investing in the trader generating such a track record, or if it is
worth pursuing the given trading strategy. You can even buy the student
version of his software for under $999 and run it yourself during the
next rainy weekend.
But we are not sure that the world we live in" is well charted. We will
see that the judgment derived from the analysis of these past attributes
may on occasion be relevant. But it may be meaningless; it could on
occasion mislead you and take you in the opposite direction. Sometimes
market data becomes a simple trap; it shows you the opposite of its
nature, simply to get you to invest in the security or mismanage your

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

93

risks. Currencies that exhibit the largest historical stability, for example,
are the most prone to crashes. This was bitterly discovered in the
summer of 1997 by investors who chose the safety of the pegged
currencies of Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand (they were pegged to
the U.S. dollar in a manner to exhibit no volatility, until their sharp,
sudden, and brutal devaluations).
We could be either too lax or too stringent in accepting past information as a prediction of the future. As a skeptic, I reject a sole time
series of the past as an indication of future performance; I need a lot
more than data. My major reason is the rare event, but I have plenty of
others.
On the surface, my statement here may seem to contradict earlier
discussions, where I blame people for not learning enough from history.
The problem is that we read too much into shallow recent history, with
statements like "this has never happened before", but not from history
in general (things that never happened before in one area tend eventually
to happen). In other words history teaches us that things that never
happened before do happen. It can teach us a lot outside of the narrowly
defined time series; the broader the look, the better the lesson. In other
words, history teaches us to avoid the brand of naive empiricism that
consists of learning from casual historical facts.

The Rare Event Fallacy
the mother of all

deceptions

The rare event, owing to its dissimulative nature, can take a variety of
shapes. It is in Mexico that it was spotted first, where it was called by
academics the peso problem. Econometricians were puzzled by the
behavior of the Mexican economic variables during the 1980s. The money
supply, interest rates, or some similar measure of small relevance to the
story exhibited some moody behavior, thwarting many of their efforts at
modeling them. These indicators erratically switched between periods of
stability to brief bursts of turbulence without warning.

94

SOLON'S

WARNING

By generalization, I started to label a rare event as any behavior where
the adage "beware of calm waters" can hold. Popular wisdom often
warns of the old neighbor who appears to remain courtly and reserved,
the model of an excellent citizen, until you see his picture in the national
paper as a deranged killer who went on a rampage. Until then, he was not
known to have committed any transgression. There was no way to
predict that such pathological behavior could emanate from such a nice
person. I associate rare events with any misunderstanding of the risks
derived from a narrow interpretation of past time series.
Rare events are always unexpected, otherwise they would not occur.
The typical case is as follows. You invest in a hedge fund that enjoys
stable returns and no volatility, until one day, you receive a letter
starting with "An unforeseen and unexpected event, deemed a rare
occurrence . . . " (emphasis mine). But rare events exist precisely because
they are unexpected. They are generally caused by panics, themselves
the results of liquidations (the investors rushing to the door
simultaneously by dumping anything they can put their hands on as
fast as possible). If the fund manager or trader expected it, he and his
like-minded peers would not have invested in it, and the rare event
would not have taken place.
The rare event is not limited to one security. It can readily affect the
performance of a portfolio. For example, many traders engage in the
purchase of mortgage securities and hedge them in some manner to
offset the risks and eliminate the volatility, hoping to derive some profits
in excess of the Treasury bond returns (which is used as the benchmark
of the minimum expected returns on an investment). They use computer
programs and draw meaningful assistance from Ph.D.s in applied
mathematics, astrophysics, particle physics, electrical engineering, fluid
dynamics, or sometimes (though rarely) plain Ph.D.s in Finance. Such a
portfolio shows stable returns for long periods. Then, suddenly, as if by
accident (I consider that no accident), the portfolio drops by 4 0 % of its
value when you expect, at the worst, a 4 % drop. You call the manager
to express your anger and he tells you that it was not his fault, but
somehow the relationship dramatically changed (literally). He will also
point out to you that similar funds also experienced the same problems.
Recall that some economists call the rare event a "peso problem".
The designation peso problem does not appear to be undeservedly

SKEWNESS

AND

ASYMMETRY

95

stereotypical. Things have not gotten better since the early 1980s with
the currency of the U.S.'s southern neighbor. Long periods of stability
draw hordes of bank currency traders and hedge fund operators to the
calm waters of the Mexican peso; they enjoy owning the currency
because of the high interest rate it commands. Then they "unexpectedly"
blow up, lose money for investors, lose their jobs and switch careers.
Then a new period of stability sets in. New currency traders come in
with no memory of the bad event. They are drawn to the Mexican peso,
and the story repeats itself.
It is an oddity that most fixed income financial instruments present
rare events. In the spring of 1998, I spent two hours explaining to a
then-important hedge fund operator the notion of the peso problem. I
went to great lengths to explain to him that the concept was generalized
to every form of investment that was based on a naive interpretation of
the volatility of past time series. The reply was: "You are perfectly right.
We do not touch the Mexican peso. We only invest in the Russian
ruble". He blew up a few months later. Until then, the Russian ruble
Carried attractive interest rates, which invited yield hogs of all types to
get involved. He and other holders of investments denominated in rubles
lost close to 97% of their investment during the summer of 1998.
We saw in Chapter 3 that the dentist does not like volatility as it
causes a high incidence of negative pangs. The closer he observes his
performance, the more pain he will experience owing to the greater
variability at a higher resolution. Accordingly investors, merely for
emotional reasons, will be drawn into strategies that experience rare but
large variations. It is called pushing randomness under the rug.
We can look at other aspects of the problem; think of someone
involved in scientific research. Day after day, he will engage in dissecting
mice in his laboratory, away from the rest of the world. He could try
and try for years and years without anything to show for it. His
significant other might lose patience with the loser who comes home
every night smelling of mice urine. Until bingo, one day he comes up
with a result. Someone observing the time series of his occupation would
see absolutely no gain, while every day would bring him closer in
probability to the end result.
The same with publishers; they can publish dog after dog without
their business model being the least questionable, if once every decade

96

SOLON'S
