
Download at www.wowebook.com

440

Part V Trend Confirmation

AAPL-Apple Computer
230.00

220.00

210.00

200.00

190.00
slow stochastic oscillator
80.00
failure swings
50.00
44.69
34.95
20.00
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.16

Stochastic (daily: August 2005–October 2005)

AAPL is in a trending mode during the period considered but swinging in wide swings. In
this case, the use of overbought and oversold levels is fruitful. Each time a buy or sell signal
occurs from breaking toward the midpoint from oversold or overbought, an exit and reentry signal is given at the opposite extreme. This is not always the case. In a strong upward trend as
developed during the later months of the period in Figure 18.16, the oscillator did not return to
oversold. Thus, overbought breakdown sell signals in a rising trend must be suspect. They can
signal the time to get out of a long trade, but they do not necessarily signal the time to enter a
short trade.
In addition to the overbought/oversold signals, three failure swings occurred in late
November, late December, and late January. The downward signal in late November was timely,
as was the upward failure swing signal in December. The January sell signal was less profitable.
Finally, we see that before the declines in late October and early January, negative divergences developed at the peaks when the stochastic failed to confirm the new price highs.
Other Oscillators, Similar to the Stochastics
Some analysts use oscillators that are very similar to the stochastic oscillator. In particular, the
Williams %R and the Commodity Channel Index are comparable indicators.
Williams %R
The Williams %R oscillator is almost identical to the stochastic. It can be thought of as an
inverted stochastic. Instead of comparing the current close with the low that occurred during the

Download at www.wowebook.com

441

Chapter 18 Confirmation

time window, the Williams %R compares the current close with the high that occurred during the
time window. Thus, the formula for the Williams %R is as follows:
%R = [(H – C) / (H – L)] × 100
The Williams %R tells whether a stock is at a relatively high point in its trading range,
while the stochastic indicates whether a stock is at a relatively low point in its trading range.
Commodity Channel Index (CCI)
The Commodity Channel Index (CCI) is also very similar to the stochastic. Donald Lambert
developed this indicator, describing it in the October 1980 issue of Commodities (now known as
Futures) magazine. Do not be fooled by the name of the indicator; it can be used in any market,
not just commodity markets. The CCI measures the deviations of a security’s price from a moving average. This gives a slightly different picture than the stochastic, and in some cases, the signals are more reliable. However, the difference between the CCI and the stochastic is so
miniscule that using both would be a duplication of effort and liable to create false confidence.
Figure 18.17 shows how similar the CCI and the stochastic are.
The CCI is not bounded—that is, it can rise above +100 and fall below –100—as is the stochastic, and this bothers some analysts. To avoid this problem, some analysts use a stochastic calculation on the CCI, bounding the CCI to 0 to 100 and smoothing the CCI at the same time.
Barbara Star reports in Active Trader Magazine (2004) that in trending markets, this bounded,
smoothed CCI is often useful for entries in the trend direction, but not in a countertrend direction, and in trading markets, it often gives overbought and oversold signals.
Similarities Between Oscillators
Figure 18.18 shows a standard 14-day RSI compared with a 3-day to 10-day MACD. See how
the two lines follow almost identical paths. It is, thus, redundant and nonproductive to use many
oscillators that essentially tell the same story. This is why most analysts prefer to use just one, or
perhaps two, oscillators and learn their complexities and intricacies well rather than depend on
mechanical signals from many.
Combinations—Determining Trend and Trading Range
In Chapter 14, “Moving Averages,” we discussed trends, moving averages, and especially the use
of the ADX and its component parts, the DMI+ and DMI–. We found that moving averages were
only profitable in trending markets, just as we have found in this chapter that oscillators are more
profitable in trading markets. The problem, then, is to be able to determine whether a particular
market is trending or trading. Usually markets rotate from one to the other, but the signals generated by moving averages and indicators are not always quick to decipher the change. Because
most profits come from trending markets, analysts focus on moving averages and oscillators to
determine when a trend is beginning, and the sooner they recognize the trend, the better.
The most common solution is the use of Wilder’s ADX in combination with an oscillator
and a moving average. Because it is smoothed through averaging, the ADX is a lagging indicator
and should not be used for signals except from very low levels when a trend may be beginning.
Its value is in demonstrating the degree to which prices are already trending and, by implication,
suggesting what kinds of analysis—trend or trading range—should be used. It is equally adept at
trend determination from very short-term intraday trading to month-to-month investing.

Download at www.wowebook.com

442

Part V Trend Confirmation

230.00

AAPL-Apple Computer

220.00
210.00
200.00
190.00

95.12
95.00
-150.00

commodity channel index (CCI) (14-3)

80.00
44.69
20.00

fast stochastic (14-3)
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.17

CCI and fast stochastic (AAPL daily: October 1, 2009–March 29, 2010)
230.00

AAPL-Apple Computer
220.00
210.00
200.00
190.00
RSI (14 day)
80.00
49.06
20.00

MACD (3/14 day)

6.00
1.45
-2.00
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.18

MACD and RSI (AAPL daily: October 1, 2009–March 29, 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

443

Chapter 18 Confirmation

The use of the ADX is based on its level and its trend. The level determines the amount by
which prices are trending, and the direction shows the change in that trending. Low readings
(<20) suggest a trading range and low volatility in which oscillators and patterns should be used.
A moderately high reading (30) indicates strong trending in which moving average crossovers
and patterns should be used. A very high reading (>45) indicates a potential trend reversal in
which patterns, trends, support and resistance, divergences in oscillators and volume, and oscillator failures should be used. Generally, a rising ADX reflects an increased trending, up or down,
and a declining ADX reflects an approaching reversal or consolidation.

BOX 18.1 GENERAL RULES FOR USING ADX
In an article appearing in Futures Magazine, Ashwani Gujral provided general rules
for using ADX. His guidelines include the following:
When ADX is rising and at a level
Between 15 and 25
Between 25 and 45
Of 45 or above

Beginning of trending; use trending indicators.
Definite trending; use trending indicators.
Overextended; watch for trend turning point; use price
or indicator patterns.
When ADX is declining and at a level
Below 20
Between 20 and 30
Between 30 and 45

Low volatility; very short swings; no trend; use oscillators.
Consolidation; use oscillators.
Correction from extreme likely; use patterns; trending
indicators.

Analysts have developed numerous methods of utilizing the ADX with oscillators and
moving averages. Let us look at two of them: David Steckler’s popsteckle and Linda Raschke’s
holy grail.
Popsteckle
In a 2000 article, appearing in Stocks and Commodities, David Steckler described a method of
identifying stocks that are ready to “pop” upward using all three indicators. The name “popsteckle” is a contraction of “pop” and “Steckler,” but Jake Bernstein (1993) is the originator of
the method. Steckler’s setup rules are as follows:
1. Recent price action shows low volatility (dull action).
2. 14-day ADX is below 20 (no trend).

Download at www.wowebook.com

444

Part V Trend Confirmation

3. Eight-day stochastic %K is greater than the day before and above 70 (upward trend beginning).
4. Eight-week stochastic %K is greater than the week before and above 50 (upward longer
trend beginning).
5. Bullish market conditions exist (could be determined by market price above long-term
moving average).
6. Stock breaks upward out of congestion on volume 50% above its 50-day simple moving
average.
The popsteckle method monitors a low-volatility stock in a horizontal trading range for
signs of positive trending action as displayed by changes in the various stochastics. No history of
back testing this method is available, but the logic of the variables and indicators is consistent.
Holy Grail
Unlike the popsteckle, which looks for the beginning of a new trend, Linda Raschke’s Holy Grail
method takes advantage of an existing trend and uses the ADX in combination with a moving
average. First, a 14-day ADX must be above 30 to indicate an existing trend. The primary trend
is displayed by a 20-period EMA. An initial downturn in the ADX suggests a correction to the
primary trend. When this occurs, enter in the direction of the trend when the price touches or
comes close to that EMA. On the long side, the entry trigger would be a break above the high of
the most recent declining bar, and it would be the opposite on the short side. The initial target that
Raschke uses is the old price extreme, high or low, at which point the analyst must make a decision as to whether the price will continue in the primary trend direction or not.

CONCLUSION
To increase the odds that a technical price signal is correct, the technical analyst uses many other
indicators as confirmation. The primary confirmation indicator is volume because it is a series of
data independent of price. Unfortunately, volume indicators and volume itself do not always confirm a price pattern. Nevertheless, high volume at the appropriate moments does add value to the
entry decision. Other means of calculating volume for comparison with past volume and price
action have limited value in confirming signals, but they can provide warnings when not confirming price action. These divergences cannot be used as signals by themselves but do help the
analyst by suggesting that trend change is soon likely.
The other major area of confirmation comes from momentum, or rate of price change, calculations. Strong momentum suggests a trending market, and weak momentum suggests a consolidating market. Naturally, the analyst principally looks for the beginning of a trending market,
and because momentum indicators tend to lead price direction, they are often useful in warning
of such a change. However, the reliability of these indicators is highly dependent upon whether
the security is trading in a trend or in a trading range. By and large, these oscillators are more
useful in trading ranges as overbought/oversold indications. In trending markets, they are more
useful as warnings of trend change. In strong trends, they tend to be skewed in the direction of
the trend and, thus, fail to provide reliable entry signals.

Download at www.wowebook.com

445

Chapter 18 Confirmation

Some of the problems with interpreting price and volume indicators can be ameliorated
with the use of the ADX or other indicators of trend strength. Combining the ADX, a moving
average, and an oscillator, for example, can improve timing results considerably.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. General rules for interpreting volume data date back to the mid-1930s. According to these
general rules, how should volume statistics be used?
2. In terms of oscillators, describe what each of the following terms means:
a. Overbought
b. Oversold
c. Negative divergence
d. Positive divergence
e. Failure swing
f. Negative reversal
g. Positive reversal
3. What is meant by the term momentum? Looking at the prices for a hypothetical stock,
XYZ, explain what is happening as far as the price trend and momentum over time. Sketch
a graph of this stock’s price and comment on how the curve’s shape is impacted by
momentum.
Day

Price of XYZ

1
2
3

28
28
29

4
5
6

30
32
35

7
8
9
10
11
12
13

39
43
47
51
54
57
59

14
15
16

60
61
61

Download at www.wowebook.com

446

Part V Trend Confirmation

Day

Price of XYZ

17
18

60
55

19
20

50
45

21

42

22
23
24

40
39
40

25

41

26

43

4. Gather trading information for Valero (VLO) from August 1 to October 31, 2005.
a. Using this information, calculate the following:
i. On-Balance-Volume
ii. Price-volume trend
iii. Williams Variable Accumulation Distribution
iv. Accumulation Distribution
v. Chaikin Money Flow
vi. Money Flow Index (using a seven-day period)
b. Looking at the calculations you have made, what observations can you make about
Valero over the three-month period observed?
5. Look at the volume data for Valero in Question 3. Do you see any spikes or dips in volume? If so, how might these volume patterns enter into your analysis of the stock?
a. Use the data you collect in Question 3 to calculate the following:
i. MACD (using 12- and 26-day EMA)
ii. 14-day rate of change (ROC)
iii. 14-day relative strength index (RSI)
iv. 14-3-3 stochastic
v. Williams %R
b. What information do you gain about Valero from these calculations? Do you see
many similarities among the results of the five different calculations?
6. Most analysts will choose one oscillator to use in their analysis. Explain why using one
oscillator is preferable to using the information from multiple oscillators.
7. Explain how moving averages and oscillators can be used in conjunction with each other
for trading in trending and trading markets.
8. Explain what is meant by the term confirmation. What are some general concepts the analyst should consider when looking for confirmation?

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

V I

OTHER TECHNICAL
METHODS AND RULES
C HAPTER 19 C YCLES
C HAPTER 20 E LLIOTT, F IBONACCI , AND G ANN

447

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

1 9

CYCLES

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should be familiar with

• The controversy about whether cycles exist in financial market data
• How cycles are defined by their amplitude, period, and phase
• Detrending data and plotting centered moving averages
• The major methods of determining cycles in market data
• The major methods of using cycles to project future price highs and lows
Throughout this book, we have seen how prices trend, but the trend does not occur in a straight
line. Prices oscillate up and down around a trend. These oscillations form the trading ranges, patterns, and channels we have discussed. Could it be that these oscillations have some sort of regularity? Believing that they do, cycle analysts look at prices as a form of complex harmonics or
waves. (In physics, a harmonic is a wave whose frequency is a whole number multiple of the frequency of another wave.) Most standard patterns can be broken down into cycle layers. For
example, the head-and-shoulders pattern is a combination of a long cycle peaking with several
smaller cycles forming the shoulders and head. Triangles are periods within an uptrend when the
amplitude of smaller cycles declines and then expands. By breaking down known patterns into
harmonics, these analysts believe that the inherent oscillations are somewhat regular cycles and
are, therefore, predictable.
Not surprisingly, the concept of prices oscillating in cycles is controversial. There are two
basic reasons some oppose the cycle concept. First, if prices behaved in pure cycles, like radio
waves or tuning forks, the numbers would easily fit into mathematical formulas that would give
us precise predictions similar to what we know about ocean tides and sunrises. This has not happened. The inability to use present mathematical methods to identify specifically and precisely
any existing cycles is evidence to some that there are no such cycles. These objectors claim that

449

Download at www.wowebook.com

450

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

any cycles that traders think they see are merely imaginary. As we saw in Chapter 4, “The Technical Analysis Controversy,” when they discuss patterns in trading market prices, the human
mind often “sees” patterns in data that do not truly exist.
Another set of objections comes from the inability to identify causes of specific cycles that
many agree do exist in prices. There may be correlations between Super Bowl scores or rainfall
in New York City and stock prices. However, their relationships are merely curious correlations
rather than causation. There is no logical reason why these events would be causal or explanatory.
However, we do see that human behavior does strange things during different phases of the
moon. For example, Al Lieber (1978) discusses changes in emotional behavior at regularly
scheduled intervals correlated with phases of the moon in the Journal of Clinical Psychology.
Yuan, Zheng, and Zhu (2006) demonstrate the correlation between lunar phases and stock prices
in 48 countries. The moon rotates around the earth each 29.53 days. Thus, using a normal trading
week of 4.85 days (to account for occasional holidays), we should, if there is a lunar cycle in
markets, expect a cycle of approximately 20 days in stock market behavior. Does this cycle
exist? Yes, it appears to. See Figure 19.1 for a demonstration of a 20-day cycle in the Standard &
Poor’s 500. Is this cycle related to the phases of the moon? We do not know.

S&P 500
11-day SMA
(centered)

1,200.00
1,180.00
1,160.00
1,400.00
1,120.00

actual 20-day low
ideal 20-day low
(daily closes)

1,100.00
1,080.00
1,060.00
1,040.00
1,020.00

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 19.1 20-day cycle in Standard & Poor’s 500 (daily: January 27, 2010–July 22, 2010)

The astro-physical connection between market cycles and the collective human psyche is a
common argument for cycle causes and has been investigated thoroughly for correlation. Some
claim such correlations exist, and others say they do not. Nevertheless, this connection has led to

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 19 Cycles

451

the false accusation that technical analysts are “stargazers.” Extremely few analysts have seriously made any causal connections between the planets, the moon, and the sun and market
prices, and even fewer use that knowledge or presumption to act in the markets. Nevertheless,
there are certain obvious planetary cycles that definitely affect prices if only by affecting supply
and demand in agricultural markets.
The earth circles the sun every 365 days. Do we have an annual or seasonal cycle in market prices? Yes, of course, a very well-defined annual cycle exists in agricultural commodity
prices (now being dampened by importation of agricultural products from the southern hemisphere). We also see a seasonal cycle in the stock market. (For more information about seasonal
cycles in the stock market, read Research Driven Investor by Timothy Hayes [McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2000].) Obvious causes for these cycles include change in seasons and weather. Psychologists are also learning about how sun deprivation affects human behavior, not only at different latitudes but also at different seasons of the year, and about electromagnetic effects on the
brain. In addition to individual behavior, psychologists are studying crowd mood changes that
might influence the markets.
There are many observed cycles in market prices. Some of them can be explained, or
rationalized, and others cannot. Some, like the “presidential cycle” of four years, are thought to
be synthetic; others are products of nature; and most are unexplained. There are very long-term
cycles like the Kondratieff and Kuznets cycles, and very short-term ones lasting only a few minutes.
In terms of the markets, the “business cycle” is not truly a market cycle in the sense that it
does not have a periodic element. However, the business cycle obviously does affect market
prices, and it does have a rough periodicity of four to five years, which in turn can be affected by
market prices in a feedback loop.
The important point in market cycles is that they are not truly harmonics, the mathematical
description of cycles. Instead, they tend to be periodic events or extremes that can be measured
in time but not necessarily in amplitude. Amplitude is a measure of the “strength” of a cycle. In
markets just as in sunspots, amplitude can change and lie dormant for a while. Amplitude is
related to volatility, which we know also fluctuates over time. Harmonic mathematics has not
developed to the point that it can account for this conduct (it assumes a constant amplitude), and
we must often rely more on observation of periodicity alone to gain insight into the cyclical timing of future market events.
Other curious aspects of market cycles are as follows: (1) They often tend to “nest”
together—especially at turning points, more often at price lows—and when they do, larger
events seem to occur; and (2) they tend to be fractions of larger or multiples of smaller cycles,
usually by a factor of two or three. The latter is termed “harmonic” action, similar to that in
music. These aspects are useful sometimes in projecting market events ahead in time. Finally, the
aspect of “proportionality” suggests that longer cycles tend to have larger amplitudes. This is not
always the case and can often be deceiving. Because amplitude is consistently a projection problem, the most reliable projections are made strictly on periodicity and phase.
In this chapter, we consider the description and mathematics of cycles, the ways in which
analysts detect cycles, and some methods of profiting from them.

Download at www.wowebook.com

452

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

WHAT ARE CYCLES?
In mathematical terms, the cosine (and sine) function describes a cycle. Figure 19.2 shows a
right-angle triangle (one with a 90-degree angle). The side across from the 90-degree angle is the
hypotenuse, labeled (H). A cosine of an angle is the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.
For example, in Figure 19.2, the cosine for angle U is A/H. Thus, for every angle, there is a specific cosine value.
