
One Up on Wall Street 

 L OOK AT A LL THE M ONEY I’ VE L OST: I D IDN’T B UY I T! 
 We’d all be much richer today if we’d put all our money into Crown, Cork, and Seal at 50 cents a share (split-adjusted)! But now that you know this, open your wallet and check your latest bank statement. You’ll notice the money’s still there. In fact, you aren’t a cent poorer than you were a second ago, when you found out about the great fortune you missed in Crown, Cork, and Seal. 
 This may sound like a ridiculous thing to mention, but I know that some of my fellow investors torture themselves every day by perusing the “ten biggest winners on the New York Stock Exchange” and imagining how much money they’ve lost by not having owned them. The same thing happens with baseball cards, jewelry, furniture, and houses. 
 Regarding somebody else’s gains as your own personal losses is not a productive attitude for investing in the stock market. In fact, it can only lead to total madness. The more stocks you learn about, the more winners you realize that you’ve missed, and soon enough you’re blaming yourself for losses in the billions and trillions. If you get out of stocks entirely and the market goes up 100 points in a day, you’ll be waking up and muttering: “I’ve just suffered a $110 billion setback.” 
 The worst part about this kind of thinking is that it leads people to try to play catch up by buying stocks they shouldn’t buy, if only to protect themselves from losing more than they’ve already “lost.” This usually results in real losses. 
 I M ISSED T HAT O NE , I’ LL C ATCH T HE N EXT O NE 
 The trouble is, the “next” one rarely works, as we’ve already shown. If you missed Toys “R” Us, a great company that continued to go up, and then bought Greenman Brothers, a mediocre company that went down, then you’ve compounded your error. Actually you’ve taken a mistake that cost you nothing (remember, you didn’t lose anything by not buying Toys “R” Us) and turned it into a mistake that cost you plenty. 
 If you failed to buy Home Depot at a low price, and then bought Scotty’s, the “next Home Depot,” then you probably made another mistake, because Home Depot is up twenty-five-fold since it came public, and Scotty’s is up only 25–30 percent, underperforming the general market over the same period. 
 The same thing happened if you missed Piedmont and bought People Express, or you missed the Price Club and bought the Warehouse Club. In most cases it’s better to buy the original good company at a high price than it is to jump on the “next one” at a bargain price. 
 T HE S TOCK’S G ONE U P , S O I M UST B E R IGHT, OR ... T HE S TOCK’S G ONE D OWN S O I M UST B E W RONG 
 If I had to choose a great single fallacy of investing, it’s believing that when a stock’s price goes up, then you’ve made a good investment. People often take comfort when their recent purchase of something at $5 a share goes up to $6, as if that proves the wisdom of the purchase. Nothing could be further from the truth. Of course, if you sell quickly at the higher price, then you’ve made a fine profit, but most people don’t sell in these favorable circumstances. Instead they convince themselves that the higher price proves that the investment is worthwhile, and they hold on to the stock until the lower price convinces them the investment is no good. If it’s a choice, they hold on to the stock that’s risen from $10 to $12, and they get rid of the one that’s dropped from $10 to $8, while telling themselves that they have “kept the winner and dumped the loser.” 
 That’s just what might have happened back in 1981, when Zapata, an oil stock at the height of the energy boom, must have seemed far more pleasant to own than Ethyl Corp., a so-called “dog that got run over” because of the EPA ban on its main product—lead additives for gasoline. However, the “better” stock of these two went from $35 to $2, and you couldn’t have bailed that one out with the Big Dipper. Meanwhile Ethyl was getting great results from its specialty chemicals division, improved performance overseas, and rapid consistent growth from its insurance operation. Ethyl stock went from $2 to $32. 
 So when people say, “Look, in two months it’s up 20 percent, so I really picked a winner,” or “Terrible, in two months it’s down 20 percent, so I really picked a loser,” they’re confusing prices with prospects. Unless they are short-term traders who are looking for 20-percent gains, the short-term fanfare means absolutely nothing. 
 A stock’s going up or down after you buy it only tells you that there was somebody who was willing to pay more—or less—for the identical merchandise.

One Up on Wall Street 

 19 
 Options, Futures, and Shorts 
 Investment gimmicks have become so popular that the old motto “Buy a share in America” ought to be changed to “Buy an option on America.” “Invest in the future of America” now means “take a flier at the New York Futures Exchange.” 
 I’ve never bought a future nor an option in my entire investing career, and I can’t imagine buying one now. It’s hard enough to make money in regular stocks without getting distracted by these side bets, which I’m told are nearly impossible to win unless you’re a professional trader. 
 That’s not to say that futures don’t serve a useful purpose in the commodity business, where a farmer can lock in a price for wheat or corn at harvest and know he can sell for that amount when the crops are delivered; and a buyer of wheat or corn can do the same. But stocks are not commodities, and there is no relationship between producer and consumer that makes such price insurance necessary to the functioning of a stock market. 
 Reports out of Chicago and New York, the twin capitals of futures and options, suggest that between 80 and 95 percent of the amateur players lose. Those odds are worse than the worst odds at the casino or at the racetrack, and yet the fiction persists that these are “sensible investment alternatives.” If this is sensible investing, then the Titanic was a tight ship. 
 There’s no point describing how futures and options really work, because (1) it requires long and tedious exposition, after which you’d still be confused, (2) knowing more about them might get you interested in buying some, and (3) I don’t understand futures and options myself. 
 Actually I do know a few things about options. I know that the large potential return is attractive to many small investors who are dissatisfied with getting rich slow. Instead, they opt for getting poor quick. That’s because an option is a contract that’s only good for a month or two, and unlike most stocks, it regularly expires worthless—after which the options player must buy another option, only to lose 100 percent of his or her money once again. A string of these, and you’re in deep kimchee. 
 And consider the situation when you’re absolutely sure that something wonderful is about to happen to Sure Thing, Inc., and the good news will send the stock price higher. Maybe you’ve discovered a Tagamet, a cancer cure, a surge in earnings, or one of the many other positive fundamental signs you’ve learned to look for. You’ve found the perfect company, the nearest thing to a royal flush you’ll ever encounter. 
 You check your assets, and there’s only $3,000 in your savings account. The rest is invested in mutual funds that The Person Who Understands the Serious Business of Money won’t let you touch. You comb the house looking for heirlooms to take to the pawn shop, but the mink coat is riddled with moth holes. The silver flatware is a possibility, but since you’re having a dinner party over the weekend, the spouse is certain to notice it’s missing. Perhaps you could sell the cat, but it doesn’t have a pedigree. The wooden sloop leaks, and nobody would pay for rusty golf clubs with bad grips. 
 So the $3,000 is all you can come up with to invest in Sure Thing. It will only get you 150 shares at $20 a share. Just as you’ve resigned yourself to settling for that, you remember having heard about the remarkable leverage of options. You talk to your broker, who confirms that the April $20 call option in Sure Thing, now selling for $1, may be worth $15 if the stock goes to $35. A $3,000 investment here would give you a $45,000 payoff. 
 So you buy the options, and every day you open the paper, anxiously awaiting the moment the stock begins to rise. By mid-March there’s still no movement, and the options you bought for $3,000 already have lost half their value. You’re tempted to sell and get some of your money back, but you hold on because there’s still a month to go before they expire worthless. A month later, that is exactly what happens. 
 Insult is added to injury when a few weeks after you’ve been out of the option, Sure Thing makes its move. Not only have you lost all your money, you’ve done it while being right about the stock. That’s the biggest tragedy of all. You did your homework, and instead of being rewarded for it, you’ve been wiped out. It’s an absolute waste of time, money, and talent when this happens. 
 Another nasty thing about options is that they are very expensive. They may not seem expensive, until you realize that you have to buy four or five sets of them to cover stock for a year. You’re literally buying time here, and the more time you buy, the higher the premium you have to pay for it. There’s a generous broker’s commission attached to every purchase to boot. Options are the broker’s gravy train. A broker with only a handful of active options clients can make a wonderful living. 
 The worst thing of all is that buying an option has nothing to do with owning a share of a company. When a company grows and prospers, all the shareholders benefit, but options are a zero-sum game. For every dollar that’s won in the market there’s a dollar that’s lost, and a tiny minority does all the winning. 
 When you buy a share of stock, even a very risky stock, you are contributing something to the growth of the country. That’s what stocks are for. In previous generations, when it was considered dangerous to speculate in stocks of small companies, at least the “speculators” were providing the capital to enable the IBMs and the McDonald’ses and the Wal-Marts to get started. In the multibillion-dollar futures and options market, not a bit of the money is put to any constructive use. It doesn’t finance anything, except the cars, planes, and houses purchased by the brokers and the handful of winners. What we’re witnessing here is a giant transfer payment from the unwary to the wary. 
 There’s a lot of talk these days about the use of futures and options as portfolio insurance to protect our investments in stocks. Many of my fellow professionals have led the way down this slippery slope, as usual. Institutions have bought billions in portfolio insurance, to cover themselves in case of a crash. It turns out that they thought they were well-covered during the last crash, but the portfolio insurance worked against them. Part of the insurance program required them to automatically sell off stocks at the same time they were buying more futures, and the massive automatic selling drove the market lower, triggering more buying of futures and more selling. Among the plausible causes of the October collapse, portfolio insurance is a principal culprit, but many institutions are still buying the insurance. 
 Some individual investors have taken up this bad idea on their own. (Does it ever pay to imitate the experts?) They buy “put” options (which increase in value as the market goes down) to protect themselves in a decline. But “put” options, too, expire worthless, and you have to keep buying them if you want to be continually protected. You can waste 5–10 percent of your entire investment stake every year to protect yourself from a 5–10 percent decline. 
 Like the alcoholic enticed back into the gin bottle by the innocent tasting of beer, the stockpicker who invests in options as insurance often cannot help himself, and soon enough he’s buying options for their own sake, and from there it’s on to hedges, combinations, and straddles. He forgets that stocks ever interested him in the first place. Instead of researching companies, he spends all his waking hours reading market-timer digests and worrying about head-and-shoulder patterns or zigzag reversals. Worse, he loses all his money. 
 Warren Buffett thinks that stock futures and options ought to be outlawed, and I agree with him. 
 SHORTING A STOCK 
 You’ve no doubt heard of this ancient and strange practice, which enables you to profit from a stock that’s going down. (Some people get interested in this idea by looking at their portfolios and realizing that if they’d been short instead of long all these years, they’d be rich.) 
 Shorting is the same thing as borrowing something from the neighbors (in this case, you don’t know their names) and then selling the item and pocketing the money. Sooner or later you go out and buy the identical item and return it to the neighbors, and nobody is the wiser. It’s not exactly stealing, but it’s not exactly neighborly, either. It’s more like borrowing with criminal intent. 
 What the shorter hopes to do is to sell the borrowed item at a very high price, but the replacement item at a very low price, and keep the difference. You could do it with lawn mowers and garden hoses, I suppose, but it works best with stocks—especially stocks that are inflated in price to begin with. For instance, if you figured out that Polaroid was overpriced at $140 a share, you could have shorted 1,000 shares for an immediate $140,000 credit to your account. Then you could have waited for the price to drop to $14, jumped in and bought back the same 1,000 shares for $14,000, and gone home $126,000 richer. 
 The person from whom you borrowed the shares originally will never have known the difference. These transactions are all done on paper and handled by stockbrokers. It’s as easy to go short as it is to go long. 
 Before we get too excited about this, there are some serious drawbacks to going short. During all the time you borrow the shares, the rightful owner gets all the dividends and other benefits, so you’re out some money there. Also, you can’t actually spend the proceeds you get from shorting a stock until you’ve paid the shares back and closed out the transaction. In the Polaroid example, you couldn’t simply take the $140,000 and run off to France for a long vacation. You are required to maintain a sufficient balance in your brokerage account to cover the value of the shorted stock. As the price of Polaroid dropped, you could have taken some of the money out, but what if the price of Polaroid had gone up? Then you would have had to add more money to cover your position. 
 The scary part about shorting stock is that even if you’re convinced that the company’s in lousy shape, other investors might not realize it and might even send the stock price higher. Though Polaroid had already reached a ridiculous plateau, what if it had doubled once more to an even more ridiculous $300 a share? If you were short then, you were very nervous. The prospect of spending $300,000 to replace a $140,000 item that you’ve borrowed can be disturbing. If you don’t have the extra hundred thousand or so to put into your account to hold your position, you may be forced to liquidate at a huge loss. 
 None of us is immune to the panic that we feel when a normal stock drops in price, but that panic is restrained somewhat by our understanding that the normal stock cannot go lower than zero. If you’ve shorted something that’s going up, you begin to realize that there’s nothing to stop it from going to infinity, because there’s no ceiling on a stock price. Infinity is where a shorted stock always appears to be heading. 
 Among all the folk tales of successful short sellers are the horror stories of shorters who watched helplessly as their favorite lousy stocks soared higher and higher, against all reason and logic, forcing them into the poorhouse. One such unfortunate was Robert Wilson, a smart man and a good investor, who a decade or so ago shorted Resorts International. He was right, eventually—most shorters are right, eventually—didn’t John Maynard Keynes say in the long run “we all are dead”? In the meantime, however, the stock advanced from 70 cents to $70, a modest 100-bagger, leaving Mr. Wilson with a modest $20 or $30 million loss. 
 This tale is useful to remember if you’re contemplating shorting something. Before you short a stock, you have to have more than a conviction that the company is falling apart. You have to have the patience, the courage, and the resources to hold on if the stock price doesn’t go down—or worse, goes up. Stocks that are supposed to go down but don’t remind me of the cartoon characters who walk off cliffs into thin air. As long as they don’t recognize their predicament, they can just hang out there forever.

One Up on Wall Street 

 20 
 50,000 Frenchmen Can Be Wrong 
 Thinking back over my tenure as a stockpicker, I remember several major news events and their effects on the prices of stocks, beginning with President Kennedy’s election in 1960. Even at the tender age of sixteen, I’d heard that a Democratic presidency was always bad for stocks, so I was surprised that the day after the election, November 9, 1960, the market rose slightly. 
 During the Cuban missile crisis and our naval blockade of the Russian ships—the one and only time America has faced the immediate prospect of nuclear war—I feared for myself, my family, and my country. Yet the stock market fell less than 3 percent that day. Seven months later, when President Kennedy berated U.S. Steel and forced the industry to roll back prices, I feared for nothing, yet the market had one of its largest declines in history—7 percent. I was mystified that the potential of nuclear holocaust was less terrifying to Wall Street than the president’s meddling in business. 
 On November 22, 1963, I was about to take an exam at Boston College when the news that President Kennedy had been shot spread across the campus. Along with my classmates I went to St. Mary’s Hall to pray. The next day I saw in the newspaper that the stock market had fallen less than 3 percent, though trading was halted once the news of the assassination became official. Three days later the market recovered its losses of November 22, and then some. 
 In April, 1968, after President Johnson announced that he wouldn’t seek a second term, that he would halt the bombing raids in Southeast Asia, and that he favored peace talks, the market rose 2½ percent. 
 Throughout the 1970s I was totally involved in stocks and dedicated to my job at Fidelity. During that period the great events, and the market reactions to them, were as follows: President Nixon imposes price controls (market up 3 percent); President Nixon resigns (market down 1 percent) (Nixon once remarked that if he weren’t the president he’d be buying stocks, and a Wall Street wag retorted that if Nixon weren’t president, he’d be buying stocks, too); President Ford’s Whip Inflation Now buttons are introduced (market up 4.6 percent); IBM wins a big antitrust case (market up 3.3 percent), Yom Kippur War breaks out (market up slightly). The decade of the 1970s was the poorest for stocks of any of the five since the 1930s, and yet the major-percentage one-day changes were all up—on the days just mentioned. 
 The event of most lasting consequence was OPEC’s oil embargo, October 19, 1973 (another lucky October 19!), which helped take the market down 16 percent in three months and 39 percent in twelve months. It’s interesting to note that the market did not respond to the significance of the embargo, actually rising 4 points that day and climbing an additional 14 points in the five following sessions before starting its dramatic decline. This demonstrates that the market, like individual stocks, can move in the opposite direction of the fundamentals over the short term, which, in the case of the embargo, involved rising gasoline prices, long gas lines, escalating inflation, and sharply higher interest rates. 
 The 1980s has had more days of exceptional gains and losses than were seen in all the other decades combined. In the big picture, most of them are meaningless. I’d rank the 508-point drop in October, 1987, far below the meeting of economic ministers on September 22, 1985, for its importance to long-term investors. It was at this so-called G7 conference that the major industrial nations agreed to coordinate economic policy and to allow the value of the dollar to decline. After that decision was announced, the general market rose 38 percent over six months. It had a more dramatic impact on specific companies that benefited from the lower dollar, and whose stocks doubled and tripled in price in the following two years. As on October 19, 1987, I was in Europe at the time of both the Yom Kippur War and the G7 conference, but at least on those occasions I was out visiting companies instead of losing golf balls. 
 Trends and gradual changes stick in my mind. The period of conglomeration in the mid to late 1960s resulted in many major companies diworseifying, falling apart, and then not recovering for another fifteen years. Many have never come back, and others, such as Gulf and Western, ITT, and Ogden, have reemerged as turnarounds. 
 There was a great love affair with high-quality blue chips in the 1970s. These were known as the “nifty fifty” or “the one decision” stocks that you could buy and hold forever. This brief serendipity of overrated and overpriced issues was followed by the devastating market decline of 1973–74 (the Dow hit 1050 in 1973 and had regressed all the way back to 578 in December, 1974) with blue chips falling 50 to 90 percent. 
 The popular romance with small technology companies in mid-1982 to mid-1983 led to another collapse (60–98 percent) of the similarly beloved issues that could do no wrong. Small may be beautiful, but it’s not necessarily profitable. 
 The rise of the Japanese market from 1966 to 1988 has taken the Nikkei Dow Jones up seventeenfold as our Dow Jones has only doubled. The total market value of all Japanese stocks actually passed that of U.S. stocks in April, 1987, and the gap has widened since. The Japanese have their own way of thinking about stocks, and I don’t understand it yet. Every time I go over there to study the situation, I conclude that all the stocks are grossly overpriced, but they keep going higher, anyway. 
 Nowadays the change in trading hours makes it harder to pay attention to fundamentals and keep your eye off the Quotron. For eighty years until 1952 the New York Stock Exchange opened at 10 A.M . and closed at 3 P.M., giving the newspapers time to print up the results for the afternoon editions so investors could check their stocks on the ride home. In 1952, Saturday trading was eliminated, but the daily closing hour was advanced to 3:30, and in 1985, the opening hour was moved to 9:30, and now the market closes at 4:00. Personally, I’d prefer a much shorter market. It would give us all more time to devote to analyzing companies, or even to visiting museums, both of which are more useful than watching stock prices go up and down. 
 Institutions have emerged from their minor role in the 1960s to dominate the stock market in the 1980s. 
 The legal status of major brokerage firms has changed from partnerships, where the individuals’ personal wealth was on the line, to corporations, where the individual liability is limited. Theoretically this was supposed to strengthen the brokerage firms, since as corporations they could raise capital by selling stock to the public. I’m convinced it has been a net negative. 
 The rise of the over-the-counter exchange has brought thousands of secondary issues that were once traded by the obscure “pink sheet” method—where you never knew if you were getting a fair price—into a reliable and efficient computerized marketplace. 
 The nation is preoccupied with up-to-the-minute financial news, which twenty years ago was scarcely mentioned on television. The incredible success of Wall $treet Week, with Louis Rukeyser, from its debut on November 20, 1970, has proven that a financial news show can actually be popular. It was Rukeyser’s achievement that inspired the regular networks to expand their financial coverage, and that in turn led to the establishment of the Financial News Network, which has brought the ticker tape into millions of American homes. Amateur investors can now check their holdings all day. All that separates Houndstooth from the professional trader is a 15-minute tape delay. 
 The boom and then bust in tax shelters: farm land, oil wells, oil rigs, barges, low-rent housing syndicates, graveyards, movie productions, shopping centers, sports teams, computer leasing, and almost anything else that can be bought, financed, or rented. 
 The emergence of merger and acquisition groups, and other buyout groups, that are willing and able to finance $20-billion purchases. Between the domestic buyout groups (Kohlberg, Kravis, and Roberts; Kelso; Coniston Partners; Odyssey Partners; and Wesray), the European firms and buyout groups (Hanson Trust, Imperial Chemical, Electrolux, Unilever, Nestlé, etc.), and the individual corporate raiders with sizable bankrolls (David Murdock, Donald Trump, Sam Hyman, Paul Bilzerian, the Bass brothers, the Reichmanns, the Hafts, Rupert Murdoch, Boone Pickens, Carl Icahn, Asher Edelman, et al.) any company, large or small, is up for grabs. 
 The popularity of the leveraged buyout, or LBO, through which entire companies or divisions are “taken private”—purchased by outsiders or by current management with money that’s borrowed from banks or raised via junk bonds. 
 The phenomenal popularity of these junk bonds, as first invented by Drexel Burnham Lambert and now copied everywhere. 
 The advent of futures and options trading, especially of the stock indexes, enabling “program traders” to buy or sell bushels of stocks in the regular stock markets and then reverse their positions in the so-called futures markets, throwing around billions of dollars for tiny incremental profits. 
 And throughout all this tumult, SS Kresge, a moribund five-and-dime company, develops the K mart formula and the stock goes up forty-fold in ten years; Masco develops its one-handle faucet and goes up 1,000-fold, becoming the greatest stock in forty years—and who would have guessed it from a faucet company? The successful fast growers turn into tenbaggers, the whisper stocks go bankrupt, and investors receive their “Baby Bell” shares from the breakup of ATT and double their money in four years. 
 If you ask me what’s been the most important development in the stock market, the breakup of ATT ranks near the top (this affected 2.96 million shareholders), and the Wobble of October probably wouldn’t rank in my top three. 
 Some things I’ve been hearing lately: 
 I’ve been hearing that the small investor has no chance in this dangerous environment and ought to get out. “Would you build your house over an earthquake?” one cautious advisor asks. But the earthquake isn’t under the house, it’s under the real estate office. 
 Small investors are capable of handling all sorts of markets, as long as they own good merchandise. If anyone should worry, it’s some of the oxymorons. After all, the losses of last October were only losses to people who took the losses. That wasn’t the long-term investor. It was the margin player, the risk arbitrageur, the options player, and the portfolio manager whose computer signaled “sell” who took the losses. Like a cat who sees himself in a mirror, the sellers spooked themselves. 
 I’ve been hearing that the era of professional management has brought new sophistication, prudence, and intelligence to the stock market. There are 50,000 stockpickers who dominate the show, and like the 50,000 Frenchmen, they can’t possibly be wrong. 
 From where I sit, I’d say that the 50,000 stockpickers are usually right, but only for the last 20 percent of a typical stock move. It’s that last 20 percent that Wall Street studies for, clamors for, and then lines up for—all the while with a sharp eye on the exits. The idea is to make a quick gain and then stampede out the door. 
 Small investors don’t have to fight this mob. They can calmly walk in the entrance when there’s a crowd at the exit, and walk out the exit when there’s a crowd at the entrance. Here’s a short list of stocks that were the favorites of large institutions in mid-1987 but sold at sharply lower prices ten months later, in spite of higher earnings, exciting prospects, and good cash flows. The companies hadn’t changed, but the institutions had lost interest: Automatic Data Processing, Coca-Cola, Dunkin’ Donuts, General Electric, Genuine Parts, Philip Morris, Primerica, Rite Aid, Squibb, and Waste Management. 
 I’ve been hearing that the 200-million share day is a great improvement over the 100-million share day, and there’s great advantage in a liquid market. 
 But not if you’re drowning in it—and we are. Last year 87 percent of all the shares listed on the NYSE changed owners at least once. In the early 1960s a six-to seven-million-share trading day was normal, and the turnover rate in stocks was 12 percent a year. In the 1970s a forty-to sixty-million-share day was normal, and in the 1980s it became 100–120 million shares. Now if we don’t have 150-million-share days, people think something is wrong. I know I do my part to contribute to the cause, because I buy and sell every day. But my biggest winners continue to be stocks I’ve held for three and even four years. 
 The rapid and wholesale turnover has been accelerated by the popular index funds, which buy and sell billions of shares without regard to the individual characteristics of the companies involved, and also by the “switch funds,” which enable investors to pull out of stocks and into cash, or out of cash and into stocks, without delay or penalty. 
 Soon enough we’ll have a 100 percent annual turnover in stocks. If it’s Tuesday, then I must own General Motors! How do these poor companies keep up with where to send the annual reports? A new book called What’s Wrong with Wall Street reports that we spend $25 to $30 billion annually to maintain the various exchanges and pay the commissions and fees for trading stocks, futures, and options. That means we spend as much money on passing old shares back and forth as we raise for new issues. After all, the raising of money for new ventures is the reason we have stocks in the first place. And when the trading is finished, come every December, the big portfolios of 50,000 stockpickers look about the same as they did the previous January. 
 The large investors who’ve caught this trading habit are fast becoming the short-term churning suckers that neighborhood brokers used to love. Some have called it the “rent-a-stock market.” Now it’s the amateurs who are prudent and the professionals who are flighty. The public is the comforting and stabilizing factor. 
 The flightiness of trust departments, the Wall Street establishment, and the Boston financial district may be an opportunity for you. You can wait for out-of-favor stocks to hit the crazy low prices, then buy them. 
 I’ve been hearing that the October 19th drop, which happened on a Monday, was only one of several historic declines that have taken place on Mondays, and researchers have spent entire careers studying the Monday effect. They were even talking about the Monday effect back when I went to Wharton. 
