Stock market shares are traded for as long as the company that listed them stays in
business as an independent unit. Most shares are held as long positions, with only a
small percentage of shorts. In futures and options, on the other hand, the total size of
long and short positions is always identical, due to the fact that they are contracts for
future delivery. When someone wants to buy a contract, someone else has to sell it to
them, i.e., go short. If you want to buy a call option for 100 shares of Google, another
trader has to sell you that option; in order for you to be long, someone else has to
be short. Open interest equals the total long or the total short positions.
Futures and options contracts are designed to last for only a set period of time.
A futures or options buyer who wants to accept delivery and a seller who wants to
deliver have to wait until the first delivery day. This waiting period ensures that the
numbers of contracts held long and short are always equal. In any case, very few
futures and options traders plan to deliver or accept delivery. Most traders close out
their positions early, settling in cash long before the first notice day. We’ll return to
the topic of futures and options in Part Eight of this book on trading vehicles.
Open interest rises when new positions are being created and falls when positions are being closed. For example, if open interest in April COMEX gold futures
is 20,000 contracts, it means that bulls are long and bears short 20,000 contracts. If
open interest rises to 20,200, it means that the net of 200 new contracts have been
created: both bought and sold short.
Open interest falls when a bull who is long sells to a bear who is short but wants
to cover his short position. As both of them get out, open interest falls by the size of
their trade, since one or more contracts disappear from that market.
If a new bull buys from an old bull that is getting out of his long position, open
interest remains unchanged. Nor does the open interest change when a new bear
sells to an old bear who wants to buy to cover his short position. In summary, open
interest rises when “fresh blood” enters that market and falls as current bulls and
bears start leaving that market, as illustrated in the table below:
Buyer
New buyer
New buyer
Former seller buys to cover
Former seller buys to cover

Seller
New seller
Former buyer sells
New seller
Former buyer sells

Open Interest
Increases
Unchanged
Unchanged
Decreases

Technicians usually plot open interest as a line below price bars (Figure 31.1).
Open interest in any market varies from season to season because of massive hedging
by industrial users and producers at different stages of the annual production cycle.
Open interest gives important messages when it deviates from its seasonal norm.

Crowd Psychology
It takes one bull and one bear to create a futures or options contract. A bull who
believes that prices will rise buys a contract. A bear who thinks that prices are going
to drop goes short by selling a contract for future delivery. With a trade between a
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

119

31. OPEN INTEREST

A

B

C

D

E

FIGURE 31.1â•… TYH14 daily, 13-day EMA, open interest. (Chart by TradeStation)

Open Interest
Open interest (OI) reflects the number of all short or long positions in any futures or options market. Since the two are equal in the derivatives markets, OI reflects the degree of
conviction among bulls and bears.
Rising OI shows that the conflict between bulls and bears is becoming more intense
and confirms the exiting trend. Falling OI, on the other hand, shows that losers are leaving
the market, while the winners are cashing in—it signals that the trend is nearing its end.
Near the left edge of this chart of March 2014 Treasury Notes futures (TYH14), the trend
is down, but the declining OI warns bears not to overstay the downtrend. OI bottomed out
in area A, T-Notes in area B, and in area C, both were in clear uptrends, with rising OI calling
for higher prices ahead. OI topped out in area D, and while prices continue to rise in area E,
the new downtrend of OI serves up a warning to the bulls near the right edge of the chart.
Not all charts of open interest look as smooth and clear as this one. Serious traders
don’t expect to find a magic tool of a single indicator—they use several indicators and act
only when their messages confirm one another.

new bull and a new bear, open interest rises by the number of contracts they traded.
A single trade is unlikely to move any market, but when thousands of traders make
similar trades, they propel or reverse market trends.
Open interest reflects the intensity of conflict between bulls and bears. It depends
on their willingness to maintain long and short positions.When bulls and bears don’t
expect the market to move in their favor, they close out their positions, reducing
open interest.
There are two people on the opposite sides of every trade, and one of them will
be hurt when prices change. In a rally, bears will get hurt, and in a decline, bulls will
suffer. As long as the losers hold on, hoping and hanging on to their positions, open
interest doesn’t change.
A rise in open interest shows that a crowd of confident bulls is facing down a
crowd of equally confident bears. It points to a growing disagreement between the

120

VOLUME AND TIME

two camps. One group is sure to lose, but as long as potential losers keep pouring in,
the trend will continue. These ideas have been clearly put forth in L. Dee Belveal’s
classic book, Charting Commodity Market Price Behavior.
It takes conviction among both bulls and bears to maintain a trend. Rising open
interest shows that both camps keep adding to their positions. If they strongly disagree about the future course of prices, then the supply of losers is growing, and the
current trend is likely to persist. An increase in open interest gives a green light to
the existing trend.
If open interest rises during an uptrend, it shows that longs are buying while bears
are shorting because they believe that the market is overvalued. They are likely to
run for cover when the uptrend squeezes them harder—and their buying will propel
prices higher.
If open interest rises during a downtrend, it shows that shorts are aggressively
selling, while bottom pickers are buying. Those bargain hunters are likely to bail out
when falling prices hurt them, and their selling will push prices even lower.
When a bull is convinced that prices are going higher and decides to buy, but
a bear is afraid to sell short, that bull can buy only from another bull who bought
earlier and now wants to cash out. Their trade creates no new contract, and open
interest stays unchanged. When open interest goes flat during a rally, it shows that
the supply of losers has stopped growing.
When a bear is convinced that prices are going lower and wants to sell short, but
a bull is afraid to buy from him, that bear can sell only to another bear who shorted
earlier and now wants to cover, take profits and leave. Their trade creates no new
contract, and open interest does not change. When open interest stays flat during a
decline, it shows that the supply of bottom pickers isn’t growing. Whenever open
interest flattens out, it flashes a yellow light—a warning that the trend is aging and
the best gains are probably behind.
When a bull decides to get out of his long position, a bear decides to cover his
short position, and the two trade with one another, a contract disappears, and open
interest shrinks. Falling open interest shows that losers are bailing out, while winners are taking profits. When the disagreement between bulls and bears decreases,
the trend is ripe for a reversal. Falling open interest shows that winners are cashing
in and losers are giving up hope. It signals that the trend is approaching its end.

Trading Rules
1. When open interest rises during a rally, it confirms the uptrend and gives a green
light to add to long positions. It shows that more short sellers are coming into the
market. When they bail out, their short covering is likely to push the rally higher.
When open interest rises as prices fall, it shows that bottom pickers are active in
the market. It gives a green light to shorting because those bargain hunters are
likely to push prices lower when they throw in the towel.
If open interest rises when prices are in a trading range, it’s a bearish sign.
Commercial hedgers are much more likely to sell short than speculators. A sharp
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

32. TIME

121

increase in open interest while prices are flat shows that savvy hedgers are probably shorting the market.You want to avoid trading against those who likely have
better information than you.
2. If open interest falls while prices are in a trading range, it identifies short covering by major commercial interests and gives a buy signal. When commercials
start covering shorts, they show that they expect the market to rise.
When open interest falls during a rally, it shows that winners and losers alike are
becoming cautious. Longs are taking profits, and shorts are covering. Markets
discount the future, and a trend that is accepted by the majority is ready to reverse. If open interest falls during a rally, consider selling and getting out.
When open interest falls during a decline, it shows that shorts are covering
and buyers are taking losses and bailing out. If open interest falls while prices
slide, take profits on short positions.
3. When open interest goes flat during a rally, it shows that the uptrend is getting
old and the best gains have already been made. This gives you a signal to tighten
stops on long positions and avoid new buying. When open interest goes flat during a decline, it warns you that the downtrend is mature and it is best to tighten
stops on short positions. Flat open interest in a trading range does not contribute
any new information.

More on Open Interest
The higher the open interest, the more active the market, and the less slippage you
risk when getting in and out of positions. Short-term traders should focus on the
contracts with the highest open interest. In the futures markets, the highest open
interest tends to be in the front months. As the first notice day approaches and
open interest of the front month begins to drop, while open interest in the next
month begins to rise, it signals to roll over your position into the next month.

■■32. Time
Most people conduct their lives as if they will live forever — repeating the same
mistakes, not learning from the past, and hardly ever planning for the future. Freud
showed that the unconscious mind doesn’t have the notion of time. Our deep-seated
wishes remain largely unchanged throughout our lives.
When people join crowds, their behavior becomes even more primitive and impulsive. Individuals may be ruled by the calendar and the clock, but crowds pay no
attention to time. They act out their emotions as if they had all the time in the world.
Most traders focus only on changing prices but pay little attention to time. That’s
just another sign of being caught up in mass mentality.
The awareness of time is a sign of civilization. A thinking person is aware of time,
while someone who is acting impulsively is not. A market analyst who pays attention
to time becomes aware of a dimension hidden from the market crowd.

122

VOLUME AND TIME

Cycles
Long-term price cycles are a fact of economic life. For example, the U.S. stock
market tends to run in approximately four-year cycles. They exist because the ruling
party inflates the economy going into the presidential election every four years.
The party that wins the election deflates the economy when voters can’t take revenge at the polls. Flooding the economy with liquidity lifts the stock market, while
draining liquidity pushes it down3.
Major cycles in agricultural commodities are due to weather and fundamental
production factors, coupled with the mass psychology of producers. For example,
when livestock prices rise, farmers breed more animals. When those animals reach
the market, prices fall and producers cut back.When the supply is absorbed, scarcity
pushes prices up, breeders go to work again, and the bull/bear cycle repeats. This
cycle is shorter in hogs than in cattle because pigs breed faster than cows.
Long-term cycles can help traders identify market tides. Instead, many traders
get themselves in trouble by trying to use short-term cycles to predict minor turning points.
Price peaks and valleys often seem to flow in an orderly manner. Traders measure
distances between neighboring peaks, and project them into the future to forecast
the next top.Then they measure distances between bottoms and extend them into the
future to forecast the next low. Cycles put bread and butter on the tables of analysts
who sell forecasts. Few of them realize that what appears like a cycle on the charts is
often a figment of the imagination. If you analyze price data using a mathematically
rigorous program, such as John Ehlers’s MESA (Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis), you’ll find that approximately 80 percent of what looks like cycles is simply
market noise. A human mind looks for order—and even an illusion of order is good
enough for many people.
If you look at any river from the air, it appears to have cycles, swinging right and left.
Every river meanders in its valley because water flows faster in its middle than near
the shores, creating turbulences that force the river to turn. Looking for short-term
market cycles with a ruler and a pencil is like searching for water with a divining rod.
Profits from an occasional success are erased by many losses due to unsound methods.

Indicator Seasons
A farmer sows in spring, harvests in late summer, and in the fall, lays in supplies for
the winter. There is a time to sow and a time to reap, a time to bet on a warm trend
and a time to get ready for a frost. We can apply the concept of seasons to financial
markets. Taking a farmer’s approach, a trader should look to buy in spring, sell in
summer, go short in the fall, and cover in winter.
Martin Pring developed the model of seasons for prices, but this concept works
even better with technical indicators. Their seasons help recognize the current stage
This cycle was grossly distorted by the Fed’s “quantitative easing” following the 2008 debacle, but
it’s likely to return, once we crawl out of the Great Recession.
3

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

123

32. TIME

of the market cycle. This simple but effective model helps you buy when prices are
low and sell short when they are high, setting you apart from the market crowd.
We can define the seasons of many indicators by two factors: their slope as well
as their position above or below the centerline. For example, let’s apply the concept
of indicator seasons to MACD-Histogram (see Chapter 23). We define the slope of
MACD-Histogram as the relationship between two neighboring bars. When MACDHistogram rises below its centerline, it is spring; when it rises above its centerline,
it is summer; when it falls above its centerline, it is autumn; and when it falls below
its centerline, it is winter. Spring is the best season for going long, and autumn is the
best season for selling short (Figure 32.1).
Indicator Slope
Rising
Rising
Falling
Falling

Position Relative to Centerline
Below
Above
Above
Below

Season
Spring
Summer
Fall
Winter

Preferred Action
Go long
Start selling
Go short
Start covering

When MACD-Histogram is below its centerline but its slope is rising, it is spring
in the market. The weather is cool but turning warmer. Most traders expect the
winter to return and are afraid to buy. Emotionally, it is hard to buy because the
memories of a downtrend are still fresh. In fact, spring is the best time for buying,
with the highest profit potential, while risks are relatively small because we can place
a protective stop slightly below the market.
When MACD-Histogram rises above its centerline, it’s summer in the market—
and by now most traders recognize the uptrend. It’s emotionally easy to buy in summer because bulls have plenty of company. In fact, profit potential in summer is
lower than in spring, while the risks are higher because stops have to be farther away
from the market due to heightened volatility.
When MACD-Histogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down, it’s autumn in the market. Few traders recognize that change and keep buying, expecting
summer to return. Emotionally, it’s hard to sell short in autumn—it requires you to
stand apart from the crowd. In fact, autumn is the best time for selling short.
When MACD-Histogram falls below its centerline, it’s winter in the market. By
then, most traders recognize the downtrend. It is emotionally easy to sell short in
winter, joining many vocal bears. In fact, the risk/reward ratio is rapidly shifting
against bears, as potential rewards are becoming smaller and risks higher because
stops have to be placed relatively far away from prices.
Just as a farmer must pay attention to the vagaries of weather, a trader needs to
stay alert. An autumn on the farm can be interrupted by an Indian summer, and a
market can stage a strong rally in the autumn. A sudden freeze can hit the fields in
spring, and the market can drop early in a bull move. A trader needs to use several
indicators and techniques to avoid getting whipsawed.
The concept of indicator seasons focuses a trader’s attention on the passage of time.
It helps you plan for the season ahead instead of mindlessly following other people.

124

VOLUME AND TIME

Sell

Sell

Sell

Summer

Buy

Winter

Autumn

Buy

Spring

FIGURE 32.1â•… VRTX daily, MACD-Histogram 12-26-9. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Indicator Seasons
We can apply the concept of seasons to most indicators and timeframes, including intraday. This can be done with a multitude of trading vehicles, even though this example
focuses on the daily MACD-Histogram of Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (VRTX), a stock in
the Nasdaq 100.
Autumn—The indicator is above the centerline but falling. This is the best season for
establishing shorts.
Winter—The indicator drops below its centerline. Use weakness to take profits on
short positions.
Spring—The indicator turns up from below its centerline. It is the best time to establish
longs.
Summer—The indicator rises above its centerline. As the weather gets hot, use
strength to take profits on long positions.
MACD-Histogram looks very smooth in this example, but be prepared for brief fluctuations, both above and below the centerline. Spring can be interrupted by a frost, there can
be a warm spell in winter, etc.

Market Time
We measure time using calendars and watches, but seldom stop to think that our
own perceptions of time are far from universal. We keep track of time in human
terms, while huge areas of life move on vastly different timelines.
For example, we think that the ground under our feet is stable, while in fact continents move constantly. They traverse only a few inches per year, but this is enough
to radically change the face of the globe over millions of years. Within shorter timeframes, weather patterns change over centuries. Ice ages and warming periods alternate with one another.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

32. TIME

125

At the other end of the scale, there are physical particles that survive only a tiny
fraction of a second. There are insects that are born, mature, procreate, and die
within a single day.
Turning to trading, let’s keep in mind that time flows at a different speed in the
market than it does for us as individuals. The market, composed of huge masses of
human beings, moves at a much slower speed. The patterns you recognize on your
charts may have predictive value—but the turns they anticipate are likely to occur
much later than you expect.
The relative slowness of crowds can bedevil even experienced traders. Time and
again we find ourselves entering trades too early. Beginners are typically late. By
the time they recognize a trend or a reversal, that move had been underway for so
long that they miss most, if not all of it. Newbies tend to chase old trends, but the
more experienced analysts and traders tend to run into an opposite problem. We
recognize approaching reversals and emerging new trends from far away—and jump
in too soon. We often buy before the market finishes tracing a bottom or sell short
well before it completes a top. By getting in too early we can end up losing money in
trends that are too slow to turn.
What should we do? First of all, you need to become aware that the market time
is much slower than your own. Second, consider not putting on a trade when you
notice an early reversal signal. A better signal may well emerge later, especially at
market tops, which take longer to form than bottoms.
It pays not to be greedy and trade a smaller size. A smaller position is easier to
hold while a reversal is taking its sweet time. Be sure to use multiple timeframes
for market analysis: this is the essence of Triple Screen, the system we’ll review in a
future chapter.

The Factor of Five
Most beginners casually pick a timeframe that looks good to them—it can be a daily
or a 10-minute chart, or any other—and ignore others. Few are aware of the fact
that the market lives in multiple timeframes. It moves simultaneously on monthly,
weekly, daily, and intraday charts—often in opposite directions.
The trend may be up on the daily charts but down on the weeklies, and vice versa.
Which of them will you follow? And what will you do about the intraday charts,
which may well contradict either the weeklies or the dailies? Most traders ignore all
timeframes except for their own—until a sudden move from outside of their timeframe hits their account.
Keep in mind that neighboring timeframes are linked by the factor of approximately 5. If you start with a monthly chart and proceed to the weekly, you’ll notice
that there are 4.5 weeks to a month. As you switch from a weekly to a daily chart,
you know that there are 5 trading days to a week. Turning to intraday analysis, you
may look at an hourly chart—and there are approximately 5–6 hours to a trading
day. Day traders can proceed even further and look at 10-minute charts, followed
by 2-minute charts. Each is related to its neighboring timeframes by approximately
the factor of five.
