
How Do I Top That?
OK, it’s John again. I didn’t know my lovely wife, M aria, had been paying attention over all these years! It truly goes to show that this is a team effort, and being a
team has nothing to do with actually trading together. It’s about working together in this game called life.
That was great information, and reading it made my life as a trader flash before my eyes. I think I choked back both vomit and a tear. M aria doesn’t trade or have
any interest in trading, just as I have zero interest in fabric colors, and it works and brings a healthy balance to our relationship. That said, I did learn early on to just
24

“get it out there” and let her know when I had had a crappy trading day. And by crappy I don’t just mean a normal loss. I mean a situation that got out of control, like
a big gap against me on an options play. That way, she would know that I wasn’t upset at her, I was just retreating inside my head in order to dust myself off and get
back in the saddle again. Trading truly is an adventure. If you liked M aria’s insights, you can see more of them at her blog, www.renaissancemoms.com, which covers
some interesting ground on a variety of subjects.
One thing that clicked into place when I reached, as M aria would say, “intermediate trader status” was that whenever I had a situation that went horribly wrong, it
struck me that someone else was having a joyous occasion taking all that money away from me. Was there a setup in there somewhere that I had completely missed?
We saw in detail how the trading disaster unraveled for Joe Trader. And yet for someone else, this was simply a great trading opportunity. This chart of TASR
represents a different view. (See Figure 1.6.) This is a common setup that is created when large funds want to get out of a stock. They push the stock to new highs,
sucking in the retail crowd, and then they start unloading. They know that the retail crowd will buy the new highs, and they also know that the retail crowd will feel
comfortable buying all the way down to support. This gives the institutions ample time to sell their holdings. By making the stock look great, even though it isn’t
great, institutions fool the masses. I call this setup the “fake orgasm.” It certainly looks good, but there really isn’t anything to get excited about.

Figure 1.6

I use it as a fade play for swing trades on stocks. (To fade a market means to take a trade in the opposite direction from the move.) In other words, if a stock is
rallying with this setup, then I’m looking to short it.

How Does a Person Make Money from a “Fake Orgasm” Setup?
These are the rules I use in trading with the fake orgasm setup. I use this setup on individual stocks.

Trading Rules for Sells/Shorts (Buys Are Reversed)
25

• Look at stocks that are making new 52-week highs. On December 30, having made new 52-week highs the day before at point 1, TASR gapped up and hit a new alltime high of $33.45 (point 2).
• For stocks making new highs, look for a bearish divergence using a seven-period RSI (relative strength index). When TASR made new highs on December 30, the
RSI hit 72.35 (point 4), well below the level it had hit on November 15 when the stock made its last 52-week high (point 3). When prices make higher highs and, at
the same time, the RSI makes lower highs, this is called a bearish divergence. The RSI measures the power of the move, and this is telling the trader that the stock
is losing power.
• For stocks that are making new highs, look for a significant decrease in volume. When TASR made new 52-week highs, it was on one-fourth of the volume of the last
thrust to new highs. This is the equivalent of a car running out of gas. There is no sustained price movement without volume.

Figure 1.7
• Short the stock the day after it closes below the previous 52-week high. On January 3, TASR closed back below $30.98, the previous 52-week high established on
November 15. Utilizing this setup, the trader, let’s call her Joanne, goes short 2,000 shares at the open on January 4, getting filled at $30.27. She places a stop 25
cents above the all-time highs. Since the all-time highs are $33.45, the stop is placed at $33.70. This is a stop market order, not the stop limit order that Joe used.
• To exit, use a close above the high of the low day while above key support. If key support is broken, stay in the trade until there is a close above the high of the low
hour on a 60-minute chart. We take a look at this briefly here, but this is a concept I talk about in much detail later in the book.
• Don’t trail stops. The exit is the price reversal signal.
Let’s now take a look at Joanne Trader, who was on the opposite side of Joe’s trade. After she entered TASR short, the stock never rallied enough to close above
the previous day’s highs. So Joanne was still in the stock short once it broke key support on the daily charts in the form of the key uptrend line. Once it broke this
key support level, the selling got ugly.
Figure 1.7 is a 60-minute chart that shows the increase in volume once TASR broke key support on the daily charts, at point 1.
During the three large sell-off days, at points 2, 3, and 4, at no time did the market rally enough to close above the high of the low 60-minute bar. The next day, at
point 5, TASR rallied enough to close above the previous 60-minute bar, which was the low bar of the entire move down. This close was the signal to cover, and once
26

the next bar opened, Joanne covered her 2,000 shares of TASR at $16.17, pocketing $28,200. She also reversed and went long 4,000 shares at this same level, using the
lows of the move as a stop.
She stayed in the move until the 60-minute price action created a close below the low of the high 60-minute bar. This happened the next day at point 6, and Joanne
closed out her long at $20.54 for a profit of $17,480. As Joe was berating himself for being such a stupid fool and sitting through his first day of marriage counseling,
Joanne was counting her profits, totaling $45,680, and wiring a portion of them out of her account to pay for a one-week vacation to M aui.
When a trader loses money, it isn’t gone. It has just been moved into another trader’s account. This is true even of the great financial crisis of 2008. The money lost
by AIG was simply a trading gain on Goldman Sachs’s books. When AIG couldn’t pay the loss, the government was nice enough to step in and lend it taxpayer
money so that it could, in turn, pay Goldman Sachs. Nice work if you can get it!

What Is the Only Economic Principle That Matters in the Markets?
TASR didn’t lose 60 percent of its value in eight trading days because it wanted to. Desperate traders and mutual funds that had loaded up on this stock to sell covered
calls were the main victims. Covered call writing was one of the most reliable forms of income generation for most of 2004. This was because the market was choppy
and didn’t go anywhere. Because this method was doing so well, Wall Street announced plans to start a couple of mutual funds that specialized in covered calls.
Although there are no guarantees in the markets, here is one “almost” guarantee: as soon as Wall Street announces a special vehicle for trading a particular market or
strategy, then that market or strategy is done for. Once the covered call funds got started, the markets roared higher during the last two months of 2004, invalidating
this strategy as the best way to take advantage of current market conditions. Another example? Wall Street’s pushing of home-loan-backed CM Os (collateralized
mortgage obligations) was a clear signal that the housing market was about to go in the toilet. The moral of the story? When Wall Street decides to package something
up, put a bow on it, and sell it to the public, that move is over. But I digress.
TASR lost 60 percent of its value because a lot of people were caught on the long side, like Joe Trader, and froze. M any of them didn’t make a conscious decision to
sell the stock. They held on until they couldn’t take the pain any longer, or their brokers got them out because of margin calls. It was the margin calls that caused the
worst of the selling when TASR closed near $14.00 a share. These forced market orders caused riplike movements in the stock that resulted in even worse fills for
traders like Joe, who were trying to use their skills to finesse their way out of the trade.
Disgusted with themselves and red in the face, the victims of these trades stalked off to contemplate the insanity of the universe. M eanwhile, as we saw, another
group of traders took the opposite side of this “capitulation trade” and made great profits. How does a trader get on the winning side of these trades? To fully
understand how to do this, we must first step back and understand how the markets really work, and why traders continually and instinctively sabotage themselves in
the first place.
Well, the first part is easy. The markets are not that complex, and they work very simply. M arkets rise on a day-to-day basis because current demand exceeds
current supply—period. It has nothing to do with being in a secular bear market or a cyclical bull market, high price/earnings ratios (P/Es), or M aria Bartiromo’s choice
of a necklace. (For anyone who actively traded during the dot.com bubble, traders would look for a rally when M aria wore pearls. Very rational, of course.) It has
everything to do with what traders are willing to pay for a particular market or an individual stock today.
It doesn’t matter whether the demand is falsely created by a hedge fund “taking the street” (buying large amounts of a single stock to drain a market maker of its
inventory, forcing it to buy the stock back at a higher price), a squeeze that whacks shorts and forces them to cover, or a rumor that a biotech stock is being cornered
by M artha Stewart. Demand is demand, and that is what drives markets higher. The inverse is equally true: if there is too much supply in the market, prices will fall.
The best source of “too much supply” hitting the markets is generally margin calls and other means of forced selling all hitting the markets at once, such as the Joe
Traders of the world throwing in the towel and dumping their positions. This is why markets can erase gains so quickly; they take the stairs up, but they ride the
elevator down. It is very important for a trader to remember this. Yes, the stock may be acting great and its prospects may be bright, but if there are 1.5 million shares
being offered for sale all at the same instant and only 50,000 shares are being sought by buyers, then that stock is going to crash. It isn’t rocket science. It’s supply and
demand at its finest.
Trading the long or the short side is very easy, once a trader learns to ignore his own personal opinions, quits trying to be right, and quits trying to make money.
And by the way, that’s the hard part. This means pushing aside any and all prejudices about the market and focusing on the current supply and demand situation.
When you’re dancing with the market, it’s best to let the market lead. Once traders understand this, the next thing they need to work on is their own mental trading
outlook and how they process this information, and to fully understand how the human brain naturally and emphatically causes traders to do things that make them
lose money in the markets. It could be a whopper of a bad trade like Joe Trader’s or a series of smaller bad trades that grind down an account—death by a thousand
cuts. Either way, it’s the human brain that’s letting it happen. To succeed in trading, you have to get your arms wrapped around the idea that your brain is naturally
wired to sabotage your dreams of becoming a trader. And ironically, it’s doing this because it thinks it’s protecting you. Understand this and you have an edge.
And that is what we discuss in the next chapter.
Lose as if you like it; win as if you were used to it.
T OMMY HITCHCOCK, POLO PLAYER

When you have got an elephant by the hind legs and he is trying to run away, it’s best to let him run.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN

27

2
Psychology 101:
What Didn’t They
Teach About Trading and
Investing in School?
Only a fool tests the depth of the water with both feet.
AFRICAN PROVERB
Respect your limitations; your limitations will not respect you.
SWEDISH PROVERB
Emotions Are Fine at Weddings and Funerals; Why Aren’t They Fine When It Comes to Trading and Investing?
Trading is the most deceptive profession in the world. Do you know anyone who has recently walked into an airport, jumped into the cockpit of a jumbo jet loaded
with passengers, and taken off down the runway without any prior training? Yet people will routinely open an account and start trading without any guidance
whatsoever. And that is equally insane. Little do they know that their emotions and the natural functions of their brain are against them right from the opening bell.
They are the freshest of meat.
Just as a chatty masseur is the enemy of a relaxing spa treatment, emotion is the enemy of successful trading. Remember, the markets are set up naturally to take
advantage of and prey upon human nature, moving sharply only when enough people get trapped on the wrong side of a trade. This sweeps a burst of fear, frustration,
and rage into the markets—and creates fabulous trading opportunities for the prepared trader. To head into this adventure called trading (note that it is called trading,
not guaranteed income) without having a firm grasp of how human emotions move markets and how human emotions can sabotage your own trading is like trying to
hail a taxi in M anhattan during a thundershower. In other words, the odds are overwhelmingly against you.
The whole idea of this chapter is to lay the groundwork for the setups we discuss later in the book. With this foundation, traders will be able to understand how to
control their “inner demon” with respect to trading. This is the creature that mentally blocks them from following the parameters of a particular setup once they are in
the trade. It is very similar to the brain freeze that occurred during the river rafting incident discussed in the introduction and to Joe Trader in the TASR trading
example. It is also important to remember that every trader has different dominant personality traits that he uses to absorb information and relate to the world around
him. Some traders are more visual, others more auditory, and still others more kinesthetic—they relate to the world based on how events make them feel on the inside.
These three traits can have a big impact on a person’s trading. Traders who are dominantly kinesthetic are doomed from the outset—until they realize that this is how
they relate to the world and the impact that it has on their trading. If you buy a stock only when you feel good about it, you are a kinesthetic trader. Your best entries
will be the ones that are scary and make you feel nervous. If you buy only when you feel good, the stock is probably near the top of a move. Think about it. Near the
end of the book, there is a chapter on tips for when trading “isn’t working for you.” In this chapter there is a personality test that can help you determine what type of
personality you are and the pros and cons for each personality trait. The cons will work against a trader without her even knowing it—until she learns about them and
realizes what’s going on.
In addition, the trader needs to realize the importance of utilizing a specific methodology for each setup, because each setup takes advantage of a different aspect of
human emotions. A trader cannot apply the same trading rules to all setups across the board. This is one of the biggest mistakes I see newer traders make. A two-point
stop in the E-mini S&Ps can work well with one setup but cause nearly every trade to get stopped out in another. Trading five lots per $50,000 can work well with
one setup but be devastating with another. By understanding the psychology behind the trade, the individual will also then understand the right parameters and the
right allocation to use for each setup. Each setup really is unique, and it has to be treated that way.
The end result of this chapter is for you to develop what I call a professional trading mindset. Although we discuss setups for most of this book, traders have got to
have the trading psychology nailed down or their trading experience will be shortlived and painful. The other option, of course, is to go to a purely mechanical system
and have your computer trade for you. Although this sounds like a good idea, I’ve found that traders who don’t understand the psychology start tweaking the system
every time there is a losing trade, which negates the whole idea of having an automated system. The bottom line is that if you understand the trading brain, you have a
distinct advantage over (1) those individuals who don’t and (2) those large funds that are trapped in larger positions that will take them days to liquidate.

Why Is a Guy with a System Always Welcome in a Casino?
This is an old Las Vegas saying that applies equally well to the financial markets. Having a system gives people a sense of security—nothing can go wrong. Every time
I walk into M andalay Bay or Bellagio in Las Vegas, I am reminded that all these fabulous structures were paid for by people who thought they could beat the blackjack
tables. The owners of the Luxor borrowed $550 million over 20 years to build their place. They were able to pay it off in less than three. Tell them at the front desk
that you have a system, and you’ll most likely get a presidential suite and a private table.
Why don’t systems work in Vegas? The reason for this is twofold: the house has an edge with percentages, and as soon as the system falters a couple of times, the
human mind gets to work trying to tweak it to make it perfect. This eventually screws up the entire process. In the casinos, as in trading, it takes only one stupid bet
to blow your whole wad. Casino owners know this, and this is why they sell the strategy books right there on the property, prominently displayed in their own gift
shops. This elevates the concept of the fox guarding the henhouse to a whole new level.
Craps is a great game for studying the trading mindset. The board is set up to encourage more of the “stupid bets” as the game goes on. Instead of just focusing on
the higher-probability pass and no pass bets, participants get sucked in and start betting the hard ways and all the other exciting, low-probability bets. It’s a crowd
mentality case study right before your eyes. Guess who wins consistently in the end? And that’s why the drinks are free.
It’s the same process with the markets. The odds are against the trader surviving because the market has an edge: it doesn’t have any emotions. Like the river making
28

its way to the ocean, the markets ebb and flow with total disregard for the objectives of the people who are hanging on for the ride. Humans have a tendency to try to
imprint their will on the markets. This is like trying to get a tornado to shift course by yelling at it, or trying to convince your wife that making returns to the
department store is not the same as saving money.

What Is the Right Mental Outlook for the Markets, and Why Shouldn’t I Turn On My Computer Without It?
He who conceals his disease cannot expect to be cured.
ETHIOPIAN PROVERB

I will not allow yesterday’s success to lull me into today’s complacency, for this is the great foundation of failure.
OG M ANDINO

First traders must understand the psychology, and then they can learn about the setup. It’s like two pieces of a puzzle, and these two pieces have to snap together
snugly in place before a trader can expect to trade for a living without repeating the same mistakes over and over again. I’ve shown many traders setups that work. The
ones who don’t get the psychology part always screw it up. Usually this takes place right after their first losing trade: “I wonder what would happen if I added a
M ACD filter and changed the settings of this moving average. I bet if I’d done that, I wouldn’t have been stopped out.” And a good setup dies an early death as the
trader heads down the path most traveled—that of the never-ending tweak.
I’ve spent a lot of my career focused on trader psychology—not only working on myself, but working with hundreds of other traders. I’ve spent a lot of time in
large trading rooms with hedge funds and prop traders, executing orders right alongside hundreds of other traders. I’ve watched the fear and the elation and the greed
permeate a room and a group of traders like a disease. I’ve literally seen money from accounts on one side of a room flow into the accounts on the other side of the
room as each group of traders focused on different setups and parameters. In addition, I’ve worked with hundreds of traders who have come up to my office to sit
beside me and watch me trade, and to have me look over their shoulder while they trade. I’m the first to say that I’m not a shrink, but let’s just say that my
experiences have left me with a clear road map of the process most traders go through when they first start to trade. Every person is unique, but when it comes to
money, the differences are quickly stripped away. Doctor, lawyer, surfer, or engineer—it doesn’t matter. A herd of thirsty cattle will quickly drop all pretenses and
stampede to get to water.
In addition to my experiences in working with other traders, it shouldn’t be surprising to hear that I learned a lot of this firsthand from the best teacher that the
market has to offer: extensive pain and suffering.
By the time I was a senior in high school, I’d saved $1,000 working a $4 an hour job slinging cookie dough and sodas at the local mall and running my own small
mail-order business, buying and selling rare coins.
M y stepfather, Lance, noticed my stash of cash and my entrepreneurial spirit and said, “Have you thought about putting your capital to work?”
I had no idea what he meant, but he was a M organ Stanley broker, and I watched him meet with his friends every Sunday night as they visited and mapped out their
M onday morning buying strategy. When they told me they were going to buy Intel call options and asked me if I wanted in, I said, “Sure,” even though I had no idea
what in the hell a “call option” was. But I was and always have been a risk taker, so the next morning I spent my entire $1,000 savings on 10 Intel calls for a buck each.
Four days later, my stepfather told me to sell, and I did … at $1.50 per option, earning a 50 percent profit of $500. I never went back to that cookie store again, at
least not as a boy flipping cookie dough for $32 a day, less taxes. I was hooked on putting my capital to work.
For eight years, through college and for four years after college, I maintained a routine of staking myself with $10,000 in order to buy and sell low-priced stocks and
options until I increased my portfolio to the $120,000 to $130,000 range. During those eight years, I repeatedly did a smart thing, followed by a stupid thing,
whenever I ran my account up that much. The smart thing I did was when I had built up my account, I would withdraw $20,000 to $30,000 of profits to invest in real
estate (this was, of course, before the credit bubble crash, when real estate was actually trending up).
