
Forex Markets—EURUSD, May through June, 2004
1. This is a daily chart of the euro on the forex markets (see Figure 18.5). This is an example of a swing trade and a bigger example of the “power of the box.” On M ay
20 and M ay 21, 2004, we form the lows at 1.1620.

349

Figure 18.5

2. On M ay 27, the market loses steam from its vault higher and sells off, forming the highs of the box 312 pips later (a little over 3 cents).
3. On June 4 and June 5, the market retests the lows of the box.
4. And on June 16, there is a retest of the highs of the box. Once this happens, I place my orders. I use a buy stop at 1.1933 and a sell stop at 1.1619.
5. M y sell stop is hit at 1.1619 at point 5. Since the width of the box is 312 pips, I calculate my target accordingly, and I place a buy limit order at 1.1307. M y stop is
my original buy stop order at 1.1933.
6. The market moves down nicely and then shoots back higher. Anyone who was using a trailing stop for this trade would have been stopped out for a small gain. The
reason I keep my stop wider, and the reason I do not trail it, is that I know that this is a high-probability play, and I want to give this setup “room to move” in
order to give it a chance to work out. M y target is hit nearly two weeks later for a gain of 312 pips, just over three large in trader speak, or $3,120 per contract.
Next.

Forex Markets—EURUSD, August 3, 2004
1. On August 3, 2004, the euro forms a box on the 15-minute charts (see Figure 18.6). The first high is marked here at point 1.

350

Figure 18.6

2. A few hours later, we get a potential low for the box, and I draw a horizontal line at the lows here.
3. The market bounces, and we get a retest of the highs.
4. Then the euro sells off nicely, and we get a retest of the lows. Since this low pushed a little lower than the low at point 2, I go ahead and move my horizontal line
down to reflect this low. Once I have these lines set up, I place my orders. I use a buy stop at 1.2062 (1 pip above the highs) and a sell stop at 1.2042 (1 pip
below the lows).
5. M y sell stop is hit at 1.2042. Since the width of the box is 18 pips, I calculate my target, and I place a limit buy order at 1.2024. M y stop is my original buy stop
order at 1.2062.
6. M y target is hit, and I’m out for a gain of 18 pips, or $180 per contract. I don’t have to remember to cancel my open buy stop because my execution software does
it for me automatically.

Forex Markets—EURUSD, August 19, 2004
1. On this 15-minute chart of the EURUSD, we get a first test of the highs at 1.2347 (see Figure 18.7). Once the market sells off from this level, I draw a horizontal line
across the high.

351

Figure 18.7

2. The market sells off and pushes as low as 1.2323. I start off drawing a line at this level. Later I move this line back up to 1.2331 because the rest of the price
support tests are much closer to this level than the “wayward tick.”
3. Here we get another test near the highs.
4. And here we get another test near the lows. Once the four price tests are complete, I place a buy stop order at 1.2348 and a sell stop order at 1.2330. Although this
box isn’t perfect, there is no doubt that we have a nice horizontal channel in place.
5. M y buy stop order is hit. Since the width of the box is 16 pips, I place a sell limit order for my target at 1.2364. M y sell stop remains in place as my stop on this
play.
6. M y target is hit, and I’m out for 16 pips, a gain of $160 per contract. as you can see, I could have also used the low of the “wayward tick” in my calculations, and
this would have been a more profitable trade. The bottom line is that when it comes down to a few ticks, where you place your horizontal line is not a big deal, as
long as it is crystal clear that a box is in place. This applies to nearly all setups. If you have a setup, and you miss the trade because you were trying to get the
perfect entry, then you are the chump that just got played by the market. Good setups take time to develop and shouldn’t be squandered. Generally, traders who
miss their “perfect entry” usually end up chasing the markets as prices run away from them. Afraid of missing the move, they frantically jump on board.
Unfortunately, this action shifts them into the group of traders who just bought the top or sold the bottom. What was a great setup suddenly turns into a losing
trade. As with most of the scenarios in this book, I’m speaking directly from the painful and frustrating experiences all newer traders have. This particular scenario
is where the following often-quoted trader saying comes into play: don’t be a dick for a tick . I keep this somewhat crude phrase handy so that when I see a setup,
I just get into the trade and don’t try to finesse my entry. Entries are a dime a dozen. It’s the exits that make you money.

Forex Markets—AUDUSD, May 30, 2005
352

1. On this 120-minute chart of AUDUSD, we get a first test of the highs at 0.7638 (see Figure 18.8). Once the market sells off from this level, I draw a horizontal line
across the high.

Figure 18.8

353

2. The market sells off and pushes as low as 0.7584. I start off drawing a line at this level. The market bounces and retests this level again before moving higher.
3. At point 3, we get another test of the highs, pushing up a little bit above the previous highs.
4. Once this high is tested, the markets stair-step their way back to the lows at point 4. After the four price tests are complete, and prices rally about 25 percent back
into the box (the width of the box is 54 pips, so 25 percent of this is about 14 pips), I place a buy stop order at 0.7639 and a sell stop order at 0.7583. Prices rally
almost all the way to the top of the channel before rolling over and heading lower. Finally, on M ay 30, 2005, my sell stop is hit. It is important to remember that I
had to wait patiently for this setup to execute. After I placed my buy and sell stops, I had to wait 44 hours before one of them was hit.
5. After my sell stop is hit, my original buy stop becomes my stop loss on this trade. M y target is the width of the box, which is 54 pips away at 0.7530. The markets
move quickly down to this level, but don’t quite make it. Then they bounce all the way back to my entry, pause, and then reverse back lower, plunging violently
into my buy limit order. I’m out for 54 pips, a gain of $540 per lot being traded. I want to emphasize again how important it is to be patient in trading and waiting
for the right setup. This trade took 76 hours to set up. Then, once I placed my orders, it took another 44 hours for one of them to be hit. And after I was filled, it
took another 34 hours for my target to get hit. This one trade spanned 154 hours. In trading, patience is a virtue, and impatience triggers devastation.

Forex Markets—EURGBP, April 12, 2005
1. On this 120-minute chart of EURGBP, we get a first test of the highs at 0.6867 (see Figure 18.9). Once the market sells off from this level, I draw a horizontal line
across the high.

354

Figure 18.9

2. The market sells off and prints a low of 0.6848 before bouncing higher. I draw another line beneath this level.
3. Prices firm and rally back up to the highs. Once this level tests and prices roll over, I wait to see if a retest of the lows will hold.
355

4. And we get another test near the lows. Once the four price tests are complete, I wait to see if the markets can rally at least 25 percent back into the box. Since the
width of the box is 19 pips, 25 percent would be about 5 pips. Once this happens, I place a buy stop order at 0.6868 and a sell stop order at 0.6847. This box is
pretty clean.
5. Prices come back up to retest the highs, sell off to the middle of the box, come back up yet again to test the highs, and then finally roll over and go through the lows,
filling my sell stop order. M y buy stop order stays in place as my stop. EURGBP sells off quickly, and my target is hit on the second bar at point 5. (Of course,
quickly is a relative term, as these are 120-minute bars.) This currency pair is worth around $18 a pip, so the 19-pip target yields a gain of $342 per lot.

Forex Markets—USDCHF, June 10, 2005
1. On this 60-minute chart of USDCHF, there is an initial test of the highs at 1.2577 (see Figure 18.10). Prices quickly fall from this level, and I draw a horizontal line
across the high.

356

Figure 18.10

2. USDCHF sells off to 1.2519 at point 2. Once prices start to rally off this level, I place a horizontal line across the lows.
3. Prices shoot up and retest the highs at point 3.
357

4. This is quickly followed by another test of the lows at point 4. Once prices rally about 25 percent back up into the box, I place my orders, with a buy stop at
1.2578 and a sell stop at 1.2518. After retesting the lows yet again, prices firm 20 hours later and bust out through the highs, triggering my buy stop order. M y
sell stop remains in place as my stop loss on the trade. Prices plow forward, and it doesn’t take long for my target to get hit. The gain is good for 58 pips, or
roughly $464 per lot.

Forex Markets—EURJPY, April 7, 2005
1. On this 60-minute chart of EURJPY, we get a first test of the highs at 140.03 (see Figure 18.11). Once the market sells off from this level, I draw a horizontal line
across the high.

358

Figure 18.11

2. The market sells off to point 2 at 139.66 and bounces. I draw a line underneath this level.

359

3. We rally quickly back up to the highs for the third test.
4. Once prices test the highs, they quickly roll over and test the lows, and we now have the fourth test of the box in place. Once prices rally back 25 percent into the
box, I place my orders, a buy stop at 140.04 and a sell stop at 139.65.
5. Prices rally to just beneath my buy stop, then roll over and trigger my sell stop. M y buy stop stays in place as my stop loss order. Prices consolidate near the lows
for about five hours before breaking lower and hitting my target at 139.30, for a gain of 36 pips, or about $288 per lot.

Forex Markets—GBPJPY, May 16, 2005
1. On this 240-minute chart of GBPJPY, we get a first test of the lows at point 1 at 197.86 (see Figure 18.12). Once the market rallies off of this level, I draw a
horizontal line across the lows.

360

Figure 18.12

2. The market rallies and stays in the upper part of its range for a long time. We test the highs three times before selling off to test the lows again. Even though we test
the highs three times, this counts as only test 2 of the box. For this upper part of the range to become an official part of the box, it has to be offset with another
361

corresponding test of the lows. (For example, three tests of the highs and one test of the lows do not make a box.) I keep my line across the highs at 199.24 and
wait to see if we will get another test of the lows.
3. At point 3, the market finally sells off and retests the lows.
4. It doesn’t take long for the market to rally back up and test the highs of the box at point 4, and once prices fall back to within 25 percent of the box’s range, I set up
my buy stop order at 199.25 and my sell stop order at 197.85.
5. Prices continue lower and hit my sell stop order. M y buy stop order stays in place, as it is now my stop loss. Prices proceed quickly and without pause down to
my target, and I’m out for a gain of 139 pips, or about $1,112 per contract.

Forex Markets—EURJPY, August 4, 2005
1. This play was particularly fun, as it occurred while I was finishing the rewrites on this chapter, and I was able to capture it live on my execution platform. On this
15-minute chart of EURJPY, we get a first test of the highs at 1.3784 (see Figure 18.13). Once the market sells off from this level, I draw a horizontal line across
the high.

Figure 18.13

2. The market sells off and pushes as low as 137.63. Once prices rally off of this level, I draw a horizontal line across the lows.
3. Here we get another test near the highs at point 3.
4. The markets drift back down and retest the lows. Once prices rally back about 25 percent into the box, I place a buy stop order at 137.85 and a sell stop order at
137.62.
5. The market rallies right off the lows to and through the highs. M y buy stop order is triggered, and shortly thereafter my target is hit, for a gain of 21 pips, or $168

362

per contract.

Ringing the Cash Register—Scaling Out of a Position as It Goes Your Way
M y style within a strategy is to get into the trade all at once and then scale out as the trade goes my way. M y goal is to still have one-third to one-half of my position
left if and when the strategy hits my target. This is one big advantage of trading multiple lots. With one lot, I would just stay in the trade from start to finish. With
multiple lots, a trader can start peeling off contracts so that if the trade does reverse and gets stopped out, the overall loss will be offset by any gains already booked,
thus increasing the trader’s risk/reward ratio. On this particular play, my buy stop order was for 75 lots. Once the markets triggered my buy stop, I scaled out in thirds
all the way up to my target (see Figure 18.14). This snapshot of my execution platform shows that I sold 25 lots at 137.93, another 25 lots at 138.05, and the final 25
lots at 138.07, for a total gain on the play of $14,957.62. Because I literally executed this trade while scrambling to make the deadline for this chapter, it put into
perspective how much writing a book really is a labor of love, albeit painful. This is my first book, but I’m guessing that my year of toil in trying to fill hundreds of
blank pages with semiuseful material will probably net me about the same amount as this two-hour trade. (I’m sure there is a lesson in there somewhere.)

363

364

Figure 18.14
If you wish to drown, do not torture yourself with shallow water.
BULGARIAN PROVERB

Summing Up the Currency Box Play
I always enjoy the act of giving presents and opening them over the holidays. I find that I enjoy that feeling almost as much as discovering a new “box” to open up in
the currency markets. With this play, Christmas seems to happen a few times each week instead of just once a year.
In parting, I can’t emphasize enough how important it is for traders to find a market that fits their own personality if they hope to be successful. If you find that
you are happy only if you are buying breakouts and selling breakdowns, then the currencies are probably your market of choice. Currencies break and trend well, while
the E-mini S&Ps tend to suck in traders with false breakouts and breakdowns. In other words, if you are buying breakouts in the S&Ps and getting killed, then give the
currencies a try. I particularly like to combine the box play and the squeeze play on the hourly charts for all of the major currencies, especially on the overnight
session. I call this the “life is like a box of chocolates” play because when you wake up in the morning, you never know what you are going to get. This particular trade
setup has controlled risk and open targets, so it’s possible to really catch big moves during the overnight action. I’ve included examples of this hourly squeeze/box play
in the link below.
Visit www.tradethemarkets.com/box for updates and additional examples on the box play.

365

19
HOLP and LOHP—
Catching Trend Reversals
Without Getting Smashed
Buying a Market Just Because It’s Cheap or Shorting a Market Just
Because It’s Expensive Is Dangerous—Unless It’s Done Like This
When it comes to the financial markets, the bottom line is that the current action is going to be determined by one thing and one thing only: the price that people are
willing to pay right now. A stochastic can be overbought, a M ACD (moving average convergence divergence) can be rolling over as a potential short, and moving
averages can be violated to the extreme. Whatever the indicator, it doesn’t mean that price action is going to reverse. There is a high probability, to be sure, but that
doesn’t mean that it’s going to happen. On the contrary, in these cases of extreme overbought or oversold readings, prices can still keep trending higher or lower for a
long, long time. In 1999, overbought stayed overbought for months and months. In 2000 and 2001, oversold stayed oversold almost continuously. During the 2008
financial crisis, some stocks (like Lehman Brothers) got so oversold that they disappeared. Everyone who screamed, “It’s a bargain” on the way down learned the
meaning of pain many times over.
I hear stories nearly every day from people who bought a stock “because it looked cheap,” only to have it continue to crater on a daily basis. Some of these stocks,
like EXDS (Exodus Communications, Inc.) and WCOM (WorldCom, Inc.), got real cheap, real fast. Eventually, the people who bought these stocks on the way down
either got frustrated and couldn’t take the pain anymore, so they sold, or, in many instances, they got out using one of the best tried-and-true sell signals on the planet
—the company declared bankruptcy, and the stock went to zero. The opposite is also true, in that I’ve heard plenty of war stories about traders shorting a stock
“because it looked too high.” They were soon experiencing shell shock as the stock continued to race higher and destroy their account.
Speaking of shorting, I always find it amusing that brokers talk about how dangerous shorting a stock is, because the potential losses are “infinite.” Well, I have yet
to see a stock rise to infinity, but I’ve seen plenty of stocks go to zero. Never mind the fact that brokers and trading firms make a huge living shorting stock to the
public.
In trading, it is never a good idea to try to catch a falling knife (buy a steep sell-off) or step in front of a freight train (short a frantic rally) just because prices “look
too low” or “look too high.” How, then, does a trader catch a reversal without risking life and limb?
That is where this setup comes into play. This method for catching market tops and bottoms is based on the one solitary thing that matters most in trading: price.

Trading Rules for Sells (Buys Are Reversed)
This is a reversal play. I will short tops and buy bottoms only upon confirmation of this setup. I generally use this for swing plays, but it is valid on all time frames,
including smaller time frames for intraday plays. HOLP and LOHP are acronyms for “high of the low period” and “low of the high period.” We pronounce them
“HOPE” and “LOPE.”
1. Identify a trending market, or an individual stock, that is ideally making new 20-day (or period) highs. This is a rule of thumb; markets that are making only 17- or
18-day (or period) highs are also fine. The point is that you want to see a definitive trend and be ready to step in when that trend reverses.
2. Identify the high bar in the uptrend. This is typically the current bar, but it could be a few bars back. By “high bar,” I mean the bar with the highest intraday price
prints in the entire move higher.
3. Once I identify the high bar, I will then go short once price action closes below the low of this high bar. (Say that really fast three times.)
4. The initial stop is the high of the high bar. If I am still in the trade on the third day, or period, I will start to use a two-bar trailing stop. I will exit this trade when the
current bar closes above the price level represented by the two-bar trailing stop.
5. Because of retracement price patterns while in a play, the two-bar trailing stop will sometimes have to be held on the current “stop bar” until the trend resumes.
Once the trend resumes, the two-bar trailing stop can also be resumed. This doesn’t happen very often, and I realize that it makes no sense while reading this text.
Don’t worry, it is not subject to interpretation, and it will become clear when you see a specific example. I will focus specifically on this in Figure 19.13.
This setup works in all markets, in all time frames. I usually use this play on individual stocks and their corresponding stock options, stock index futures, and the
forex currencies on the 60-minute and daily charts.

E-mini S&P—December 2004 Contract, October 7, 2004
1. Figure 19.1 is an example of the entry method. This particular chart is a daily representation of the E-mini S&P futures. Once I’ve gone over this entry method, we
will jump into the exit strategy. It is important to understand how to enter this trade. The white bar labeled point 1 represents the “high bar” in the uptrend. The
low of this high bar is 1133.50. The high of this bar represents the highest prices seen in at least 20 days. In fact, the last time the S&Ps were at this price level
was back on July 1, 2004.

366

Figure 19.1

2. Since the black bar labeled point 2 broke the low of the high day, we enter this position at the close of this day. M y entry is 1131.50. This trade does not have an
exit at the time this snapshot was taken because an exit signal has not fired off. I usually get a few questions here when I discuss this trade. The first is, “Can I
enter the trade intraday as soon as it breaks the low of the high day instead of waiting for the close?” M y answer to this is that you can, but I really want to see a
close to show that the market means business. Often I would take this trade intraday, only to have it close back up above the low of the high day, which
invalidates the trade. By waiting for the close, you are getting extra insurance that this reversal is valid. The other question I get usually has to do with entry points
and knowing which bar is actually going to be the high bar. Of course, you don’t know which bar is going to be the high bar that kicks off the reversal until the
price break actually occurs. Is it going to be this bar? Or are we going to get another, higher bar first? All you can do is continue to watch the new bars develop.
When I identify a high bar, I keep an eye out to see whether price action closes below the low of that high bar. If the next bar goes even higher, then this new,
higher bar becomes the high bar. In essence, I’m trailing an imaginary sell stop order. As prices advance higher, so will my entry until we finally get a break of the
low of the high bar. Although this is a simple concept, I have found that it takes a few examples for people who are new to this setup to get the hang of it. That
said, let’s look at some more examples.
