
CHAPTER 1

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

5

test done to determine substance.) Taking this personal litmus test
forces you to face the brutal reality of whether you are made of “gold” or
“fools’ gold.”

YOUR PERSONAL LITMUS TEST
1.

2.

Are you more honest than dishonest? Do you always tell the
truth? or do you exaggerate and make up stuff along the way?
As a child, I acquired the habit of exaggerating from my dad. He
would exaggerate about nearly everything he did, saw, and
experienced. Yet when I challenged him about his falsehoods,
his justification was that “exaggerations make the story more
interesting.”
Not surprisingly, I began to follow in his footsteps. When I
began dating my wife, she challenged me about my exaggerations
the same way I did my dad. When we were alone, she would calmly
say to me, “That didn’t happen that way. When you exaggerate,
you are outright lying. That is not a good habit!”
Telling the truth is critical. It builds relationships and earns
security, trust, and respect from those with whom you associate. It
helps others know who you truly are. It also prevents future trading
missteps.
After you have been taught how to trade, if you are in the habit of
exaggerating, you’ll begin to lie to yourself and others about your
success. You will lie to yourself about how well you follow the rules
when in reality you are trading on emotion and hunches. And if you
lie about your level of success, that bad habit will curse you when
everyone wants to see proof of your trading prowess. They’ll want
to know your secrets of supposed success. Be honest in everything
you do!
Are you a promise keeper or a promise breaker? Integrity is all
about making sure your word equals your deed. If your word does
not equal your deed, then you are a promise breaker. No one likes
a promise breaker. You will not be able to attract the right people in
your life unless you become a promise keeper.
When you make commitments to yourself and others, you need
to keep them. If you are not a promise keeper, you will bring this
bad habit to the trading table and you will not follow the rules as

6

3.

4.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

you trade. You will make promises to yourself and then break them.
Believe me when I say that if you promise never to trade without a
protective stop-loss order, which is an order that protects you from
losing all your money in a single trade, and then break that promise,
your career as a trader will quickly be over. Avoid this fate—be a
promise keeper.
Are you a rule maker or a rule breaker? Freedom is something of a
paradox because in order to be free, you must abide by a plethora of
rules. Just look at all the rules when driving your car. But the more
you obey the rules, the safer you are when driving. Breaking the
rules, however, will endanger your life and may cost you your
freedom.
Our lives are filled with rules. From an early childhood we learn
our parents’ household rules. Then we learn rules about school,
about dating, about working, about marriage, parenting, and so on.
The rules in our life protect us and help us get where we are going
faster and safer. Breaking those rules creates risks, problems, and,
eventually, setbacks. These setbacks can take you completely off
track and dramatically delay you from achieving your goal in a
timely manner.
Learning to trade, and being successful at it, requires that you
follow certain rules. Ignoring the rules will cause you trouble when
you are trading. You will be driven by your emotions and will be
caught up in chasing the market, changing your mind, and breaking
every rule in the book in the spirit of trying to save yourself. Don’t
get yourself caught in this position.
Are you a good or bad listener? Being a good listener has its
rewards. The greatest reward comes to those who develop the art of
hearing what is not said.
I used to be a bad listener, constantly interrupting people when
they were talking and completing their sentences for them. I
assumed I already knew what they were going to say and where
they were going with the conversation. And yet I was almost
always wrong. To overcome this habit, I had to learn to keep my
mouth shut until the person speaking to me finished what they
were saying.
Interrupting someone’s conversation can potentially get the
topic off track and plunge all involved into confusion. Imagine
the impact of such an interruption on a trade in process. Learning
to be a successful trader requires good listening skills. You

CHAPTER 1

5.

6.

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

7

may ask, “What am I listening to?” You are listening to the
market’s story.
As the market moves, it “tells” a story. Because history repeats
itself, where the market has been begins to predict where it is going.
If you interrupt its story and try to second guess what it is going to
say, you will set yourself up to make a poor decision. Although
trading charts are unable to express themselves verbally, they do
communicate to traders who are good listeners. You cannot find
success in trading by disrupting the flow of the market’s conversation. Listen, don’t interrupt.
Do you think before you speak or speak before you think? Have you
ever wished you could take back something you just said? Your
comments and words are like ringing a bell; once the bell is rung,
you cannot “un-ring” it! Your words are like the sound of the
bell—they resonate! People who speak before they think are often
branded as ignorant and annoying; few are respected. On the other
hand, we respect and look up to people who think before they speak;
we value their conversation and opinions because they are carefully
considered.
Which do you do? Are you habitually putting your foot in
your mouth? Or do you respond with educated answers and
arguments? As a trader, you must engage in a conversation with
the market and your response can either be ignorant or intelligent.
If you are disciplined enough to think before you speak, you
will probably find success in trading. However, if you insist on
speaking before you think, the market will allow you to prove
your ignorance.
Do you think before you act or act before you think? The conscious
and subconscious parts of your mind are your greatest assets and
your greatest liabilities. The conscious mind dissects, considers, and
categorizes everything you see and hear. If action is needed, the
conscious mind thinks through how it will execute the action. If
action is taken, the subconscious mind records the thought with the
action and matches the two for future reference. In the future, all we
have to do is think that thought, and the subconscious mind stands
by to automatically execute the exact action that matched the
thought. That is how a habit is formed.
Think about it once, do it once, and you have started a habit.
Think about it three times, do it three times, and you now have
established an automatic habit—good or bad. When you create good

8

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

or bad actions, your subconscious mind takes over automatically,
enabling you to do things without thinking. That is both good news
and bad news.
If you are involved in any unproductive actions that have turned
into bad habits, you are unconsciously incompetent. That is when
your mind is working on destructive autopilot and you need to
regain control. You need to become conscious again in order to
recognize your bad habits and admit they are not benefiting you.
When you recognize your bad habits, you are able to learn a new
skill or a new habit to replace the unproductive one. Learning a new,
productive skill or habit is the first step to managing your success.
When you learn a new skill, you usually have to think through
each step of the action. Thinking through that action and successfully executing it is called conscious competence. When you are
disciplined enough to consciously repeat it when the situation
requires, your subconscious mind automatically replaces the
previously recorded action associated with the thought and forms a
new habit. The subconscious mind does not think, it just recalls and
executes the actions that matched the thought. The more you repeat
the action—good or bad—the more that habit becomes unconsciously automatic. If you are locked into executing bad habits, you
are unconsciously incompetent. If you are locked into executing
good habits, you are called unconsciously competent. The road to
success involves the recognition of unconscious incompetence, then
passing through to conscious incompetence, working your way to
conscious competence, and eventually arriving at unconscious competence. In achieving this you have purged yourself of your bad
habits and have replaced them with productive, automatic, good
habits that allow you to perform successful actions without thinking
about them. It is like learning to drive a car.
Think back: the first time you got into the driver’s seat, you literally had to think through everything that needed to be done just to
pull out of the driveway. That process took about 15 minutes
because you had to consciously think through everything you did.
You were consciously competent. Now, if you began to drive and
received speeding tickets and got into accidents, you became
unconsciously incompetent. It was when you consciously committed yourself to stop speeding and to look in every direction to
avoid accidents that you became a consciously competent driver.
Today, if you have been driving and are free from speeding tickets

CHAPTER 1

7.

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

9

and accidents, you are considered an unconsciously competent
driver. You have now become unconsciously competent in your
successful driving habits. You probably take about three seconds to
pull out of the driveway, probably driving part of the way with your
knee as you juggle a cup of coffee in one hand and a cell phone in
the other, focusing on the conversation rather than each individual
skill needed to drive the car. Can you see how powerful your
mind is and how critically important it is to properly think
through everything before you act?
When it is time to trade, you must think before you act. If you act
before you think and make mistakes, your subconscious mind will
take over and record all your ignorant actions and subconsciously
create bad trading habits. That is how you start to lose money or just
get by in trading. Successful traders think before they act to execute
successful trading habits.
Failure is like cancer. You don’t treat cancer by cutting it out. If
you have to remove the cancer, much of the time it is too late. You
treat cancer by preventing it and you treat success by creating good
habits from the beginning. This way you are preventing failure. As
you learn to trade, you will need to get in the habit of thinking
through all the details potentially involved with that trade. You will
need to have checklists that cover all the details. You will need to get
in the habit of creating a trading plan and maintaining the discipline
of trading your plan. That habit forces you to think before you act,
avoiding impulsive, emotional actions that generate unsuccessful
trades. The market has no remorse for ignorance and impulsive
action. The ignorant will suffer. Think before you act.
Do you manage your emotions or do your emotions manage you?
Most financially successful people are very unemotional when it
comes to business decisions. Believe it or not, successful business is
nothing more than making and executing unemotional decisions that
make economic sense. It is no different than unemotionally figuring
out a mathematical equation. Two plus two will always equal four,
regardless of how desperately you wanted it to be five—it will
always equal four.
Unsuccessful business is nothing more than making and executing emotional decisions that don’t make economic sense. For
example, holding onto unproductive employees because you like
them, does not make economic sense and is a bad business
decision rooted in emotion.

10

8.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

In life, there are good emotions and bad emotions. The bad
emotions usually don’t serve us well, whereas the good emotions
enhance our lives. When it comes to business, you need to make all
your decisions unemotionally. Your decision process needs to be
educated, logical, and unemotional. Any financial decision made in
the heat of negative emotion will hurt you much more than it will
ever help you.
When it is time to trade, the more you rely on your emotions to
make your decisions, the more money you will lose. The more you
rely on your education and logic, the more money you will make.
Thinking through problems unemotionally allows you to stay
focused on achieving long-term happiness and success. Bad things
happen to all of us, and many times we have no control over them.
The reality is that we have no control over the cards we are dealt, we
only have control over what we do with those cards. What we do
have control over is how we handle the situation—emotionally or
unemotionally. Successful traders manage their emotions; unsuccessful traders let their emotions manage them.
Are you responsive or reactive? When something doesn’t go according to plan or doesn’t go your way, do you throw a temper tantrum
and have a “mental meltdown”? Unsuccessful people usually do.
Successful and positive-thinking people are able to process properly
the negative things that happen to them, put them into perspective,
and move on. If your emotions control you, you are going to be
more reactive than responsive and you will probably go through life
with unhappiness, poverty, and mediocrity. As a rule, just about
everything negative that happens to us is either self-inflicted or the
result of not paying attention to red flags, warnings signs, or details.
Accepting responsibility for our own actions is such a painful event
that we find it easier to react and blame someone else rather than
analyzing what really happened and responding by creating a system to avoid that situation again.
If you bring your reactive bad habits to the trading table, the market will know exactly which emotional buttons to push. When it
does, you will run like a scared rabbit being pursued by a pack of
hungry wolves. Running scared is not conducive to calming down
and thinking through your next move. Reacting versus calmly
thinking through the situation and responding eliminates your
ability to see clearly what happened. When it comes to any crisis,
in trading or otherwise, you owe it to yourself to respond logically,

CHAPTER 1

9.

10.

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

11

not emotionally. Reactive trading will cause you to lose all your
money, whereas responsive trading will allow you to think through
your next move and take advantage of the next opportunity that
knocks.
Is your ego more constructive or destructive? Are you more humble
or more arrogant? Do you make your decisions based on your pride
and ego or based on logic regardless of the consequences to your
ego? If you go through life allowing your decisions and actions to
come from a destructive ego, you will be no different than the person who purchased a brand new sailboat and ignored the first line of
the owner’s manual: “Avoid storms at all costs. Do not go looking
for storms as you sail your boat, they will naturally find you!” A
destructive ego is nothing more than a storm chaser living through
one bad storm after another. A constructive ego keeps you focused
on all the details necessary to avoid any and all storms as you sail
through life.
A person with a constructive ego believes their mind is like a
parachute; it only works when it is open. A person with a destructive
ego thinks he or she already knows everything. Unfortunately, when
it comes to trading, the market will teach that destructive ego the
true definition of humility. When conflict shows its face to a constructive ego, the constructive ego, through humility, will in the end
fight to be happy rather than right.
Are you more positive about life or more negative? How you answer
this question will greatly determine your overall happiness in life. Is
your glass always half empty or half full? There is a law that is
every bit as much valid as the law of gravity: it is called the law of
attraction.
The law of attraction stipulates that whatever we think about,
those thoughts will radiate out of our being and create circumstances and events and attract people that align with our thoughts.
When we think positive thoughts, that positive mindset will radiate
out of us, creating positive circumstances and positive events in our
life and, as a result, will attract positive people into our lives. The
flip side of this law is also true. When we think negative thoughts,
that negative mindset will create negative circumstances and negative events in our lives, attracting negative people into our lives.
The power of this law plays an incredible part in determining
your success or failure in life. Positive people are considered optimistic people, whereas negative people are considered pessimistic,

12

11.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

but the only real difference between an optimist and a pessimist is
that the optimist believes there is an answer to every question and a
solution to every problem, whereas the pessimist believes most
questions have no answer and most problems are unsolvable. This
mindset significantly limits the pessimist’s potential, success, and
happiness in life. Optimists, on the other hand, create positive outcomes via the law of attraction.
The simple shifting of your mindset from negative to positive
changes your entire world. Negative people are constantly shifting
blame and frustrated about how unfair life is; they walk around with
a victim mentality. Positive people accept responsibility for their
circumstances and place themselves in a position to figure out how
to avoid negative situations in the future.
If you want to become a successful trader, you will have to purge
your negative attitude and adopt a positive mindset and attitude.
Negativity when trading only creates more negative circumstances,
more negative events and financial losses.
Do you fear your mistakes or do you embrace them and learn from
them? All people make mistakes, but only wise people learn from
them. The only true mistake is the one from which we learn nothing.
Mistakes show us what needs improvement. Without mistakes, how
would we know what we need to work on?
Avoiding situations in which you might make a mistake could be
the biggest mistake of all. When you have the courage to go out on a
limb and make a decision, right or wrong, you risk making a
mistake. Everyone makes mistakes. Strong people make as many
mistakes as weak people—the difference is that strong people admit
their mistakes, laugh at them, learn from them, and become
stronger. When you make mistakes, problems usually surface, which
creates fear and anxiety.
Pessimists live a life fearful of making any mistake because that
mistake will create a problem, and just about all problems, in their
opinion, have no solution. Optimists can make just as many
mistakes as, if not more than, pessimists. However, when a problem
arises for an optimist, they aggressively work on it, believing it can
be resolved, and the second they see the solution, the fear and
anxiety dissipates.
When life hands you lemons, do you waste time sucking on them
or do you learn to make lemonade? Making mistakes is part of
being human. Just about all of life’s important lessons can only be

CHAPTER 1

12.

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

13

learned the hard way, usually by making a mistake. Mistakes can be
resolved and corrected as long as you believe there is a solution. So
when you make a mistake that creates a problem, you need to
muster the courage to face the problem head-on until a solution is
achieved. As you do this repeatedly, unemotionally, you will
develop the skill of effective problem solving. Remember, failure is
not the problem; the problem lies in the time we waste lamenting
over the problem rather than focusing in on the solution to the problem. Failure is not falling down; failure is staying down.
Learning from your mistakes is critical to your success. Choosing
not to learn from your mistakes as you learn to trade will cause you
to become a repeat offender. Your subconscious mind will take over
and will form an unproductive bad habit, costing you money. You
must pay attention to your mistakes and embrace them with a positive attitude.
Do you focus on what you have or on what you have lost? As you
go through life making mistakes, you will inevitably lose things
along the way—money, close relationships, personal property, you
name it. But how much time do you spend holding onto those
mistakes? How much time do you spend calculating your losses
and wishing you had back everything you had lost? The longer you
dwell on past failures and losses, the longer you will stay captive in
your current state of failure. You must let go of your past failures
and focus on where you are going.
Have you ever wondered why the rearview mirror is 50 times
smaller than the windshield? The windshield is so much larger to
help us stay focused on where we are going versus where we have
been. Holding onto past wounds or losses will only stand in the way
of achieving your rightful success as a trader. Every trader loses
money and makes money as they trade, but successful traders will
make more money than they lose. Successful traders spend no time
worrying or thinking about their losses; they stay focused on the
next opportunity that is knocking.
People that manage their poverty or mediocrity are so busy holding onto their past that they can’t grab onto future opportunities.
Holding onto past losses or failures creates a bitter mindset. If you
come to the trading table with a bitter mindset or victim mentality,
you will bring with you all your past emotional baggage that has
stood in the way of you becoming successful at anything you
attempted in the past. It will stand in the way of you becoming a

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

14

13.

successful trader. If you want to be successful at trading, you must
focus on what you have gained versus what you have lost.
Are you a goal setter or a goal quitter? When you set out to do
something, do you persist until you succeed or do you get discouraged and quit along the way? One of the most important habits to
develop is the habit of finishing what you started. My son recently
graduated from high school. At his graduation ceremony, the principal stood up and congratulated everyone for completing 12 years of
education. He also pointed out that during the last year of school, 48
percent of the students in the graduating class had dropped out.
They came so close, but they did not persist until the very end.
Most people in life are rainbow chasers; they set new goals
almost daily. Most of the time their new goals have nothing to do
with yesterday’s, last week’s, or even last month’s goals. As a result,
they never move forward in any one direction. You need to believe
there is a reward at the end of every journey you embark on, a “pot
of gold” at the end of each rainbow, or you will give up and never
achieve your goal.
Setting goals helps you create a road map in life, outlining where
you are going. Without that road map you can easily get off track
without even knowing it and not know how to get back on. If you do
not create goals as you learn to trade, you will not have any recognizable milestones of achievement.
Any great achievement will be accompanied by setbacks, but
beginning with a clear goal in mind will keep you on track to reach
your goals even after you hit a detour. Traders who set goals and
persist until they succeed reach their pot of gold at the end of the
rainbow. A trader’s pot of gold is described as executing your trades
correctly 100 percent of the time. That does not mean you will make
money 100 percent of the time, rather, that you consistently make
more money than you lose. Persisting to achieve your realistic goals
is nothing more than discipline in action.
