
285/396

“After the wall came down we were offered
the chance to buy it back,” says Müller. “This
building had been ours before the war. But
the condition was that we had to put
everything back exactly the way it was. It all
had to be hand-fabricated.” He points out
the seemingly antique brass doorknobs and
the seemingly antique windows. Across Germany, in the past twenty years or so, town
centers completely destroyed by bombs in
World War II have been restored, stone by
stone. The German government has agreed
to pay some huge sum of money to rebuild
the Berliner Schloss, the old Royal Palace
that was leveled in the 1950s by the East
German authorities, so that it will look exactly as it does in prewar photographs. If the
trend continues, it will one day appear as if
nothing terrible had ever happened in Germany, when everything terrible happened in
it. “Do not ask me what it cost,” the bank
chairman says, and laughs.

286/396

He then offers me the same survey of German banking that I will hear from half a
dozen others. German banks are not, like
American banks, mainly private enterprises.
Most are either explicitly state-backed or
small savings co-ops. Commerzbank,
Dresdner Bank, and Deutsche Bank, all founded in the 1870s, are the only three big
private German banks. In 2009 Commerzbank bought Dresdner. Both turned out
to be loaded with toxic assets, and so the
merged bank required a government bailout.
“We are not a proprietary trading nation,”
says Müller, getting pretty quickly to the nub
of Germany’s banking problems. German
banking was never meant to be a high-stakes
affair. Banking, done in the proper German
fashion, is less a free enterprise than a utility. “Why should you pay twenty million to a
thirty-two-year-old trader?” Müller asks
himself. “He uses the office space, the IT, the
business card with a first-class name on it. If

287/396

I take the business card away from that guy
he would probably sell hot dogs.” This man is
the German equivalent of the head of Bank
of America or Citigroup. And he is actively
hostile to the idea that bankers should make
huge sums of money.
In the bargain, he tells me why the current
financial crisis has so unsettled the German
banker’s view of the financial universe. In
the early 1970s, after he started at Commerzbank, the bank opened the first New
York branch of any German bank, and he
went to work in it. He mists up a bit when he
tells stories about the Americans he did business with back then: in one story, an American investment banker who had inadvertently
shut him out of a deal hunts him down and
hands him an envelope with seventy-five
grand in it, because he hadn’t meant for the
German bank to get stiffed. “You have to understand,” he says emphatically, “this is
where I get my view of Americans.” In the

288/396

past few years, he adds, that view had
changed. I sense a feeling of loss.
“How much money did you lose in
subprime?” I ask.
“I don’t want to tell you,” he says.
He laughs and then continues. “For forty
years we didn’t lose a penny on anything
with a triple-A rating,” he says. “We stopped
building the portfolio in subprime in 2006. I
had the idea that there was something wrong
with your market. I did not have the idea
that your market would completely collapse.”
He pauses. “It has told something to me. I
was in the belief that the best supervised of
all banking systems was in New York. To me
the Fed and the SEC were second to none. I
did not believe that there would be e-mail
traffic between investment bankers saying
that they were selling . . .” He pauses again,
and decides he shouldn’t say “shit.” “Dirt,”
he says. “This is by far my biggest professional disappointment. I was in a much too

289/396

positive way U.S.-biased. I had a set of beliefs about U.S. values.”
The global financial system may exist to
bring borrowers and lenders together, but,
over the past few decades, it has become
something else, too: a tool for maximizing
the number of encounters between the
strong and the weak, so that the one might
exploit the other. Extremely smart traders
inside Wall Street investment banks devise
deeply unfair, diabolically complicated bets,
and then send their sales forces out to scour
the world for some idiot who will take the
other side of those bets. During the boom
years a wildly disproportionate number of
those idiots were in Germany. As a reporter
for Bloomberg News in Frankfurt named
Aaron Kirchfeld put it to me, “You’d talk to a
New York investment banker and they’d say,
‘No one is going to buy this crap. Oh. Wait.
The Landesbanks will!’” When Morgan Stanley designed extremely complicated credit

290/396

default swaps so they were all but certain to
fail, so that their own proprietary traders
could bet against them, the buyer was German. When Goldman Sachs helped the New
York hedge fund manager John Paulson
design a bond to bet against—a bond that
Paulson hoped would fail—the buyer on the
other side was a German bank called IKB.
IKB, along with another famous fool at the
Wall Street poker table called WestLB, was
based in Düsseldorf—which is why, when
you asked a smart Wall Street subprime
mortgage bond trader circa June 2007 who
was still buying his crap, he could say,
simply, “Stupid Germans in Düsseldorf.”
Berlin to Düsseldorf takes
longer than it should. For long stretches the
highway is choked with cars and trucks. A
German traffic jam is a peculiar sight: no one
honks, no one switches lanes searching for
some small, illusory advantage, all trucks remain in the right-hand lane, where they are
THE DRIVE FROM

291/396

required to be. The spectacle of sparkling
BMWs and Mercedes-Benzes in the left lane
and immaculate trucks in a neat row in the
right lane is almost a pleasure to watch. Because everyone in the jam obeys the rules,
and believes that everyone else will obey
them, too, the cars and trucks move as fast as
they can, given the circumstances. But the
pretty young German woman behind the
wheel of our car doesn’t take any pleasure in
it. Charlotte huffs and groans at the sight of
brake lights stretching into the distance. “It’s
what I hate more than anything in the
world,” she says apologetically. “I hate being
stuck in traffic.”
She pulls from her bag the German translation of Alan Dundes’s book. I’d asked her
about the title. There is a common German
expression, she explains, that translates directly as “lick my ass.” To this hearty salutation the common German reply is, “You lick
mine first.” The German version of Dundes is

292/396

called You Lick Mine First. “Everyone will
understand this title,” she says. “But this
book, I don’t know about this.”
The last time I’d been in Germany for more
than a few days was when I was seventeen
years old. I’d traveled across the country
with two friends, a bike, and a German
phrase book. In my head was a German love
song taught to me by an American woman of
German descent. So few people spoke English that it was better to assume they did not
and deploy whatever German came to
hand—which usually meant the love song.
And so I assumed on this trip I would need
an interpreter. I didn’t appreciate how much
the Germans had been boning up on their
English. The entire population seems to have
taken a total-immersion Berlitz course. And
on Planet Money, even in Germany, English
is the official language. It’s the language used
for all meetings inside the European Central
Bank, for instance, even though the ECB is in

293/396

Germany, and the only ECB country in which
English is even arguably the native tongue is
Ireland.
Through a friend of a friend of a friend I’d
landed Charlotte, a sweet-natured, keenly intelligent woman in her twenties who was also
shockingly steely—how many sweet-natured
young women can say “lick my ass” without
blushing? She spoke seven languages, including Mandarin and Polish, and was finishing up her master’s in Intercultural
Misunderstanding, which just has to be
Europe’s next growth industry. By the time I
realized I didn’t need her I’d already hired
her, and so she had ceased to be my interpreter and become my driver. As my interpreter, she would have been ridiculously
overqualified; as my chauffeur she is frankly
preposterous. But she’d taken on the job
with gusto, going so far as to hunt down an
old German translation of Dundes’s little
book.

294/396

And it troubled her. For a start, she refused
to believe there was such a thing as a German national character. “No one in my field
believes this anymore,” she says. “How do
you generalize about eighty million people?
You can say they are all the same, but why
would they be this way? My question about
Germans’ being anally obsessed is how
would this spread? Where would it come
from?” Dundes himself actually made a stab
at answering the question. He suggested that
the unusual swaddling techniques employed
by German mothers, which left babies stewing in their own filth for long periods of time,
might be responsible for their energetic anality. Charlotte was not buying it. “I’ve never
heard of this,” she says.
But just then she spots something and
brightens. “Look!” she says. “A German flag.”
Sure enough, a flag flies over a small house
in a distant village. You can spend days in
Germany without seeing a flag. Germans

295/396

aren’t allowed to cheer for their team the way
other people do. That doesn’t mean they
don’t want to, just that they must disguise
what they are doing. “Patriotism,” she says,
“is still taboo. It’s politically incorrect to say,
‘I’m proud to be German.’”
The traffic eases, and we’re once again flying toward Düsseldorf. The highway looks
brand-new, and she guns the rented BMW
until the speedometer tops 210 kilometers
per hour.
“This is a really good road,” I say.
“The Nazis built it,” she says. “That’s what
people say about Hitler, when they get tired
of saying the usual things. Well, at least he
built good roads.”
BACK IN FEBRUARY 2004 a financial writer in

London named Nicholas Dunbar broke the
story about some Germans in Düsseldorf,
working inside a bank called IKB, who were
up to something new. “The name IKB just
kept coming up in London with bond

296/396

salesmen,” says Dunbar. “It was like everybody’s secret cash cow.” Inside the big Wall
Street firms there were people whose job it
was, when the German customers from Düsseldorf came to London, to get a wad of cash
and make sure the Germans got whatever
they wanted.
Dunbar’s piece appeared in Risk magazine
and described how this obscure German
bank was rapidly turning into Wall Street’s
biggest customer. IKB had been created back
in 1924 to securitize German war reparation
payments to the Allies, morphed into a successful lender to midsized German companies, and was now morphing into something
else. The bank was partially owned by a German state bank, but was not itself guaranteed by the German government. It was a
private German financial enterprise, seemingly on the rise. And it had hired a man
named Dirk Röthig, a German with some experience in the United States (he’d worked

297/396

for State Street Bank), to do something new
and interesting.
With Röthig’s help IKB created, in effect, a
bank, incorporated in Delaware and listed on
the exchange in Dublin, Ireland, called
Rhineland Funding. They didn’t call it a
bank. If they had called it a bank, people
might have asked why it was not regulated.
They called it a “conduit,” a word that had
the advantage that no one understood what
it meant. Rhineland borrowed money for
short periods of time by issuing something
called commercial paper. They invested it in
longer-term “structured credit,” which
turned out to be a euphemism for bonds
backed by American consumer loans. Many
of the same Wall Street investment banks
that raised the money for Rhineland (by
selling the commercial paper for them) sold
Rhineland the bonds backed by the American consumer loans. Rhineland’s profits came
from the difference between the rate of

298/396

interest it paid on the money it borrowed
and the higher rate of interest it earned on
the money it lent through its bond purchases. As IKB guaranteed the entire enterprise, Moody’s rating service gave Rhineland
its highest rating, enabling Rhineland to borrow money cheaply.
The Germans in Düsseldorf had one critical
job: to advise this offshore vehicle they had
created about which bonds it should buy.
“We are one of the last to get our money out
of Rhineland,” Röthig told Risk magazine,
“but we’re so confident of our ability to advise it in the right way that we still make a
profit.” Röthig further explained that IKB
had invested in special tools to analyze the
complicated bonds, called collateralized debt
obligations (CDOs), that Wall Street was now
peddling. “I would say it has proven a worthwhile investment because we have not faced
a loss so far,” he said. In February 2004 all
this seemed like a good idea—so good that

299/396

lots of other German banks copied IKB, and
either rented IKB’s conduit or set up their
own offshore vehicles to buy subprime mortgage bonds. “It sounds like quite a profitable
strategy,” the man from Moody’s who had
awarded Rhineland’s commercial paper a
triple-A rating told Risk magazine.
I met Dirk Röthig for lunch at a restaurant
in Düsseldorf, on a canal lined with busy
shops. From their profitable strategy IKB has
announced losses of roughly $15 billion,
though their actual losses are probably greater, as German banks are slow to declare anything. Röthig viewed himself, with some
justice, more as victim than perpetrator. “I
left the bank in December 2005,” he says
quickly, as he squeezes himself into a small
booth. Then he explains.
The idea for the offshore bank had been
his. The German management at IKB had
taken to it, as he put it, “like a baby takes to
candy.” He’d created the bank when the

300/396

market was paying higher returns to bondholders: Rhineland Funding was paid well
for the risk it was taking. By the middle of
2005, with the financial markets refusing to
see a cloud in the sky, the price of risk had
collapsed: the returns on the bonds backed
by American consumer loans had collapsed.
Röthig says he went to his superiors and argued that, as they were being paid a lot less
to take the risk of these bonds, IKB should
look elsewhere for profits. “But they had a
profit target and they wanted to meet it. To
make the same profit with a lower risk
spread they simply had to buy more,” he
says. The management, he adds, did not
want to hear his message. “I showed them
the market was turning,” he says. “I was taking the candy away from the baby, instead of
giving it. So I became the enemy.” When he
left, others left with him, and the investment
staff was reduced, but the investment activity
boomed. “One-half the number of people

301/396

with one-third the experience made twice the
number of investments,” he says. “They were
ordered to buy.”
He goes on to describe what appeared to be
a scrupulous and complicated investment
strategy but was actually a mindless, rulebased investment strategy. IKB could “value
a CDO down to the last basis point,” as one
admiring observer told Risk magazine in
2004. But in this expertise was a kind of
madness. “They would be really anal about,
say, which subprime originator went into
these CDOs,” says Nicholas Dunbar. “They’d
say we won’t take loans from First Franklin
but we will take them from Countrywide. But
it didn’t matter. They were arguing about
bonds that would collapse from one hundred
[par] down to two or three [percent of par].
In a sense they were right: they bought the
bonds that went to three, rather than to
two.” As long as the bonds offered up by the
Wall Street firms abided by the rules

302/396

specified by IKB’s experts, they got hoovered
into the Rhineland Funding portfolio
without further inspection. Yet the bonds
were becoming radically more risky, because
the loans that underpinned them were becoming crazier and crazier. After he left,
Röthig explains, IKB had only five investment officers, each in his late twenties, with
a couple of years’ experience: these were the
people on the other end of the bets being
handcrafted by Goldman Sachs for its own
proprietary trading book, and by other big
Wall Street firms for extremely clever hedge
funds that wanted to bet against the market
for subprime bonds. The IKB portfolio went
from $10 billion in 2005 to $20 billion in
2007, Röthig says, “and it would have gotten
bigger if they had had more time to buy.
They were still buying when the market
crashed. They were on their way to thirty billion dollars.”

303/396

By the middle of 2007 every Wall Street
firm, not just Goldman Sachs, realized that
the subprime market was collapsing, and
tried frantically to get out of their positions.
The last buyers in the entire world, several
people on Wall Street have told me, were
these willfully oblivious Germans. That is,
the only thing that stopped IKB from losing
even more than $15 billion on U.S. subprime
loans was that the market ceased to function.
Nothing that happened—no fact, no piece of
data—was going to alter their approach to investing money.
On the surface the IKB’s German bond
traders resembled the reckless traders who
made similarly stupid bets for Citigroup and
Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley. Beneath
it they were playing an entirely different
game. The American bond traders may have
sunk their firms by turning a blind eye to the
risks in the subprime bond market, but they
made a fortune for themselves in the

304/396

bargain, and have for the most part never
been called to account. They were paid to put
their firms in jeopardy, and so it is hard to
know whether they did it intentionally or
not. The German bond traders, on the other
hand, had been paid roughly one hundred
thousand dollars a year, with, at most,
another fifty-thousand-dollar bonus. In general, German bankers were paid peanuts to
run the risk that sank their banks, which
strongly suggests that they really didn’t know
what they were doing. But—and here is the
strange thing—unlike their American counterparts, they are being treated by the German public as crooks. The former CEO of
IKB, Stefan Ortseifen, was given a jail term
(since suspended) and has been asked by the
bank to return his salary: 805 thousand
euros.
Dirk Röthig had enjoyed a ringside seat not
only to IKB but to the behavior of its imitators, the German state-backed banks, the

305/396

Landesbanks. And in his view, the border
created by modern finance between AngloAmerican and German bankers was treacherous. “The intercultural misunderstandings
were quite intense,” he says, as he tucks into
his lobster. “The people in these banks were
never spoiled by any Wall Street salesmen.
Now there is someone with a platinum
American Express credit card who can take
them to the Grand Prix in Monaco, takes you
to all these places. He has no limit. The
Landesbanks were the most boring bankers
in Germany so they never got attention like
this. And all of a sudden a very smart guy
from Merrill Lynch shows up and starts to
pay a lot of attention to you. They thought,
‘Oh, he just likes me!’” He completes the
thought. “The American salespeople are
much smarter than the European ones. They
play a role much better.”
At bottom, he says, the Germans were
blind to the possibility that the Americans

306/396

were playing the game by something other
than the official rules. The Germans took the
rules at their face value: they looked into the
history of triple-A-rated bonds and accepted
the official story that triple-A-rated bonds
were completely risk-free.
This preternatural love of rules almost for
their own sake punctuates German finance
as it does German life. As it happens, a story
had just broken that a German reinsurance
company called Munich Re, back in June
2007, or just before the crash, had sponsored
a party for its best producers that offered not
just chicken dinners and nearest-to-the-pin
golf competitions but a blowout with prostitutes in a public bath. In finance, high or
low, this sort of thing is of course not unusual. What was striking was how organized the
German event was. The company tied white
and yellow and red ribbons to the prostitutes
to indicate which ones were available to
which men. After each sexual encounter the

307/396

prostitute received a stamp on her arm to indicate how often she had been used. The
Germans didn’t just want hookers: they
wanted hookers with rules.
Perhaps because they were so enamored of
the official rules of finance, the Germans
proved especially vulnerable to a false idea
the rules encouraged: that there is such a
thing as a riskless asset. After all, a triple-A
rating was supposed to mean “riskless asset.”
There is no such thing as a riskless asset. The
reason an asset pays a return is that it carries
risk. But the idea of the riskless asset, which
peaked about late 2006, overran the investment world, and the Germans fell for it the
hardest. I’d heard about this, too, from
people on Wall Street who had dealt with
German bond buyers. “You have to go back
to the German mentality,” one of them had
told me. “They say, ‘I’ve ticked all the boxes.
There is no risk.’ It was form over substance.
You work with Germans, and—I can’t

308/396

emphasize this enough—they are not natural
risk takers. They are genetically disposed to
fucking it up.” So long as a bond looked clean
on the outside, the Germans allowed it to become as dirty on the inside as Wall Street
could make it.
The point Röthig wants to stress to me now
is that it didn’t matter what was on the inside. IKB had to be rescued by a state-owned
bank on July 28, 2007. Against capital of
roughly $4 billion it had lost more than $15
billion. As it collapsed, the German media
wanted to know how many U.S. subprime
bonds these German bankers had gobbled
up. IKB’s CEO, Stefan Ortseifen, said publicly that IKB owned almost no subprime
bonds at all—which is why he’s now charged
with misleading investors. “He was telling
the truth,” says Röthig. “He didn’t think he
owned any subprime. They weren’t able to
give any correct numbers of the amount of
subprime they had, because they didn’t

309/396

know. The IKB monitoring systems did not
make a distinction between subprime and
prime mortgages. And that’s why it
happened.” Back in 2005, Röthig says, he
proposed to build a system to track more
precisely what loans were behind the complex bonds they were buying from Wall
Street firms, but IKB’s management didn’t
want to spend the money. “I told them you
have a portfolio of twenty billion dollars, you
are making two hundred million dollars a
year and you are denying me six point five
million. But they didn’t want to do it.”
FOR THE THIRD time in as many days we cross
