
 Results from the three strategies were very similar. Absolute momentum was in stocks 70% of the time. It had 31 trades over these 40 years, for an average of 0.83 trades per year. The 10-month moving average was in stocks 74% of the time and had 49 trades, or 1.2 trades per year. Absolute momentum therefore had lower transaction costs than the 10-month moving average. Table 9.1 does not reflect these costs. 
 Moving averages and absolute momentum both try to identify trends by reducing noise. In 1906, British scientist Sir Francis Galton (cousin of Charles Darwin) first noticed the importance of noise reduction. 6 Galton was attending a fair where 800 people tried to guess the weight of a dead ox. After the prize was awarded, Galton asked if he could see the guesses. Most of them were way off the mark. Galton was shocked, however, to see that the average guess was 1,197 pounds, while the actual weight of the ox was 1,196 pounds! There was a true signal hidden among all the noise. Averaging was able to make sense from apparent randomness. 
 Absolute momentum reduces noise by looking at two reference points in time. It essentially asks if today’s price is higher or lower than the price was 12 months ago. Moving averages reduce noise by smoothing it out through averaging, just as Galton had done. 
 MARKET TIMING USING VALUATION 
 Some practitioners believe they can time the market by paying attention to valuation metrics, such as the Shiller 10-year Cyclically Adjusted Price Earnings (CAPE) ratio. CAPE is calculated by taking the S&P 500 and dividing it by the average of 10 years’ worth of earnings. The current CAPE ratio is then compared to its long-term average of about 17. Investors look for mean reversion back toward this average. Historically, CAPE ratios under 10 have led to future annual stock market returns of over 20%, while CAPE ratios over 20 have given future annual stock market returns of only 5%. 
 The current CAPE level of about 26 indicates that the U.S. stock market is expensive compared to historic norms. However, this does not necessarily mean that stocks are near a bull market top. Those who got out of the market in 1996, when the CAPE was at approximately the same level as it is now, would have missed out on seeing the U.S. market more than double in value as the CAPE ratio rose to over 40 in 1999–2000. Paul Tudor Jones noted that the last one-third of a bull market is often the most dramatic, where mania runs wild and prices go parabolic. Market timing based on valuation could miss out on all this. 
 In addition, the normal level of corporate earnings may have changed over time, and studies of past CAPE levels may have overfit the data. Valuation metrics are only capable of giving a crude approximation of what future returns might be like. 7 
 RELATIVE MOMENTUM REVISITED 
 The majority of momentum studies focus on individual stocks, and most practical applications of relative strength momentum similarly use individual stocks. Because of its popularity, we will also look at applying momentum to individual stocks. Fortunately, the folks at AQR Capital Management LLC maintain readily accessible and freely available momentum-based stock index data on their website. 8 
 The AQR Momentum Index is composed of the top one-third of the 1,000 highest capitalization U.S. stocks based on 12-month relative strength momentum with a one-month lag. AQR weights its index positions based on market capitalization. It adjusts its positions quarterly. 
 Table 9.2 shows the results of the AQR Momentum Index, the Russell 1000 Index, and 12-month absolute momentum (with aggregate bonds as a safe harbor) applied to the Russell 1000 Index from when the AQR momentum indexes began in January 1980. 
 Table 9.2 AQR Momentum, Russell 1000, and Absolute Momentum, 1980–2013 

 AQR estimates transaction costs of 0.7% per year for its AQR Momentum Index. These are not accounted for in its index returns or in Table 9.2 . 
 We see that the AQR Momentum Index gave higher returns than the Russell 1000 Index, but that it also had higher volatility over this 33-year period. The Sharpe ratios and maximum drawdowns of the two indexes are comparable. Accounting for the 0.7% per year in additional transaction costs for the AQR Momentum Index would have put it at a disadvantage to the Russell 1000 index on a risk-adjusted basis. 
 The simple addition of absolute momentum to the Russell 1000 Index gives a higher return than the AQR Momentum Index or the Russell 1000 Index, as well as a much lower standard deviation and a greatly reduced maximum drawdown. The absolute momentum Sharpe ratio is also much higher. Transaction costs of using our simple absolute momentum strategy would be negligible, and there would be no fees incurred from managing a large portfolio of individual stocks. There seems little reason to choose an individual stock momentum strategy over using a low-cost, broad-based stock index combined with simple absolute momentum. 
 In their 2014 working paper “Fact, Fiction, and Momentum Investing,” Asness, Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz of AQR argue that momentum applied to individual stocks is worthwhile even if it were to show a zero return, provided one combines momentum stocks with value stocks. 9 This is because value and momentum exhibit a pronounced negative correlation. 
 Table 9.3 shows the AQR Momentum Index, the Russell 1000 Value Index, and a 50/50 combination of momentum and value as used in Asness et al. (2013). We see that value combined with momentum does give a slightly higher Sharpe ratio than either value or momentum alone. However, there is little or no advantage with respect to maximum drawdown, and results still pale in comparison to absolute momentum combined with the Russell 1000 Index. 
 Table 9.3 AQR Momentum, Russell 1000 Value, 50/50 Momentum, and Value, 1980–2013 

 Furthermore, two of the four authors of Asness et al. (2014), Israel and Moskowitz, are the same authors who showed in their own 2013 paper that value, as it is commonly used, only offers a historic premium when applied to very small stocks, which are generally unusable by institutional investors. 
 Perhaps we can find other ways to improve upon individual stock momentum so that it becomes more useful. There have been dozens of research papers exploring possible enhancements to relative strength momentum. I will touch on four that look promising for individual stocks. We may also be able to apply two of these enhancements to market indexes or to assets other than stocks. Those who want to explore the potential enhancements in more detail can download the referenced research papers while keeping in mind the caveats given previously about data mining and model overspecification. 
 PROXIMITY TO 52-WEEK HIGHS 
 In the 1950s, both Dreyfus and Darvas extolled the virtue of investing in stocks that were making new highs. In their 2004 paper “The 52-Week High and Momentum Investing,” George and Hwang showed that the 52-week high explains a large portion of the profits from momentum investing. Using U.S. stocks from 1963 through 2001, the authors calculated the ratio of the current stock price to the 52-week stock price high. They then demonstrated that profits based on nearness to the 52-week high plus the highest returns over the past six months were superior to profits based solely on the highest returns over the past six months. Nearness to the 52-week high dominated the forecasting power of past returns. The authors postulated that stocks near their 52-week high are those for which good news has recently arrived. If this is really the reason why being near a 52-week high is effective, then nearness to a 52-week high is likely to be more effective with individual stocks than with stock indexes or asset classes that may not be as sensitive to news events. 
 PRICE, EARNINGS, AND REVENUE MOMENTUM 
 In their 2013 paper, “Does Revenue Momentum Drive or Ride Earnings or Price Momentum?” Chen et al. (2014) examined the profitability of strategies based on price, earnings, and revenue momentum, both alone and in combination with one another. Looking at U.S. stocks from 1974 through 2007, the authors measured price momentum based on past stock returns, as is usually done. They also measured earnings and revenue momentum, which they based on historical earnings and revenue. Using long/short hedged portfolios, the authors found that price momentum gave the largest average profit, followed by earnings, then revenue momentum. None of the three momentum strategies was dominant, which means that each carried some exclusive information content. The authors sorted all three factors into quintiles and matched up the top quintiles of each factor to create a double sort. Hedged portfolios from double sorts on two of the three factors, on average, outperformed single-sort portfolios. The one portfolio formed from a triple sort of all three factors outperformed all the double-sort portfolios. Revenue and earnings momentum combined accounted for only 19% of the price momentum effects, so price momentum was the most important factor. Overall evidence suggests that a strategy combining past return, earnings, and revenue momentum outperforms strategies based on only one or two of these factors. Since this approach incorporates earnings and revenue information, it would apply only to stocks and not to other asset classes. 
 ACCELERATING MOMENTUM 
 In their 2013 paper, “Investor Attention, Visual Price Pattern, and Momentum Investing,” Chen and Yu investigated visual patterns of past stock prices that indicate momentum acceleration, garner investor attention, induce overreaction, and amplify the momentum effect. 
 For U.S. stocks from 1962 through 2011, the authors performed a linear regression of daily returns against the square of time in order to determine the price trajectory curvature. A positive coefficient indicated convex price trajectory curvature, whereas a negative coefficient indicated concave curvature. 
 When the authors sorted stocks based on this curvature, they found that the gross returns and three-factor alphas of convex (accelerating upward) positive momentum stocks were significantly higher than the gross returns and alphas of stocks with concave positive momentum. The authors showed that ignoring positive momentum stocks with concave price trajectories is the key to earning higher momentum returns. 
 Docherty and Hurst (2014) took a similar approach in the Australian stock market using data from 1992 through 2011. They measured the slope of recent performance relative to the 12-month geometric average rate of return. They called this shorter-term relative performance “trend salience.” Doing a double sort on trend salience and traditional momentum, the authors found that the combined approach significantly outperformed traditional momentum. Accelerating momentum as either curvature or trend salience might be effective with stock indexes and other assets, in addition to its use with individual stocks. 
 FRESH MOMENTUM 
 In “Fresh Momentum,” Chen, Kadan, and Kose (2009) defined fresh winners as the strongest stocks during the previous 12 months that were relatively weak during the 12 months prior to that. Stale winners, on the other hand, are those stocks that were strongest during both periods. Doing a double sort by quintiles on relative price strength in months 1 through 12 (excluding the most recent month) and months 13 through 24 for U.S. stocks from 1926 through 2006, the authors found that fresh winners outperformed stale winners by 0.43% per month. One could easily apply this fresh momentum approach to stock indexes and other assets, in addition to individual stocks. 
 GLOBAL BALANCED MOMENTUM 
 Earlier I mentioned that we could use dual momentum in other ways besides our GEM model. The following are two proprietary models I developed that utilize dual momentum. 
 The simplest extension of dual momentum is to start with the allocation given for conservative investors in Chapter 8 that permanently has 70% in GEM and 30% in U.S. aggregate bonds. This time, instead of holding the permanent fixed-income portion of the portfolio always in U.S. aggregate bonds, we will use dual momentum to select from among the following fixed-income alternatives: Barclays Capital U.S. Long Treasury, Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Government, Bank of America Merrill Lynch U.S. Cash Pay High Yield, and 90-day U.S. Treasury bills. 
 I call this dual momentum global stock/bond strategy my Global Balanced Momentum (GBM) model. GBM has 70% allocated to the same equities holdings as GEM, but its fixed-income holdings, including a permanent 30% allocation to fixed income, are selected from the previous list of fixed-income alternatives using dual momentum. This means that the equity portion of the portfolio when stocks are weak, as well as the fixed-income portion, can be in any of the fixed-income alternatives mentioned in the last paragraph, depending on which of them has been the strongest over the look-back period. 
 GBM has substantial advantages over traditional stock/bond balanced portfolios. Average returns of the typical 60% stock/40% bond portfolio have barely kept pace with inflation across 7 of the 11 decades since 1900. A typical 60/40 balanced stock/bond portfolio had negative real returns over rolling 10-year periods almost one-quarter of the time over the past 114 years. Severe and lengthy drawdowns have also been common, including ones of –66% and –55%. 
 Table 9.4 and Figure 9.2 show the performance of GBM compared with benchmark allocations of 70% GEM with 30% U.S. Aggregate Bonds, 70% ACWI with 30% U.S. aggregate bonds, and a typical balanced portfolio of 60% S&P 500 and 40% U.S. aggregate bonds. We see that applying dual momentum to the fixed-income side boosts the annual return of the conservative 70% GEM/30% U.S. aggregate bond portfolio by over 150 basis points. Compared to the traditional 60/40 U.S stock/bond balanced portfolio, GBM has twice the Sharpe ratio and only half the maximum drawdown. GBM has both a higher expected return and a lower-risk profile than a typical stock/bond balanced portfolio. GBM has achieved a substantial reduction in maximum drawdown compared to the 60/40 balanced portfolio without having to resort to more than a 30% permanent allocation to bonds. 
 Table 9.4 Global Balanced Momentum Versus Benchmarks, 1974–2013 

 Figure 9.2 Global Balanced Momentum, 1974–2013 
 DUAL MOMENTUM SECTOR ROTATION 
 Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) postulated that industry components are the primary source of stock momentum profits and that momentum strategies provide compensation for industry risk. They constructed an industry-based momentum strategy that produced the same average monthly returns as an individual stock momentum strategy. Momentum based on industries, or sectors of closely related industries, is much easier to implement than individual stock momentum, and transaction costs are considerably lower. 
 My favorite dual momentum strategy is one that rotates among the strongest U.S. stock market equity sectors. The Morningstar sectors separate the U.S. stock market into 11 nonoverlapping segments. These cover technology, industrials, energy, communication services, real estate, financial services, consumer cyclical, basic materials, utilities, consumer defensive, and healthcare. 
 We can select an equally weighted basket of the top-performing sectors using relative strength momentum in what I call my Dual Momentum Sector Rotation (DMSR) model. When the U.S. stock market is in a downtrend, according to absolute momentum, DMSR moves all of its assets into the Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate Bond Index. Table 9.5 and Figure 9.3 show how DMSR has performed in comparison to the S&P 500, a portfolio of monthly rebalanced equally weighted equity sectors, and 77% equally weighted sectors plus 23% U.S. aggregate bonds. We include the last benchmark because DMSR has overall spent 77% of its time in equities and 23% in U.S. aggregate bonds. Data is from January 1992, which is the starting date of the Morningstar U.S equity sectors. Monthly rebalancing of sectors captures some mean reversion profit for all the portfolios other than the S&P 500. 10 
 Table 9.5 Dual Momentum Sector Rotation Versus Benchmarks, 1993–2013 

 Figure 9.3 Dual Momentum Sector Rotation, 1993–2013 
 Figure 9.4 shows the contributions to DMSR from both relative and absolute momentum. We see clearly that absolute momentum offers both a higher return and a substantially lower drawdown than relative momentum. Dual momentum reflects the higher returns and drawdown reduction of applying absolute momentum to enter and exit the 11 equally weighted equity sectors, while also capturing the higher returns that sometimes come from relative strength momentum. DMSR can also reduce portfolio risk exposure by rotating into defensive sectors, such as consumer defensive and utilities, prior to market tops. These defensive sectors often hold up well following market tops and before trend-following absolute momentum can kick in and take us out of all equity positions. 

 Figure 9.4 Sector Rotation, Absolute and Relative Momentum, 1993–2013 
 WHAT TO DO NOW 
 There are many ways to use dual momentum. The risk reduction that comes from absolute momentum frees us to go after markets such as U.S. equities that offer the highest risk premium instead of having to focus on diversification that may not deliver its promised reduction in volatility and drawdown. Although I have developed and use more sophisticated momentum models, the simple GEM model shown in Chapter 8 is a very good model for most investors. It is simple, easy to implement, and not subject to overfitting bias. Readers can find monthly performance updates of all three of my dual momentum models, Global Equities Momentum, Global Balanced Momentum, and Dual Momentum Sector Rotation, on my website: http://www.optimalmomentum.com/performance.html .

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CONTENTS 
                             F OREWORD by Wesley R. Gray, PhD 
                             A CKNOWLEDGMENTS 
                             P REFACE 
    CHAPTER 1       W ORLD’S F IRST I NDEX F UND 
    CHAPTER 2       W HAT G OES U P … S TAYS U P 
    CHAPTER 3       M ODERN P ORTFOLIO T HEORY P RINCIPLES AND P RACTICES 
    CHAPTER 4       R ATIONAL AND N OT -S O -R ATIONAL E XPLANATIONS OF M OMENTUM 
    CHAPTER 5       A SSET S ELECTION : T HE G OOD, THE B AD, AND THE U GLY 
    CHAPTER 6       S MART B ETA AND O THER U RBAN L EGENDS 
    CHAPTER 7       M EASURING AND M ANAGING R ISK 
    CHAPTER 8       G LOBAL E QUITIES M OMENTUM 
    CHAPTER 9       M O ’ B ETTER M OMENTUM 
 CHAPTER 10       F INAL T HOUGHTS 
 APPENDIX A       G LOBAL E QUITY M OMENTUM M ONTHLY R ESULTS 
 APPENDIX B       A BSOLUTE M OMENTUM : A S IMPLE R ULE -B ASED S TRATEGY AND U NIVERSAL T REND -F OLLOWING O VERLAY 
                             N OTES 
                             G LOSSARY 
                             B IBLIOGRAPHY 
                             R ECOMMENDED R EADING 
                             I NDEX

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 Copyright © 2015 by Gary Antonacci. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
 ISBN: 978-0-07-184945-6 MHID:       0-07-184945-9 
 The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-184944-9, MHID: 0-07-184944-0. 
 eBook conversion by codeMantra Version 1.0 
 All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
 McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com . 
 This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting, securities trading, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. 
 — From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations 
 TERMS OF USE 
 This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
 THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
