
NEW HIGHS VERSUS NEW LOWS

In addition to the number of advancing and declining stocks, the
financial press also publishes the number of stocks hitting new 52
week highs or new 52 week lows. Here again, these figures are
available on a daily and weekly basis. There are two ways to show
these figures. One way is to plot the two lines separately. Since the
daily values can sometimes be erratic, moving averages (usually 10
days) are plotted to present a smoother picture of the two lines.
(See Figure 18.4.) In a strong market, the number of new highs
should be much greater than the number of new lows. When the
number of new highs start to decline, or the number of new lows
start to expand, a caution signal is given. A negative market signal
is activated when the moving average of new lows crosses above


Stock Market Indicators 441

New Highs (10 Day Average) F 40

F 350

300

+ 250

F 200}

F 150]

F 100

New Lows (10 Day Average) f

In” ont” "Wey" liune Tuy" " Tupust” Ben” ‘TOctober” Nov” " bocemberliove. — FetrueryMarch

Figure 18.4 A 10 day average of new highs versus a 10 day average of
new lows. A healthy market should see more stocks hitting new highs than
new lows. During October 1997, the two lines almost crossed before reassert-
ing their bullish alignment.

the moving average of new highs. It can also be shown that when-
ever the new highs reach an extreme, the market has a topping
tendency. Similarly, whenever new lows reach an extreme, the
market is near a bottom. Another way to use the new highs versus
new lows numbers is to plot the difference between the two lines.

NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX

The advantage of a New High-New Low index is that it can be
directly compared to one of the major market averages. In that
way, the high-low line can be used just like an advance-decline
line. (See Figure 18.5.) The trend of the high-low line can be chart-


442 Chapter 18

New York Composite Index | i Lane

wer

New High - New Low Index

5

essRRSFssEERs EBs

Heat biay’ Dane Day 2 Dctoter' December" Ti90e February Ierch’

ra

Figure 18.5 The New High-New Low Index versus the NYSE Composite
Index. This line plots the difference between the number of stocks hitting new
highs and new lows. A rising line is positive. Notice the sharp drop during
October of 1997.

