
Fixed Profits at Risk Multiples
If the initial risk is always known at the time of trade entry, we can use multiples of that
risk for profit targets. This is my personal approach: I usually exit between 25 and 33
percent of the position on a limit order at a profit equal to my initial risk in the trade.
For instance, if I am buying a $50 stock with a $45 stop and my position sizing rules have
me buying 10,000 shares, I will offer out between 2,500 and 3,000 of those shares at $55.
As a matter of discipline, this order is entered as soon as the entry order is filled, and is
left working good till canceled (GTC) in all sessions. From a practical standpoint, you
usually do not want to work stop orders in premarket and postmarket hours, as they can
be hit by strange off-market orders in those illiquid environments, but this is actually a
benefit to your profit-taking orders. As much as possible, you want these profit-taking
limit orders to be working in overnight, thin markets, because sometimes other traders
will make mistakes and you should be happy to provide liquidity to them at these spots.
In addition, orders are prioritized in most electronic trading books in the order in
which they are received. If there are 25,000 shares bid at a price and you join the bid
for 500 shares, you will not be filled until 25,500 shares print at that price. However,
modern order books have a tremendous amount of cancel-and-replace activity due to
the presence of high-frequency electronic trading algorithms. Most of those 25,000 shares

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

236

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

might be canceled and replaced thousands of times each minute. If you put a real order
into the book (one that you do not intend to cancel), it will percolate to the top of queue
as other orders are canceled and replaced. This is why it is so important to get your
orders in as soon as possible. Even with daytrades, you will often find yourself filled first
at prices if your orders have been in the book awhile—it is completely possible that 1,000
shares print at the high of the day, and all 1,000 of them will be yours if your order has
been in the book for a couple of hours.
This concept can be extended to taking profits at two or three times your initial risk.
This is very much a matter of personal preference, but I also make it a point to be down
to between one-third to half my initial size at two times my initial risk, and then manage
the remainder according to a different set of rules. Whatever you decide to do, first test
it over a large set of trades to make sure it makes sense and that it works with your
market selection and entry criteria. Once you have settled on a plan, be consistent. You
may have multiple rules and qualifying conditions, but, within those rules, you must be
absolutely, perfectly consistent. The market is random enough; don’t make your results
more volatile by adding random decisions to your process.

Market Structure Targets
A good argument can be made for putting profit targets at visible points in the market.
You should generally assume that your limit order will have to be traded through to be
filled. In other words, a limit to sell at $10.00 will certainly not be filled if the highest
price is $9.99, and, in backtesting, you should assume it will not be filled even if a lot
of volume trades at $10.00. However, in most electronic markets, you are guaranteed
to be filled if price trades to $10.01, as this cannot happen until all liquidity (including
your limit order) is taken at $10.00. Because of this, it makes sense to place your limits
slightly inside the actual point in the market; if there is clearly visible support at $10.00
and resistance at $20.00, you would place a limit to buy above $10.00 (perhaps between
$10.01 and $10.15, depending on the market and your time frame) and a limit to sell
somewhere below $20.00. If you are a daytrader looking to take profits at the high of
the day, your profit-taking order should be a few cents or ticks below the high. It rarely
makes sense to put your orders on the other side of a visible chart point, unless you are
counting on extra volatility from stop orders being hit in those areas. This is an obvious
but often-overlooked point, and is something to consider if you tend to trade around
those chart patterns.
It is not possible to create a comprehensive list of every chart structure that may
provide a reasonable profit target, nor is it necessary to do so. Many are obvious: visible support or resistance; visible support or resistance on a higher time frame; big highs
and lows like important 52-week highs and lows for stocks or contract highs and lows
for commodities; high and low of the session for intraday trades; long shadows of accumulation below ranges or distribution above; and so on. In most cases, it is enough
to be aware of the market structure as delineated by the pivot highs and lows of the
swings. Don’t over think. If you normally take profits at risk multiples and find yourself

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

237

entering an order to buy or sell beyond one of these visible points, it probably makes
sense to tighten the orders up a little bit and bring them inside the swings. This will
slightly reduce your profit (though, theoretically, the probability shift will compensate),
but there is no sense learning to read market structure if you don’t make good use of the
information it is giving you.

Trailing Stops
Many traders use some type of trailing stop approach to winning trades. Though there
are many variations on this concept, they all define stop levels that move with the trade
according to some rule set. They may adjust very infrequently according to simple rules.
For instance, a trader taking profits at 1× the initial risk on the trade might then move
the stop for the remainder of the position to a higher price, effectively locking in a profit
on the trade. There are also many more complex, algorithmic rules for trailing stops
that adapt to market conditions as the trade develops. Let’s look at some variations of
these rules.
Moving Averages and Trend Lines Many traders will get into a trending trade and
will then stop out when price touches or, in some cases, closes below a moving average.
Traders often use 100-, 50-, or 20-period moving averages, but we have to ask: why not
103, 98, 49, or 17 periods? Why not 53? The choice of which moving average to use is
arbitrary, and so the moving averages in general are arbitrary. Using a moving average
for a stop is better than having no plan at all, but moving averages usually make poor
choices for stop levels.
Another commonly used plan is a stop below an important trend line. There is some
logic to this idea, but there are also some serious flaws. First, trend lines are unavoidably
arbitrary; two traders will often draw two different trend lines on the same chart. This in
itself does not compromise the validity of the tool, but the bigger problem is that trend
lines are not suitable stop levels. It is extremely common to see a good trend line violated,
and then to see price immediately recover. Some of the best entries into patterns occur
when these trend line breaks are reversed, so why choose a stop plan that puts you on
the wrong side of that tendency? If you want to use a trend line as a trailing stop, it
might make sense to require significant price action under the trend line. How you define
significant price action is up to you: multiple closes, consolidation under, multiple legs
under, are all possibilities, but they all require price movement and leave the position
open to larger losses. Again, there are better tools for trailing stops.
Wilder’s Parabolic SAR and LeBeau’s Chandelier Stop Welles Wilder created
a trading system he called Parabolic Stop and Reverse (SAR) in his 1978 New Concepts
in Technical Trading Systems. The Parabolic, as it is usually called, was originally intended to be a complete trading system designed to keep traders always in the market,
flipping their bias from long to short as the trend changed. It works by identifying the
most extreme trend point (highest point in an uptrend or lowest point in a downtrend),

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

238

TRADING STRATEGIES

and then placing a stop a certain distance from that extreme point. Each day, the stop
is moved closer to that extreme point by an amount called the acceleration factor; this
factor also increases every day so the stop is ratcheted in at an ever-increasing rate. If
the market trends strongly, the Parabolic stop level will trail behind, but if the market
reverses or goes flat, the acceleration factor will usually force a trend change indication
very quickly. Originally, if this stop level was reached, the trend was deemed to have
changed and you were also supposed to flip your position. Figure 8.2 shows an example
of the Parabolic applied to a continuous chart of oat futures.
Though it is difficult to trade the Parabolic as a stand-alone system in the always-in
context that was originally intended, it can be an extremely useful tool for discretionary
traders who can turn to the Parabolic for trailing stop levels in trending markets. It is
possible to initiate a position, take your first partial profit (if that is in your trading plan),
and then use the Parabolic’s levels as trailing stops. When the stop level is hit, exit the
position but do not flip. The usual caveat applies: it is a mistake to use any trading tool
that you do not completely understand. If you are going to use the Parabolic, do whatever
you need to internalize its calculations. If calculating it by hand or in a spreadsheet helps,

FIGURE 8.2 The Parabolic System Applied to Oat Futures

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

239

do so. I would highly recommend some kind of test environment where you can apply
it to artificial data series you create (see Chapter 7) so that you can see how it reacts to
every imaginable market situation.
A similar idea is found in Chuck LeBeau’s chandelier stop, which basically hangs
a stop a fixed number of ATRs from the extreme point of a trend, creating a stop level
that is comceptually similar to the Parabolic without the acceleration factor. One of the
problems with using the Parabolic on a strict, systematic basis is that the acceleration
factor is constantly moving the stop closer to the market, even when there is no trend at
all. While this is desirable behavior in some contexts, it also results in multiple flips from
long to short while the market is chopping sideways. The chandelier exit usually gives
the trade more room, which, though it may result in larger losses, will also allow you to
stay in trades at the beginning of trends. Conversely, in mature trends the Parabolic will
usually tighten stops dramatically compared to the chandelier stop, which may help to
protect profits in open trades.

Other Price Action/Market Structure Stops It is also possible to use references
to price action and market structure for trailing stop points. For instance, a simple plan
might be to stop out of an uptrending market on the first down close, at the lowest low
of three days ago, or on two consecutive downward closes. If you are going to explore
these, also consider stops that limit your loss on any one day, perhaps stopping out a
certain ATR multiple from the previous day’s high, low, or closing values, and be certain
that you understand the statistical tendencies supporting your stop plan. For instance,
all other things being equal, stopping out after three consecutive downward closes in
stocks would be a bad plan because the market is usually primed for a bounce at that
point. Whatever you choose to do, it should be subjected to a battery of statistical tests
if possible, and backtested by hand (so that you see each detail of each trade) on at least
several hundred trades.
Any of these stops will work well in strongly trending markets, but there is an important point here—anything will work well on carefully chosen examples in strongly
trending markets. If you do research and backtesting on trailing stop methodologies applied to strongly trending markets, you are preselecting the ideal environments for those
stops, and they will all usually look fantastic. In actual trading, results will often fall short.
Another thing to consider is that it is possible to switch to these types of stops once
you have used other techniques to enter and to manage the initial stages of a trade,
but, at that point, we need to ask if these stops really add anything at all. The answer
will be different for different traders at different stages of their development. My experience is that good discretionary traders will outperform any rule-based trailing stop
methodology over a large set of trades. There will be exceptions, but discretionary
traders will know when to stop out of trades before the rule-based level is reached, or
will also know that sometimes they should let the trailing stop’s level break without actually exiting the trade. Some discretionary traders will use a tool such as the Parabolic
as a reference, incorporating it into the trade management process in various ways.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

240

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
Many trading systems are designed with fixed profit targets and loss limits that are entered at the time of the trade and not modified until one is hit and the other is canceled,
and others use various combinations of dynamic levels calculated from tools like the
Parabolic SAR. These are certainly valid approaches to trade management, but most discretionary traders will gravitate toward a more active style that allows them to make
decisions while the trade is underway. This is, in fact, one of the main reasons for being
a discretionary trader, but it raises some questions. First, are we adding value through
this interaction? Psychological studies have shown that people performing a task with
a random reward falsely attribute more of their results to their skill if they have more
chances to interact with the process. The designers of slot machines and rub-off lottery
tickets know this very well, but could the same thing apply to trading? Could traders also
be vulnerable to this error? Could they develop a false sense of their ability if they can
change indicator settings, look at different markets, and make many small adjustments
to their trades?
The second important issue to consider is that decision making under pressure is difficult, and everyone is vulnerable to making mistakes. Even experienced traders struggle
under the pressure of real-time position management; for the new trader, the task is almost impossible. The extreme highs and lows in any market are driven by the emotions
of market participants—the last buyer finally dumps his position at the lows, or the last,
stubborn short gives up and covers in desperation right at the highs. This last buyer or
last seller phenomenon is one of the most important psychological drivers of price at
extremes; one reason people trade automated or fixed systems is to avoid the possibility
of participating in those errors. Anyone who has traded for even a short period of time
invariably marvels at how many times their on-the-fly execution decisions were made
at the worst possible point in the market. There is no possible way to completely avoid
these kinds of mistakes, but, if you decide to adjust and actively manage positions, having
a clear plan will reduce your vulnerability to making emotional mistakes under pressure.

Choices: Enter All at Once or Scale In?
Once you have determined the size to trade, you have the choice of entering the position
all at once or in several pieces. There are times when that choice is constrained by market
conditions or the type of trade setup. For instance, an order may be so large or the market
so thin that it would be impossible to enter the whole position at one time. There are also
kinds of trade entries—for instance, scaling in in anticipation of mean reversion—that
may require multiple entries to be effective. The decision to scale in or enter all at once
will depend as much on the type of trade signal as on the trader’s inclination. There are
many cases where it may make sense to buy into a decline or to short into a rally in a
series of small trades, but there it is important to monitor your risk closely. It is very easy

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Trade Management

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

241

to scale into a trade, to keep scaling in, and to end up with more size and a larger loss
than you had originally planned. This is unacceptable and dangerous. These larger-thanexpected losses will add up, with the possibility of a catastrophic loss looming around
the corner as well. (Remember, the fact that you can scale into the trade in the first place
means that the market is moving the wrong way.) First, define an absolute dollar amount
you want to risk on the trade. Next, define the ultimate drop-dead stop in the market past
which you will not hold the trade, and then carefully track your size and average price so
that you know, at all times, what the impact of a loss at that ultimate stop level will be.

Taking Partial Profits
Taking partial profits as the trade moves in your favor can make good sense; you are
paying yourself as the market proves your trade idea correct. There is an unavoidable
trade-off: taking partial profits will mean that you do not have your full size on for the
trades that become big winners, so the trade-off is consistency at the expense of larger,
but less frequent, wins. In the context of a well-planned trading program, either approach
is viable. Some traders feel the need for activity, and will start exiting part of their positions without any plan soon after entry. If this is not well thought out, what usually
happens is that these early exits simply remove some of the edge from winning trades,
as the natural psychological tendency will be to lock in some profits, however small, on
winners. In addition, short-term traders on all time frames are especially vulnerable to
making executions in the noise level of the market. While they may believe that they are
contributing something of value to the trade, this is often not true. Make sure that your
partial profits are actually adding to the bottom line.

Taking Partial Losses
Another possibility is to take partial losses as the trade moves against you to reduce the
size of the final loss if the trade hits your stop point. There are a few things to consider
here; the same concern with making executions in the noise level of the market applies.
If you are entering a $50.00 stock with an ATR of $2.00 on the daily chart, making decisions when you are up or down $0.25 on the trade probably does not make sense. More
importantly, partial exits on either the profit or loss side of the entry will have the effect
of anchoring the profit and loss (P&L) to that side. In the case of partial profits, this is
what we are trying to accomplish, but taking partial losses may work against us.
One useful tool for visualizing this is to imagine two lines moving in time: one is the
market you are trading, and the second is your P&L. If you have your full size on, the
P&L line will track the market exactly; if you have half size on, then the line will move
half as fast (change half as much) as the market, either up or down, and this pattern
continues for different amounts of leverage. Imagine entering a full-size position, and
then the market swings down to a loss, where you exit part of your position. The market

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

242

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

FIGURE 8.3 Partial Exits (Marked with Arrows) at Two Optimal Points Early in the Trade

turns back up, but your P&L line now lags the market because you sold some of your
position at a small loss, in effect locking in that loss.
Figures 8.3 and 8.4 show two scenarios of a theoretical P&L with partial exits compared to the underlying market they are tracking. Both traders entered at the left edge of
the chart with full trading size, but took partial exits of one-third of their initial position
at two points early in the trade. The trader in Figure 8.3 obviously had a working crystal
ball, because he knew to take his exits at the high points of the early swings. Conversely,
the trader in Figure 8.4 made the worst possible decisions, and took off one-third of his
position at the exact low points. The market eventually went higher, and both traders
should have profited, but notice that partial profits taken on either side of the line that
defines the entry price will tend to anchor the P&L on that side of the line. Locking in
losses makes it very difficult to ever recover those losses. If you are ever considering
taking partial exits at a loss, it may make sense to simply exit the entire position at a
small loss rather than deleveraging your P&L in the loss space. Use this tool to visualize various scenarios and their impact on your bottom line, and carefully consider the
impact of these partial exits at a loss.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Trade Management

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

243

FIGURE 8.4 The Same Market, with Partial Exits at the Two Worst Points Early in the Trade

Adding to Existing Trades
There are a few different schools of thought on whether to add to existing trades. Be
sure to separate these additions from the case of a normal, planned trade entry done
in pieces. The normal scaling-in entry (if that is in your trading plan) is usually done as
the trade moves against you, and with the idea of accumulating a maximum intended
position size against a clear risk level. These additions are different from additions that
come after the initial entry has already reached its maximum size, and they may or may
not come after partial profits have been taken. In some cases, you may add to a full-size
trade and so have on two or more times your expected exposure. In other cases, you
may book partial profits (or losses) on an existing trade, and then add back only enough
size to get back to your initial trading size and risk. There are too many possibilities here
to consider every possible scenario, but let’s consider some arguments for and against a
few scenarios.
Never Add to an Existing Trade Some trading systems are designed to simply
enter on a set of criteria and exit on another set of criteria. In these systems, all we are
