
leftovers would have been not only Milken and Ranieri but Joseph Perella
and Bruce Wasserstein of First Boston, the leaders in corporate takeovers and, coincidentally, the other two men who helped Ronald Perelman
chase Salomon Brothers.)
Here the similarity ends. For unlike Ranieri, Michael Milken took
complete control of his firm. He moved his junk bond operation from New
York to Beverly Hills and eventually paid himself $550 million a year, 180
times what Ranieri made at his peak. When Milken opened his Wilshire
Boulevard office (which he owns), he let it be known who
was in charge by putting his name on the door instead of Drexel's. And
he created a working environment that was different from Salomon
Brothers in one crucial respect: Success was measured strictly by how
many deals you brought in, rather than by how many people worked for
you, whether you had a seat on the board of directors, and how many
gossip columns you appeared in.
It is always hard to say what it is about a man that makes him suited to
overturn the conventions by which the rest of the world has been living
for ages. In Milken's case, it is especially difficult because he's almost
neurotically private and offers no helpful insights into his character to
would-be biographers, other than the business he does. My view is that
he combined two qualities that were, at the time of his ascendancy,
regarded as mutually exclusive. They certainly did not coexist within
Salomon Brothers in the early 1980s. Milken possessed both raw bondtrading skills and patience with ideas. He had an attention span.
Here Milken overcame great odds. Loss of concentration, a complete lack
of ability to focus, was the chief occupational hazard of the trading
floor. Dash Riprock was an excellent and typical case in point. Watching
Dash was as disconcerting as watching a music video. There were brief
moments, for example, when Dash was glum. On occasion, usually when his
business had momentarily waned, he dropped his telephone with a thud
and explained to me how one day he planned to quit investment banking
and go back to school. He was going to bury himself in a library for a few
years, then become a history professor. Or maybe a writer. The idea of
Dash locked in quiet contemplation, even for five minutes, struck me as
uniquely improbable, and these conversations of ours would end with my
trying to say so and his not listening because he was bored and wanted to
change the topic. "I don't mean I want to study now," he'd say "I mean

when I'm thirty-five and have a few million dollars in the bank," as if,
after years of jamming bonds, a few million dollars in the bank would
make him more likely to pay attention.
After three years of bond sales Dash couldn't concentrate sufficiently
to enjoy a decent period of moodiness. Almost as soon as it had occurred
to him to sulk ("Don't fuck with me, I'm in a bad mad mood," he'd warn
traders) he would have forgotten about it, for somehow, in the throes of
his gloom, he'd sell a few hundred million dollars' worth of government
bonds and grow bright again. "Yeah, Mikey!" he'd
shout, as he scribbled a sales ticket. "The nippers, they love me. And I'm
whipping and driving them. OOOOhhhhhhh yeaahhhh." Most of his
thoughts were entirely devoted to finding the next trade. His was a
never-ending search for a fix.
Michael Milken, who began in a job not dissimilar to Dash's, was building
a business, rather than making an endless series of trades. He was willing
to look up from the blips on his trading screen and think clear and
complete thoughts years into the future. Would a certain microchip
company survive for twenty years to meet its semiannual interest
payments? Would the U.S. steel industry survive in any form? Fred
Joseph, who became CEO of Drexel, listened to Milken on the subject of
corporations and thought he "understood credit better than anyone in
the country." As a by-product, Milken came to understand companies.
Companies had long been the domain of commercial bankers and the
corporate finance and equity departments of investment banks. They
hadn't been subjected to the mental processes of a bond trader. We at
Salomon, as I have said, relegated the equity department to a corner in
our basement. Many of our bond traders thought of our corporate
financiers as administrative assistants; their pet name for the corporate
finance department was Team Xerox. Anyone who might have seen what
Milken saw never reached a position to do anything about it. That was a
great shame, because it left us blind to a prize within our reach.
Thinking like a bond trader, Milken completely reassessed corporate
America. He made two observations. First, many large and seemingly
reliable companies borrowed money from banks at low rates of interest.
Their creditworthiness had but one way to go: down. Why be in the
business of lending money to them? It didn't make sense. It was a stupid
trade: tiny upside, huge downside. Many companies that had once been

models of corporate vitality subsequently went bust. There was no such
thing as a riskless loan. Even corporate giants are felled when their
industries collapse under them. Witness the entire U.S. steel industry.
Second, two sorts of companies could not persuade risk-averse
commercial bankers and money managers to lend them so much as the
time of day: small new companies and large old companies with problems.
Money managers relied on the debt-rating agencies to tell them what was
safe (or, rather, to sanction their investments so they did not appear
imprudent). But the rating services, like the commercial banks, relied
almost exclusively on the past-corporate balance sheets and track
records-in rendering their opinions. The outcome of the analysis was
determined by the procedure rather than by the analyst. This was a poor
way to evaluate any enterprise, be it new and small, or old, large and
shaky. A better method was to make subjective judgments about the
character of management and the fate of their industry. Lending money
to a company such as MCI, which funded most of its growth with junk
bonds, could be a brilliant risk-if one could foresee the future of
competitive long-distance phone services and the quality of MCI's
management. Lending money to Chrysler at extortionate rates of
interest could also be a smart bet, as long as the company had enough
cash flow to pay that interest.
Milken often spoke to students at business schools. On these occasions
he liked, for dramatic effect, to demonstrate how hard it actually is to
put a large company into bankruptcy. The forces interested in keeping a
large company afloat, he argued, are far greater than those that wish to
see it perish. He'd present the students with the following hypothetical
situation. First, he'd say, let's locate our major factory in an earthquake
zone. Then let's infuriate our unions by paying the executives large sums
of money while cutting wages. Third, let's select a company on the brink
of bankruptcy to supply us with an essential irreplaceable component in
our production line. And fourth, just in case our government is tempted
to bail us out when we get into trouble, let's bribe a few indiscreet
foreign officials. That, Milken would conclude, is precisely what Lockheed
had done in the late 1970s. Milken had purchased Lockheed bonds when
the company looked to be heading for liquidation and had made a small
fortune when it was saved in spite of itself, just as Alexander had
bought Farm Credit bonds when all seemed lost but wasn't.

What Milken was saying was that the entire American credit-rating
system was flawed. It focused on the past when it should have focused
on the future, and it was burdened by a phony sense of prudence. Milken
plugged the hole in the system. He ignored large Fortune 100 companies
in favor of ones with no credit standing. To compensate the lender for
the higher risk, their junk bonds bear a higher rate of interest,
sometimes 4 or 5 or 6 percent higher, than the bonds of blue-chip
companies. They also tend to pay the lender a big fat fee if the borrower
makes enough
money to repay his loans prematurely. So when the company makes
money, its junk soars, in anticipation of the windfall. And when the
company loses money, its junk sinks, in anticipation of default. In short,
junk bonds behave much more like equity, or shares, than old-fashioned
corporate bonds.
Therein lies one of the'surprisingly well-kept secrets of Milken's market.
Drexel's research department, because of its close relationship with
companies, was privy to raw inside corporate data that somehow never
found its way to Salomon Brothers. When Milken trades junk bonds, he
has inside information. Now it is quite illegal to trade in stocks on inside
information, as former Drexel client Ivan Boesky has ably demonstrated.
But there is no such law regarding bonds (who, when the law was written,
ever imagined that one day there would be so many bonds that behaved
like stock?).
Not surprisingly, the line between debt and equity, so sharply drawn in
the mind of a Salomon bond trader (Equities in Dallas!), becomes blurred
in the mind of a Drexel bond trader. Debt ownership in a shaky
enterprise means control, for when a company fails to meet its interest
payments, a bondholder can foreclose and liquidate the company. Michael
Milken explained this more succinctly to Meshulam Riklis, thede facto
owner of Rapid-American Corporation, at a breakfast meeting in the late
1970s. Milken claimed that Drexel and its clients, not Riklis, controlled
Rapid-American. "How can that be when I own forty percent of the
stock?" asked Riklis.
"We own a hundred million dollars of your bonds," said Milken, "and if you
miss one payment, we'll take the company away."
Those words are balm for the conscience of any bond salesman, 1 ike me,
weary of screwing investors on behalf of corporate borrowers. // you

miss one payment, we'll take the company away. "Michael Milken," Dash
Riprock said, "has turned the business inside out. He screws the
corporate borrower on behalf of investors." Borrowers were squeezed
because they had nowhere else to go but to Milken for money. What
Milken offered was access to lenders. The lenders, along with Milken,
made money. The gist of Milken's pitch to them was this: Build a huge
portfolio of junk bonds, and it does not matter if a few turn out to be
lemons, the higher payoff on the winners should more than offset the
losses on the losers. Drexel was prepared to gamble on companies, said
Milken to institutional investors. Join us. Invest in the future of America, the small-growth companies that make us great. It was a populist
message. The early junk bond investors, like mortgage investors, could
make money and feel good about themselves. "You should have heard
Mike's speech each year at the junk bond seminar in Beverly Hills"
(known as the Predators' Ball, for the carnivores, like Ronald Perelman, in
attendance), says a Drexel executive in New York. "It would have
brought tears to your eyes."
It's impossible to say exactly how much money Milken converted to his
cause. Many investors simply gave over their portfolios to him. Tom
Spiegel of Columbia Savings & Loan, for example, responded to Milken's
message by inflating his balance sheet from $370 million in assets to
$10.4 billion, much of it junk. A company that in sweet theory made loans
to homeowners was simply taking billions of dollars in savings deposits
and buying junk bonds with it. Before 1981 savings and loans did, almost
exclusively, lend money to homeowners. Since the deposits were insured
by the federal government-giving thrift managers cheap funds-the
investments were restricted by the federal authorities. In 1981, when
they began to flounder, the U.S. Congress decided to let the savings and
loans try to speculate their way out of trouble. And though it meant,
effectively, gambling with the government's money, they were allowed to
buy junk bonds. Spiegel has spent some of the profits from his junk bond
portfolio on television advertisements that say what a prudent place the
Columbia Savings & Loan really is, in spite of what you might hear. A little
man in a blue suit climbs a bar graph to demonstrate how quickly
Columbia's assets are growing.
By 1986 Columbia Savings & Loan was one of Drexel's biggest customers.
Tom Spiegel's salary was ten million dollars, making him the highest paid

of America's 3,264 thrift managers. Other S&L managers thought
Spiegel a genius and followed his lead. "Zillions of little S and Ls all over
the country now own junk bonds," one of my former training program
classmates told me as he rubbed his hands together in glee. He had left
Salomon in the middle of 1987 and, like many other Salomon bond
experts, had gone to work with Michael Milken in Beverly Hills.
Herein, funnily enough, lies one of the chief reasons why Salomon
Brothers did not rush into the junk bond market when the opening
presented itself in the early 1980s or succeed in it later on. As it stood,
the entire savings and loan industry was, within Salomon, Lewie Ranieri's captive customer. Had Salomon become big dealers in junk bonds,
Bill Voute, the head of corporate bonds, would have demanded equal
access to savings and loans. Lewie Ranieri feared losing his grip on
Salomon Brothers' savings and loan customers and found a couple of ways
to foil the small, fledgling junk bond department created by Voute in
1981.
In 1984 our two-man junk bond department spoke at a Salomon Brothers
seminar for several hundred savings and loan managers. They had been
invited to address the thrifts by the mortgage department. But after
their three-hour presentation, Ranieri rose to deliver the closing
address. The customers, of course, hung on his every word; as I've said,
they viewed Lewie as their savior. "There are two things you absolutely
should never do," said Ranieri. "And the first is buy junk bonds. Junk
bonds are dangerous." Of course, he might have believed it. In the end,
however, the thrifts did not, and Ranieri's objection served only to
discredit Salomon's junk bond department and drive the thrifts into the
arms of Drexel. And Bill Voute's people were livid about being humiliated
before such an important audience. "It was sort of like being invited to
dinner and finding out you're the dinner," says one former Salomon junk
bond man.
The same two-man team of junk bond specialists spent six months
crossing America making presentations to individual S&L managers. "It
was a crackerjack presentation, and we were getting a great response,
but no one was calling up to buy bonds," says one of the Salomon former
junk bond specialists. They expected that the orders to buy junk bonds
would soon follow their road show. But not one savings and loan manager
ever called. "We found out why later, when a member of the team quit

Salomon and went to Drexel to work for Milken," says this man. "The
customers told him that one of Lewie's salesmen had been right behind
us telling the thrifts not to believe us." It says a great deal about the
lack of leadership on the forty-first floor that the mortgage department
got away with this little stunt. But such was the state of our corporation.
Meanwhile, the new market was exploding. One indication of Mil-ken's
success was the number of new junk bonds issued. From virtually zero in
the 1970s, new junk bond issuance grew to $839 million in 1981, to $8.5
billion in 1985, and to $12 billion in 1987. By then junk bonds were 25
percent of the corporate bond market. Between 1980 and
1987, according to IDD information services, $53 billion worth of junk
bonds came to market. That is only a fraction of the market, however,
because it neglects the billions of dollars worth of new, man-made fallen
angels. Milken devised a way to transform the bonds of the most stable
companies to junk: leveraged corporate take-overs.
Having attracted tens of billions of dollars to his new speculative market,
Michael Milken, by 1985, was faced with more money than places to put
it. It must have been awkward for him. He simply could not find enough
worthy small-growth companies and old fallen angels to absorb the cash.
He needed to create junk bonds to satisfy the demand for them. His
original premise-that junk bonds are cheap because lenders are too
chicken to buy them-was shot to hell. Demand now exceeded natural
supply. Huge pools of funds across America were dedicated to the
unbridled pursuit of risk. Milken and his Drexel colleagues fell upon the
solution: They'd use junk bonds to finance raids on undervalued
corporations, by simply pledging the assets of the corporations as
collateral to the junk bond buyers. (The mechanics are identical to the
purchase of a house, when the property is pledged against a mortgage.) A
take-over of a large corporation could generate billions of dollars' worth
of junk bonds, for not only would new junk be issued, but the increased
leverage transformed the outstanding bonds of a former blue-chip
corporation to junk. To raid corporations, however, Milken needed a few
hit men.
The new and exciting job of invading corporate boardrooms appealed
mainly to men of modest experience in business and a great deal of
interest in becoming rich. Milken funded the dreams of every corporate
raider of note: Ronald Perelman, Boone Pickens, Carl Icahn, Mar-vin

Davis, Irwin Jacobs, Sir James Goldsmith, Nelson Peltz, Samuel Heyman,
Saul Steinberg, and Asher Edelman. "If you don't inherit it, you have to
borrow it," says one. Most sold junk bonds through Drexel to raise money
to storm such hitherto unassailable fortresses as Revlon, Phillips
Petroleum, Unocal, TWA, Disney, AFC, Crown Zellerbach, National Can,
and Union Carbide. It was an unexpected opportunity, not just for them
but for Milken, for he certainly did not have the overhaul of corporate
America in mind when he envisioned his junk bond market in 1970. He
couldn't have. When he stumbled upon the idea, no one imagined that
corporations could be undervalued.
As a graduate student at the London School of Economics I was
taught that stock markets were efficient. Broadly this means that all
outstanding information about companies is built into their share pricesi.e., they are always fairly valued. This sad fact was hammered home to
students with a series of studies demonstrating that stock market
brokers and analysts, people with the very best information, fared no
better in their stock market picks than a monkey drawing a name from a
hat or a man throwing darts at the pages of the Wall Street Journal.
The first implication of the so-called efficient markets theory is that
there is no sure way to make money in the stock market other than
trading on inside information. Milken, and others on Wall Street, saw
that this simply was not true. The market, which may have been quick to
digest earnings data, was grossly inefficient in valuing everything from
the land a company owns to the pension fund it creates.
There is no easy explanation why this should be so, not that anyone on
Wall Street wasted any time trying to explain it. To the men in Wall
Street's small mergers and acquisitions departments, Michael Milken was
a godsend, a vindication of their choice of careers. Joe Perella at First
Boston, having started the M&A department in 1973 and hired Bruce
Wasserstein in 1978, had devoted resources to take-overs merely "on a
hunch," he says. "There was this huge opportunity," says Perella, "and it
was lying under the dirt. You had a steady supply of companies whose
assets were undervalued. But there was a paucity of buyers. People who
wanted to buy these companies couldn't monetize their desire. SomeoneMilken-came along and kicked away the dirt. Now anyone with a twentytwo-cent stamp can make a bid for a company.''
Perella, Wasserstein, and countless others apart from Drexel relished

the turn of events. Each take-over required a minimum of two advisers:
one for the raider and another for his prey. So Drexel couldn't keep all
the business it created for itself. Most deals involved four or more
investment bankers, as several buyers competed for the prize. The
raiders were the stone dropped into the still pond, and they sent ripples
shooting across the surface of corporate America. The process they
began took on a life of its own. Managers running public companies with
cheap assets began to consider buying the companies from their
shareholders for themselves (what is known in Europe as management
buyout, or MBO, and in America as a leveraged buyout, or LBO). They put
themselves in play. Then, finally, Wall Street investment bankers became
involved in what Milken had been quietly doing all along:
taking big stakes in the companies for themselves. The assets were
cheap. Why let other people make the money? So the take-over advisory
business was all of a sudden shot through with the same conflict of
interest I faced every day selling bonds: If it was a good deal, the
bankers kept it for themselves; if it was a bad deal, they'd try to sell it
to their customers.
There was, in other words, plenty of work to go around. Mergers and
acquisitions departments mushroomed across Wall Street in the mid1980s, just as bond trading departments had mushroomed a few years
before. There was a deep financial connection between the two: Both
drew heavily on the willingness of investors to speculate in bonds. Both
also drew on the willingness of people to borrow more than they could
easily repay. Both, in short, depended on a whole new attitude toward
debt. "Every company has got people sitting around who do nothing for
what they get paid," says Joe Perella. "If they take on a lot of debt, it
forces them to cut fat." The take-over specialists did for debt what
Ivan Boesky did for greed. Debt is good, they said. Debt works.
There was a deep behavioral connection between bond trading and takeovers as well: Both were driven by a new pushy financial entrepreneurship that smelled fishy to many who had made their living on Wall
Street in the past. There are those who would have you think that a
great deal of thought and wisdom is invested in each take-over. Not so.
Wall Street's take-over salesmen are not so different from Wall
Street's bond salesmen. They spend far more time plotting strategy
than they do wondering whether they should do the deals. They basically

assume that anything that enables them to get rich must also be good
for the world. The embodiment of the take-over market is a high-strung,
hy-perambitious twenty-six-year-old, employed by a large American
investment bank, smiling and dialing for companies.
And the process by which a take-over occurs is frighteningly simple-in
view of its effects on community, workers, shareholders, and
management. A paper manufacturer in Oregon appears cheap to the
twenty-six-year-old playing with his computer late one night in New York
or London. He writes his calculations on a telex, which he send to any
party remotely interested in paper, in Oregon, or in buying cheap
companies. Like the organizer of a debutante party, the twenty-six-yearold keeps a file on his desk of who is keen on whom. But he isn't
particularly discriminating in issuing invitations. Anyone can buy beI
cause anyone can borrow using junk bonds. The papermaker in Oregon is
now a target.
The next day the papermaker reads about himself in the "Heard on the
Street" column of the Wall Street Journal. His stock price is convulsing
like a hanged man because arbitrageurs like Ivan Boesky have begun to
buy his company's shares in hopes of making a quick buck by selling out
to the raider. The papermaker panics and hires an investment banker to
defend him, perhaps even the same twenty-six-year-old responsible for
his misery. Five other twenty-six-year-olds at five hitherto unoccupied
investment banks read the rumors and begin to scourge the landscape
for a buyer of the paper company. Once a buyer is found, the company is
officially "in play." At the same time the army of young overachievers
check their computers to see if other paper companies in America might
not also be cheap. Before long the entire paper industry is up for grabs.
The money to be made from defending and attacking large companies
makes bond trading look like a pauper's game. Drexel has netted fees in
excess of $100 million for single take-overs. Wasserstein and Perella, in
1987, generated $385 million in fees for their employer, First Boston.
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Shearson Lehman, and others wasted no
time in establishing themselves as advisers, and though none had the
fund-raising power of Salomon, all made great sums of money. Salomon
Brothers, slow to learn about take-overs and largely absent from the
junk bond market, missed the bonanza. There was no reason for this
