
19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 271

Chapter 12: Buy Indicators and Bullish Reversal Candlestick Patterns

Figure 12-3:
Using the
RSI and a
candlestick
pattern to
select an
entry and
exit on a
chart of
DVN.

If I were trading the scenario you see in Figure 12-3, I’d place a stop loss order
based on the low of the candlestick pattern and keep that stop in place until
the RSI crosses above 50. That way I’d still be in the trade even if a small pullback occurred. After the RSI reached 50, I’d simply keep an eye on the trend.
The trend eventually heads higher with a clearly defined trend break, and
when that trend break occurs, I’d execute a sell order and pocket a nice
profit. I know that it looks quite easy in hindsight, but it really is a prime
example of how you can use the RSI in conjunction with candlestick patterns,
particularly bullish reversal patterns.
Still not convinced? I offer another example in Figure 12-4. That figure features a chart of Texas Instruments, which is a technology and semiconductor
company that trades under the symbol TXN. You can see that the ideal entry
point is when the RSI has been under 30, and then a three outside up pattern
appears which indicates that the trend is headed upward, and you need to
buy and take on a long position.
After a promising start, the stock stalls out and things look a bit disappointing. The trading is essentially trendless for a couple of weeks. The support
level isn’t broken, and an uptrend doesn’t develop. If you stay patient,
though, eventually you see the stock make a small run. The RSI gets back
up to 50, and then on the following day, a hanging man pattern appears.
(Flip back to Chapter 6 for more on the hanging man.) That’s a reversal
signal, which indicates that the trend is heading southward, and the time
has come to sell the stock, enjoy a small profit, and move on to the next
trade.

271

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 272

272 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators

Figure 12-4:
Combining
the RSI and
candlesticks
to select an
entry and
exit on a
chart of
TXN.

Buying with the Stochastic Indicator and
a Bullish Reversal Candlestick Pattern
The stochastic indicator is another very useful indicator for detecting overbought or oversold security conditions. It has two components: the slow and
the fast stochastic. When the fast is under the slow, there’s a downtrend in
place, and when the fast is higher than the slow, there’s an uptrend. The
slow and fast stochastic indicators oscillate between 0 and 100 and have
fairly complex look back periods, much like the RSI. (See “Buying with the
RSI and Bullish Reversal Candlestick Patterns” earlier in this chapter for
more info on RSI.)
For simplicity’s sake I use the 14-period look back, which is a standard level
in charting packages. The standard oversold level for a stochastic indicator is
20, and the standard overbought level is 80. For a detailed explanation of the
nuts and bolts of the stochastic indicator, flip back to Chapter 11.
You can use the trend reversal signals that stochastic indicators provide in
combination with candlestick patterns to pick outstanding entry points for
your trades. And you can also utilize stochastic indicators to select exit
points — just keep an eye out for when the slow and fast stochastics cross.
Allow me to elaborate in the following sections.

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 273

Chapter 12: Buy Indicators and Bullish Reversal Candlestick Patterns

Using the stochastic indicator
to help pick a long entry point
You can use the stochastic indicator to determine a good time to buy a stock
if you watch for instances where the slow and fast levels both trade below
the oversold level of 20, and then the fast stochastic crosses over or goes
higher than the slow stochastic. I’ve always felt confident in the stochastic
indicator because of that feature; even though the levels are technically oversold, it’s not truly a buy signal until the trend starts to move just a little bit
higher. And it’s even more comforting when you combine it with a bullish
reversal candlestick pattern. You can see what I mean in Figure 12-5.
Figure 12-5 is a chart of Johnson Controls (JCI), a manufacturer of large systems and parts for cars and buildings. The company is very much tied to the
overall economy, and I like trading it for that reason.
The chart begins with a downtrend. The slow and fast stochastic levels trade
below the oversold level of 20. Then a three outside up reversal pattern
appears on the chart, when the stochastic levels are still well under the 20
level. But the second two days of this pattern are very bullish, and the slow
and fast stochastic readings start to move higher. The icing on the cake is a
cross of the fast stochastic over the slow. The stochastic indicator is indicating an uptrend, the stock has been oversold, and a bullish reversal pattern
has developed on the chart. It’s the perfect time to put on a long position!

Figure 12-5:
The
stochastic
indicator
and a bullish
reversal
candlestick
pattern
signaling a
buy on a
chart of JCI.

273

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 274

274 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
The trend that follows the sequence of events in Figure 12-5 is pretty impressive. It’s so strong that the stochastic indicator stays in an overbought state
for several weeks.
You can see another example of how you can combine the stochastic indicator with a bullish reversal pattern in Figure 12-6. The chart in this figure is of
the stock TXU, a Texas utility that was taken private while I was in the
process of writing this book.

Figure 12-6:
The
stochastic
indicator
and a bullish
reversal
pattern
signal a buy
on TXU.

The stock has clearly been in a downtrend. (Note that the downtrend
occurred after a bearish pattern appeared on the chart a few weeks prior —
aren’t candlesticks great?) The stochastic readings reach the oversold level,
and a three outside up pattern develops. At just about the same time, the fast
stochastic moves above the slow one, signaling a change in trend from down
to up. It’s time to buy, buy, buy! The uptrend continues for several weeks, and
a savvy trader who identifies the combination of the stochastic indicator and
the bullish reversal pattern will have her profits piling up.

Using the stochastic indicator
to help pick long exits
You can also use the stochastic indicator to help you determine when it’s
time to exit a long trade. For instance, if you’re in a long position and the fast

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 275

Chapter 12: Buy Indicators and Bullish Reversal Candlestick Patterns
stochastic moves below the slow stochastic, that can tip you off that the
uptrend may be changing to a downtrend, and the time for getting out of your
long is probably drawing near.
Stochastic indicators can signal a trend change even when the stochastic
readings haven’t yet reached an overbought or oversold level. For an example, check out Figure 12-7 — a chart of the 30-year U.S. Treasury bond
futures. I highlight a case where an uptrend changes to a downtrend outside
of a stochastic indicator’s overbought level. Notice, too, that some other midlevel trend changes appear earlier on the chart.
Just keep in mind that with your exits, you may need to act and get out of a
trade when the fast and slow stochastics cross, regardless of whether they’re
in overbought or oversold territory.
I provide an excellent example of how you can combine the stochastic indicator with a candlestick pattern to identify a successful entry point and profitable exit in Figure 12-8. This chart of Plumb Creek Timber (PCL) shows the
company’s timber lands throughout the United States.
You can see that the entry point shows itself after a downtrend, when the
stochastic levels make an upward break after spending some time under
the 20 buy level. The break coincides with a three outside up bullish reversal
pattern, and that combination of factors is a crystal clear indication that it’s
a good time to get in on a long trade. The uptrend gets going quickly after
that.

Figure 12-7:
The
stochastic
indicator
signaling a
trend
change on a
chart of the
30-year U.S.
Treasury
bond
futures.

275

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 276

276 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Figure 12-8:
The
stochastic
indicator
and a bullish
reversal
candlestick
pattern
provide
useful entry
and exit
levels on a
chart of
PCL.

The stock trades higher, and both the slow and fast stochastic readings move
up with it. They both reach an overbought level, and then as the trend dwindles, the fast stochastic crosses under the slow one. That’s a good indication
that the uptrend is on its last legs, and it’s especially true in this case
because the crossover occurs with both stochastics above the overbought
level of 80. The stock does continue to grind higher but not for long.
The final example to close out the section is a bit different from the other
examples in this chapter because it’s a relatively lousy trade (albeit one with
a small profit) and it includes a doji (dojis are covered in Chapter 5). It’s all
included in Figure 12-9, which features a chart of Apple Inc. (AAPL).

Figure 12-9:
The
stochastic
indicator
and
candlesticks
giving all
kinds of
mixed
signals on a
chart of
AAPL.

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 277

Chapter 12: Buy Indicators and Bullish Reversal Candlestick Patterns
The chart shows that the stochastic levels are under 20 after a short-lived
downtrend. The levels then cross, forecasting the emergence of an uptrend.
There’s also a doji hanging out all by itself — another indication that the
trend direction is about to change. The stochastic levels get over 80 pretty
quickly, and the early stages of an uptrend begin to appear. It looks like it’s
time to buy.
But wait. Although the stochastic levels run to 80, they then cross again, indicating that the uptrend may not be around much longer. A nimble trader can
recognize this sign as the time to exit and be happy with a profit, no matter
how small. An even nimbler trader notices that just after the crossover to a
downtrend, a bearish reversal candlestick pattern emerges.
I didn’t highlight it, but if you look closely, you can see a three inside down
candlestick pattern. You can also see that the stochastic readings indicate a
forthcoming shift to a downtrend. Many traders see that and think that an
opportunity to make some money on a short is on the way. They’re wrong.
The stock climbs much higher and stays overbought for some time. If a
trader initiated a short position, hopefully he included a solid protective
stop.

277

19_178089 ch12.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 278

278 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 279

Chapter 13

Sell Indicators and Bearish
Reversal Candlestick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Using the relative strength index and candlestick patterns for your short trades
 Shorting with combinations of the stochastic indicator and bearish candlestick patterns

T

echnical indicators are useful in many trading situations, and as I
describe in the other chapters in Part IV, you can use them in tandem
with candlestick patterns to conduct some outstanding trades. In this chapter, I fill you in on how to combine a couple of common technical indicators
with bearish candlestick patterns to help you make wise decisions about
short trades.
I focus much more on the prospects for shorting than the opportunities to
use candlesticks and indicators to tell you when to exit a long trade, because
realizing when to exit a long is relatively easy: If it looks like a trend is ready
to tank, sell and get out!
I know some people are resistant to short selling, but it’s part of the game,
and not using the short side of trading puts you at a disadvantage. Risks are
involved, but if you employ the methods I describe in this chapter, you can
minimize those risks. With any luck, after reading my Chapter 13, you won’t
have to file Chapter 13!

Shorting with the RSI and Bearish
Candlestick Patterns
The relative strength index (RSI) is an indicator that can reveal an oversold or
overbought security. The RSI typically appears in an area below a chart, and
visually, it’s represented by a line that moves up and down between 0 and
100. It’s really up to you to choose which levels in that range will be considered overbought and oversold, but in this chapter, I use 30 as my oversold

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 280

280 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
level and 70 as my overbought level. That means that an RSI reading under 30
tells you that a bottom is forthcoming. Be ready to buy when that situation
presents itself. Using 70 as an overbought level means that an RSI over 70
should alert you to either put on a short or sell a long position, because the
trend is about to head south. You can read all about the nuts and bolts of the
RSI in Chapter 11.
When combined with candlestick patterns, the RSI can provide an even
stronger indication of when the situation is ripe for executing short trades or
selling on long positions. In this section, I discuss the ways in which you can
combine your candlestick charts with the RSI to make some clever, profitable
trades.

Picking short entry points with
the RSI and candlesticks
When using the RSI combined with a candlestick pattern to pick a good time
to enter a short position, you want to see an RSI reading over 70 (or your
personal overbought level) that coincides with the formation of a bearish
candlestick pattern. If you have your eye on a chart and you see those two
things come together, get your short pants on! (That’s just a figure of speech,
of course — I encourage everyone to wear pants of an appropriate length
while trading.)
What better way to master these scenarios than to see them on a chart, so
please take a gander at Figure 13-1. This example is a situation when you can
combine the RSI with a bearish reversal candlestick pattern to figure out
when to put on a short. The chart in Figure 13-1 is of the stock for Masco
(MAS), a manufacturer and distributor of home improvement and building
products. With fundamental exposure like that, it’s an excellent stock to trade
when the economic outlook is in question.
The RSI in Figure 13-1 goes into the overbought range early in November, and
when you see that happen, start looking for bearish reversal candlestick patterns. In this example, the pattern comes in the form of a gravestone doji.
(Check out Chapter 5 for the gravestone doji details.) The gravestone doji
can indicate a reversal in either direction, but in this case there’s an established uptrend, and the RSI reading has been overbought for some time, so
it’s very safe to say that this particular gravestone doji is signaling a bearish
reversal.

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 281

Chapter 13: Sell Indicators and Bearish Reversal Candlestick Patterns

Figure 13-1:
An
overbought
RSI reading
and a doji
reversal
pattern
signal when
to initiate a
short on a
chart of
MAS.

If you keep an eye on this overbought RSI and you spot the gravestone doji,
you’d put on a short position, because the gravestone doji really shows that
the bears are taking control of the price action after a run by the bulls. The
pattern is followed by a small downtrend that lasts just a couple of weeks.
You wouldn’t be able to go out and start shopping for yachts if you trade this
pattern successfully, but it’s certainly worth studying, because it’s a fairly
reliable indication of bearishness.
Perhaps it’s most important to note that this example shows you how the RSI
(or other technical indicators, for that matter) can be very useful when you
spot a reversal signal that doesn’t tell you definitively which way the trend
will go. You’ve got to really be sure of the market environment in those cases,
and the RSI can tell you what you need to know.
Good things do come in pairs, so I provide another example of how you can
combine the RSI with a bearish candlestick pattern in Figure 13-2. This figure
features a chart of the futures contracts that trade based on the level of U.S.
Treasury bonds.
You can see in Figure 13-2 that the price action produces a three inside down
pattern, which is a pretty reliable bearish reversal pattern that I describe in
detail in Chapter 10. The pattern’s first day is a white candle that occurs in an
uptrend. More importantly, this first day combined with the price action leading up to it causes the RSI reading to close over 70, which tells you that
you’re looking at an overbought situation. The pattern is complete with a
bearish second day that’s inside the first day, and a down final day.

281

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 282

282 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Figure 13-2:
A chart of
the U.S.
Treasury
bond futures
with the RSI
and a
bearish
candlestick
pattern
signaling a
useful short
position
entry.

If you want to capitalize on a situation like this, enter a short sale near the
completion of the pattern or be prepared to put on a short on any small
rebound during the next couple of days. The combination of the candlestick
pattern and the overbought level of the RSI turns out to be a solid sell signal.
The price action following the end of the pattern results in a quick drop of
over three points in the Treasury bond futures. Although three points may
not sound like a lot, consider that a point move in a single contract is worth
$1,000 (when you’re on the right side).

Using the RSI to help pick
short entry and exit points
You can combine the RSI with your candlestick patterns to pick wise entry
points for a short trade. But that’s not the whole story. You can also use that
same combination of trading tools to indicate when you should exit a short.
Figure 13-3 presents a situation in which a combination of the RSI and a bearish candlestick pattern can show you when to get in and out of a short position. The chart is for Peabody Energy (BTU), a mining company that focuses
on coal production.
Peabody Energy’s symbol may seem a little odd at first, but BTU stands for
British Thermal Unit, which is a measure of the heat value of various fuels.
Makes sense for a coal producer, right?

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 283

Chapter 13: Sell Indicators and Bearish Reversal Candlestick Patterns

Figure 13-3:
A chart
of BTU
where a
combination
of the
RSI and
candlesticks
indicate a
short entry
and exit
point.

The bearish candlestick pattern in Figure 13-3 starts to develop after several up
days in a row. Along with this strength in the stock’s price, the RSI rises to a
level over 70 (overbought). The three outside down pattern then appears, with
a black candle on the second day that’s an outside day relative to the first day.
The pattern is completed with a down day on the third day. (To understand the
inner workings of the three outside down pattern, check out Chapter 10.) The
uptrend is reversing to a downtrend, so the time is right for entering a short.
There’s another element to the chart in Figure 13-3 that’s worth highlighting.
The three outside down pattern is completed when the RSI level is just a hair
over 70. Seeing the RSI in an overbought range when a reversal pattern is
completed is pretty rare, because a reversal pattern normally occurs when a
trend changes direction, and when that happens, the RSI usually ends up in
the middle range between overbought and oversold.
The exit level for this short isn’t set in stone, but it should definitely yield a
profit on the trade. The RSI moves down below 50 fairly quickly with the
downtrend, and that should serve as a signal to start keeping an eye out for
some sort of exit pattern or reversal in the downtrend. Unfortunately,
another reversal pattern doesn’t come along to tell you when to exit the
short. But that doesn’t mean that you have to just take a stab in the dark to
figure out when to get out. There’s a period of four days where the downtrend appears to be in trouble; the trend flattens and a couple of bullish days
pop up. You can decide at that point that the trend has run its course, and it’s
time to get out and take a profit. You can enjoy even larger profits if you hold
on just a little while longer, because the downtrend kicks back in and the
stock trades lower still. But you have to exit the position sometime, and a
good opportunity for that comes when the RSI pushes below the oversold
level. Even without a pattern to confirm it, that should serve as a pretty solid
sign that it’s time to exit and book your profits.

283

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 284

284 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
I provide one more example of how you can use the RSI in tandem with bearish candlestick patterns to flesh out short entries and exits for short trades
in Figure 13-4. This chart is of Radio Shack (RSH), which is an electronics
retailer that covers the U.S. with more than 1,000 stores.
The RSH stock in Figure 13-4 is in a well-defined uptrend with the RSI reaching
just a tad over 70. The day that the RSI reaches 70 is also the first day of a
three outside down pattern (see Chapter 10 for details), and that serves as a
signal for you to enter into a short trade.
If you short after seeing this combination of an overbought RSI and a bearish
reversal candlestick pattern, you’re quickly rewarded with a gap down on the
opening of the day after the pattern is completed. You may shudder a bit two
days later when there’s a gap up and the high of the pattern (a resistance level)
is approached, but that level isn’t violated and the signal remains valid. The
stock continues to trade off, and during this downtrend the RSI works its way
down to below 50. Here is where you should start watching out for an exit
point.
The exit signal in Figure 13-4 comes quickly, with a one-day reversal pattern.
With the downtrend in place and the RSI in the bottom half of its range, a
hammer day appears. (You can read all about the hammer pattern in Chapter
6.) The signal is a reversal pattern, and determining the trend that follows the
pattern generally depends on the market context in which the pattern
appears. The prevailing trend is clearly down in this situation, so you can bet
that the hammer indicates that a switch to an uptrend is in the works. That
turns out to be just the case, and the stock starts trading higher.

Figure 13-4:
A chart of
RSH where
the RSI and
two bearish
candlestick
patterns tip
you off on
the best
entry and
exit points
for shorting.

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 285

Chapter 13: Sell Indicators and Bearish Reversal Candlestick Patterns
The hammer pattern serves as a useful short exit signal in Figure 13-4, but
the profits on the trade weren’t exorbitant. However, you still earned some
revenue, and by using the candlestick pattern for an exit signal you avoided
seeing your earnings winnowed down (or even turned into losses) as the
trend heads upward for a stretch.
