
34

You will have an exact plan.You will need to follow it exactly in order to succeed.
You will not overtrade.
You will take low‐risk bets with the understanding that these trades do not have to
work.
You will immediately take losses when trades do not work out without a second
thought.
You will allow profits to run when trades do work and not cut them short.
You will have the proper mindset to overcome all the challenges, drawdowns,
and durations of drawdowns.
You will learn the proper mindset of patience and discipline.
You will not blame your broker, the market, or even yourself.
You know there is no perfect methodology or trading system.
You will not jump into a trade prematurely.
You do not need to be right. Trading has nothing to do with being right.
The right mindset is one of the keys to investment success, and most traders fail
to understand this.

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 3

Why Trend
Following?
Y

ou have all kinds of ways to make money as well as lose it. Many have tried the
buy‐and‐hold (or buy‐and‐pray) method of stock market investing or real estate
and realized it is not the way.
Trend following is natural and not that complicated. However, complicated and easy
is a misnomer. Trend following probably has to be one of the hardest and easiest things
to do because of our emotional baggage.
Markets can only do several things.
Markets only go up, down, or sideways.
Trend following entails following the markets when they go up as well as following
them when markets go down!
When you trade with a well‐thought‐out plan, you will not take out a large percentage of your business day if you decide to trade daily bars. You might only spend
between 30–60 minutes a day as I do when I put on my trades. It is your choice to sit
in front of a screen and day trade (which is a definite possibility) or to download daily
data and determine what action you need to take, if at all.You can trade stocks, forex,
or commodities. The same principles apply to all.
It is that simple! But it is not simple due to our mental baggage such as fear,
greed, and ego.
Too many times we try to make simple things more complicated!There are those who
think simple means unsophisticated or impossible to generate money.They are very wrong
and track records going back decades from many trend followers prove them wrong.

35

The key to success or compounding money over time is the ability to stay focused, stay
disciplined, follow the plan, and have patience. This is the holy grail!
Trend following in itself is basically simple. You do not have to overanalyze it. You
just have to just do it, as Nike says.

■ Why Not Fundamental or Even

Technical Analysis?

Fundamental analysis is defined by an examination of the financial statements of the
company to determine its current financial strength, future growth, profitability prospects, and current management skills in order to estimate whether the stock’s price is
undervalued or overvalued. One must almost be an accountant!
A great deal of reliance is placed on annual and quarterly earnings reports; the
economic, political, and competitive environment facing the company; as well as any
current news items or rumors relating to the company’s operations.
And then with all the analysis the stock or commodity can do the unexpected. That
is why I hold very little faith in fundamental analysis.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

36

Technical Analysis
Technical analysis is defined by the fact that the stock’s current price or commodity
price discounts all information available in the market: that price movements are not
random, and that patterns in price movements, in many cases, tend to repeat themselves or trend in some direction.
It’s easier (and therefore faster) to learn technical analysis than to even attempt
fundamental analysis.
You can learn the basics by reading a couple of books, but you might be deluded
or confused with all the countless indicators and still might not have a plan. Technical
analysts look at charts the same way a doctor would look at X‐rays. Technical analysts
examine the charts for information on the future direction of the markets. Again,
once they think they have it figured out, then the market does something unexpected.
There are many ideas about support and resistance. Too many traders believe those are
lines in the sand, not to be broken. However, they are broken all the time. So again
you need a plan.

Mechanical Trading Systems
With the upgrades in computers, trading system development has become the rage.
Too many make mechanical trading system development a hobby, as a way to compound money over time. Too many traders focus all their time and energy searching

37
WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

for new and elusive indicators and better mechanical trading systems. To some degree,
this is an admirable quest. However, having the patience and discipline to follow a
simple robust trading methodology is preferable to a complicated “supposedly” mechanical trading system. I had a conversation with an engineer who works on helicopters regarding trading. His astute opinion was that the fewer moving parts in a trading
system, the better. He made the comparison to a helicopter. The more parts, the more
potential defects or impediments. I thought this was a great analogy. Consider that
with enough optimization snake oil mechanical system sellers can make their system
look like the holy grail. It is perfect. It sells at the highs and buys at the lows. However,
in the real world when money is really on the line, these systems do not hold up and
simply blow up. Even if you do not purchase a mechanical system, do not make the
mistake of optimization of variables and markets.
I want to put everything in balance.There are many advantages to a mechanical system.
I believe you can increase your chances of success over time because a mechanical system
removes ego and the emotional dilemmas from a lot of the decision‐making processes.
The advantage of a mechanical system is that it does not care if Bernanke is speaking or
if the crop report is coming out in the next couple of hours. It is completely removed
from the emotional issues that can cloud our judgment. The mechanical system simply
spits out buy and sell orders based on preprogrammed criteria. Do not confuse this
with trading success over time or negating losing trades.The mechanical system makes
our trading plan somewhat easier compared to a trader who has no plan and trades
based on his gut. The tough decisions have been made and tested with a mechanical
system. Before one starts trading a mechanical system, the trader has done some sort
of back‐testing as to the validity of the concept. Back‐testing is not the holy grail
either, though. There are traders who overoptimize or pick markets based on past
returns. This is another recipe for losses and disaster. Traders also might doubt the
validity of their mechanical system once they experience the inevitable drawdown.
The danger is if the trader gives up on the program and tries another one during a
drawdown.
There is no free lunch or anything perfect in trading. Too many traders think they
can buy certainty with a robot that trades for them. Contrarily there are traders that
think they know the future and trade from their gut. The only problem is that they are
following the news or some guru. First they go short, and then out of panic they think
they must buy or cover. The trader hesitates because all of a sudden he is unsure what
to do or he simply freezes. The market is unforgiving and gladly takes his hard‐earned
money, as if he were standing on top of a building and throwing up dollar bills. Examples like this exemplify the benefits of mechanical systems. First, a nonoptimized
robust mechanical trading plan eliminates the myriad of emotional and psychological
issues of trading. Traders are relieved of having to make consistent and pressing decisions. The mechanical system has the rules implanted; they have been tested and hopefully accepted by the trader. The testing gives confidence to the viability of the trading
concept as well as monies needed for trading the account.

In both cases I have attempted to show the reasons we need a well‐thought‐out plan
and need to follow it through thick or thin. Set parameters for entries that are robust,
clear, and repetitive; follow the signal with the proper risk and money; and let the possibilities work over time. This gives you the potential for success over time. In conjunction with the entry signals you have to have realistic expectations. Too often traders
overexaggerate what they expect. They set themselves up for severe disappointment.

■ My Answer: Trend Following

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

38

Let’s keep it simple: Money is made if you buy when the market is going up and sell
when the market is going down. An uptrend is present when prices make a series of
higher highs and higher lows. A downtrend is present when prices make a series of
lower highs and lower lows.
Trading can be simple: You buy when the market is going up and you
sell when the market is going down. That’s how money is made.
Trend followers do the hard thing!
Trend followers buy the highs and sell the lows.
This is clearly counterintuitive as virtually all market participants want to be smart
and buy the low and sell the highs, right? In the real world this is impossible. Only liars
and people at parties with a lot of drinks in them can call tops and bottoms consistently.
Trend following is the antithesis of what we are taught in school. We are taught to
rely on intelligence. We want to prove we are smart. Trend followers take responsibility for their trades and do not need to prove anything. Trend followers are committed
to compounding money over long periods of time. Trend followers are committed to
the plan. Commitment to trend following through the bad periods as well as the good
periods is similar to the commitment of an Olympic athlete.
It is not easy to be an Olympic athlete. Olympic athletes go through rigorous training and have constant coaching. Trend following is no different. Athletes do not become Olympic athletes overnight. They train and go through much pain until they
reach their goal. In today’s society people want instant gratification. Trend following is
not instant gratification. Compounding money is not easy to do in our society that is
solely focused on instant gratification.The trend follower’s ability to delay gratification
and inevitable losses gives him or her the potential to succeed over time.
Have the deep desire to be long‐term consistent and successful via
trend following if you want to succeed!

Liquidity
One can liquidate one’s whole portfolio in minutes. Can you do that with real estate
or a hedge fund that has a lockup?

Transparency
With managed accounts you will see every position. Hedge funds are secretive and
you have no idea what they are doing with your money.

Profit Potential

■ You’ve Got to Love That Saying!
People have been destroyed from the recent real estate bubble. Everyone was buying
second or third homes and flipping them.
The house flipping mania was not that different from the tulip bubble hundreds of
years ago. There is very little difference between Enron and WorldCom and today’s
Netflix.
It was like musical chairs until the music stopped. We are overwhelmed and think
we need to have all the information to make prudent financial decisions. Take a look at
Figure 3.1 to see the equity curve of the stock market over the past 10 years.
Greed, fear, hope, denial, follow‐the‐neighbor mentality, and impatience are always the same generation to generation. Faster computers, phones with stock quotes,
24‐hour Bloomberg, and more!
All of this is not needed in order to grind profits out of the markets.
My goal is to take you off the rat race and start to try to create income
via your trading.

39
WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

The father of trend following, Richard Donchian, traded for 50 years with this strategy. The fact that Donchian traded this strategy profitably for 50 years proves the viability of the concept.
Further on I will show you numerous trend followers who have been compounding
money for decades. These are real and audited numbers. Richard Donchian traded up
until his 90s.
Trend following challenges the traditional thinking about successful trading and
traders. The vast majority of traders want to buy low and sell high. Trend followers do
exactly the opposite; they buy high with the anticipation of prices going higher or sell
lows with the anticipation that prices will fall further.
Many of you are exploring trend following due to your recent experiences in the
stock market. Maybe you are tired of the buy and hold mantras that have been ingrained in our psyche since the start of the great bull market in the1980s and you have
lost a considerable amount of your net worth in the stock market.
People are drawn to manias like moths to a light. From the Great Depression to
the dot‐com bubble, people have lost their life’s fortune. I remember being told to buy
tech stocks before they run out!

FIGURE 3.1 Equity Curve of the Stock Market with a Compound Annual Rate of Return

of 0.39% over 10 Years
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

40

Even worse than 10 years of not making any money in the stock market is the chart
of the Japanese equity market. The Japanese stock market in 1989 was at a high of
approximately 39,000; today the Japanese stock market is fluctuating around 8,500
(Figure 3.2). Can you imagine still being a long‐term buyer‐and‐holder? In Japan it has
been buy and lose all of your net worth.

FIGURE 3.2 Japanese Equity Market

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

Buy and Hold for the Long Term!
Stay the Course!
Buy the Dips!
Has this message been touted by an industry with a conflict of interest?
This is the reality of what happened in the U.S. stock market from 2000 to 2010.
What is ironic is that it is not unique. Buy and hold did not do anything for investors
from December 1972 until March 1980.This also was a flat period of no profits.Worse
are the durations and depths of the bear markets in this century, as shown in Table 3.1.
Do not be deluded. There are losses and drawdowns with trend following.
There is no free lunch out there, and the greatest drawdown is always ahead of you,
not behind you.
Once you really internalize the realities of trend following you will be free to decide for yourself.You cannot trust anyone but yourself.
Countless people lost their life’s savings due to various market crashes. Many times
the politicians and even market legends come out with all types of reasons to delude
TABLE 3.1 Bear Markets since the Great Depression
Bear Market Beginning

Max DD

Sept 1929

June 1932

−86.25 %

July 1933

March 1935

−33.9%

March 1937

March 1938

−54.5%

Nov 1938

April 1942

−45.8%

May 1946

June 1949

−29.6%

July 1957

Oct 1957

−20.6%

Dec 1961

June 1962

−28%

Feb 1966

Oct 1966

−22.2%

Oct 1968

May 1970

−34%

Jan 1973

Oct 1974

−48.2%

Sept 1976

March 1978

−19.4%

Nov 1980

Aug 1982

−27.1%

Aug 1987

Dec 1987

−40.4%

July 1990

Oct 1990

−21.2%

Mar 2000

Oct 2002

−49.1%

June 2008

Mar 2009

−54%

Average Bear Market: −37.3%
Buy and Hold since 1942
Compounded Annual Rate of Return: 8.03%
Maximum Drawdown: 54%

41
WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

Bear Market Ending

you. There were statements that were made during the Great Depression of 1929 that
in retrospect will make your hair stand out.
Below is a sampling of some of that I found through Internet searches.

Bottom Line
Have a plan and have the patience and discipline to let it work over time! Here is some
Great Depression advice from a few influential leaders in finance, economics, and
politics during that time.

Great Depression 1929 Quotes & Statements
Have no opinion . . . let the markets tell you what to do . . . and manage the risks.
“We will not have any more crashes in our time.”
—John Maynard Keynes, 1927
“I cannot help but raise a dissenting voice to statements that we are living in a
fool’s paradise, and that prosperity in this country must necessarily diminish
and recede in the near future.”
—E. H. H. Simmons, president, New York Stock Exchange, January 12, 1928

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

42

“There will be no interruption of our permanent prosperity.”
—Myron E. Forbes, president, Pierce Arrow Motor Car Co., January 12, 1928
“No Congress of the United States ever assembled, on surveying the state of
the Union, has met with a more pleasing prospect than that which appears at
the present time. In the domestic field there is tranquility and contentment
… and the highest record of years of prosperity. In the foreign field there is
peace, the goodwill which comes from mutual understanding.”
—Calvin Coolidge, December 4, 1928
“There may be a recession in stock prices, but not anything in the nature of
a crash.”
—Irving Fisher, leading U.S. economist, Ph.D. in economics, quoted in the
NewYork Times, September 5, 1929
“Stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau. I do
not feel there will be soon if ever a 50 or 60 point break from present levels,
such as [bears] have predicted. I expect to see the stock market a good deal
higher within a few months.”
—Irving Fisher, leading U.S. economist, Ph.D. in economics, October 17, 1929
“This crash is not going to have much effect on business.”
—Arthur Reynolds, chairman, Continental Illinois Bank of Chicago,
October 24, 1929

“There will be no repetition of the break of yesterday . . . . I have no fear of
another comparable decline.”
—Arthur W. Loasby, president, Equitable Trust Company, quoted in the
NewYork Times, Friday, October 25, 1929
“We feel that fundamentally Wall Street is sound, and that for people who can
afford to pay for them outright, good stocks are cheap at these prices.”
—Goodbody and Company market letter quoted in the NewYork Times, Friday,
October 25, 1929
“This is the time to buy stocks. This is the time to recall the words of the late
J. P. Morgan . . . that any man who is bearish on America will go broke.Within
a few days there is likely to be a bear panic rather than a bull panic. Many of
the low prices as a result of this hysterical selling are not likely to be reached
again in many years.”
—R. W. McNeel, market analyst, quoted in the NewYork Herald Tribune,
October 30, 1929
“Buying of sound, seasoned issues now will not be regretted.”
—E. A. Pearce, market letter, quoted in the NewYork Herald Tribune,
October 30, 1929
“Some pretty intelligent people are now buying stocks. … Unless we are to
have a panic—which no one seriously believes, stocks have hit bottom.”
—R. W. McNeal, financial analyst, October 1929

“Hysteria has now disappeared from Wall Street.”
—The Times of London, November 2, 1929
“The Wall Street crash doesn’t mean that there will be any general or serious
business depression . . . . For six years American business has been diverting a substantial part of its attention, its energies and its resources on the
speculative game . . . . Now that irrelevant, alien and hazardous adventure is
over. Business has come home again, back to its job, providentially unscathed,
sound in wind and limb, financially stronger than ever before.”
—BusinessWeek, November 2, 1929
“[D]espite its severity, we believe that the slump in stock prices will prove an
intermediate movement and not the precursor of a business depression such
as would entail prolonged further liquidation.”
—Harvard Economic Society, November 2, 1929
(continued)

WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

“The decline is in paper values, not in tangible goods and services. … America
is now in the eighth year of prosperity as commercially defined. The former
great periods of prosperity in America averaged eleven years. On this basis we
now have three more years to go before the tailspin.”
—Stuart Chase, American economist and author, quoted in the
NewYork Herald Tribune, November 1, 1929

43

Great Depression 1929 Quotes & Statements (Continued)
“[A] serious depression seems improbable; [we expect] recovery of business
next spring, with further improvement in the fall.”
—Harvard Economic Society, November 10, 1929
“The end of the decline of the Stock Market will probably not be long, only a
few more days at most.”
—Irving Fisher, professor of economics,Yale University, November 14, 1929
“In most of the cities and towns of this country, this Wall Street panic will
have no effect.”
—Paul Block, president, Block newspaper chain, editorial, November 15, 1929
“Financial storm definitely passed.”
—Bernard Baruch, cablegram to Winston Churchill, November 15, 1929
“I see nothing in the present situation that is either menacing or warrants pessimism . . . . I have every confidence that there will be a revival of activity in the
spring, and that during this coming year the country will make steady progress.”
—Andrew W. Mellon, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, December 31, 1929

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

44

“I am convinced that through these measures we have reestablished confidence.”
—Herbert Hoover, December 1929
“[1930 will be] a splendid employment year.”
—U.S. Dept. of Labor, New Year’s Forecast, December 1929
“For the immediate future, at least, the outlook (stocks) is bright.”
—Irving Fisher, Ph.D. in economics, early 1930
“There are indications that the severest phase of the recession is over.”
—Harvard Economic Society, January 18, 1930
“There is nothing in the situation to be disturbed about.”
—Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, February 1930
“The spring of 1930 marks the end of a period of grave concern . . . . American
business is steadily coming back to a normal level of prosperity.”
—Julius Barnes, head of Hoover’s National Business Survey Conference,
March 16, 1930
“The outlook continues favorable.”
—Harvard Economic Society, March 29, 1930
“While the crash only took place six months ago, I am convinced we have now
passed through the worst—and with continued unity of effort we shall rapidly
recover. There has been no significant bank or industrial failure. That danger,
too, is safely behind us.”
—Herbert Hoover, president of the United States, May 1, 1930
