
The tasuki gap fails to indicate more bullishness
I’m fond of the upside tasuki gap pattern, but it certainly does have, well, a
downside. Have a look at Figure 9-27 for an example of what can happen
when the upside tasuki gap turns out to be a dud.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 213

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-27:
The upside
tasuki gap
offers a bad
signal on a
chart of
FedEx stock.

The chart in Figure 9-27 is for the stock that represents ownership of FedEx
Corporation (FDX). This is another stock that I love to trade, for a few reasons. First, on the business side, FedEx is exposed to the energy markets on
the cost side of its business and the overall economy on the income side. As
a result, it proves itself to be a very volatile (and fun to trade) stock. Second,
the first industry for which I was ever given investment responsibility was
transportation, and FedEx (Federal Express at the time) was an early company in my coverage. Finally, I grew up in Memphis (FedEx headquarters),
where everyone knows someone at FedEx. Needless to say, the company is
close to my heart.
On to the chart. During a well-defined uptrend, a long white candle appears
on the chart, and that forms the pattern’s first day. It’s actually laying on a
support line, which would be considered a bonus in this situation. I include a
trendline on the chart. The second day is an up day, and a gap between the
first and second day is created. Finally, the third day is a down day that
encroaches but doesn’t close the gap.
The pattern looks like a winner, and the failure takes a while to occur. But
note that the low of the first day is violated — a sure sign of failure in this
scenario. To introduce another possible level of failure, I also extended the
trendline out to where the failure occurred. You can use this line as a stop
that adjusts as time moves along. That’s just another one of the countless
ways you can exit a position when the theory behind the trade is no longer
valid.

213

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 214

214 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
The upside gap filled pattern
The final bullish three-day pattern that I explore in this chapter is the upside
gap filled pattern. It offers bullish trend confirmation, but it’s particularly
nice because the gap that’s created gets filled without violating the prevailing
uptrend. Sometimes gaps on charts are targets for either longs or shorts to
push trading to fill the gaps. But with this gap filled, there isn’t a gap present
to encourage the shorts to take action.

Recognizing the upside gap filled pattern
The upside gap filled pattern is aptly named, as you can see in Figure 9-28. The
first day is a white candle that occurs in an uptrend. The second day is bullish, with a gap opening and a closing that establish a gap. The third and final
day is bearish, and it actually closes the gap, but it doesn’t violate the low of
the first day.
A low level for entry on the final day makes this pattern very attractive in my
opinion. Also, as the low of the first day would be considered a stop level,
losses are typically minimal when the pattern doesn’t work as planned.

Making wise trades using the upside gap filled pattern
Examine the price action depicted in Figure 9-29 for a look at how you can
profit from a trade by using the upside gap filled pattern. The stock charted
is Edison International (EIX), a utility that deals primarily in southern
California. This is actually the second time EIX has been used as an example
in this chapter. (Have a look at Figure 9-15 for the first.) I guess utilities can
be fun to trade!
The pattern in this chart emerges pretty early in an uptrend. The first day is
an up day, and it’s followed by a white candle for the second day, which gaps
up. The third day is a down day that fills in the gap and closes in the range of
the first day. The upside gap is filled!
The price action following the pattern is muted for a few days, and it even
looks like the pattern will fail as prices come close to the low of the first day.
But the bulls prevail, and the trend continues upward for some time.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 215

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-28:
The upside
gap filled
pattern.

Figure 9-29:
The upside
gap filled
pattern
creates an
appealing
trading
opportunity
on a chart
of EIX.

215

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 216

216 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
The upside gap followed by lower prices
But the bulls don’t always prevail, of course. The upside gap filled pattern
can go wrong, and although it’s ugly, you need to know what it looks like
when it happens. Check out Figure 9-30. It shows a pattern failure on a chart
for the stock of Comcast (CMCSA), which provides cable TV, Internet, and
phone services to many Americans.
The pattern on the chart in Figure 9-30 occurs at what would’ve been the
very beginning of an uptrend, if the pattern had worked out. There are a few
up days that start to indicate that the trend is positive, and then the first day
of the upside gap filled pattern appears as a very long white candle. It’s followed by an upside gap that closes, leaving that gap in place. Finally, the
third day is a down day that closes the gap and closes within the first day’s
range.
This pattern takes a while to fail, and like several of the other examples in
this chapter, it may illustrate a situation where you’d be better served by
bailing out of the trade because of time concerns than by exiting because
of a clear price level violation. After all, you can probably do more with your
money in another trade than you can with it tied up for what seems like forever in a questionable upside gap filled pattern trade.

Figure 9-30:
The upside
gap filled
pattern
fizzles out
on a chart
of CMCSA.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 217

Chapter 10

Trading with Bearish
Three-Stick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Predicting a trend reversal with bearish three-stick patterns
 Working with bearish three-stick patterns that signal a downtrend continuation

I

n this chapter, I focus on the biggest bearish formations included in this
book: the three-stick bearish candlestick patterns. Throughout the next few
pages I cover some of the most common bearish three-stick patterns that
pop up on your charts.
If you flip back to Chapter 9, you can read about a variety of bullish three-stick
patterns that can tell you when a downtrend is about to shift upward, as well
as a few of those patterns that reveal when a downtrend continues. This
chapter features the bearish counterparts of those patterns, and they can
reveal when an uptrend is about to fall apart and head downward or when
a downtrend is likely to continue. Use these patterns when you’re looking to
put on a short position or as sell signals if you’ve already established a
long position.

Understanding Bearish Three-Stick
Trend Reversal Patterns
Much like their bullish counterparts from Chapter 9, a host of three-day
bullish patterns commonly indicate that a trend reversal is forthcoming.
The patterns in this section tell you when an uptrend is nearing its end and
when a downtrend is ready to begin. The bearish reversal patterns can be
very useful for shorts, but keep in mind that shorting — especially with
stocks — when the trend is up can be a difficult undertaking.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 218

218 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
The three inside down pattern
The three inside down pattern is a handy reversal pattern that shows up
fairly regularly. The indecision implied by the pattern’s second day (an inside
day) provides great insight into the action, telling you that the bears are
starting to push against the trend.

Figuring out how to spot the three inside down pattern
The three inside down always occurs in an established uptrend:
1. The first day of the pattern is an up day.
The bulls are in control on the first day of the three inside down.
2. The second day is bearish, and it’s also an inside day relative to the
first day.
(The open is lower than the previous day’s close, and the close is higher
than the previous day’s close.) The high and low of the second day also
fall within the high/low range established on the first day of the pattern.
The bears take over on the second and third days (see next bullet
point).
3. The pattern is completed on the third day with another down day that
actually violates the low of the first day.
As you may guess, this formation is usually a great sign that an uptrend is set
to fizzle out. For an example, see Figure 10-1.

Figure 10-1:
The three
inside down
pattern.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 219

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns
Trading on the three inside down pattern
The preceding section shows how to identify the three inside down pattern,
so now set your sights on Figure 10-2 for a real-world trading scenario where
the pattern can potentially help you turn a profit. The chart in this figure is of
Tribune Corporation (TRB), the owner of the Chicago Tribune newspaper, as
well as the owner (as of this writing) of the Chicago Cubs. (The Cubs have
been in what you could call a downtrend for the last 100 years, but that’s a
different story altogether.)
The three inside down pattern is the opposite of its bullish counterpart discussed in Chapter 9. It starts out with a bullish first day, but things start to
turn bearish after that. Here’s how the pattern unfolds:
1. The first day is a long white candle that occurs in the midst of a pretty
strong uptrend.
2. The following day, in textbook fashion, a down, inside day appears.
The open of the second day is lower than the close of the first, and the
close of the second day is higher than the first. Both the wick and the
body are “inside” the first day’s price action.
3. The third day reveals a takeover by the bears, and they begin to push
prices down.
The stock opens lower and continues to trade down below the low of
both the first and second days. The ensuing downtrend is strong, and it
lasts for a few weeks.
If you watch this pattern develop and look to make a trade, you need to
either be prepared to short near the close of the first day or pick an entry
level to try to sell short on the second day.

Figure 10-2:
The three
inside down
pattern
precedes a
trend
reversal on
a chart of
TRB.

219

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 220

220 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
Failing to give a good bearish signal
If you’ve read through any of the preceding chapters, you already know
that I never provide a winning pattern example without following it up with
a similar pattern that fails. For my failure example of the three inside down
pattern, I offer up the chart in Figure 10-3. This chart is for BEA Systems
(BEAS), a provider of business-oriented software. As far as stock trading
goes, software stocks offer as much volatility as any industry, and BEAS has
been a great one to trade for years.
Figure 10-3 shows that the inside down day on BEAS occurs at the very beginning of an uptrend. It appears after some relatively strong days, so by trading
it, you’re either fighting a strong trend or catching the stock when it’s due for
a turnaround.
The first day in the three inside down pattern in Figure 10-3 is an up day, but
it’s nothing spectacular because of the recent bullishness. The second day is
an inside day, and the third day reveals a rally by the bulls that falls short
when the day closes down. The price action that plays out shortly after the
pattern is pretty encouraging for the bears, but after a couple of weeks, the
trend turns back up and the pattern clearly fails. The most liberal stop level
for the three inside down is the pattern’s high, but you can always go with a
more conservative stop, such as the high of the last day.

Figure 10-3:
The three
inside down
pattern fails
on a chart of
BEAS.

The three outside down pattern
Like the closely related three inside down pattern from the preceding section,
the three outside down pattern should show up pretty frequently on your
charts. The pattern is a solid three-stick bearish trend reversal, and if you
know how to correctly identify it, you can rely on it for some lucrative trades.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 221

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns
Spotting the three outside down pattern
This pattern shows up during an uptrend and commences with another up
day in the bullish run. On the second day, the bulls get started again with a
gap opening, but they don’t control the price action for long. The bears find a
selling point above the previous day’s close and go to work driving down the
price. This means that the second day has a close lower than the first day
and a low that’s lower that the first day. The second day is, therefore, an outside day relative to the first day.
On the third day of the three outside down pattern, the bears call the shots
from open to close. The day produces a black candle with the open, high,
low, and close all lower than the previous day’s levels. The bears are now
firmly in control. For an illustration, check out Figure 10-4.

Figure 10-4:
The three
outside
down
pattern.

Making trades with the three outside down pattern
The three outside down pattern does an outstanding job of picking up a
change in trend and offering a useful sell or short opportunity, and you
can see it really sing in Figure 10-5. The chart in this figure is for Applebee’s
International (APPB). Applebee’s operates in the restaurant industry, and
stocks in that industry experience a lot of unpredictability. Restaurant
stocks fluctuate with the economy, people’s tastes, and even the weather.
(Bad weather every weekend during a month can mean a bad month for a
restaurant.)

221

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 222

222 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 10-5:
The three
outside
down
pattern
offers a
sound signal
on a chart of
APPB.

The first day of the pattern featured in Figure 10-5 is an up day, and although
it’s nothing to write home about, it’s still an up day occurring in a prevailing
uptrend. It’s followed by an outside and down day. Both the body and wick of
the second day are outside relative to the first day. Finally, on the third day
of the pattern, the bears seize control and begin pushing prices down at the
start of what becomes a sustained downtrend. In fact, it takes a couple of
weeks before the bulls even attempt some sort of rally. The three outside
down pattern predicted a trend reversal, and that’s exactly what played out.

Offering a failing signal
But what happens when the three outside down pattern doesn’t deliver on its
suggestion that a downtrend is on the way? For an answer, take a look at
Figure 10-6. The chart in Figure 10-6 displays price action for the stock of the
biotech company Millennium Pharmaceuticals (MLNM). Biotech stocks can
be wildly volatile and fun to trade. This chart is interesting because there’s
more there than just a failure of the three outside down pattern, and I explain
the extra features in a moment.
The outside down pattern on this chart is a classic example of how the pattern appears as it gives a sell signal. The first day is bullish in a bullish trend,
followed by a second day where the bulls push higher on the opening, but
then the bears push back, creating a down day that’s outside compared to
the first day. Finally, the bears are in control on the final day as they push
prices even lower.
After the pattern, a couple more bearish days exist, and then the trend takes
a turn to the upside. As I said, biotech stocks can be highly unpredictable!
The pattern fails and then something funny happens. Take a look. You may
think I highlighted another instance of the bearish outside day pattern, but
that’s not the case.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 223

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 10-6:
The three
outside
down
pattern
offers a
failing signal
on a chart of
MLNM.

It’s a little difficult to tell, but the highs of the first and second days marked
with ??? are equal. This disqualifies the pattern as an outside down pattern.
So does a penny of price action on the second day really mean that there was
a huge difference in the trading behind these three days? Apparently not. A
new downtrend that lasts several weeks pops up right after the appearance
of what you may call the “almost bearish outside pattern.”
Splitting hairs on candlestick pattern formation can cost you a profitable
trade. Just because there’s a very small price difference that seems to disqualify a pattern, don’t be too quick to disregard the formation altogether.
The psychology behind the pattern that almost panned out is the same as
what drives a by-the-book pattern, and you may be able to make a successful
trade, if you aren’t harshly strict with your pattern evaluations.

The three black crows pattern
The pattern featured in this section looks just plain ugly. The three black
crows pattern certainly isn’t much to look at, but it can benefit your trading
activities if you can spot it and trade it wisely.

Identifying the three black crows pattern
If you’re into the kind of bird watching that can lead to profits on the stock
market, keep on the lookout for the three black crows. This pattern includes
three down days in a row, and it must occur during an uptrend for it to be
valid. Set your sights on Figure 10-7 for an example.

223

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 224

224 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 10-7:
The three
black crows
pattern.

The first day of the pattern may actually include a gap opening when compared to the previous day, but even if the bulls are in charge at the start of
the day, it doesn’t last long. The bears push prices lower, and the result is an
obvious down day. The next two days see lower price levels across the
board. Both the second and third days are black candles with lower opens,
highs, lows, and closes. The bears have definitely taken over.

Making trades with the three black crows pattern
The example of a successful three black crows pattern that I provide is based
on a chart of a stock that’s closely tied to the stock market. TROW is the
symbol for T. Rowe Price Group, which is an asset management firm that provides mutual fund investments for individuals and retirement plans. Its business is based on people’s confidence in investing in the market. This
confidence moves right along with trends in the stock market, so TROW and
other asset management stocks are always good trading vehicles. Take a
moment to review Figure 10-8 and allow me to explain how the three black
crows can take flight for an attractive trade.
The three black crows show up shortly following a gap up in an uptrend. The
black crows fill the gap up, which I consider to be a pretty encouraging sign.
As you can see, each day of the pattern is a black candle, and each level is
lower than the previous day’s levels.
It’s safe to say that this sign is pretty bearish. After all, sellers are putting
pressure on a stock for three straight days. This also means that there’s been
a lot of downward price movement in a short period of time — an indication

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 225

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns
that there can be an opportunity to make a sale a little higher than the close
of the pattern. That’s the case with the pattern in Figure 10-8, and for the next
few days, the pattern holds, despite a weak attempt by buyers to resume the
uptrend. A patient trader that sold even the day after the pattern would be
rewarded with a nice entry point.

Figure 10-8:
The three
black crows
predict a
trend
reversal on
a chart of
TROW.

Failing to signal lower prices ahead
If you’re the kind of trader who insists that this pattern always works out
when it appears, you may end up eating crow. The three black crows can fail,
as you can plainly see in Figure 10-9.

Figure 10-9:
The three
black crows
pattern fails
on a chart
of INTC.

225

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 226

226 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
Figure 10-9 is a chart of Intel (INTC). Intel produces semiconductors, but
you’d think they make birdfeeders with all the black crows flocking on this
chart! Okay, maybe not. The chart is a little unusual because it includes
two failures of the three black crows pattern:
 The first occurrence of the pattern appears in an uptrend that starts
with a gap up on the first day, which brings in three solid days of selling.
The bulls make a run, but the signal stays valid because, although
there’s a slight uptrend, no price action violates the levels set by the
three black crows — for the time being, at least.
 The second occurrence of the three black crows comes in the continued
uptrend, but it features slightly lower levels than the first pattern. A
hopeful trader may be excited by the presence of two sets of the three
black crows pattern, but his hopes will soon be dashed when the high of
both patterns is violated.
The three black crows covers a lot of ground on the down side, and placing
a stop at the high of the first day leaves you with a lot of room to accumulate
losses before getting out of the position.
When working on a three black crows trade, try to pick a stop that achieves
a middle ground between what you can tolerate in terms of losses and where
you really believe the pattern will no longer be valid. You may first consider
the midpoint of the pattern, which can be a prudent level depending on your
ability to take a loss.

The evening star and bearish
doji star patterns
You didn’t think I could get through a chapter without discussing a doji pattern, did you? I confess my love for the doji several times in this book, and
I’m happy to report that the two patterns described in this section make me
grow only fonder of dojis and the trading opportunities they present.
The evening star and bearish doji star patterns are technically two different
patterns, but they’re so close and the trading psychology behind them so
similar that I lump them together in this section.

Recognizing the evening star and bearish doji star
Both the evening star and bearish doji star patterns start with an up day, followed by a gap opening and then a doji for the second day (for the bearish
doji star), or at least a day with very tight trading action in either direction
(for the evening star). The gap between the first and second days attracts
sellers, which keeps the stock from going much higher than the first day’s
open. The third and final day is down, and this final day closes the gap
