
 Source: The Wall Street Journal , January 5, 2009. 
 The evidence in favor of index investing grows stronger over time. Standard & Poor’s publishes reports each year comparing all actively managed funds with various Standard & Poor’s 500 stock indexes. The 2014 report is shown below. When one looks at a five-year period, over two-thirds of active managers are outperformed by their benchmark indexes. And each year’s report is much the same. Every time I do a revision of this book, the results are similar. The index performance is not mediocre—it exceeds the results achieved by the typical active manager. And the result holds for big stocks and small, domestic as well as international. Moreover, the same result obtains if one looks at ten- or twenty-year results. And it works for the bond market as well as the stock market. Index investing is smart investing. 

 Source: S&P SPIVA Report—March 2014. 
 I am not suggesting that it is impossible to beat the market. But it is highly unlikely. An interesting way to demonstrate this result is to examine the records of all the equity mutual funds that were in existence in 1970 (when I first began work on this book) and follow their performance through 2013. This is the experiment shown in the exhibit on page 181. 
 In 1970, 358 equity mutual funds existed. (Today there are thousands.) We can measure the long-term records of only 84 of those original funds because 274 of them no longer exist. Thus, the data in the exhibit suffer from “survivorship bias.” You can be sure that the surviving funds are the ones with the best records. There is a nasty secret in the mutual-fund industry that if you have a poorly performing fund, it does not reflect well on the managers of the mutual-fund complex. So the poorly performing funds tend to get merged into funds with better records, thereby killing off their embarrassing records. The surviving funds, measured in the exhibit, are the better-performing ones. But even with this survivorship bias in the data, observe how few of the original funds actually had superior records. You can count on the fingers of one hand the number of funds from the original 358 that actually beat the market index by 2 percentage points or more. 

 Source: Lipper. 
 The point is that it is highly unlikely you can beat the market. It is so rare that it’s like looking for a needle in a haystack. A strategy far more likely to be optimal is to buy the haystack itself: that is, buy an index fund—a fund that simply buys and holds all the stocks in a broad stock-market index. Fortunately, more and more investors are doing just that. During 2014, about one-third of the money invested by individuals and institutions was invested in index funds. And that percentage continues to grow each year. 
 Although the preceding discussion has focused on mutual funds, it should not be assumed that the funds are simply the worst of the whole lot of investment managers. In fact, the mutual funds have had a somewhat better performance record than many other professional investors. The records of life insurance companies, property and casualty insurance companies, pension funds, foundations, state and local trust funds, personal trusts administered by banks, and individual discretionary accounts handled by investment advisers have all been studied. No sizable differences in the investment performance of common-stock portfolios exist among these professional investors or between these groups and the market as a whole. Exceptions are very rare. No scientific evidence has yet been assembled to indicate that the investment performance of professionally managed portfolios as a group has been any better than that of a broad-based index. 
 THE SEMI-STRONG AND STRONG FORMS OF THE EFFICIENT-MARKET HYPOTHESIS (EMH) 
 The academic community has rendered its judgment. Fundamental analysis is no better than technical analysis in enabling investors to capture above-average returns. Nevertheless, given its propensity for splitting hairs, the academic community soon fell to quarreling over the precise definition of fundamental information. Some said it was what is known now; others said it extended to the hereafter. It was at this point that what began as the strong form of the efficient-market hypothesis split into two. The “semi-strong” form says that no public information will help the analyst select undervalued securities. The argument here is that the structure of market prices already takes into account any public information that may be contained in balance sheets, income statements, dividends, and so forth; professional analyses of these data will be useless. The “strong” form says that absolutely nothing that is known or even knowable about a company will benefit the fundamental analyst. According to the strong form of the theory, not even “inside” information can help the investors. 
 The strong form of the EMH is obviously an overstatement. It does not admit the possibility of gaining from inside information. Nathan Rothschild made millions in the market when his carrier pigeons brought him the first news of Wellington’s victory at Waterloo before other traders were aware of the victory. But today, the information superhighway carries news far more swiftly than carrier pigeons. And Regulation FD (Fair Disclosure) requires companies to make prompt public announcements of any material news items that may affect the price of their stock. Moreover, insiders who do profit from trading on the basis of nonpublic information are breaking the law. The Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson summed up the situation as follows: 
 If intelligent people are constantly shopping around for good value, selling those stocks they think will turn out to be overvalued and buying those they expect are now undervalued, the result of this action by intelligent investors will be to have existing stock prices already have discounted in them an allowance for their future prospects. Hence, to the passive investor, who does not himself search for under- and overvalued situations, there will be presented a pattern of stock prices that makes one stock about as good or bad a buy as another. To that passive investor, chance alone would be as good a method of selection as anything else. 
 This is a statement of the EMH—the efficient-market hypothesis. The “narrow” (weak) form of the EMH says that technical analysis—looking at past stock prices—cannot help investors. Prices move from period to period very much like a random walk. The “broad” (semi-strong and strong) forms state that fundamental analysis is not helpful either. All that is known concerning the expected growth of the company’s earnings and dividends, all of the possible favorable and unfavorable developments affecting the company that might be studied by the fundamental analyst, is already reflected in the price of the company’s stock. Thus, purchasing a fund holding all the stocks in a broad-based index will produce a portfolio that can be expected to do as well as any managed by professional security analysts. 
 The efficient-market hypothesis does not, as some critics have proclaimed, state that stock prices move aimlessly and erratically and are insensitive to changes in fundamental information. On the contrary, the reason prices move randomly is just the opposite. The market is so efficient—prices move so quickly when information arises—that no one can buy or sell fast enough to benefit. And real news develops randomly, that is, unpredictably. It cannot be predicted by studying either past technical or fundamental information. 
 Even the legendary Benjamin Graham, heralded as the father of fundamental security analysis, reluctantly came to the conclusion that fundamental security analysis could no longer be counted on to produce superior investment returns. Shortly before he died in 1976, he was quoted in an interview in the Financial Analysts Journal as saying, “I am no longer an advocate of elaborate techniques of security analysis in order to find superior value opportunities. This was a rewarding activity, say, 40 years ago, when Graham and Dodd was first published; but the situation has changed. . . . [Today] I doubt whether such extensive efforts will generate sufficiently superior selections to justify their cost. . . . I’m on the side of the ‘efficient market’ school of thought.” And Peter Lynch, just after he retired from managing the Magellan Fund, as well as the legendary Warren Buffett, admitted that most investors would be better off in an index fund rather than investing in an actively managed equity mutual fund. 
 A Note on High-Frequency Trading (HFT) 
 A popular book published in 2014, Flash Boys , shined a spotlight on high-frequency trading and unleashed a firestorm of criticism against the technique. High-frequency trading (HFT) has been alleged to give a select group of traders an unfair advantage over the public and even over institutional investors such as mutual funds and pension funds. 
 HFT involves the placement of high-speed computers in close proximity to stock-market servers to give some participants the ability to buy and sell stocks faster than the blink of an eye. In a sense, it is merely the next development in response to investors’ ever-increasing appetite for speed. From shouting orders from office buildings to traders standing under a buttonwood tree on Wall Street in 1792, technology has dramatically improved the efficiency of trading, reducing transaction costs and increasing liquidity for all investors. It has also helped ensure that market-moving news is reflected in stock prices as rapidly as possible. 
 It’s easy to stir up fear over such trading activity, but most stock-market volume is conducted over these high-speed networks. And whether you’re buying 100 shares of a stock or 100,000 shares, you directly or indirectly participate. We’re all high-frequency traders now. 
 Another major advantage of HFT is that it ensures that the exchange-traded broad-based index funds, which I recommend for individual investors, are appropriately priced. Any discrepancy between the price of the ETF and the underlying stocks can be quickly arbitraged away. Thus, HFT, rather than harming individual investors, actually benefits them by assuring that ETFs are fairly priced. 
 That doesn’t mean that HFT is completely benign. Right now, as critics note, optimally positioned traders can see trade orders from other investors before they are executed. They can execute a purchase just ahead of those orders and run the price up just a bit, pocketing the difference. This kind of scalping, called “front-running,” is a form of insider trading. If someone else is able to know that I want to buy 10,000 shares of a stock before I actually buy the shares, that’s insider information, and it should be illegal to trade on such information. The SEC needs to address these practices and find regulatory solutions. But critics of HFT are wrong to assert that the practice has harmed individual investors. Investors both small and large have always been well served by technological advances that improve liquidity, make trades at better prices, and speed up the trading process. HFT makes markets more efficient and reinforces the advantage of index-fund investing. 

 * If we had let the losers continue to play (as mutual-fund managers do, even after a bad year), we would have found several more contestants who flipped eight or nine heads out of ten and were therefore regarded as expert coin-flippers.

A Random Walk Down Wall Street 

 8 

 A NEW WALKING SHOE: MODERN PORTFOLIO THEORY 
 . . . Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. —J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money 
 T HROUGHOUT THIS BOOK , I have attempted to explain the theories used by professionals—simplified as the firm-foundation and the castle-in-the-air theories—to predict the valuation of stocks. As we have seen, many academics have earned their reputations by attacking these theories and maintaining that they cannot be relied on to yield extraordinary profits. 
 As graduate schools continued to grind out bright young financial economists, the attacking academics became so numerous that it seemed obvious that a new strategy was needed; ergo, the academic community busily went about erecting its own theories of stock-market valuation. That’s what this part of the book is all about: the rarefied world of the “new investment technology” created within the towers of the academy. One insight—modern portfolio theory (MPT)—is so basic that it is now widely followed on the Street. The others remain controversial enough to continue to generate thesis material for students and hefty lecture fees for their advisers. 
 This chapter is about modern portfolio theory, whose insights will enable you to reduce risk while possibly earning a higher return. In chapter 9 , I turn to the academics who have suggested that investors can increase their returns by assuming a certain kind of risk. Then, in chapters 10 and 11 , I cover the arguments of some academics and practitioners who conclude that psychology, not rationality, rules the market, and that there is no such thing as a random walk. They argue that markets are not efficient, that market prices are predictable, and that a number of investment strategies can be followed to “beat the market.” These include a number of “smart beta” strategies that have become popular on Wall Street. Then I conclude by showing that, despite all the critics, traditional index funds remain the undisputed champions in taking the most profitable stroll through the market. 
 THE ROLE OF RISK 
 The efficient-market hypothesis explains why the random walk is possible. It holds that the stock market is so good at adjusting to new information that no one can predict its future course in a superior manner. Because of the actions of the pros, the prices of individual stocks quickly reflect all the news that is available. Thus, the odds of selecting superior stocks or anticipating the general direction of the market are even. Your guess is as good as that of the ape, your stockbroker, or even mine. 
 Hmmm. “I smell a rat,” as Samuel Butler wrote long ago. Money is being made in the market; some stocks do outperform others. Common sense attests that some people can and do beat the market. It’s not all chance. Many academics agree; but the method of beating the market, they say, is not to exercise superior clairvoyance but rather to assume greater risk. Risk, and risk alone, determines the degree to which returns will be above or below average. 
 DEFINING RISK: THE DISPERSION OF RETURNS 
 Risk is a most slippery and elusive concept. It’s hard for investors—let alone economists—to agree on a precise definition. The American Heritage Dictionary defines risk as “the possibility of suffering harm or loss.” If I am able to buy one-year Treasury bills to yield 2 percent and hold them until they mature, I am virtually certain of earning a 2 percent monetary return, before income taxes. The possibility of loss is so small as to be considered nonexistent. If I hold common stock in my local electric utility for one year, anticipating a 5 percent dividend return, the possibility of loss is greater. The dividend of the company may be cut and, more important, the market price at the end of the year may be much lower, causing me to suffer a net loss. Investment risk, then, is the chance that expected security returns will not materialize and, in particular, that the securities you hold will fall in price. 
 Once academics accepted the idea that risk for investors is related to the chance of disappointment in achieving expected security returns, a natural measure suggested itself—the probable dispersion of future returns. Thus, financial risk has generally been defined as the variance or standard deviation of returns. Being long-winded, we use the accompanying exhibit to illustrate what we mean. A security whose returns are not likely to depart much, if at all, from its average (or expected) return is said to carry little or no risk. A security whose returns from year to year are likely to be quite volatile (and for which sharp losses occur in some years) is said to be risky. 
 Illustration: Expected Return and Variance Measures of Reward and Risk 
 This simple example will illustrate the concept of expected return and variance and how these are measured. Suppose you buy a stock from which you expect the following overall returns ( including both dividends and price changes) under different economic conditions: 

 Business Conditions Possibility of Occurrence Expected Return 
 “Normal” economic conditions 1 chance in 3 10% 
 Rapid real growth without inflation 1 chance in 3 30% 
 Recession with inflation (stagflation) 1 chance in 3 –10% 

 If, on average, a third of past years have been “normal,” another third characterized by rapid growth without inflation, and the remaining third characterized by “stagflation,” it might be reasonable to take these relative frequencies of past events and treat them as our best guesses (probabilities) of the likelihood of future business conditions. We could then say that an investor’s expected return is 10 percent. One-third of the time the investor gets 30 percent, another one-third 10 percent, and the rest of the time she suffers a 10 percent loss. This means that, on average, her yearly return will turn out to be 10 percent. 
 Expected return = (0.30) + (0.10) + (–0.10) = 0.10. 
 The yearly returns will be quite variable, however, ranging from a 30 percent gain to a 10 percent loss. The “variance” is a measure of the dispersion of returns. It is defined as the average squared deviation of each possible return from its average (or expected) value, which we just saw was 10 percent. 
 Variance = (0.30–0.10) 2 + (0.10–0.10) 2 + (–0.10–0.10) 2 = (0.20) 2 + (0.00) 2 + (–0.20) 2 = 0.0267. 
 The square root of the variance is known as the standard deviation. In this example, the standard deviation equals 0.1634. 
 Dispersion measures of risk such as variance and standard deviation have failed to satisfy everyone. “Surely riskiness is not related to variance itself,” the critics say. “If the dispersion results from happy surprises—that is, from outcomes turning out better than expected—no investors in their right minds would call that risk.” 
 It is, of course, quite true that only the possibility of downward disappointments constitutes risk. Nevertheless, as a practical matter, as long as the distribution of returns is symmetric—that is, as long as the chances of extraordinary gain are roughly the same as the probabilities for disappointing returns and losses—a dispersion or variance measure will suffice as a risk measure. The greater the dispersion or variance, the greater the possibilities for disappointment. 
 Although the pattern of historical returns from individual securities has not usually been symmetric, the returns from well-diversified portfolios of stocks are at least roughly symmetric. The following chart shows the distribution of monthly security returns for a portfolio invested in the S&P 500-Stock Index over seventy years. It was constructed by dividing the range of returns into equal intervals (of approximately 1¼ percent) and then noting the frequency (the number of months) with which the returns fell within each interval. On average, the portfolio returned close to 1 percent per month or about 11 percent per year. In periods when the market declined sharply, however, the portfolio also plunged, losing more than 20 percent in a single month. 

 Source: Global Financial Data. 
 For reasonably symmetric distributions such as this one, a helpful rule of thumb is that two-thirds of the monthly returns tend to fall within one standard deviation of the average return and 95 percent of the returns fall within two standard deviations. Recall that the average return for this distribution was close to 1 percent per month. The standard deviation (our measure of portfolio risk) turns out to be about 4½ percent per month. Thus, in two-thirds of the months the returns from this portfolio were between +5½ percent and –3½ percent, and 95 percent of the returns were between 10 percent and –8 percent. Obviously, the higher the standard deviation (the more spread out the returns), the more probable it is (the greater the risk) that at least in some periods you will take a real bath in the market. That’s why a measure of variability such as standard deviation is so often used and justified as an indication of risk. 
 DOCUMENTING RISK: A LONG-RUN STUDY 
 One of the best-documented propositions in the field of finance is that, on average, investors have received higher rates of return for bearing greater risk. The most thorough study has been done by Ibbotson Associates. Its data cover the period 1926 through 2013, and the results are shown in the following table. What Ibbotson Associates did was to take several different investment vehicles—stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills—and measure the percentage increase or decrease each year for each item. A rectangle or bar was then erected on the baseline to indicate the number of years the returns fell between 0 and 5 percent; another rectangle indicated the number of years the returns fell between 5 and 10 percent; and so on, for both positive and negative returns. The result is a series of bars showing the dispersion of returns and from which the standard deviation can be calculated. 

