
TRADING LORE

158

■

The average biggest draw‐down was 77.3 percent across the 1,000 runs.

■

16 percent of the runs had draw‐downs of 90 percent or greater.

■

The best run “only” had a max draw‐down of 36 percent.

When you start trading one of these 100‐trade sequences, you expect to
see a 77 percent draw‐down in your bankroll at some point. I think the bottom line is that it’s called “gambling” for a reason. It isn’t investing; it isn’t
trading; it isn’t even wild speculation. Nobody would take their hard‐earned
money and subject themselves to trading in that fashion. Sure, you might
take a throwaway amount of money to Vegas and bet that way for a weekend, but before you go you tell yourself, “When this is gone, I’m done.” You
expect to lose it all. It’s part/most of the entertainment.
Let’s take the same trading scenario and do what a trader, not a gambler, would do to determine how much to risk each trade. Our winning
percentage is 60 percent, and we get $1 for every $1 bet when we win.
Let’s vary the bet size from 1 percent to 20 percent per trade and look at the
outcomes. The results are shown in Table 10.1.
TABLE 10.1 Traders Money Management for Gambling Scenario
Percent of Equity
Risked per Trade

Average Percent
Return

Average Max
Draw‐Down
(%)

Max draw‐Down
(%)

Percent Bust

1

22

6.1

20.8

0

2

49

11.8

37.6

0

3

181

17.5

59.7

0

4

224

22.7

62.7

0

5

269

27.8

73.0

0

10

735

49.0

91.0

0

20*

4,866

77.3

99.6

2

* Kelly criteria recommended bet size

I don’t know about you, but I wouldn’t trade this strategy at a bet size
greater than 2 percent. And the worst one in the table, to me, is the Kelly
recommended bet‐size. One last note: As you peruse the money management literature, you’ll run across another common statement: Never risk
more than x percent on a trade. The x percent is always less than 5, and usually between 1 and 3. Those people are traders, not gamblers.

The last bulleted theme concerns the “best” type of money management.
The ones listed here (optimal f, fixed risk, fixed size, fixed ratio) are all formulas for the bet size to use, just like the Kelly criteria.We’ll look at some in
the money management chapters (Chapters 11–15), but to me the position
size is one of the least‐important elements of money management. Far more
important are things like how you manage diversification, serial correlation
of trades, whether the account size is small or large, and individual trade
risk. The method of position sizing won’t make much difference until you
address those other issues.
■ Monte Carlo Analysis: The Best Way

to Determine the Ultimate Trading
Statistics of a Strategy

159
TRADING LORE

Monte Carlo analysis has proven useful in myriad scientific and analytical
studies. A number of trading‐related books and web sites have used it as
a means of finding the ultimate trading statistics of a strategy based on a
sample of trades. Can this be done? I don’t think so, but certainly not in the
simplistic way most are doing it.
Most Monte Carlo trading simulations take a number of hypothetical
trades, put the results in a file and then randomly pull them out
one‐by‐one to form a trade sequence. The trade sequence is used to build
an equity curve, and statistics like return, draw‐down, and flat‐time are
computed. This process is done hundreds or even thousands of times,
and summary statistics can be generated from the entire set of runs.
Summary statistics might include largest return, largest draw‐down,
average largest draw‐down, probability of an x percent return, and probability of an x percent draw‐down. The problem with this simplistic approach is explained here.
We’ve seen (in Chapter 2) that it takes thousands of trades to get away
from curve‐fitting. By the same logic, you can’t define the ultimate distribution of those thousands of trades with a sample of 20 trades taken in real
time. The 20 trades that unfolded under the watchful eye of real time could
have been a spectacularly successful trading period, or a representative trading period, or a spectacularly bad period.Yet these Monte Carlo simulations
are assuming that it represents the underlying distribution of the way this
strategy will trade forever. Obviously, this situation represents “garbage in/
garbage out.”

TRADING LORE

160

Suppose the analyst actually waits until there are thousands of trades either by using the development trade sample, or actually waiting for years
until there are thousands of real‐time trades. Obviously this is a better situation. But will it yield meaningful statistics? Still, probably not. One reason is
that when you pull a trade randomly, you’re getting one number: the profit
or loss from that trade. As we’ve seen, the wart of mid‐ to longer‐term
trend‐following is open‐equity give‐back. Your trade runs up to $8,000 of
profit, but you only net $4,000 for the trade; you had an open‐equity give‐
back of $4,000. This aspect of the trade is totally missing from the Monte
Carlo analysis. That missing $4,000 is draw‐down your simulation doesn’t
count in its statistics. Missing, too, is the fact that you enter x trades a day,
on average, but sometimes you enter four times as many, and sometimes
you don’t get any entries for days/weeks/months. That effect is also missing
from the analysis.
I don’t know of any Monte Carlo package for trading, that addresses the
two issues above in a proper manner, but I will admit that the capability exists for someone to do it. Would a Monte Carlo analysis that used thousands
of trades, used the whole trading sequence for a trade, and appropriately
modeled trading frequency yield a meaningful simulation? Still, probably
not, for two reasons.
The reason that sometimes there are a number of trades in a day isn’t
totally random, like our Monte Carlo analysis engine assumes. Sometimes
there are a slew of trades because a trading group like the metals or energies
gets good/bad news and the whole group heads north/south. It is likely that
trades in the same group triggered on or near the same day will have the same
trade outcome: all small winners, or all large winners, or all small losers,
or all large losers. This effect is not modeled. The Monte Carlo might take
x trades, but one will be an oats trade in 1983 and the other a coffee trade
in 2011, when they should be from the same group and the same day. Those
who think these shortcomings don’t apply to stock systems should consider
the long‐only stock strategy developed so far in Chapters 4 through 6.
When the market was crumbling in September through December 2008,
the vast majority of the “enter on weakness” trades from the strategy would
be losers, and large losers at that. And trades might be triggered in nearly
every one of our Nasdaq 100 basket stocks when the market opens down
300 to 500 Dow points. The Monte Carlo analysis engine won’t capture
the severity and duration of that period. It is highly likely that the trading
statistics in our back‐test for that period would be far worse than any Monte
Carlo analysis could predict.

■ Artiﬁcial Data
If we had unlimited data for something we wanted to trade, the development process would be simple. We don’t, and so we’re stuck doing the best
we can with what’s available. A number of authors have suggested that a way
around this problem is to create synthetic data. The most common approach
is to take the existing data stream for a trading instrument and create a sequence based on the difference between today’s close and yesterday’s close.
That difference stream is placed on a file and randomly sampled to create a

161
TRADING LORE

Lastly, the effects of money management can’t be captured by a Monte
Carlo analysis. We haven’t discussed money management yet in this book,
but it harnesses the raw power of your trading strategy and makes it more
tradeable than if you took every trade signaled. A simple example will help.
Suppose you have a trading system that intra‐day trades soybeans, crude oil,
and the yen. Suppose the basic strategy generates, on average, two trades
per day in each of the three commodities. You’ve diligently developed the
strategy and are convinced it’s minimally curve‐fit. You’ve found in your
money management analysis that if you take a max of one trade per day
in each commodity, your equity curve is much smoother and your draw‐
downs are much smaller. (The reason why this is so doesn’t matter for this
discussion, but it’s probably true because of serial correlation in the trade
stream of each individual commodity: winners on a given day beget other
winners that day, while losers lead to other losers.) In any event, the Monte
Carlo engine sees a max of three trades per day and randomly selects each
day’s trades. Sometimes, it will have three trades in one commodity, and
sometimes it will have one in each commodity. Your money management
rules are often violated. Since your money management rules were put in
place for a better trading solution, the fact that they are ignored in the Monte Carlo analysis means that, on average, the Monte Carlo results will be
worse than they should be.
If you do your development correctly for both your trading strategy and
your money management overlay, the statistics of that development are your
best estimate of what you’ll experience going forward. Sure, “your largest
draw‐down is always in the futures,” but those development statistics are
probably a better indication of what that might be than any Monte Carlo
analysis. In my opinion, Monte Carlo analysis tells you nothing useful beyond your development statistics.

TRADING LORE

162

sequential stream of differences data that can be used to create the artificial
closing price data. This approach has flaws that are similar to those of the
Monte Carlo analysis.
First, it assumes that the data difference we randomly pick today has
nothing to do with the data difference before and after it. This is just not
the case. It’s easy to show the serial relationship of sequential data by
correlating the data stream with the same data stream, but lagged one or
more places. If you correlate a data stream with itself without a lag, you
will get a correlation coefficient of 1 as the result. If you slide the data
stream one place to the left (a lag of 1) and correlate the original stream
with the lagged stream, you will get an answer ranging from ‐1 to 1. If
the answer is 0, then the two data streams are uncorrelated and the difference that occurs today doesn’t influence what will happen tomorrow.
If that were the case, then the Monte Carlo practice of making artificial
data from randomly generated differences would be valid (if that were the
only problem with the approach). Let’s make some runs and see if there
is serial correlation. Using some stocks and commodities, the data differences streams were lagged up to 20 times and a correlation coefficient
found between the lagged data and the original stream. Table 10.2 shows
the max correlation coefficient and the number of days before there was
a sign change for negative to positive or vice versa, signifying that the two
streams were not correlated beyond that point.

TABLE 10.2 Serial Correlation of Commodity and Stock Streams
Commodity

Highest Coefficient

Sign Change

Corn

–0.09

13 days

Lean Hogs

–0.08

19 days

Coffee

–0.07

11 days

Copper

–0.08

20 days

Crude Oil

–0.12

12 days

Japanese Yen

–0.07

14 days

30‐Year Bond

–0.07

11 days

S&P 500

–0.06

12 days

Highest Coefficient

Sign Change

–0.08

13 days

Microsoft Corp.

–0.09

12 days

Google

–0.07

12 days

Kellogg Co.

–0.14

10 days

Stock

International Business Machines

In every case, there was a perceptible negative correlation in the lagged
data that lasted over two weeks.The negative correlation means that up closes are followed by down closes, and down closes are followed by up closes,
to a slight degree. This is in line with stocks acting in a counter‐trend manner, and for commodities, it jives with the day‐of‐week filter we examined
(in Chapter 6), where we wait for a down day to go long or an up day to go
short.
This is not the only relationship in the trading data. Range has a short‐
lived but strong negative correlation, as shown in Table 10.3.
TABLE 10.3 Serial Correlation of Range for Stocks and Commodities
Commodity

Highest Coefficient

Sign Change

Corn

–0.46

4 days

Lean Hogs

–0.46

4 days

Coffee

–0.45

4 days

Copper

–0.44

3 days

Crude Oil

–0.43

3 days

Japanese Yen

–0.46

5 days

30‐Year Bond

–0.48

4 days

–0.48

4 days

163

Highest Coefficient

Sign Change

–0.46

4 days

Microsoft Corp.

–0.45

3 days

Google

–0.44

5 days

Kellogg Co.

–0.43

5 days

TRADING LORE

S&P 500
Stock

International Business Machines

Table 10.3 shows significant negative range correlation that lasts between
three and five days in every tradeable tested. What this means to the trader
is that a big range day has a tendency to be followed by a quiet period, and a
small range day followed by bigger ranges. A number of trading filters can be
built using this information. One of the most popular is to look for a breakout following an inside day (a day where today’s smaller range is entirely
contained within yesterday’s bigger range).
These aren’t the only issues with artificial data. If you trade a basket like
the Nasdaq 100, or the basket we used to develop the futures strategy, there
will be a strong correlation between some members. For the stocks, a big
market day will see most of the Nasdaq 100 moving up or down in line
with the market. For the commodities, there is strong correlation within

each group (see Appendix B). An artificial data stream won’t capture this
important correlation effect. In fact, every data stream created this way will
be non‐correlated (correlation coefficient of 0) with every other artificially
created stream. In my opinion, artificial data is worthless.
■ Never Add to a Loser

TRADING LORE

164

This adage arises from the dangers of martingale betting. In games with
a near 50 percent chance of winning (like roulette, when you bet black
or red), a martingale betting strategy would increase (usually double) the
bet size with every loser. Eventually, you’ll win, and a sequence of losing
bets would end with a winner and you’d recoup your losses plus win the
original bet.
In trading, a position is taken and as it goes against you into loss, a martingale strategy would be to double‐up the position. This is called “averaging
down,” and it requires a smaller move to the upside for your entire position
to become profitable. Is this always bad?
Clearly the danger is risk of ruin if you continue to add to the loser. Eventually, if the position continues to move against you, you’ll get a margin call
or run out of additional trading equity. But never do it?
There may be a very sound reason to add to a loser: The increment
you’re adding on is a good trading opportunity in its own right. Forget the
original trade for a moment; if the new increment is worth trading all by
itself, why not?
Here’s an example: Suppose we test a stock scalping strategy that buys a
stock when it closes one standard deviation below its 10‐day average price.
We find something that’s tradeable, but in our development, we see that buying at two standard deviations below price is better, but it doesn’t happen as
much. Why not take the trades at one standard deviation below the average,
and if price continues to go against you and it gets down to two standard
deviations below price, add on another unit? Here’s the trade breakout for
our basket of Nasdaq 100 stocks from 2000 until the end of 2011 when we
buy a $5,000 position on the next open if the close is one standard deviation
below the 10‐day average:
Winning trades: 11,400
Losing trades: 5,138
Total profit: $619,363
Profit‐per‐trade: $37

Here are the stats when we add a $5,000 unit to the position size if price
closes two standard deviations below the average:
Winning trades: 11,891
Losing trades: 4,647
Total profit: $754,658
Profit‐per‐trade: $46
In this case, the trade stats improved.Whether you’d trade it or not would
depend on the draw‐downs, but the point is it’s conceivable that adding to a
loser could lead to a better trading solution.
■ Add to Winners

■ Nobody Ever Got Hurt Taking a Proﬁt
I’m not a psychologist, but after trading for over 30 years and talking to
thousands of traders, I know the feelings that go with experiencing equity
run‐up and equity draw‐down. When you’re in run‐up, you’re in a state of

165
TRADING LORE

This seems like a natural thing to do, and if you search the Internet, you’ll
find that some of the people who tell you to never add to loser say it’s actually the right thing to do to add to a winner. Is it?
Adding to a winner has one inherent problem: You’re “averaging down”
your winning position. If you’re ahead $500 when you add on and the
trade then goes down $300 from there, you’ll be down $100 on the aggregate position, but you’d still be up $200 if you hadn’t added on. The only
reason you’d do that is if the increment you’re adding on has a probability
of making more than the original signal. Otherwise, you’d have just traded
two units on the original signal. I’ve never seen a continuation signal that’s
more powerful than a properly designed entry signal into a trend. That’s
not to say one couldn’t exist, but it doesn’t make sense to be able to get
into the trade later in the trend and make more than an entry already in
the trend.
Note that I’m not discounting short‐, medium‐, and longer‐term
strategies independently taking a position and exiting on their own
rules as the trend strengthens. I’m talking about adding to a winner at
some profit increment of the original strategy with the same exit rules
in place.

euphoria. Everything about life is rosy. That feeling influences you to make
the following trading mistakes:
■

■

Letting the few losers you have run past their exit points. (“Everything is
working; I’m a trading genius; those losers will come back.”)
Putting on too much size. (“I’m supposed to do one contract, but everything is working; I’m a genius; I’m doing two and if the trade starts well
I might add another.”)

In short, you deviate from your plan by overtrading.
When you’re in draw‐down, you’ve got the blues. Everyone and everything are out to get you.You tend to make these trading mistakes:
■

■

TRADING LORE

166

■

Bypass or delay trade entry. (“This trade looks risky and everything’s going against me; I’m going to wait and see how it starts off before I take a
position.”)
Undersizing positions. (“I know I’m supposed to do two lots, but everything’s going against me; I’m going to step into the trade and start with
only one contract.”)
Taking profits prematurely. (“I’m losing almost every trade; everything’s
going against me; this trade is in profit; I’m cashing it in; nobody ever got
hurt taking a profit.”)

I’m convinced this trading maxim is due to people in draw‐down trying
to justify a trading mistake to themselves.
The only way out of draw‐down is to trade your plan and wait for winners to build back your equity. Going into a defensive crouch will only lead
to smaller profits when things turn around and delay your recovery.
Overtrading while you’re in run‐up only means that draw‐down, when it
inevitably comes, will be deeper than it should have been.You’ve spent a lot
of time building a plan you’re willing to put real dollars behind to trade in
real time. Trade that plan.
■ Thirty Trades Are Enough
When I do seminars, I always start with curve‐fitting material like I presented in Chapter 2. Invariably, someone brings up that a trading expert has said,
“30 trades is enough” history to characterize a trading system. They’re right.
I’ve seen statements like that at least five times in print, and some of the

people who made the statements really know their stuff. What the experts
are confusing is the difference between actually characterizing a distribution
and testing the distribution. Most statisticians will tell you that some minimum number of samples is needed before you can do certain tests on the
data, like standard deviation t‐tests or z‐tests. The number most often used
is 30 samples. That doesn’t mean 30 samples are enough to tell you all about
the underlying distribution. Here’s an example that should make this clear.
Suppose you pulled 30 pairs of socks out of a big barrel and 15 were black
and 15 were white. You’d probably be pretty confident that the barrel was
filled about half and half with black and white socks.
If your computer has 16‐bit color, there are 65,536 different true colors.
Suppose a barrel was filled with some random number of socks for each color.
After 30 sock pulls, would you have any idea of the distribution? Of course not.
You couldn’t even know all the colors in the barrel until at least 65,536 draws.
The last example is like trading. Trades range from large losers to large
winners. You can’t define the distribution statistics with a small subset of
trades.
■ The best system statistic is:
Sharpe ratio

■

Winning trade percentage

■

Profit factor

■

Ulcer index, Calmar ratio

Everyone’s got their favorite set of metrics, but a good metric must include some measure of both risk and reward. Things like profit‐per‐trade
and winning trade percentage only tell you part of the story.You need some
measure of risk for context. But even metrics that incorporate risk and reward have flaws; the Nobel prize–winning Sharpe ratio isn’t perfect. Jack
Schwager pointed out four problems with the Sharpe ratio in his classic
book, A Complete Guide to the Futures Markets. So what should you use?
I think the best metric really isn’t a metric; it’s a picture: the equity
curve—the old, “a picture is worth 1,000 words.” You can tell at a glance
if something’s worth trading by looking at its equity growth. Figure 10.1
shows four equity curves that have the same profit, and all but the last have
the same max draw‐down over the one‐year period being shown. What do
you think of each one?
