
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

the tape I sent in an order through my Stock Exchange
house to sell a hundred shares of that particular stock at
the market. I urgently asked for quick action.
Well, you can imagine what happened when the selling
order got to the floor of the Exchange; a dull inactive stock
that a commission house with out-of-town connections
wanted to sell in a hurry. Somebody got cheap stock. But
the transaction as it would be printed on the tape was the
price that I would pay on my five buying orders. I was long
on balance four hundred shares of that stock at a low
figure. The wire house asked me what I'd heard, and I said
I had a tip on it. Just before the close of the market I sent
an order to my reputable house to buy back that hundred
shares, and not waste any time; that I didn't want to be
short under any circumstances; and I didn't care what they
paid. So they wired to New York and the order to buy that
hundred quick resulted in a sharp advance. I of course had
put in selling orders for the five hundred shares that my
friends had bucketed. It worked very satisfactorily.
Still, they didn't mend their ways, and so I worked that
trick on them several times. I did not dare punish them as
severely as they deserved, seldom more than a point or two
on a hundred shares. But it helped to swell my little hoard
that I was saving for my next Wall Street venture. I
sometimes varied the process by selling some stock short,
without overdoing it. I was satisfied with my six or eight
hundred clear for each crack.
One day the stunt worked so well that it went far
beyond all calculations for a ten-point swing. I wasn't
looking for it. As a matter of fact it so happened that I had
two hundred shares instead of my usual hundred at one
broker's, though only a hundred in the four other shops.
That was too much of a good thing for them. They were
sore as pups about it and they began to say things over the
wires. So I went and saw the manager, the same man who

60

IV

had been so anxious to get my account, and so forgiving
every time I caught him trying to put something over on
me. He talked pretty big for a man in his position.
"That was a fictitious market for that stock, and we
won't pay you a damned cent!" he swore.
"It wasn't a fictitious market when you accepted my
order to buy. You let me in then, all right, and now you've
got to let me out. You can't get around that for fairness,
can you?"
"Yes, I can!" he yelled. "I can prove that somebody put
up a job."
"Who put up a job?" I asked.
"Somebody!"
"Who did they put it up on?" I asked.
"Some friends of yours were in it as sure as pop," he
said.
But I told him, "You know very well that I play a lone
hand. Everybody in this town knows that. They've known
it ever since I started trading in stocks. Now I want to give
you some friendly advice: you just send and get that
money for me. I don't want to be disagreeable. Just do
what I tell you."
"I won't pay it. It was a rigged-up transaction," he
yelled.
I got tired of his talk. So I told him: "You'll pay it to me
right now and here."
Well, he blustered a little more and accused me flatly of
being the guilty thimble-rigger; but he finally forked over
the cash. The others were not so rambunctious. In one
office the manager had been studying these inactive-stock
plays of mine and when he got my order he actually bought
the stock for me and then some for himself in the Little
Board, and he made some money.
These fellows didn't mind being sued by customers on
charges of fraud, as they generally had a good technical
legal defense ready. But they were afraid I'd attach the
furniture—the money in the bank I couldn't because they
61

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

took care not to have any funds exposed to that danger. It
would not hurt them to be known as pretty sharp, but to
get a reputation for welshing was fatal. For a customer to
lose money at his broker's is no rare event. But for a
customer to make money and then not get it is the worst
crime on the speculators' statute books.
I got my money from all; but that ten-point jump put an
end to the pleasing pastime of skinning skinners. They
were on the lookout for the little trick that they themselves
had used to defraud hundreds of poor customers. I went
back to my regular trading; but the market wasn't always
right for my system—that is, limited as I was by the size of
the orders they would take, I couldn't make a killing.
I had been at it over a year, during which I used every
device that I could think of to make money trading in
those wire houses. I had lived very comfortably, bought an
automobile and didn't limit myself about my expenses. I
had to make a stake, but I also had to live while I was
doing it. If my position on the market was right I couldn't
spend as much as I made, so that I'd always be saving
some. If I was wrong I didn't make any money and
therefore couldn't spend. As I said, I had saved up a fairsized roll, and there wasn't so much money to be made in
the five wire houses; so I decided to return to New York.
I had my own automobile and I invited a friend of mine
who also was a trader to motor to New York with me. He
accepted and we started. We stopped at New Haven for
dinner. At the hotel I met an old trading acquaintance, and
among other things he told me there was a shop in town
that had a wire and was doing a pretty good business.
We left the hotel on our way to New York, but I drove by
the street where the bucket shop was to see what the
outside looked like. We found it and couldn't resist the
temptation to stop and have a look at the inside. It wasn't
very sumptuous, but the old blackboard was there, and the
customers, and the game was on.
62

IV

The manager was a chap who looked as if he had been
an actor or a stump speaker. He was very impressive. He'd
say good morning as though he had discovered the
morning's goodness after ten years of searching for it with
a microscope and was making you a present of the
discovery as well as of the sky, the sun and the firm's bank
roll. He saw us come up in the sporty-looking automobile,
and as both of us were young and careless—I don't
suppose I looked twenty—he naturally concluded we were
a couple of Yale boys. I didn't tell him we weren't. He
didn't give me a chance, but began delivering a speech. He
was very glad to see us. Would we have a comfortable seat?
The market, we would find, was philanthropically
inclined that morning; in fact, clamoring to increase the
supply of collegiate pocket money, of which no intelligent
undergraduate ever had a sufficiency since the dawn of
historic time. But here and now, by the beneficence of the
ticker, a small initial investment would return thousands.
More pocket money than anybody could spend was what
the stock market yearned to yield.
Well, I thought it would be a pity not to do as the nice
man of the bucket shop was so anxious to have us do, so I
told him I would do as he wished, because I had heard that
lots of people made lots of money in the stock market.
I began to trade, very conservatively, but increasing the
line as I won. My friend followed me.
We stayed overnight in New Haven and the next
morning found us at the hospitable shop at five minutes to
ten. The orator was glad to see us, thinking his turn would
cony day. But I cleaned up within a few dollars of fifteen
hundred. The next morning when we dropped in on the
great orator, and handed him an order to sell five hundred
Sugar he hesitated, but finally accepted it in silence! The
stock broke over a point and I closed out and gave him the
ticket. There was exactly five hundred dollars coming to
me in profits, and my five hundred dollar margin. He took
twenty fifties from the safe, counted them three times very
63

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

slowly, then he counted them again in front of me. It
looked as if his fingers were sweating mucilage the way the
notes seemed to stick to him, but finally he handed the
money to me. He folded his arms, bit his lower lip, kept it
bit, and stared at the top of a window behind me.
I told him I'd like to sell two hundred Steel. But he
never stirred. He didn't hear me. I repeated my wish, only
I made it three hundred shares. He turned his head. I
waited for the speech. But all he did was to look at me.
Then he smacked his lips and swallowed as if he was going
to start an attack on fifty years of political misrule by the
unspeakable grafters of the opposition.
Finally he waved his hand toward the yellow-backs in
my hand and said, "Take away that bauble!"
"Take away what?" I said. I hadn't quite understood
what he was driving at. "Where are you going, student?"
He spoke very impressively.
"New York," I told him.
"That's right," he said, nodding about twenty times.
"That is exactly right. You are going away from here all
right, because now I know two things two, student! I know
what you are not, and I know what you are. Yes! Yes! Yes!"
"Is that so?" I said very politely.
"Yes. You two" He paused; and then he stopped being in
Congress and snarled: "You two are the biggest sharks in
the United States of America! Students? Ye-eh! You must
be Freshmen! Ye-eh!"
We left him talking to himself. He probably didn't mind
the money so much. No professional gambler does. It's all
in the game and the luck's bound to turn. It was his being
fooled in us that hurt his pride. That is how I came back to
Wall Street for a third attempt. I had been studying, of
course, trying to locate the exact trouble with my system
that had been responsible for my defeats in A. R. Fullerton
& Co.'s office. I was twenty when I made my first ten
thousand, and I lost that. But I knew how and why because
I traded out of season all the time; because when I couldn't
64

IV

play according to my system, which was based on study
and experience, I went in and gambled. I hoped to win,
instead of knowing that I ought to win on form. When I
was about twenty-two I ran up my stake to fifty thousand
dollars; I lost it on May ninth. But I knew exactly why and
how. It was the laggard tape and the unprecedented
violence of the movements that awful day. But I didn't
know why I had lost after my return from St. Louis or after
the May ninth panic. I had theories—that is, remedies for
some of the faults that I thought I found in my play. But I
needed actual practice.
There is nothing like losing all you have in the world for
teaching you what not to do. And when you know what not
to do in order not to lose money, you begin to learn what
to do in order to win. Did you get that? You begin to learn!

65

V
The average ticker hound or, as they used to call him, tapeworm goes wrong, I suspect, as much from overspecialization as from anything else. It means a highly
expensive inelasticity. After all, the game of speculation
isn't all mathematics or set rules, however rigid the main
laws may be. Even in my tape reading something enters
that is more than mere arithmetic. There is what I call the
behavior of a stock, actions that enable you to judge
whether or not it is going to proceed in accordance with
the precedents that your observation has noted. If a stock
doesn't act right don't touch it; because, being unable to
tell precisely what is wrong, you cannot tell which way it is
going. No diagnosis, no prognosis. No prognosis, no profit.
It is a very old thing, this of noting the behavior of a
stock and studying its past performances. When I first
came to New York there was a broker's office where a
Frenchman used to talk about his chart. At first I thought
67

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

he was a sort of pet freak kept by the firm because they
were good-natured. Then I learned that he was a
persuasive and most impressive talker. He said that the
only thing that didn't lie because it simply couldn't was
mathematics. By means of his curves he could forecast
market movements. Also he could analyse them, and tell,
for instance, why Keene did the right thing in his famous
Atchison preferred bull manipulation, and later why he
went wrong in his Southern Pacific pool. At various times
one or another of the professional traders tried the
Frenchman's system and then went back to their old
unscientific methods of making a living. Their hit-or-miss
system was cheaper, they said. I heard that the Frenchman
said Keene admitted that the chart was 100 per cent right
but claimed that the method was too slow for practical use
in an active market.
Then there was one office where a chart of the daily
movement of prices was kept. It showed at a glance just
what each stock had done for months. By comparing
individual curves with the general market curve and
keeping in mind certain rules the customers could tell
whether the stock on which they got an unscientific tip to
buy was fairly entitled to a rise. They used the chart as a
sort of complementary tipster. To-day there are scores of
commission houses where you find trading charts. They
come ready-made from the offices of statistical experts and
include not only stocks but commodities.
I should say that a chart helps those who can read it or
rather who can assimilate what they read. The average
chart reader, however, is apt to become obsessed with the
notion that the dips and peaks and primary and secondary
movements are all there is to stock speculation. If he
pushes his confidence to its logical limit he is bound to go
broke. There is an extremely able man, a former partner of
a well-known Stock Exchange house, who is really a
trained mathematician. He is a graduate of a famous
technical school. He devised charts based upon a very
68

V

careful and minute study of the behaviour of prices in
many markets—stocks, bonds, grain, cotton, money, and
so on. He went back years and years and traced the
correlations and seasonal movements oh, everything. He
used his charts in his stock trading for years. What he
really did was to take advantage of some highly intelligent
averaging. They tell me he won regularly until the World
War knocked all precedents into a cocked hat. I heard that
he and his large following lost millions before they
desisted. But not even a world war can keep the stock
market from being a bull market when conditions are
bullish, or a bear market when conditions are bearish. And
all a man needs to know to make money is to appraise
conditions.
I didn't mean to get off the track like that, but I can't
help it when I think of my first few years in Wall Street. I
know now what I did not know then, and I think of the
mistakes of my ignorance because those are the very
mistakes that the average stock speculator makes year in
and year out.
After I got back to New York to try for the third time to
beat the market in a Stock Exchange house I traded quite
actively. I didn't expect to do as well as I did in the bucket
shops, but I thought that after a while I would do much
better because I would be able to swing a much heavier
line. Yet, I can see now that my main trouble was my
failure to grasp the vital difference between stock
gambling and stock speculation. Still, by reason of my
seven years' experience in reading the tape and a certain
natural aptitude for the game, my stake was earning not
indeed a fortune but a very high rate of interest. I won and
lost as before, but I was winning on balance. The more I
made the more I spent. This is the usual experience with
most men. No, not necessarily with easy-money pickers,
but with every human being who is not a slave of the
hoarding instinct.
69

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Some men, like old Russell Sage, have the moneymaking and the money-hoarding instinct equally well
developed, and of course they die disgustingly rich.
The game of beating the market exclusively interested
me from ten to three every day, and after three, the game
of living my life. Don't misunderstand me. I never allowed
pleasure to interfere with business. When I lost it was
because I was wrong and not because I was suffering from
dissipation or excesses. There never were any shattered
nerves or rum-shaken limbs to spoil my game. I couldn't
afford anything that kept me from feeling physically and
mentally fit. Even now I am usually in bed by ten. As a
young man I never kept late hours, because I could not do
business properly on insufficient sleep. I was doing better
than breaking even and that is why I didn't think there was
any need to deprive myself of the good things of life. The
market was always there to supply them. I was acquiring
the confidence that comes to a man from a professionally
dispassionate attitude toward his own method of providing
bread and butter for himself.
The first change I made in my play was in the matter of
time. I couldn't wait for the sure thing to come along and
then take a point or two out of it as I could in the bucket
shops. I had to start much earlier if I wanted to catch the
move in Fullerton's office. In other words, I had to study
what was going to happen; to anticipate stock movements.
That sounds asininely commonplace, but you know what I
mean. It was the change in my own attitude toward the
game that was of supreme importance to me. It taught me,
little by little, the essential difference between betting on
fluctuations and anticipating inevitable advances and
declines, between gambling and speculating.
I had to go further back than an hour in my studies of
the market which was something I never would have
learned to do in the biggest bucket shop in the world. I
interested myself in trade reports and railroad earnings
and financial and commercial statistics. Of course I loved
70

V

to trade heavily and they called me the Boy Plunger; but I
also liked to study the moves. I never thought that
anything was irksome if it helped me to trade more
intelligently. Before I can solve a problem I must state it to
myself. When I think I have found the solution I must
prove I am right. I know of only one way to prove it; and
that is, with my own money.
Slow as my progress seems now, I suppose I learned as
fast as I possibly could, considering that I was making
money on balance. If I had lost oftener perhaps it might
have spurred me to more continuous study. I certainly
would have had more mistakes to spot. But I am not sure
of the exact value of losing, for if I had lost more I would
have lacked the money to test out the improvements in my
methods of trading.
Studying my winning plays in Fullerton's office I
discovered that although I often was 100 per cent right on
the market that is, in my diagnosis of conditions and
general trend—I was not making as much money as my
market "tightness" entitled me to. Why wasn't I?
There was as much to learn from partial victory as from
defeat.
For instance, I had been bullish from the very start of a
bull market, and I had backed my opinion by buying
stocks. An advance followed, as I had clearly foreseen. So
far, all very well. But what else did I do? Why, I listened to
the elder statesmen and curbed my youthful
impetuousness. I made up my mind to be wise and play
carefully, conservatively. Everybody knew that the way to
do that was to take profits and buy back your stocks on
reactions. And that is precisely what I did, or rather what I
tried to do; for I often took profits and waited for a
reaction that never came. And I saw my stock go kiting up
ten points more and I sitting there with my four-point
profit safe in my conservative pocket. They say you never
grow poor taking profits. No, you don't. But neither do you
grow rich taking a four-point profit in a bull market.
71

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Where I should have made twenty thousand dollars I
made two thousand. That was what my conservatism did
for me. About the time I discovered what a small
percentage of what I should have made I was getting I
discovered something else, and that is that suckers differ
among themselves according to the degree of experience.
The tyro knows nothing, and everybody, including
himself, knows it. But the next, or second, grade thinks he
knows a great deal and makes others feel that way too. He
is the experienced sucker, who has studied not the market
itself but a few remarks about the market made by a still
higher grade of suckers. The second-grade sucker knows
how to keep from losing his money in some of the ways
that get the raw beginner. It is this semi-sucker rather
than the 100 per cent article who is the real all-the-yearround support of the commission houses. He lasts about
three and a half years on an average, as compared with a
single season of from three to thirty weeks, which is the
usual Wall Street life of a first offender. It is naturally the
semi-sucker who is always quoting the famous trading
aphorisms and the various rules of the game. He knows all
the don'ts that ever fell from the oracular lips of the old
stagers excepting the principal one, which is:
Don't be a sucker!
This semi-sucker is the type that thinks he has cut his
wisdom teeth because he loves to buy on declines. He
waits for them. He measures his bargains by the number
of points it has sold off from the top. In big bull markets
the plain unadulterated sucker, utterly ignorant of rules
and precedents, buys blindly because he hopes blindly. He
makes most of the money until one of the healthy
reactions takes it away from him at one fell swoop. But the
Careful Mike sucker does what I did when I thought I was
playing the game intelligently according to the intelligence
of others. I knew I needed to change my bucket-shop
methods and I thought I was solving my problem with any
72

V

change, particularly one that assayed high gold values
according to the experienced traders among the
customers.
Most—let us call 'em customers—are alike. You find
very few who can truthfully say that Wall Street doesn't
owe them money. In Fullerton's there were the usual
crowd. All grades! Well, there was one old chap who was
not like the others. To begin with, he was a much older
man. Another thing was that he never volunteered advice
and never bragged of his winnings. He was a great hand
for listening very attentively to the others. He did not seem
very keen to get tips—that is, he never asked the talkers
what they'd heard or what they knew. But when somebody
gave him one he always thanked the tipster very politely.
Sometimes he thanked the tipster again—when the tip
turned out O.K. But if it went wrong he never whined, so
that nobody could tell whether he followed it or let it slide
by. It was a legend of the office that the old jigger was rich
and could swing quite a line. But he wasn't donating much
to the firm in the way of commissions; at least not that
anyone could see. His name was Partridge, but they
nicknamed him Turkey behind his back, because he was so
thick-chested and had a habit of strutting about the
various rooms, with the point of his chin resting on his
breast.
The customers, who were all eager to be shoved and
forced into doing things so as to lay the blame for failure
on others, used to go to old Partridge and tell him what
some friend of a friend of an insider had advised them to
do in a certain stock. They would tell him what they had
not done with the tip so he would tell them what they
ought to do. But whether the tip they had was to buy or to
sell, the old chap's answer was always the same.
The customer would finish the tale of his perplexity and
then ask: "What do you think I ought to do?"
