going back, day after day, dropping two dollars per cup for the Starbucks
“experience.” Starbucks has made stellar gains and is a great moneymaking

FIGURE 1.9
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

29

stock. It has solid industry leadership, textbook marketing concepts, and,
more important, customer loyalty. These are all the qualities to look for
when selecting a long-term purchase.

BECOME THE NEXT WARREN BUFFETT
I believe that stocks should be traded as an investment, but there are many
ways to capture a profit. I must say for all investors and for every trader,
you can start your own mutual fund. It requires discipline not only to open
a stock account but also to fund it and add to it every month. If you are a
new investor, just reading this book to see if trading for a living is for you,
it is imperative that you start somewhere and start with a select stock account first. The discipline is that you should add money in the account
every month, like you are paying a bill. If you are under 30, consider it your
retirement. You are paying your bills in the future now. That is some of the
best advice anyone gave me, and I think it is worthy of passing on to you.
Once you gain more experience, you can separate long-term investing from
short-term speculative trading, which is one form of diversification. After
all, you may see a long period of flat performance in one of your core holdings. Short-term day trading, if you have the time and resources, can be a rewarding experience. Imagine owning Wal-Mart and for literally seven years
experiencing a loss to a flat performance. Figure 1.10 illustrates the market’s sideways move in one of the world’s biggest retail stores.
If you are considering supplementing your investment techniques, one
of the many drawbacks of trading stocks for a short-term day trader with a
small trading account is that you are limited to how many trades you can
make, especially if your account is less than $25,000 and you are not signed
up for a margin account. In that case, you are limited to five round-trip buyand-sell trades per week due to SEC rules. So short-term trading would not
be a good consideration for stocks. That is where trading stock index futures and forex markets takes over, as I will explain in the following pages.
There is one high-risk, high-reward method of trading stocks that I have
not covered yet: getting in on an initial public offering (IPO) stock. Those
investors lucky enough to get in on an IPO like Google (goog), the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME), or even the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT—
stock, BOT) were able to double, triple, quadruple, or even better, their initial investment dollars.
The Chicago Board of Trade has been around for over 155 years, and I
imagine it will likely continue to be around for another 155 years, with little competition in products traded on its exchange and with the increase in
popularity on the electronics metals products, such as gold and silver, plus

30

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.10
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

the huge volume of trades generated in the grain markets. And with the action in the U.S. Treasury notes and bonds and Federal (Fed) funds contracts, the CBOT certainly has a positive longer-term outlook for profitable
revenue growth. Figure 1.11 shows that the price exploded to nearly as
high as 134 but has managed to trade back as low as 86 as of this writing.
The BOT stock illustrates that not all IPOs are guaranteed moneymakers; in
fact, depending on your entry, these offerings can be hazardous to your financial well-being. The phrase “invest wisely” means “not putting all your
eggs in one basket.” Find out which is the sector leader, and go with that
stock, unless you like the underdog. In this case, the underdog would be
BOT compared to CME.
As you can see in Figure 1.11, BOT stock initially shot up from the 80s
to a little over 130. At the time I was preparing to write this book, it had not
managed to get back over 130 but traded as high as 119. I do feel that once
the Treasury reinstates issuing the 30-year Treasury bond, volume will increase, which will translate into more revenue for the exchange. Therefore, the profitability should improve through the next few years. If a
drought scare causes the grain complex to go through the roof, you will see

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

31

FIGURE 1.11
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

this stock price move like a rocket. Many see the Chicago Board of Trade
mimicking the Chicago Mercantile Exchange success story. As Figure 1.12
shows, in just three short years, CME stock went from under 40 to close to
400 by late November 2005.
The biggest surprise of the three had to be the gains by Google, as
Figure 1.13 shows. After the dot-com implosion in 2001, not many were
willing to experiment with any Internet stock. That mentality may be the
one reason why this stock had such a move, from a contrarian point of
view, that is.

LONG-TERM INVESTING OR SHORT-TERM TRADING
We have briefly covered ways to trade stocks and certain methods to trade
leaders of stocks in certain sectors. Investing carries less stress, fewer dayto-day decisions, and less risk than trading does; and with that come fewer
rewards. Just as we all have different personalities, there are that many
opinions on how to trade the markets.

32

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.12
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Some of the keys to successful trading are:
• Diversification. This not only applies to markets, such as a wide assortment of stocks in a portfolio, but also to trading different strategies
and various investment instruments.
• Risk Management. Profitable trading also comes from skills acquired
from practicing discipline, patience, and risk management techniques
that preserve your capital.
• Behavior or Emotions. Successful trading means removing the most
destructive element, negative emotional feelings that plague investors
when trading: fear, greed, and anxiety. Finding the right mixture of investment products and trading styles can teach you to feel secure when
trading.
The methods we cover in this book can be applied to the topic of selecting stock and spread trading, as we just covered, and to long-term-position trading, as in the style of trading for which Warren Buffett is famous.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

33

FIGURE 1.13
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS
Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are listed on different exchanges and are
traded on the open market. Choosing this kind of product allows an investor to select the right sector of performance, rather than pinpointing an
individual stock. The benefits of trading ETFs compared to a mutual fund
are enormous: They allow diversification; they incur more effective transaction costs; there is pricing transparency; and they are tax efficient. After
all, it is almost impossible for an individual trader with limited trading resources to effectively track and trade every stock in all sectors of the market. ETFs are index-based investment vehicles and are traded as a share of
a single security based on an entire portfolio of stocks. The advantage here
is that the trader can mix the benefits of applying technical analysis and
fundamental analysis to a combination of stock and index trading.
In the most recent development, ETFs have started to include products
related to commodities such as crude oil, gold, and silver; but also they
have expanded into the forex arena by launching a euro currency product.

34

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Personalized Mini-Mutual Fund
Instead of agonizing over which stock will outperform in a certain sector,
you can use ETFs as an investment vehicle that has certain stocks in a basket as one unit, listed as a sector fund. This allows individual investors to
invest in a group of stocks in a sector, rather than relying on a mutual fund
to do it for them. Moreover, many mutual funds charge management fees
and at times do not fully invest all an investor’s cash in the market. Because
ETFs trade like a stock, the price of which fluctuates daily, an ETF does not
have its net asset value (NAV) calculated every day like a mutual fund. By
owning an ETF, you get the diversification of an index fund plus the ability
to sell short, buy on margin, and purchase as little as one share.
Another advantage of an ETF is that the expense ratios for most ETFs
are lower than that of the average mutual fund. When buying and selling
ETFs, you have to pay the same commission to your broker that you’d pay
on any regular order. ETFs allow you to sell without the uptick rule, so you
can short right away, even after the market is in a strong downtrend. You do
not have to wait until the close of the day settlement price as happens in a
mutual fund. Another benefit is the tax consequences because of shielding
from capital gains due to the fact that ETFs do not change holding like a
mutual fund does. So purchasing shares of ETFs is a viable alternative to
investing in mutual funds for individual investors. Keep in mind that many
of the ETFs available today have access to trading options around the ETF.
Therefore, you can develop simple or more complex hedge or spreading
strategies tied around an ETF. There are some negatives, such as the threeday settlement restriction and a bid/ask spread just like any other market;
but the benefits certainly outweigh the negatives, especially for longer-term
swing and position traders.

The Birth of ETFs
The original ETF was offered to the investing public back in 1993 by the
American Stock Exchange (go to www.amex.com for more listings) and
was known as the SPDRs, which stands for Standard & Poor’s Depositary
Receipts and corresponds with the price movements of the Standard &
Poor’s 500.
The more actively traded and by far more popular ETF came with the
QQQs, which directly correspond with the Nasdaq 100. Then there are the
Diamonds, which move in correlation to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
ETFs have since expanded, and there is now a new breed of investment vehicles to capture opportunities in sectors known as HOLDRs. These trading
vehicles are based on certain stocks in a certain sector, known as a basket
of diversified stocks in a specific sector.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

35

Just as the examples comparing the U.S. Real Estate Trust (IYR) shown
in Figure 1.14 to Toll Brothers, ETFs can offer investors a relationship to
overall sector performance that is better than outright exposure in just one
stock if you are wrong in your investment decision. As we go forward in the
book, I will show you a technical analysis method such as pivot points
using a longer-term time frame and how it can help you determine entry
and exit targets, such as targeting almost the exact high in Toll Brothers, as
well as other stocks.
As you can see in the comparison of the two charts in Figure 1.15, Toll
Brothers took a nasty hit while the Real Estate Investment Trust ETF rebounded from the correction.
Looking at a related or similar stock, such as Caterpillar in Figure 1.16,
you would assume that if the construction or housing and real estate markets could experience a setback due to the 14 interest rate hikes orchestrated by the Federal Reserve, then a company that manufactures
construction and heavy equipment might suffer a significant correction as

FIGURE 1.14
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

36

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.15
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

well. However, that was not the case, as the chart illustrates. In fact, it is
quite the opposite. So by utilizing an ETF and investing in an overall sector,
an investor has a better chance of gaining a better rate of return. By using
the technical analysis methods that will be covered in this book, an investor
can apply those signals to ETF markets. Keep in mind that options will
eventually be available for most ETFs as well. That will offer investors quite
an edge as far as hedging or protecting against adverse market moves, too.

Hot Sectors, Hot Stocks
In order to take advantage of a hot sector of the market, such as energy,
biotechnology, technology, Internet, brokers, semiconductors, telecom,
and cyclical, to name a few, how would an investor identify the best stocks
in that sector and then narrow it down to one or two stocks and be right?
That is generally the tough part of investing. Trading an ETF or a HOLDR
can help remove that difficulty and may help a longer-term investor achieve
that goal. Moreover, it can also allow an individual to literally trade like a
hedge fund through means of diversified sectors and allow for implement-

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

37

FIGURE 1.16
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

ing simple to sophisticated trading strategies integrating options as stated
earlier. With market liquidity and market transparency, traders using ETFs
can buy or sell at current market values rather than at assigned market values based on the close, as is the case when investing in mutual funds. In
fact, some mutual funds may not be fully vested in stocks at a given time.
This means your cash may not be working at 100 percent capacity.

Currency ETFs
This book will also reveal more about the forex markets or foreign currency trading. And on that subject, there was a new ETF that may appeal to
those who want to participate in currency investing but have neither the
time capacity nor the desire for excessive leverage exposure. Rydex Investments launched the first-ever currency-based exchange-traded product back in December 2005.
The Euro Currency Trust (FXE) is an ETF that tracks the price of the
euro, with each share representing about 100 euros plus accrued interest.
Shares of the trust, called “Euro Currency shares,” trade on the New York

38

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Stock Exchange (NYSE). The ETF has a 0.4 percent annual fee. Investors
generally pay commissions to buy and sell ETFs, which trade daily on exchanges as stocks do. Initially, the trust registered 17 million Euro Currency shares, for a total offering price of about $2 billion. Shares of the ETF
can be sold short and are eligible for margin, as most ETFs are. Notice the
correlation of price movement in the ETF shown in Figure 1.17 with the
euro FX currency futures contract shown in Figure 1.18.
Granted there is more liquidity in the price of the euro futures contract;
but keep in mind the that the euro ETF was in its third week of trading after
its initial launch date. I suspect that by the time this book is published, the
volume and liquidity will improve dramatically.

Commodity ETFs
Not all ETFs track the price movement of the underlying derivative market
exactly. Take for example the OIH chart shown in Figure 1.19. As you com-

FIGURE 1.17
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.18
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.19
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

39

40

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

pare moves in the underlying commodity of crude oil, as shown in Figure
1.20, you will see that at times the correlation is not 100 percent exact. In
fact, at times the ETF has actually been a leading price indicator of the underlying commodity price move! Now there is an ETF that is more closely
correlated to crude oil, such as the United States Oil Fund (USO).
The example in Figure 1.21 is streetTRACKS Gold ETF, traded on the
NYSE. It was launched in late 2004; and as of December 2005, when I
started writing this book, it was trading roughly 2.1 million shares a day. It
has attracted $5.65 billion from investors. Each share of the ETF represents one-tenth of an ounce of gold, which allows mutual funds or private
investors to invest in gold without actually owning the metal. It mirrors or
tracks the price movement of gold almost exactly, as you can see from Figure 1.21 when compared to the gold futures chart in Figure 1.22.
The objective of the trust is for the value of its shares to reflect at any
given time the price of gold owned by the trust at that time, minus
the trust’s expenses and liabilities. The trust is not actively managed. It receives gold deposited with it in exchange for the creation of baskets of
iShares. The trust sells gold as necessary to cover the trust’s liabilities, and

FIGURE 1.20
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.21
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.22
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

41

42

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

it delivers gold in exchange for baskets of iShares surrendered to it for redemption. The trust is not an investment company registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 nor a commodity pool for purposes of the
Commodity Exchange Act. This is traded on the American Stock Exchange
(AMEX).
Figure 1.22 shows the CBOT gold minicontract; and as you can see as
you compare the two charts, the price movement in the gold ETF shown in
Figure 1.21 mirrors almost exactly the price movement in the gold futures
contract.
For silver bulls, bears, or spread traders, the newest ETF addition was
the AMEX iShares Silver Trust (SLV). It is a fund based on the daily price of
one ounce of silver as set by the London Bullion Market Association. Those
spread traders buying gold or selling silver now can use ETFs. The key in
showing you the various markets as compared to the ETFs is that you realize that once you identify the opportunity, you then can make a good decision on which opportunity best presents itself. While futures offer the
leverage, you may want to invest longer term; and an ETF would be right up
your alley without having to pick a gold or silver mining stock. If you are
bullish on precious metals but don’t want to buy the physical metal and if
you have the luxury to trade options, then an ETF would be the right
choice.
It does not go without saying that an outright stock selection can provide a great return and can at times outperform the sector and even the underlying market. Look at the price move for Newmont Mining in Figure
1.23. This stock took off and never looked back, even when the price of
gold and the gold ETF made a price correction. There are times when that
can happen. Even if you were to purchase long call options, the most profitable rate of return comes from the leverage of an outright long call option
position in a straight up move, such as Newmont experienced. The question
is how many times can that trade and, more important, the timing of such
an event be replicated.
Another advantage of an ETF is the availability and structured use of
iShares. If you are trying to match the most liquid investment vehicle with
a specific sector or group of like stocks, this may be the right investment
choice. IShares are considered to be like an open-ended mutual fund that
reinvests dividends. This investment class is always fully invested in the
market; so when the market moves up and you are long, you would fully
benefit. These index funds also trade just like stocks. Each fund share represents a proportion of ownership in each stock that makes up the index.
As we have briefly discussed, to make the right choice in an investment and
choose the right stock, you can utilize fundamental analysis, such as earnings per share and market capitalization, to determine what the potential
futures earnings might be. This data can help you determine if the stock is

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

43

FIGURE 1.23
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

ripe as a buying opportunity or if the price is too high or overvalued and
should be avoided. Considerations that can never be determined are the
hidden demand for a company’s product and the way the company is run,
to see if the profit margins are high or if operating costs and deep discounts
to retailers cut into the company’s bottom line. Therefore, it could be prudent to possibly play the sector through an ETF, which effectively would
eliminate the issue of selecting the wrong stock or the underperformer of
that specific sector.

The Hot Stock
Take, for example, one of the most amazing come-from-behind stories in
2005 and early 2006. Advance Micro Devices (AMD) triumphed, surpassing
Intel’s price level. It would have taken patience and discipline to stick with
this winner; but outperform it did, and what a hot stock it was, as the chart
shows in Figure 1.24!
For a specific ETF or iShare that would list AMD and Intel, you would
look at the iShares Goldman Sachs Semiconductor (IGW) listing. The top 10

44

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.24
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

holdings as of 12/31/2005 were Texas Instruments, Intel, Motorola, Applied
Materials, STMicroelectronics NV, Marvell, Technology Analog Devices,
Broadcom, Advanced Micro Devices, and Maxim Integrated Products.
Intel was a darling among institutional traders and mutual funds, but it
had not performed well, let alone offered enough volatility to day trade or
even swing trade a position. There was just not enough movement in this
stock, as Figure 1.25 shows.
So how was an investor to make money, and how would one possibly
choose to invest in AMD instead of Intel? Actually, once a few simple concepts of identifying market price momentum through candle charts are covered in the next few chapters, you will see how and why to stick around
when a market goes into a trending phase. Also, once you learn these techniques, it will be pretty easy to help select the right stock. Another simple
investment decision would be to buy the iShares Goldman Sachs Semiconductor ETF! As you can see from Figure 1.26, the semiconductor ETF
moved up. It would have been a far better trade simply being outright long
AMD from under 15 in March 2005, but the torture of watching Intel go
nowhere would have been a reason to buy the semiconductor ETF and
