
really studied to learn whether what they’re doing is right or wrong. They
haven’t studied in enough detail what makes a successful stock go up and
down. Luck has nothing to do with it, and it’s not a total mystery. And it certainly isn’t a “random walk” or an efficient market, as some inexperienced
university professors formerly believed.
It takes some work to become really good at stock selection, and still
more to know how and when to sell. Selling a stock correctly is a tougher job
and the one that is least understood by everyone. To do it right, you need a
plan to cut losses and the discipline to do this quickly without wavering.
Forget your ego, swallow your pride, stop trying to argue with the market,
and don’t get emotionally attached to any stock that’s losing you money.
Remember: there are no good stocks; they’re all bad . . . unless they go up
in price. Learn from the 2000 and 2008 experience. Those who followed
our selling rules protected their capital and nailed down gains.
Those who did not have or follow any selling rules got hurt.

253

11

• CHAPTE R •

When to Sell and Take Your
Worthwhile Profits

This is one of the most vital chapters in this book, covering an essential subject

few investors handle well. So study it very carefully. Common stock is just
like any other merchandise. You, as the merchant, must sell your stock if
you’re to realize a profit, and the best way to sell a stock is when it’s on the
way up, while it’s still advancing and looking strong to everyone else.
This may be contrary to your human nature, because it means selling
when your stock is strong, is up a lot in price, and looks like it could make
even more profit for you. But if you do this, you won’t get caught in the
heartrending 20% to 40% corrections that can hit market leaders and put
downside pressure on your portfolio. You’ll never sell at the exact top, so
don’t kick yourself if a stock goes still higher after you sell.
If you don’t sell early, you’ll be late. The object is to make and
take significant gains and not get excited, optimistic, greedy, or
emotionally carried away as your stock’s advance gets stronger.
Keep in mind the old saying: “Bulls make money and bears make money,
but pigs get slaughtered.”

The basic objective of every account should be to show a net profit. To
retain worthwhile profits, you must sell and take them. The key is knowing
when to do just that.
Bernard Baruch, the financier who built a fortune in the stock market,
said, “Repeatedly, I have sold a stock while it was still rising—and that has
been one reason why I have held on to my fortune. Many a time, I might

254

When to Sell and Take Your Worthwhile Profits

have made a good deal more by holding a stock, but I would also have been
caught in the fall when the price of the stock collapsed.”
When asked if there was a technique for making money on the stock
exchange, Nathan Rothschild, the highly successful international banker, said,
“There certainly is. I never buy at the bottom, and I always sell too soon.”
Joe Kennedy, one-time Wall Street speculator and father of former
President John F. Kennedy, believed “only a fool holds out for the top
dollar.” “The object,” he said, “is to get out while a stock is up before it
has a chance to break and turn down.” And Gerald M. Loeb, a highly successful financier, stressed “once the price has risen into estimated normal
or overvaluation areas, the amount held should be reduced steadily as
quotations advance.”
What all these Wall Street legends believed was this: you simply must get
out while the getting is good. The secret is to hop off the elevator on one of
the floors on the way up and not ride it back down again.

You Must Develop a Profit-and-Loss Plan
To be a big success in the stock market, you need definite rules and a profitand-loss plan. I developed many of the buy and sell rules described in this
book in the early 1960s, when I was a young stockbroker with Hayden,
Stone. These rules helped me buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange
and start my own firm shortly thereafter. When I started out, though, I concentrated on developing a set of buy rules that would locate the very best
stocks. But as you’ll see, I had only half of the puzzle figured out.
My buy rules were first developed in January 1960, when I analyzed the
three best-performing mutual funds of the prior two years. The standout
was the then-small Dreyfus Fund, which racked up gains twice as large as
those of many of its competitors.
I sent away for copies of every Dreyfus quarterly report and prospectus
from 1957 to 1959. Then I calculated the average cost of each new stock the
fund had purchased. Next, I got a book of stock charts and marked in red
the average price Dreyfus had paid for its new holdings each quarter.
After looking at more than a hundred new Dreyfus purchases, I made a
stunning discovery: every stock had been bought at the highest price it had
sold for in the past year. In other words, if a stock had bounced between $40
and $50 for many months, Dreyfus bought it as soon as it made a new high
in price and traded between $50 and $51. The stocks had also formed certain chart price patterns before leaping into new high ground. This gave me
two vitally important clues: buying on new highs was important, and certain
chart patterns spelled big profit potential.

255

256 BE SMART FROM THE START
Jack Dreyfus Was a Chartist
Jack Dreyfus was a chartist and a tape reader. He bought all his stocks based
on market action, and only when the price broke to new highs off sound
chart patterns. He was also beating the pants off every competitor who
ignored the real-world facts of market behavior (supply and demand) and
depended only on fundamental, analytical personal opinions.
Jack’s research department in those early, big-performance days consisted of three young Turks who posted the day’s price and volume action of
hundreds of listed stocks to very oversized charts. I saw these charts one day
when I visited Dreyfus’s headquarters in New York.
Shortly thereafter, two small funds run by Fidelity in Boston started
doing the same thing. They, too, produced superior results. One was managed by Ned Johnson, Jr., and the other by Jerry Tsai. Almost all the stocks
that the Dreyfus and Fidelity funds bought also had strong increases in their
quarterly earnings reports.
So the first buy rules I made in 1960 were as follows:
1. Concentrate on listed stocks that sell for more than $20 a share with at

least some institutional acceptance.
2. Insist that the company show increases in earnings per share in each of

the past five years and that the current quarterly earnings are up at least
20%.
3. Buy when the stock is making or about to make a new high in price after

emerging from a sound correction and price consolidation period. This
breakout should be accompanied by a volume increase to at least 50%
above the stock’s average daily volume.
The first stock I bought under my new set of buy rules was Universal
Match in February 1960. It doubled in 16 weeks, but I failed to make much
money because I didn’t have much money to invest. I was just getting
started as a stockbroker, and I didn’t have many customers. I also got nervous and sold it too quickly. Later that year, sticking with my well-defined
game plan, I selected Procter & Gamble, Reynolds Tobacco, and MGM.
They, too, made outstanding price moves, but I still didn’t make much
money because the money I had to invest was limited.
About this time, I was accepted to Harvard Business School’s first Program for Management Development (PMD). In what little extra time I had
at Harvard, I read a number of business and investment books in the library.
The best was How to Trade in Stocks, by Jesse Livermore. From this book,
I learned that your objective in the market was not to be right, but to make
big money when you were right.

When to Sell and Take Your Worthwhile Profits

Jesse Livermore and Pyramiding
After reading his book, I adopted Livermore’s method of pyramiding, or
averaging up, when a stock advanced after I purchased it. “Averaging up” is
a technique where, after your initial stock purchase, you buy additional
shares of the stock when it moves up in price. This is usually warranted
when the first purchase of a stock is made precisely at a correct pivot, or buy,
point and the price has increased 2% or 3% from the original purchase
price. Essentially, I followed up what was working with additional but
always smaller purchases, allowing me to concentrate my buying when I
seemed to be right. If I was wrong and the stock dropped a certain amount
below my cost, I sold the stock to cut short every loss.
This is very different from how the majority of people invest. Most of
them average down, meaning they buy additional shares as a stock declines
in price in order to lower their cost per share. But why add more of your
hard-earned money to stocks that aren’t working?

Learning by Analysis of My Failures
In the first half of 1961, my rules and plan worked great. Some of the top
winners I bought that year were Great Western Financial, Brunswick, KerrMcGee, Crown Cork & Seal, AMF, and Certain-teed. But by summer, all
was not well.
I had bought the right stocks at exactly the right time and I had pyramided with several additional buys, so I had good positions and profits. But
when the stocks finally topped, I held on too long and watched my profits
vanish. If you’ve been investing for a while, I’ll bet you know exactly what
I’m talking about. It’s a problem you must tackle and solve if you want real
results. When you snooze, you lose. It was hard to swallow. I’d been dead
right on my stock selections for more than a year, but I had just broken even.
I was so upset that I spent the last six months of 1961 carefully analyzing
every transaction I had made during the prior year. Much like doctors do
postmortem operations and the Civil Aeronautics Board conducts postcrash
investigations, I took a red pen and marked on charts exactly where each buy
and sell decision was made. Then I overlaid the general market averages.
Eventually my problem became crystal clear: I knew how to select the
best leading stocks, but I had no plan for when to sell them and take profits.
I had been completely clueless, a real dummy. I was so unaware that I had
never even thought about when should a stock be sold and a profit taken.
My stocks went up and then down like yo-yos, and my paper profits were
wiped out.

257

258 BE SMART FROM THE START
For example, the way I handled Certain-teed, a building materials company that made shell homes, was especially poor. I bought the stock in the
low $20s, but during a weak moment in the market, I got scared and sold it
for only a two- or three-point gain. Certain-teed went on to triple in price. I
was in at the right time, but I didn’t recognize what I had and failed to capitalize on a phenomenal opportunity.
My analysis of Certain-teed and other such personal failures proved to be
the critical key to my seeing what I had been doing wrong that I had to correct if I was to get on the right track to future success. Have you ever analyzed every one of your failures so you can learn from them? Few people do.
What a tragic mistake you’ll make if you don’t look carefully at yourself and
the decisions you’ve made in the stock market that did not work. You get
better only when you learn what you’ve done wrong.
This is the difference between winners and losers, whether in the market
or in life. If you got hurt in the 2000 or 2008 bear market, don’t get discouraged and quit. Plot out your mistakes on charts, study them, and write some
additional new rules that, if you follow them, will correct your mistakes and
let you avoid the actions that cost you a lot of time and money. You’ll be that
much closer to fully capitalizing on the next bull market. And in America,
there will be many future bull markets. You’re never a loser until you quit
and give up or start blaming other people, like most politicians do. If you do
what I’ve suggested here, it could just change your whole life.
“There are no secrets to success,” said General Colin Powell, former secretary of state. “It is the result of preparation, hard work, and learning from
failure.”

My Revised Profit-and-Loss Plan
As a result of my analysis, I discovered that successful stocks, after breaking
out of a proper base, tend to move up 20% to 25%. Then they usually
decline, build new bases, and in some cases resume their advances. With
this new knowledge in mind, I made a rule that I’d buy each stock exactly at
the pivot buy point and have the discipline not to pyramid or add to my position at more than 5% past that point. Then I’d sell each stock when it was up
20%, while it was still advancing.
In the case of Certain-teed, however, the stock ran up 20% in just two
weeks. This was the type of super winner I was hoping to find and capitalize on the next time around. So, I made an absolutely important exception
to the “sell at +20% rule”: if the stock was so powerful that it vaulted 20%
in only one, two, or three weeks, it had to be held for at least eight weeks.
Then it would be analyzed to see if it should be held for a possible six-

When to Sell and Take Your Worthwhile Profits

month long-term capital gain. (Six months was the long-term capital gains
period at that time.) If a stock fell below its purchase price by 8%, I would
sell it and take the loss.
So, here was the revised profit-and-loss plan: take 20% profits when you
have them (except with the most powerful of all stocks) and cut your losses
at a maximum of 8% below your purchase price.
The plan had several big advantages. You could be wrong twice and right
once and still not get into financial trouble. When you were right and you
wanted to follow up with another, somewhat smaller buy in the same stock
a few points higher, you were frequently forced into a decision to sell one of
your more laggard or weakest performers. The money in your slower-performing stock positions was continually force-fed into your best performers.
Over a period of years, I came to almost always make my first follow-up
purchase automatically as soon as my initial buy was up 2% or 2½% in price.
This lessened the chance that I might hesitate and wind up making the additional buy when the stock was up 5% to 10%.
When you appear to be right, you should always follow up. When a boxer
in the ring finally has an opening and lands a powerful punch, he must
always follow up his advantage . . . if he wants to win.
By selling your laggards and putting the proceeds into your winners, you
are putting your money to far more efficient use. You could make two or
three 20% plays in a good year, and you wouldn’t have to sit through so many
long, unproductive corrections while a stock built a whole new base.
A 20% gain in three to six months is substantially more productive than a
20% gain that takes 12 months to achieve. Two 20% gains compounded in
one year equals a 44% annual rate of return. When you’re more experienced, you can use full margin (buying power in a margin account), and
increase your compounded return to nearly 100%.

How I Discovered the General Market System
Another exceedingly profitable observation I made from analyzing every
one of my money-losing, out-of-ignorance mistakes was that most of my
market-leading stocks that topped had done so because the general market
started into a decline of 10% or more. This conclusion finally led to my discovering and developing our system of interpreting the daily general market
averages’ price and volume chart. It gave us the critical ability to establish
the true trend and major changes of direction in the overall market.
Three months later, by April 1, 1962, following all of my selling rules had
automatically forced me out of every stock. I was 100% in cash, with no idea
the market was headed for a real crash that spring. This is the fascinating

259

260 BE SMART FROM THE START
thing: the rules will force you out, but you don’t know how bad it can really
get. You just know it’s going down and you’re out, which sooner or later will
be worth its weight in gold to you. That’s what happened in 2008. Our rules
forced us out, and we had no idea the market was headed for a major breakdown. Most institutional investors were affected because their investment
policy was to be fully invested (95% to 100%).
In early 1962, I had finished reading Reminiscences of a Stock Operator,
by Edwin LeFevre. I was struck by the parallels between the stock market
panic of 1907, which LeFevre discussed in detail, and what seemed to be
happening in April 1962. Since I was 100% in cash and my daily Dow analysis said the market was weak at that point, I began to sell short stocks such
as Certain-teed and Alside (an earlier sympathy play to Certain-teed). For
this, I got into trouble with Hayden, Stone’s home office on Wall Street. The
firm had just recommended Certain-teed as a buy, and here I was going
around telling everyone it was a short sale. Later in the year, I sold Korvette
short at over $40. The profits from both of these short sales were good.
By October 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis, I was again in cash. A
day or two after the Soviet Union backed down from President Kennedy’s
wise naval blockade, a rally attempt in the Dow Jones Industrial Average followed through, signaling a major upturn according to my new system. I then
bought the first stock of the new bull market, Chrysler, at 585⁄8. It had a classic cup-with-handle base.
Throughout 1963, I simply followed my rules to the letter. They worked
so well that the “worst”-performing account I managed that year was up
115%. It was a cash account. Other accounts that used margin were up several hundred percent. There were many individual stock losses, but they
were usually small, averaging 5% to 6%. Profits, on the other hand, were
awesome because of the concentrated positions we built by careful, disciplined pyramiding when we were right.
Starting with only $4,000 or $5,000 that I had saved from my salary, plus
some borrowed money and the use of full margin, I had three back-to-back
big winners: Korvette on the short side in late 1962, Chrysler on the buy
side, and Syntex, which was bought at $100 per share with the Chrysler
profit in June 1963. After eight weeks, Syntex was up 40%, and I decided to
play this powerful stock out for six months. By the fall of 1963, the profit had
topped $200,000, and I decided to buy a seat on the New York Stock
Exchange. So don’t ever let anyone tell you it can’t be done! You can learn
to invest wisely as long as you’re willing to study all of your mistakes, learn
from them, and write new self-correcting rules. This can be the greatest
opportunity of a lifetime, if you are determined, not easily discouraged, and
willing to work hard and prepare yourself. Anyone can make it happen.

When to Sell and Take Your Worthwhile Profits

For me, many long evenings of study led to precise rules, disciplines, and
a plan that finally worked. Luck had nothing to do with it; it was persistence
and hard work. You can’t expect to watch television, drink beer, or party with
your friends every night and still find the answers to something as complicated as the stock market or the U.S. economy.
In America, anyone can do anything by working at it. There are no limits
placed on you. It all depends on your desire and your attitude. It makes no
difference where you’re from, what you look like, or where you went to
school. You can improve your life and your future and capture the American
Dream. And you don’t have to have a lot of money to start.
If you get discouraged at times, don’t ever give up. Go back and put in
some detailed extra effort. It’s always the study and learning time that you
put in after nine to five, Monday through Friday, that ultimately makes the
difference between winning and reaching your goals, and missing out on
truly great opportunities that really can change your whole life.

Two Things to Remember about Selling
Before we examine the key selling rules one by one, keep these two key
points in mind.
First, buying precisely right solves most of your selling problems. If you
buy at exactly the right time off a proper daily or weekly chart base in the
first place, and you do not chase or pyramid a stock when it’s extended in
price more than 5% past a correct pivot buy point, you will be in a position
to sit through most normal corrections. Winning stocks very rarely drop 8%
below a correct pivot buy point. In fact, most big winners don’t close below
their pivot point. Buying as close to the pivot point as possible is therefore
absolutely essential and may let you cut the smaller number of resulting
losses more quickly than 8%. A stock might have to drop only 4% or 5%
before you know something could be wrong.
Second, beware of the big-block selling you might see on a ticker
tape or your PC just after you buy a stock during a bull market. The selling might be emotional, uninformed, temporary, or not as large (relative to past volume) as it appears. The best stocks can have sharp
sell-offs for a few days or a week. Consult a weekly basis stock chart for
an overall perspective to avoid getting scared or shaken out in what may
just be a normal pullback. In fact, 40% to 60% of the time, a winning
stock may pull back to its exact buy point or slightly below and try to
shake you out. But it should not be down 8% unless you chased it too
high in price when you bought it. If you’re making too many mistakes
and nothing seems to be working for you, check and make sure you’re

261

262 BE SMART FROM THE START
not making a number of your buys 10%, 15%, or 20% above the precise,
correct buy point. Chasing stocks rarely works. You can’t buy when you
get more excited.

Technical Sell Signs
By studying how the greatest stock market winners, as well as the market
itself, all topped, I came up with the following list of factors that occur
when a stock tops and rolls over. Perhaps you’ve noticed that few of the
selling rules involve changes in the fundamentals of a stock. Many big
investors get out of a stock before trouble appears on the income statement. If the smart money is selling, so should you. Individual investors
don’t stand much chance when institutions begin liquidating large positions. You buy with heavy emphasis on the fundamentals, such as earnings,
sales, profit margins, return on equity, and new products, but many stocks
peak when earnings are up 100% and analysts are projecting continued
growth and higher price targets.
On the same day in 1999 that I sold Charles Schwab stock on a climax
top run-up and an exhaustion gap, one of the largest brokerage firms in
America projected that the stock would go up 50 points more. Virtually all
of my successful stocks were sold on the way up, while they were advancing and the market was not affected. A bird in the hand is worth two imaginary ones in the bush. Therefore, you must frequently sell based on
unusual market action (price and volume movement), not personal opinions from Wall Street. You must wean yourself from listening to personal
opinions. Since I never worked on Wall Street, I never got distracted by
these diversions.
There are many signals to look for when you’re trying to recognize when
a stock could be in a topping process. These include the price movement
surrounding climax tops, adverse volume, and other weak action. A lot of
this will become clearer to you as you continue to study this information and
apply it to your daily decision making. These rules and principles have been
responsible for most of my better decisions in the market, but they can seem
a bit complicated at first. I suggest that you reread Chapter 2 on chart reading, then read these selling rules again.
In fact, most of the IBD subscribers I’ve met at our hundreds of workshops who have enjoyed real success with their investments have told me
that they read this entire book two or three times, or even more. You probably aren’t going to get it all in one reading. Some who have been distracted
by all the outside noise say that they read it periodically to help them get
back on the right track.
