
Source: Investors Intelligence
FIGURE 21.8 Point-and-figure chart of the ratio of the (a) S&P Utility Sector and the (b) S&P Financials
Sector to the S&P 500

Download at www.wowebook.com

516
S&P500 Energy (S5ENRS) 402.299+1.09
plotted relative to S&P 500 Index (x2000)
875

Part VII Selection
S&P500 Materials (S5MATR) 193.837+3.75
plotted relative to S&P 500 Index (x2000)

23 Jul 2010

23 Jul 2010

425

850
400

825
375

800
350

775
325

750

300

725
275

1 Box=5, Close Prices

1 Box=5, Close Prices

FIGURE 21.9 Point-and-figure chart of the ratio of the (a) S&P Energy Sector and the (b) S&P Materials
Sector to the S&P 500

Plotting the relative strength ratio of an industry and often a stock to some underlying average, we often see an irregular line that is difficult to interpret. By plotting these ratios on a pointand-figure chart, the minor, less significant oscillations are eliminated, and the overall
relationship of the two indices becomes more obvious. In Figure 21.8a, for example, it is clear
that underperformance of utility stocks began in 2009. These charts are much more informative
than a line chart. Remember, however, when deciding whether to act on any of the ratio analyses,
the absolute price action of the stock in the numerator always must be analyzed as well. When
both charts demonstrate a trend, one can act with more confidence.

BOTTOM UP—SPECIFIC STOCK SELECTION AND RELATIVE
STRENGTH
At present, almost 8,000 stocks trade in the active stock markets in the United States. This number is too large for an analyst to screen at frequent intervals. Some technical analysts briefly
inspect the chart of every stock in their universe, using either a bar, candlestick, or point-and-figure chart. This is a laborious process and far from objective. Others screen through relative
strength ratio charts. The least time-consuming and most objective method is to screen all stocks
on a periodic basis for relative price strength using one of the methods described next. Relative
strength provides evidence that a particular stock is outperforming the market and is very likely
in a strong, upward trend. These methods have also been used successfully in mutual funds,
ETFs, industry group selection, commodities, and foreign securities.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing

517

Relative Strength
Most technical screening methods use a concept called relative strength to judge which securities
have the most promise. Relative strength is a reliable concept that has been demonstrated academically and practically to have value. Indeed, because the method is so successful, it is the primary argument against the Random Walk and Efficient Markets Hypotheses. The presumption
behind the concept of relative strength is that strength will continue, similar to how trends will
continue, and that by recognizing the strongest trends, an edge can be obtained by investing in
them until their strength abates. If the strongest stocks remain strong, the market cannot be random or efficient.
The most common means of establishing relative strength is called the ratio method. It is
merely the ratio between two investments, sectors, industry groups, averages, commodities, and
so on, to see which is outperforming the other. Usually a line chart is drawn that shows the item
of interest, say a steel stock, and a ratio of the item to an average, say a steel industry average. If
the line of the ratio is rising, it is simply showing that the particular stock is stronger than its
industry average. Interpretations of behavior are similar to those used in price and other oscillators. Divergence analysis, trend lines, and even patterns appear in the ratio lines. The item can
also be plotted in a point-and-figure chart along with a point-and-figure chart of the ratio similar
to what is shown in the sector charts shown in Figures 21.8 and 21.9.

Academic Studies of Relative Strength
In 1967, Robert Levy, PhD, published a paper in the Journal of Finance in which he argued that
relative price strength tended to remain for a long-enough period that it could be profitable and
that the concept of random walk was, therefore, dead. His paper received considerable opposition at that time when the Efficient Markets Hypothesis and the Random Walk Hypothesis were
relatively new and highly favored among academics.
Not until 1993 was another major paper published on the subject of relative price strength,
or “momentum” as it is commonly called. This paper, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” was also published in the Journal of Finance.
The authors, Professors Narishimhan Jegadeesh and Sheridan Titman, demonstrated how stocks
with high returns over a 3- to 12-month period earned excess profits of about 1% per month for
the following year. However, they also found that these stocks on average had losses 13 to 60
months later, thus proposing the theory that relative price strength was not permanent but more
likely a temporary phenomenon. They clearly stated that the t-test statistical evidence forced
them “to conclude that the hypothesis of market efficiency can be rejected at even the most conservative levels of significance.”
In a study of 150 momentum (relative strength) and contrarian strategies, Conrad and Kaul
(1998) also found that the optimum profit occurred during the 3- to 12-month horizon. In addition, they found that a contrarian strategy (buying the lows) only had statistically significant
profits during the period 1926 through 1947.
Of course, other academics immediately criticized the study for any number of possible
reasons, but by the time of Conrad and Kaul’s paper, other doubts about market efficiency had
also been demonstrated, and the evidence was not rejected immediately as it had been with Levy
in the 1960s. Since then, the basis of their paper has been proven correct not only in foreign

Download at www.wowebook.com

518

Part VII Selection

countries but also in the period following the original paper in the United States, as reported in a
subsequent paper by Jegadeesh and Titman in 2001 in the Journal of Finance.
In 1998, Professor K. G. Rouwenhorst showed that momentum was successful in 12 European stock markets, and in 1999, he demonstrated that momentum was most strong in emerging
markets. Other studies confirm the existence of profitability from relative strength in China, Germany, 8 different Asian markets (without Japan), and Switzerland. Even Professor Eugene Fama,
one of the originators of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis, found that momentum was the only
anomaly to survive a multitude of tests (Fama and French, 1996). Academia has, thus, concluded
that the theory of relative price strength shows success not only in producing profits but also in
debunking part of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis.
Various reasons have been proposed for the existence of relative strength, none of which
has been proven. The most logical has to do with behavioral tendencies of investors and the flow
of information. An excellent discussion of the behavioral model describing investor underreaction and overreaction is Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997). However, we are not concerned
with why relative strength is valid. Our only concern is that over a period of three to six months,
using relative strength is a viable strategy and is, thus, a reliable means of selecting stocks.

Measuring Relative Strength
Given the importance of relative strength, the technical analyst needs a method for measuring it.
A number of methods of measuring relative strength exist, the most popular being the percentage
change, the alpha, the trend slope, and the Levy methods.
Percentage Change Method
In their study, Jegadeesh and Titman used a six-month price change as their basic lookback calculation. “Lookback” is the period over which relative price strength is calculated. The stocks
then were sorted based on these rates of change. They found that the higher decile stocks continued to be strong for the next three to ten months. Their sample included both large capitalized
and thinly capitalized and both high-priced and low-priced stocks. All performed similarly both
in the original experiment and in the subsequent out-of-sample tests.

BOX 21.2 CALCULATION OF ALPHA FOR AAPL
The graph in Figure 21.10 shows the scatter plot of weekly changes in AAPL (Apple
Computer stock) and the S&P 500 index. The linear regression line through the scatter plot can be defined by its beta (1.60) and its alpha (1.55). Beta represents how
volatile AAPL is relative to the S&P. AAPL’s beta of 1.6 implies that AAPL stock
will oscillate on a weekly basis 60% more than the S&P. The alpha of 1.55 indicates
that AAPL has been outperforming the S&P by 1.55% on average over the 52 weeks
in the plot. It thus has a positive alpha and is a strong stock. Comparing AAPL’s
alpha to that of other stocks is a way to determine which are the strongest and best
candidates for investment. For a more thorough explanation of linear regression, see
Appendix A, “Basic Statistics.”

Download at www.wowebook.com

519

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing
80

60

AAPL

40

20

0

20

40

60
20

10

0

10

20

30

SPX

FIGURE 21.10 Alpha and beta of AAPL versus Standard & Poor’s 500, weekly

Alpha Method
A number of different methods of calculating relative strength have been developed. One is the
alpha method. In the beta theory of Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT), stock prices are compared
with an average, usually the S&P 500, weekly, over a year (and sometimes with different time
intervals and period). The weekly percentage change in the stock price is plotted versus the
weekly percentage change in S&P 500, and a linear regression line is drawn through these plots
on a best-fit basis. The line so defined is expressed using the slope of the line, called the beta,
and the intercept with the vertical axis, called the alpha. Thus, each stock over a specified period
has an alpha and a beta. Traditionally, beta has been used as a measure of volatility relative to the
S&P 500 and considered a definition of volatility risk. Stocks that oscillated widely have a high
beta representing a steep slope in their regression line and, thus, demonstrate a proclivity to
swing widely about the S&P. The alpha describes the value when the regression line crosses the
0% change in the S&P and is, thus, a measure of the trend relative to the S&P 500. MPT suggested that high beta stocks would be more profitable but would also be more risky. What they
missed is that high beta stocks could also have negative alphas, suggesting that, while more
volatile, their trends relative to the S&P could be downward. In MPT, the alpha must always
either approach or be close to zero because, in theory, no systemic gain can come from the market (the S&P 500) itself. In other words, a stock’s price motion is determined by beta, not alpha.

Download at www.wowebook.com

520

Part VII Selection

Alpha is not considered of any importance. However, in actual markets, alpha does not remain at
the zero level and has, thus, become a measure of how much better or worse the stock is performing relative to the S&P. When alpha is compared among stocks, it provides a relative strength
measure, and stock lists can be ranked by alpha to show which issues are the strongest. Alpha
will change more frequently and more widely than beta, but beta is somewhat irrelevant to the
relative price strength and has been largely discarded, even as a measure of volatility.
Trend Slope Method
Rather than go through the more complicated calculation of alpha and beta, another method of
screening for relative price strength is to calculate the slope of the price curve in percentage
terms over a specified period through a linear regression formula for each stock. The stocks can
then be ranked by the slopes of their price curves. This method is similar to the alpha method and
to the Jegadeesh and Titman method. It is easier to calculate than the alpha method and does not
suffer from the drop-off effect of a rate-of-change calculation beginning at an arbitrary price.
Levy Method
Robert Levy introduced a method of calculating relative strength in his 1965 paper. Levy first
calculated the ratio of the stock’s current price to its 131 trading-day moving average. He then
ranked this ratio against the same ratio for all other stocks.
Levy found, as did Jegadeesh and Titman later, that the screen for relative strength should
be calculated on performance of the stock over a six-month lookback period. Anything shorter
tended to give multiple whipsaws in postcalculation performance, and anything longer tended to
be too close to when the performance began to regress back to its mean. Levy also found that
when the overall stock market headed downward into a lengthy bear market, relative strength
continued to be reliable but gradually lost its ability to pick winning stocks, and when the final
decline, the washout, occurred, those stocks having been relatively the strongest usually declined
the most. In his estimation, relative strength was, thus, a bull market selection process and should
not be used when the stock market declines.
One of the authors has tested the method live over 17 years (Kirkpatrick, 2001) using 26weeks as the lookback period and found it still provides a consistent list of winning stocks. 26
weeks is close enough to Levy’s original 131 days and can be substituted in the ratio to make the
calculation easier.

EXAMPLES OF HOW SELECTED PROFESSIONALS SCREEN FOR
FAVORABLE STOCKS
Different analysts develop different methods for screening for favorable stocks. Let’s look at
ways a few selected professionals go about this task.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing

521

William O’Neil CANSLIM Method
CANSLIM is an acronym for a method of picking stocks to buy, devised by William O’Neil
(2002), publisher of Investor’s Business Daily. The data and ratings for each stock are included
in a subscription to that newspaper. The breakdown of CANSLIM is as follows:
C—Current quarterly earnings per share versus a year earlier
A—Annual earnings increases
N—New products, management, and stock price highs
S—Supply and demand of stock
L—Leader or laggard
I—Institutional sponsorship
M—Market direction
We, as technical analysts, are only concerned with L and M. The other selection criteria are
useful but not in the domain of this book. To determine L, leader or laggard, O’Neil calculates
the 12-month percentage price change of every stock, weighted more heavily over the most
recent 3 months, and ranks each stock in percentiles from 99 to 0, with 99 being the strongest. He
has not divulged the exact formula, but as we know from academic studies and others, the exact
calculation is less important than the lookback time over which price change is measured. This
method is on the long side at 12 months, about the time when a strong stock begins to revert to
its moving average. The weighting over the past 3 months reduces the overall time for comparison and, therefore, improves the prospects of price strength continuing. O’Neil found that the
average relative strength percentile, by his calculation, was 87 before large upward moves.
For M, market direction, O’Neil refuses to listen to newsletters and “gurus” and refuses to
use economic data because it lags behind the market. He has a number of specific indicators and
patterns he watches for signs that a market is bottoming. He believes that the buy-and-hold
method is faulty because the widely held belief that all stocks will recover after a bear market is
a myth.

James P. O’Shaughnessy Method
Not surprisingly, James O’Shaughnessy, the president of O’Shaughnessy Capital Management in
Greenwich, Connecticut, found in studying 43 years of fundamental and price data that most
investment strategies are mediocre at best and that traditional investment management does not
work. He studied market capitalization, price-to-earnings ratios, price-to-book ratios, price-tocash flow ratios, price-to-sales ratios, dividend yields, earnings changes, profit margins, and
return on equity. He found that relative price strength, out of all the possible variables, fundamental and technical, was the only “growth variable that consistently beats the market” (1997).
O’Shaughnessy’s calculation of relative strength is similar to O’Neil’s in that it takes a
ratio of the year-end price to the price one year prior. It is, thus, a 12-month relative price
strength measure, a slightly longer-term calculation considering the history of relatively strong

Download at www.wowebook.com

522

Part VII Selection

stocks remaining strong. O’Shaughnessy developed from his testing of data from December 31,
1954, through December 31, 1995, a multifactor investment strategy model called the Cornerstone Growth Strategy. It includes a primary screen for stocks with a price-to-sales ratio below
1.5, earnings greater than the previous year, and of those selected so far, the top 50 stocks in relative price strength.

Charles D. Kirkpatrick Method
Charles Kirkpatrick (2002), coauthor of this book, has long had a model similar to that of
O’Shaughnessy. The principal differences are threefold. First, in working with Robert Levy in
the late 1960s, he discovered the importance of relating all ratios to each other. Thus, in using the
price-to-sales ratio, he calculates the relative price-to-sales ratio of all stocks. Second, Kirkpatrick uses the Levy calculation of relative price strength over six months in line with Levy’s
original work and that of later studies showing the importance of that period for postcalculation
continuation of price strength (see Figure 21.11). A multifactor investment strategy is developed
using the relative rankings of each of the preceding factors. This method has outperformed the
S&P 500 over the past 27 years in live weekly reporting by better than four to one.

Value Line Method
The Value Line Ranking System (www.valueline.com) has an extraordinary history of outperforming the stock market. Value Line claims that its Timeliness Ranking system has outperformed the Standard & Poor’s 500 by 16 to 1 since 1965. Although the company will not divulge
its method of calculation, it does admit that a significant portion of it includes a calculation of
relative price strength. Other factors include earnings trends, recent earnings, and earnings surprises. Value Line charges a fee for its stock services.

Richard D. Wyckoff Method
A method of profiting from the stock market using technical analysis and relative price strength
that has stood the test of over 80 years is the method taught by Richard DeMille Wyckoff beginning in 1931.
Richard Wyckoff, now considered a legend and one of the most important proponents of
technical analysis, began his long career in Wall Street as a runner in 1888 when he was only 15
years old. He organized his own brokerage firm by the time he was 25. From his brokerage firm,
he published a daily newsletter that evolved into a magazine called the Magazine of Wall Street.
Motivated by seeing “appalling losses in securities suffered annually by millions of people who
do not realize what they are risking and have an amazingly small knowledge of the market” (Hutson, 1986), in 1910, under the pen name “Rollo Tape,” Wyckoff described many important
aspects of the stock market in a book titled Studies in Tape Reading. His observations then are
still valid today. Before retiring for health reasons in 1928, his subscriber list exceeded 200,000
names, and later, when he returned to Wall Street in the early 1930s, he wrote many books on the
subject of profiting from the stock market and developed a correspondence course.

Download at www.wowebook.com

523

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing

Relative Price Strength Percentile Three Months Ahead

Current Relative Price Strength
Percentile and Relative Price Strength
Percentile Three Months Ahead
70.00

R2 = 0.893
Slope = 0.326

60.00

50.00

40.00

30.00
BEST FIT PERCENTILES
ACTUAL PERCENTILES

20.00

Market Average Performance (50%)
10.00
2 7 12 17 22 27 32 37 42 47 52 57 62 67 72 77 82 87 92 97
Current Relative Price Strength Percentile

Chart of the relationship between the current relative price strength percentile (independent variable) and relative price strength percentile three months later (dependent variable). The relationship is strong. The dark,
straight line (actual data) fits closely to the dark, dashed line (expected data) and has a relatively steep slope
of 0.326. This suggests that for every increased point in relative price strength percentile, the results increased
by close to a third of a point. Its R2 is high at 0.893, suggesting that the relationship is relatively close to perfect, which would be 1.000. It is positive, which suggests the higher the current relative price strength percentile, the higher will be the relative price strength percentile three months later. The best three-month
performance comes from the highest level of current relative price strength percentile.

Source: Kirkpatrick (2009)
FIGURE 21.11 Relative three-month performance of stocks selected by relative price strength using the
Kirkpatrick (2009) method.

