
: It breaks the channel and obviously you make the classic
mistake we’ve all made where you say no, no it’s going back up.

A : Exactly.

Q.- But every single day that it going down, were you saying to
yourself, “No, no it’s going to bounce, it’s going bounce?” What
was preventing you from pulling the trigger?

A : What was going through my mind was, if I sell it now, it’s
just going to drive it down lower. I was looking for a way to get
out. I made a mistake. I had a friend who actually forgot all about
it. She had stops and followed my recommendation to get out at

24


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

7.78 or something. She lost maybe 10 or 15 cents on the panic
spread because it was crashing so hard. She [laughter] did much
better than I did. If I am ever in the same situation again, there are
two things I would change: One, I was overconcentrated. I should
have not had that big of a position. Two, I knew that there was a
problem with management. So I’m never taking a large position in
a company where I have questions about management. The third
thing—TI should have sold at least half of it no matter what was
happening. I should have sold it right then and there. I made a
mistake on how I handled the trade.

Q.- the days that it was dropping, did you go to bed and say to
yourself, “You know, if it goes below five I’m just blowing out of
the position, I don’t care what price I get. I’m just not going to take
anymore of this pain.” Did it ever come to that point?

A : Yes, it was just a classical terrible, emotional trading experi-
ence. I'll fill it in with a little human interest story: Sometimes I'd
make $40,000 or $50,000 in one week on the stock. So one day I
said to a buddy, “I’ve always wanted a new Corvette.” About a week
before this happened, I went out and ordered a new Corvette.

: So not only the pressure of the trade but you had the burden
of the Corvette on your shoulders?

A : That’s right. Yeah [laughter].

Q.: You spent money that you didn’t quite yet have, Fortunately,
of course, the story still ends up very positive for you. After that
experience did you modify your exit strategies? Are you a lot more
cautious these days in terms of getting out?

A : Yes, and became better at not taking concentrated positions.

25


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

: Let us go back to some general life questions: Are you mar-
ried? And if you are, how does your spouse react to your trading?

A: I'm not.

Q:s0 you don’t have anybody to answer to, which makes it a lot

easier.

A: That is correct and I’m using my own money and I’ve actually
turned down money. I’ve had people offer me money, several
times in the last two years. But the thought of losing someone
else’s money . .. you know, having started a business where people
invested half a million dollars—a lot of it from friends and not
being able to return their money for a long time—that was just
terrible. So that’s why I’m hesitant to take other people’s money. I
want to be absolutely sure that I can get them a profit. I hate losing
my money. But I can handle it. The idea of telling someone else
sorry, you know, the account is down 5 percent this month, is an
extra burden that I don’t want.

Q: Doe you have multiple trading accounts or do you concentrate
on one?

A: Thave five. All for different reasons. Cyber-Trader I like. That’s
actually what I’m looking at right now on my screen. I have Fidelity,
because of Wealth Lab. I like Wealth Lab, wonderful back-testing.
And I have Interactive Brokers because you could trade just about
anything there is and the commissions are wonderful.

Q.: When you decided to start trading full time, you obviously
had capital. Did you walk into this venture essentially saying to
yourself, “Oh, I can do this for a full year and not have to make a
dime”?

A : Well no. And if you lose your money, it is a self-correcting
problem. It prevents future losses [laughter].

26


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

Q: But were you capitalized enough to basically not have to draw
income off your trading for a while?

A : No, not really. I was fortunate enough to do very well. I'll give
you the actual figures. I had money tied up in other things, but the
starting capital I had in December 31, 2002, was $172,000. And I
was very blessed, because of very good appreciation. I was able to
pay all my expenses and multiply the stakes.

Q.: That's impressive.

A : Thank you. There are a lot of horror stories out there; but I
was able to succeed. Like my original traditional IRA. I had a very
small one, it was like $18,000 as of October 2002, and since then its
grown to $200,000. So I was able to do an 11 bagger on that, and,
by having it in an IRA, I don’t have to go through the tremendous
pain of all the accounting [laughter].

Qu can imagine the reconciliation of your trades must be
tremendous. It’s probably 3,000 to 4,000 trades per year, maybe
more, right?

A : Yes, actually more. I think I average something like 7,000 to
8,000 trades a year. And now that I’m doing options, it’s even more
complicated. I might have on one trade with four or five different
options on certain stock. So I think my trade numbers are actually

going to go up.

Q.: When you started trading and you went into trading full time,
did you write a business plan for yourself? And then did you set
daily, weekly, monthly earning targets, or was it much more fluid
than that?

A : I did write a business plan but made several changes. For
example, I had an automated system in 2002 to 2003, but the results

27


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

weren't what I was expecting. Then one day I was, just walking
outside taking a hike, it hit me. I had optimized the system to go
from 70 percent to 130 percent profit and as result it just ended up
breaking even. [Authors’ note: Dana refers to the constant danger
of system based trading, namely the desire to overoptimize your
strategy in order to produce more profit. In fact such tactics often
lead to sub-par results as all trading systems typically require very
large margins of error.] So it’s things like that that have happened
where I correct my mistakes and write a new business plan. I am a
firm believer in doing that. Another thing I’ve heard some people
say is just look at all your trades. Van Tharp pushes that idea. You
can’t do that all the time, but I will do that occasionally, and I'l
pick up some really big revelations such as a certain type trading is
not making me any money at all.

Q.: How often do you do that kind of analysis? Once every three
months?

A : Yeah, if that, maybe three to six months, but I suggest to other
people to do it once a month [laughter].

Q: Do as I say, not as I do?

A: That’s right. Just did it recently and picked up that something
I wanted to do for safe trading was actually working much better
than I thought. Some other things were masking the profitability
of this low risk system. Just figured that out three days ago through
a review of trades.

Quis there anything else that you could share with us regarding

your analysis or is it proprietary?

A : It was very proprietary. I can tell you that some of the dis-
cretionary stuff I was doing was not working very well and it was
masking what the safe strategy was doing.

28


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

Q : 80 you are coming to the conclusion that the systematic
approach is actually the most efficient approach for your type of
trading?

A : | believe that’s the case, yes.

Q.- pia you have any mentors when you started trading and, at
present, do you have a support group or a group of traders you
talk to?

A : Yes I do. Starting off I didn’t really know any successful full-
time retail traders. It is a fairly rare thing, but I strongly suggest to
people to goto Trader’s Expo, one is out in Las Vegas, and you get
to be around all these other people who are full-time traders and
get to talk to a lot of top authors. I found that to be a wonderful
experience. In the San Francisco area, where I used to live, I
formed a group of about four other traders and we would talk on
Yahoo! chat and get together every week and have trading sessions
together, which I would suggest.

Q.: What would that be like?

A : You have a laptop, someone has an Internet connection, and
we all have wireless, and then one person would put up a projector
on the wall, and we look at the chart and try to decide on a trade
and discuss this particular stock. I find that process very valuable.
I think everyone gains from it and on top of that, after the market
closes, you share experiences. We watch video tapes together from
various authors and so forth.

Q.:can you run us through a typical trading day? Especially now
that you're in Nevada. Obviously you start the day quite early?

A : Sure. I try to get up before the market opens, check some
things out. I have a lot of software I have to open up. Then I bring

29


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

up the charts on the positions that I have. I am actually putting in
a better multiscreen setup here now.

Q - How many screens do you look at usually?

A : Up to now I’ve done something people think is pretty wild, I
use one screen. [laughter] A 21-inch old CRT, but I’m switching
over to three 19-inch flat panels, to use with two computers. That’s
an unusual thing about me—I often do 50 trades a day and I
was doing it across one screen and people say how do you do
that? [Laughter.] I do a lot of switching—wouldn’t recommend
that to anyone—on the stocks I am most interested in, then check
for news. I go use the stock boards on Yahoo! There’s a lot of
knowledgeable people on some stocks like EGY and CWEI.

Q.: What kind of a news services do you use?

A : Luse Yahoo! It is my main source.

Quis most of your trading done in the first two to three hours of
the market between 6 and 9 A.M. your time?

A : To an extent. As mentioned to you, I’m doing a lot more
option trading where I am looking for specific skews in the market,
searching for those all day long, whatever time they happen, I'll try
to enter into some very low-risk trades on that.

Q.:When you are talking about arbitraging options, are you look-
ing at discrepancies between the underlying and the option? Where
you could offset one with the other because there’s some skew that
you feel you can take advantage of? [Authors’ note: This is a very
sophisticated strategy that tries to exploit momentary mispricing
between the option contract and the underlying security. Often op-
tions value will be driven unnaturally high or low after a big order

30


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

sweeps through the market. At that time a trader can sometimes
take advantage of the discrepancy by buying the option contract
and offsetting the risk by selling the underlying instrument. ]

A : Yes and now I can also use single stock futures. I’m looking
for those types of things—as low risk as possible. If I can make 2
percent or more per month with no—or very low—risk, then that’s
a heck of a deal.

Q.: where did your interest and education in options come from?

A: I traded options since I was 21. Then sort of moved away from
them, part of it was the bid-ask spreads and the big commissions.
But now the commissions are almost nothing. They're wonderful,
and the bid-ask spreads have gotten better. Plus sometimes you
get fills that are between the spread. Let’s say the option is 7.40 to
7.80 bid ask. You put an order at 7.60 and you wait 5 or 10 minutes
and very often someone will go out and hit it. I found that if you bid
with very small lots, then the market makers see them as irritants
and will take your bid just to get you out of the way. You put 10
out there and they won't hit it. But if you put one or two out there,
they'll hit it just to get rid of you.

Q. was there any particular books or seminars that you attended
that sharpened your knowledge in options?

A : Yes. I read Larry McMillan’s book and met him at Trader’s
Expo and talked to him. One thing I think is a little bit of a weak-
ness in that book and all option books is they don’t really discuss
what makes money and what doesn’t make money. So I’m doing
some software development to prove a strategy—both so I can
make money off the software and I’m interested in actually pub-
lishing it. Also, I am reading Natenberg now, excellent book. And
Thinkorswim free seminars are wonderful, strongly recommend
them.

31


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q : could you share one or two strategies that you think do have
a high probability of making money in the options market?

A : Yes. Things related to selling nearbys that are going to de-
cay much faster and then, if you can get a volatility skew on top
that in your favor, that helps. Also covered calls on lower-priced
stocks with huge volatility. I’m doing that on RMBS now. Diagonal
Bull and Bear spreads have a good chance for a profit. [Authors’
note: These are various option strategies that essentially try to sell
one strike price against another in order to take advantage of the
volatility differences between a set of similar options with different
strike prices. ]

: Let us wrap this up with a couple of final questions. Where is
the drudgery in trading? Do you find anything boring or annoying,
or is everything about this discipline really interesting to you?

A : Good question. Well I think the worst thing is—maybe it’s
not boring—but the worse thing is losing money [laughter]. And
having to deal with paperwork and the taxes is very boring.

Q.: How do you deal with losing money? Have you gotten to the
point where you can shrug it off or does it still simmer and burn
and you become very annoyed?

A : I definitely got used to it. I can lose $5,000 or $10,000 in a day
and not get affected, but if I lose money 17 out of 20 days, then it
still does affect me.

Q.: What's been the longest losing streak you can remember?
Have you ever had a string of 10 to 12 days where it’s just been
nothing but bleeding?

A : Pretty much, yeah. I have. That’s the very worst. If it’s a slow
bleed, it does wear you down. Part of it is that you want to be in
tune with the market. Sometimes I just get so in tune with the

32


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

market, know exactly what it is going to do. And then there are
other times when I feel out of tune. I’m out of phase. It’s not doing
what I expect, what’s going on here?

Q. When you're out of tune, what do you do to get your mojo
back?

A : I try and drop back to 40 percent cash, sometimes even 70
percent cash. I try to figure out what the reason is. I also think
there is a humbling factor that does make you better in the long
run. I think the greatest deterrence is that most of us don’t think
high consistent returns are possible. You can’t achieve something if
you don’t think it’s possible. All you have to do is make a percent a
day, that’s 200 percent per year! [Laughter.] There are stocks that
move around 3 percent, every day and so it’s got to be possible,
and because I believe its possible then it helps me to get better
results.

: Last question of the day, what would you say is your number-
one rule for trading?

A : [think my number one trading rule is to not worry about being
right, just focus on making money and just deal with being wrong.
The purpose of trading is not being right, the purpose is to make
money, and I think that’s my number-one rule. Don’t get hung up
on your current positions.

LESSONS FROM DANA ALLEN
Look for 10 Baggers

One of the most impressive aspects of Dana Allen’s trading is the
amount of trades in his career that have returned him more than
10 times his initial investment or, as he calls them, 10 baggers.
Whether in options, stocks, or commodities, Dana has been able

83.


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

to achieve these incredible results by always buying value. Using
John Templeton’s maxim that investors get the best bargains when
the world seems to be coming to an end, Dana has been able to pick
up bargains at severely distressed levels more than once during his
trading career. In fact, using the same method that Templeton
employed half a century before him, Dana bought as many $1
stocks on the NYSE and Nasdaqas he could find, following the 2001
market crash—a strategy that proved to be extremely profitable in
the ensuing market recovery. One critical rule that Dana always
follows is to only buy securities of companies that have no debt.
This is a very wise approach because debt-ridden companies can
collapse even if their underlying business remains relatively sound
especially if they are forced to divert their cash flow to service debt.

Stocks Have an Upside Bias

Over the past two centuries, stocks in the United States have re-
turned an average of 7 percent. Massive stock corrections notwith-
standing, equities are the only financial asset that show an un-
equivocal uptrend on a longer timeframe. Therefore, selling rallies
works less well in the stock market than buying dips. Stocks have a
natural upside bias as they to tend appreciate with the expanding
economy. Many market analysts refer to this phenomenon as the
upward drift. Certainly stocks can fall mercilessly for days, weeks,
and even years on end. Over the long term, however, they tend to
rise rather than fall. As a wise man once said, the race does not
always go to the strongest and the swiftest, but that is the way to
bet. And that is the way that Dana Allen generally bets preferring
to buy crashes rather than sell manias.

Stops Should Use Time as Well as Price

One very interesting part of Dana’s methodology is the use of a
time stop as well as price stop. After all, trades travel through both
time and price, yet traders only focus on the price part of the
risk. Dana uses a simple end-of-the-day stop on his crash-buying
system. If the price hasn’t reached his objective by end of the day,
he terminates the trade even if it remains above his stop. The basic

34


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

premise of his setup is that prices should quickly bounce off their
depressed crash levels as bargain hunters swoop in. If the bounce
hasn’t materialized, that may mean that the majority of the market
does not perceive value at these levels and further declines may
be in store. Therefore, a time stop as well as price stop could help
traders to minimize risk.

Best Trade Setup Is a Disconnect Between Fundamentals
and Price

Divergence is one of the most common setups in trading. Typi-
cally, divergence is traded off technical factors when momentum
indicators disagree with price action. However, Dana Allen likes to
trade divergence based on fundamental reasons. One of his favorite
trade setups occurs when a company reports superior earnings but
the stock sells off on profit taking. This is a very interesting strategy
because once again Allen positions himself on the side of value.
Once the wave of initial profit taking crests, and the selling is com-
pleted, the same stock can often present a compelling value as
long-term investors buoyed by strong fundamentals return to the
bid. The one exception to this setup is the biotech sector. Dana
feels that financial value of biotech stocks is extremely difficult to
gauge, given the fact most of these companies live or die by the
actions of the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
and have no assets aside from their intellectual property.

35




CHAPTER 3

THE 100-PIP TRADER
ROB BOOKER

Even though Rob Booker is a former lawyer turned full-time
trader, if you asked him to describe his job, he would tell you that
he is a “back tester” first and a trader second. In less than five
years, he has gone from being a $2,500 trader to a client of a major
bank who trades a respectable-size account. He practices defensive
trading and focuses on preservation of capital. His number one rule
of trading is, “If 1 can’t prove that a system works from my testing,
then I have no business trading it with real money.” A fan of the
casual attire lifestyle, his humorous laid-back approach has built
him a huge following. He is one of the funniest traders that we
know as well as one of the most humble. He has taught over a
thousand traders how to trade and all of them call him their friend,
as he strives to maintain a lifetime relationship with each one of
them.

From his office in Wheeling, West Virginia, Rob took a few
hours to talk to us about his approach to the market and to share
some of his tricks of the trade.

ST


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q : can you tell us a little bit about your background in the
financial markets? Were you exposed to the concept of finance as
a kid or was it much later?

A : If I had any experience in anything related to stocks or in-
vestments when I was young, it was probably somewhat negative.
It’s not that I was discouraged from being involved in the markets,
but I was always encouraged to think of what I would call more
traditional occupations—law or medicine. I don’t know enough
math to save my life—and I always heard that to work in the mar-
kets, I would need to have a strong math background—so Wall
Street wouldn’t have been much of an option in my mind anyway.
Honestly, I was never encouraged to think about working in the
markets, so I guess you wouldn’t call it discouragement but it never
arose as an option, as a career, or even as a hobby, and it wasn’t
even something I was remotely interested in. The earliest that I
can remember being interested in investing at all was when I took
a course in high school as a freshman and it was a business course.
We were expected to buy stocks at the beginning of the semester
with a play account and then track the quotes in the newspaper for
the semester and see how it turned out.

Q.:- pia that whet your appetite in the financial markets enough
to keep you interested?

A : No, I think I took the class and forgot about it. But I really
enjoyed taking the class. I remember I bought Pioneer stock. It was
the company that made electronics and I really wanted a Pioneer
stereo with a CD player at the time. So I decided that I would pick
a stock based on something that I liked and I am fairly certain I
came in last [laughter]. So much for investing in something just
because I liked it and not because it had true upside potential.
Yet during that semester of high school, I was entranced by the
thought that you could actually buy a piece of a company or invest
in something and then basically play the game of waiting to see if
you had made the right decision. I was seriously interested in it at
