time that they heard of the crash was 10:32 a.m. EDT. Individual investors
reported talking on average to 7.4 other people about the market situation
on the day of the crash; institutional investors reported talking on average
to 19.7 other people.
The channels of human communication that we know today seem to
favor the interpersonal face‑to‑face and word‑of‑mouth communication that
developed over millions of years of evolution, during times when such communication was virtually the only form of interpersonal communication. The
patterns of communication hard‑wired into our brains rely on there being
another person’s voice, another person’s facial expressions, another person’s
emotions, and an associated environment of trust, loyalty, and cooperation.

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

181

Because these elements are missing from the written or electronic word,
people find it somewhat more difficult to react to these sources of information. They cannot give these other sources the same emotional weight, nor
can they remember or use information from these other sources as well.
This is an important reason why we still have teachers—why we cannot tell
our children to simply sit down and read books or rely on computer‑aided
instruction.
It is also for this reason that television is such a powerful medium, in that it
mimics much of the appearance of direct interpersonal conversation. Watching
television simulates the very stimuli—the voices, faces, and emotions—that
we experience in conversation. Indeed, television advertisers often recreate
images of everyday conversation about their products. Television today has
become more interactive, now that viewers will chat on social media while
watching it, but the communication it offers is primarily one‑way, and so it is
still not as effective as direct person‑to‑person communication.
The telephone, invented well over a hundred years ago, may still be the
most important artificial medium for interpersonal communication today,
because it so closely simulates face‑to‑face communications, lacking only the
visual stimuli. Studies by sociologists and communications researchers have
found that telephone conversations come very close to face‑to‑face communications in information transmission and problem‑solving functions, though
they still fall somewhat short in conflict‑resolution and person‑perception
functions.9
The impact of the telephone appears to have been a factor behind the volatile
stock market of the 1920s. Although the telephone was invented in 1876, it was
slow to be adopted. Clarence Day, in his book Life with Father, recalled why his
family did not get a telephone in the 1890s: “Since almost nobody had them
but brokers, there was no one to talk to . . . though people saw vaguely that a
telephone might be a convenience if everyone had one, they decided to wait
in a body until everyone did.”10 The telephone did not become widely used
until a number of improvements brought the cost down and made the case for
a telephone more compelling—improvements such as the invention in 1915 of
vacuum tube amplification of longer‑distance telephone calls. By the mid‑1920s,
the average person was making over two hundred telephone calls per year
in the United States. The 1920s saw the spread of “boiler rooms” and “bucket
shops” that actively sold stocks to the public using the telephone, employing
questionable tactics that easily slipped past ineffective “blue‑sky” legislation
at the level of the states. The proliferation of telephones un­doubtedly made it
easier to sell stocks to the public, and the resulting impetus to fraud helped
bring the country to the point of enacting the Securities Act of 1933 and the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which created the Securities and Exchange
Commission.11

182

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

During the 1990s stock market boom, we were witnessing another explosion of technological innovations that facilitate interpersonal communication,
consisting of e‑mail and chat rooms, and after 2000 these led to social media.
Like the telephone, many people were slow to use these innovations at first,
but as time went by, it became increasingly clear that it was inevitable that
virtually everyone would be making them part of their daily lives.
These new and effective media for interactive (if not face‑to‑face) communication may have the effect of expanding yet again the interpersonal
contagion of ideas. They may have allowed enthusiasm for the market to
spread much more widely than it would otherwise have. Certainly we are
still learning how to regulate the use of these new media in the public
interest.
Although e‑mail and other Internet platforms were significant changes
in the technology of communications, it is not clear that their advent was
more significant than that of the telephone many decades ago. Because the
telephone allows communication of emotions as expressed vocally, it may
yet be a better simulator of effective communication than those that rely on
the written word, like e-mail, Twitter, or Weibo. However, the advances in
video interaction, like Skype, Facetime, or Google Hangouts, may further
enhance the potency of long-distance communication by more nearly mimicking human interaction.

Epidemic Models Applied to Word‑of‑Mouth Communication
The mathematical theory of the spread of disease has been used by epidemiologists to predict the course of infection and mortality.12 These models can
be used to better understand the transmission of attitudes and the nature of
the feedback mechanism supporting speculative bubbles.
In the simplest epidemic model, it is assumed that the disease has a given
infection rate (the rate at which the disease spreads from contagious people to
susceptible people) and a given removal rate (the rate at which infected people
become no longer contagious, through recovery or death).
If the removal rate is zero, the graphical plot of the number of infected
people after the introduction of one contagious person follows a mathe­
matical curve called the logistic curve.13 With the logistic curve, the percentage of the population that is infected rises initially at the infection
rate. Although the rate of increase is nearly constant at first, the absolute
number of people recorded as contracting the disease rises faster and
faster: as more and more people become contagious, more and more people
become infected and are seen in doctors’ offices complaining of the first
symptoms of the disease. But the rate of increase starts to decline as the
pool of yet‑to‑be‑infected susceptibles begins to be depleted. Even though

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

183

the intrinsic infection rate of the disease is unchanged, the rate at which
new infected people are being produced declines, because those who are
infected meet fewer people who have yet to become infected. Eventually the
entire population is infected and the logistic curve becomes flat, at 100%;
then of course there are no new cases.
If the removal rate is greater than zero but less than the infection rate, the
model predicts instead that the course of the epidemic will be bell shaped:
the number of infectives will at first rise from zero, peak, and then drop back
to zero. The peak can occur before 100% of the population is ever infected.
If the removal rate is greater than the infection rate, then the epidemic will
never get started and will never even be observed.
Epidemiologists use these models constructively to understand the pattern of disease outbreaks. Using such models they can infer, for example,
that if the removal rate is just above the infection rate, then a nearly healthy
population is in danger of an epidemic, for any small uptick in the infection rate or downtick in the removal rate can tip the balance toward a new
epidemic. Thus, epidemiologists can infer that a change in weather patterns
that will tend to keep people indoors together (where they are more likely to
infect one another) may cause the infection rate to increase above the removal
rate. The epidemic will then begin, but the absolute number of infectives
will grow slowly at first. If, in this example, the weather changes fairly soon
again in such a way that the infection rate is brought back down, so that
the number of infectives never becomes very large, then the epidemic will
fail to be noticed by the general public. But if the bad weather lingers long
enough relative to the difference between the bad‑weather‑infection rate
and the removal rate, then the epidemic will become large and noticeable
in the population at large. Epidemiologists can use this model to predict,
according to this example, how long a spell of bad weather is necessary to
produce a serious epidemic.
The same type of epidemic models has been applied to other biological
phenomena that may have relevance to financial markets. Economist Alan
Kirman has used them to model the behavior of ants in exploiting food
sources, and he notes that the models also seem relevant to stock market
price changes.14 It has been found experimentally that ants, when presented
with two identical food sources near their nest, tend to exploit both sources,
but one more intensively than another. Over time (and as the experimenter
constantly replenishes the food sources so that they remain exactly equal),
the primary attention of the ants may switch from one source to the other.
Why should they not exploit the two equally, and what causes them to switch
their attention? Kirman notes that ants individually recruit other ants to food
sources; there is no central direction for the nest as a whole. Recruitment is
done by contact and following (tandem recruitment) or by laying a chemical

184

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

trail (pheromone recruitment). Both of these processes are the ant equivalent
of word‑of‑mouth communication. Kirman shows that if there is randomness
in the recruitment process, the experimentally observed phenomena can be
explained in terms of a simple epidemic model.
Although disease spread and ant behavior are of theoretical interest in our
consideration of stock market bubbles, of greatest practical relevance is the fact
that epidemic models have been applied by sociologists to predict the course
of word‑of‑mouth transmission of ideas.15 Here, the infection rate is the rate
of communication of ideas, and the removal rate is the rate of forgetting or of
losing interest. The dynamics of such transmission may mimic that of disease.
The formal mathematical theory of epidemics appears, however, to be less
accurate for modeling social processes than for modeling disease spread or
ant behavior, and it has yet to spawn an influential and successful literature
by social scientists. This lack of success may be explained by the fact that the
basic parameters of these models are not as constant in the social sciences as
in biological applications.
One reason for the lack of success in applying epidemic models to the
spread of ideas may be that the mutation rate, the rate of transmission errors,
is much higher for ideas than for disease or other biological processes. Many
of us recall the children’s game of telephone, in which the first person selects
a simple story and whispers it into the ear of the second person, who then
whispers it into the ear of the third, and so on. When the story is finally told to
the group by the last person in the chain, the distortion of the original story is
often so dramatic as to provoke laughter. The person‑to‑person transmission
of stories of any complexity is just not very reliable.
For this reason, pure word‑of‑mouth transmission of ideas, even if abetted
by the telephone, is not likely to extend widely enough to infect an entire
nation all by itself. The accuracy of transmission will falter long before
that happens. In contrast, computer‑to‑computer transmission is un­­erring.
Computer viruses can spread nationally and internationally with no alteration whatsoever. But viruses do not have the ability to change people’s thinking; they do not get beyond the machine. The ability of users of e‑mail to
forward others’ messages or to provide web links effectively permits word
of mouth to spread unerringly. And new technology that makes it possible
and natural to forward word‑of‑mouth messages from others as part of a
telephone conversation or a video conference or the social media would
again dramatically improve the accuracy and persistence of interpersonal
communications.
Although the imprecision and variability of interpersonal communications
as they currently occur prevent formal mathematics from predicting with
any reliability how ideas spread, epidemic models are still helpful in understanding the kinds of things that can bring about changes in market prices.

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

185

For example, it is useful to consider that any change in the infection rate or
removal rate will change the rate of spread of new ideas.
Thus, for example, a major national news story unrelated to speculative
markets may lower the infection rate of ideas related to speculative markets
by deflecting attention from them. This phenomenon may help explain why,
as noted in Chapter 6, stock price movements are not notoriously volatile at
times of national crisis despite the potential importance of such crises for the
nation’s businesses and why most large stock market movements occur when
there is not much other news. In contrast, national news that ties in with or
encourages discussion of the stock market may raise the infection rate. This
may be part of the explanation for the Internet’s apparently exaggerated effect
on the stock market: attention being paid to the Net promotes conversation
about technology stocks in general, thereby raising the infection rate for
theories about these stocks.
The word‑of‑mouth transmission of ideas does not have to infect the
entire nation to affect national prices in the stock market or the market for
homes. Moreover, word of mouth may function to amplify public reaction
to news events or to media accounts of such events. It is still necessary to
consider the infection rate relative to the removal rate in order to understand
the public impact of any new idea or concept, since most people’s awareness
of any of these is still socially mediated. Thus, the likelihood of any event
affecting market prices is enhanced if there is a good, vivid, tellable story
about the event.
The importance of a tellable story for keeping the infection rate of ideas
high can be seen in many examples drawn from new‑product marketing,
such as the promotion of motion pictures. Marketers launch an ad campaign
as the movie is first screened, to attract the attention of especially receptive
people. Only a small fraction of the population responds directly to the
initial advertisements. Yet the success of the movie ultimately depends on
the reaction of these people to the film—and the opinions they pass on to
others. It is well known that the advice of movie critics has less impact than
the mass effect of such word of mouth. Producers have learned over the years
the importance of including set pieces in movies. These are scenes that in
and of themselves have story quality, scenes that, either during a screening
or even as part of a trailer, pack word‑of‑mouth potential analogous to that
of popular jokes or tall tales—or stories linked to high‑flying companies on
the nation’s exchanges.
The effect of story quality on the contagion of ideas can have a real impact
on market value. Why are certain paintings valued so highly among others?
When I took my older son to the Louvre and we viewed the Mona Lisa, he
expressed puzzlement that this painting should be considered so much more
valuable than the others. He said it was undeniably good, but it did not stand

186

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

out among all the other remarkable paintings. We then found ourselves betting that many people in the crowd viewing the painting were saying to each
other—in whatever language—much the same thing.
To understand the exaggerated value of the Mona Lisa, we must consider
the powerful word-of-mouth potential of a certain story about Mona Lisa’s
smile, apparently created by embellishment in word-of-mouth transmission
from a story that first appears in Giorgio Vasari’s biography of Leonardo written shortly after Leonardo’s death. The story, which now appears in many
forms, is that the artist had difficulty capturing her smile and worked four
years on it but never felt he had fully succeeded. In his original biography,
Vasari reported that Leonardo tried musicians, singers, and jesters to get the
model to show the right expression. Vasari said that the smile in the painting “was a thing more divine than human, and it was held to be a marvel.”16
Vasari’s description of the painting does not match the Mona Lisa that we see
today, and so there may be some confusion; the story might actually be from
a different painting. But no matter—the story is attached to that painting in
the Louvre today.
That story has real currency; why it does is hard to pin down. The story
seems to attach to many other thoughts. Mona Lisa’s smile was used as a
theme by poets and essayists over the centuries. Public attention could never
have fixated on this painting without the story of Leonardo’s long struggle to
capture the smile, a story with powerful word-of-mouth potential.
The story of Mona Lisa’s smile gained further impetus from two events
that occurred in the year 1910. Both events enriched the story of her smile and
provided immense publicity for it.
The first was the publication in 1910 of a provocative book by Sigmund
Freud that undertook to examine Leonardo’s subconscious and that dwelled
on the Mona Lisa. Freud thought that for Leonardo, Mona Lisa’s smile was a
suppressed memory of his birth mother, from whom he was separated at age
four, and who had expressed an unnatural affection for her son.
The second was the story of the theft of the Mona Lisa from the Louvre
in 1910 and the continuing saga of the law authorities’ attempts to recover it,
then the story of the return of the painting and the trial of the thief. Of course
the newspaper writers mentioned the smile: good writers covering the theft
would not miss it. The theft story evolved over a period of years, a period long
enough to reinforce the smile story firmly in the public consciousness. The
smile story was ubiquitous in the press coverage. Even a 1914 story about the
thief’s final sentencing concluded with the ridiculous assertion, “He listened
to his sentence with a facial expression somewhat akin to ‘Mona Lisa’s’ enigmatic smile.”17 The reporter just had to get that smile story in.
According to a Proquest search of English language publications, the
number of references to Mona Lisa during 1915–25 (after the theft story was

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

187

completed) was twenty times greater than during 1899–1909, that is, before
1910. The legacy of the news coverage during 1910–14 is still with us today, since
it amplified a media and word-of-mouth feedback about that smile, reinforced
by continuing news mentions and parodies of the painting, that continue to
this day. The 1910 events are forgotten in themselves by most people today, but
the enhanced smile story is not, and the events are thus an important cause
of the extraordinary value placed on the Mona Lisa today.
By analogy, news events that are more likely to be transmitted in informal
conversations are in turn more likely to contribute to the contagion of ideas.
The dry, analytical outlook an expert may offer for the nation’s economy is
very unlikely to be transmitted by word of mouth. In contrast, news that
the stock market or the housing market has made a sudden move is vastly
more likely to be communicated. To be sure, experts’ opinions sometimes
tag along with news stories about price movements, but they are seldom
vivid enough to become the focus of word‑of‑mouth communications by
themselves.
Word‑of‑mouth communications, either positive or negative, are an essential part of the propagation of speculative bubbles, and the word‑of‑mouth
potential of any event must be weighed in judging the likelihood of that
event to lead to a speculative bubble. Thus, for example, the predictions of
widespread computer problems after the beginning of the new year in 2000
due to the so‑called Y2K bug was a classic word‑of‑mouth story because of
its association with both the world’s fascination with computers and the
new millennium. Thus—although fears ultimately proved groundless—it
was likely to have an exaggerated impact on the markets compared with
other, less vivid stories.

A Pool of Conflicting Ideas Coexisting in the Human Mind
One reason the contagion of ideas can sometimes happen rapidly, and
public thinking can experience such abrupt turnarounds, is that the ideas in
question are already in our minds. Even conflicting ideas can coexist at the
same time in our minds, and a shift in supporting facts or public attentions
may suddenly bring to the fore an apparent belief that contradicts formerly
stated beliefs.
For example, people widely believe that the stock market is unforecastable
and that market timing is futile. But they also believe (as we saw in Chapter 5)
that if the stock market were to crash, it would surely come back up. Such
views are clearly inconsistent.
One explanation for the fact that people are able to hold such conflicting
views simultaneously is that they think they have heard both views endorsed
by experts. The culture transmits a number of supposed facts, often attributed

188

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

only to “them,” as in: “They say that. . . .” When stories are casually accepted
on some imagined authority, conflicts are likely.
Sometimes, stories achieve currency even though they can be traced to no
competent authority whatsoever. One hears again and again, for example, that
“they say” that only 10% of the human brain is actually used by most people—a
myth that extends back to the nineteenth century, when neuro­logical science
was clearly incapable of either establishing or disproving such a fact. “They
say” also that the birth rate in New York City jumped nine months after a 1965
power blackout left New Yorkers with nothing to do for a while: but there was
no jump in the birth rate.18 And, more apropos, “they say” that there were an
unusually high number of suicides at the time of the crash of 1929, but there
were not.19 Stories that are useful in conversations, and in media presentations,
have a currency often unrelated to the facts.
Given this tendency to attribute views to real or imagined experts, people
do not worry much about apparent contradictions among the views they hold.
There is a willingness to free-ride here—to suppose that the experts have
thought through the apparent contradictions and therefore to assume that
the experts know why they are not in fact contradictions at all. It is certainly
true that sometimes theories that appear to be contradictory really are not.
And from there it is but a short step to the supposition that the experts could
explain away most apparent contradictions—if one asked.
People’s thinking about the arcane field of investments is surely clouded
with many half‑thought‑through ideas that may be mutually contradictory,
or at least have not been put into any coherent analytical framework. It is a
real challenge to try to infer what these ideas will mean for concrete investment decisions.
The significance of the fact that contradictory views are held simultaneously is that people may have no clear attachment to many of their views.
Therefore, we cannot attach too much credence to investors’ stated belief
that the market will surely come back up after a crash, for the circumstances
of the actual crash could bring to the forefront other, contradictory, views
that were only dimly remembered before the crash. Investors would then
react in ways that could not have been foreseen based on their previously
expressed confidence.
