
Pattern Recognition

101

stopped out will eliminate a lot of winning trade profits. The pattern of the
multiunit tactic has lots of little winners and a few larger losses. But the
bottom line is that you will make money using this technique.
Adding the multiunit tactic to your options will also enhance the total
profits of reversal bars over a long period of time. You are effectively using
the reversal bars to diversify through time. You are using it to take quick
profits and daily profits. What this means is that you are using the power to
create profits in two time frames. This diversification will actually reduce
the risk you take while enhancing profits at the same time. The interaction
between the two uses of the reversal bar creates additional profits with
less risk.

RIDING THE REJECTION RULE
The third pattern-recognition technique is a unique method I call riding
the rejection rule, or RRR. Read about the rejection rule in Chapter 3 on
channel breakouts if you don’t remember the rejection rule. I am going to
show you how to turn a losing trade, triggered by the rejection rule, into a
profitable trade. In effect, this method is another of our lemonade trades
because we take a losing trade and turn it into either a profitable trade, or
at least less of a loss. You can also use RRR as a stand-alone technique to
make money!
The basic concept of this technique came from my reading of Linda
Bradford Raschke and Larry Connor’s book Street Smart Trading (M. Gordon Publishing Group, 1996). They outlined a technique called Turtle Soup.
That was the genesis of RRR.
Raschke and Connor noticed that markets often fail to follow through
when they break through levels that traders focus on. One of the most important levels was the 20-day high and low. As I discussed in Chapter 3, this
was the level that Richard Donchian outlined in his four-week rule (4WR).
The 4WR was then adapted by the Turtles (a group of traders, only some of
whom have ever been named). Raschke and Connors felt that the market
would often go to these breakout levels and fail. The Turtle modifications
didn’t really address this issue.
So Raschke and Connors thought that they should trade the failed
breakouts. Remember that I told you that a failed signal is a signal. RRR
is a technique for finding failed signals and then jumping on them. We are
looking for a breakout that fails and then profiting from that failure. The
discussion thus far has been on the 20-day breakout but I prefer to use RRR
on the 55-day breakout used in our channel breakout technique. I do this
for several reasons. I am looking to enter trades on a break of the 55-day

102

FIGURE 6.3 Euro with RRR Marked

Pattern Recognition

103

high or low so I am more aware of the 55-day breakouts. I find that 55-day
breakouts are more significant so they yield higher profits than the 20-day
breakouts. That also means that false breakouts are more significant. We
expect that the market will follow through when we make a 55-day breakout. It is very significant if that fails. So I expect that failed signal here to
be more powerful than on the 20-day breakouts.
This is not to say that using RRR on 20-day breakouts won’t work. It
will. But the percentage of winning trades will be lower. Still, I recommend
that you use RRR on both the 20- and the 55-day breakouts. More conservative traders should consider only using RRR on the 55-day breakouts. Let’s
look at the rules of RRR. Let’s take a look at some examples. Once again,
I’ve selected a sample time period that gives us a good cross-selection of
winning and losing trades. In Figure 6.3, there is a black arrow on the left
side of the chart. The solid black line shows the 55-day high and low.
You can see that the market broke out of the 55-day high on the day
before the day with the arrow. But the market gets rejected the next day
on a reversal day no less! Our entry rule is to sell (or buy) whenever we are
stopped out of our entry trades using the channel breakout technique. Our
protective stop is the other end of our entry bar. We exit the trade at the
close of trading.
So, in this first trade, we enter on the close of trading on the bar with
the arrow. Our protective stop is the high of the bar. The next day, the
market continues the plunge that started on the arrowed day. We exit on
the close for a large profit.
Let’s go over to the bar on February 18. The rejection rule kicks in
when the price closes above the breakout level. We get long on the close
with a protective stop at the low of the bar. Actually, note that our protective stop is really just an entry back into the regular channel breakout.

THE BOTTOM LINE
These three patterns—inside days, reversal days, and riding the rejection
rule—are the foundation of a day trading program that can grind out profits
week in and week out. I like them because I can put them on each day no
matter what the trend is and make money each week. I view them as my
equivalent of W-2 income. These techniques don’t hit home runs, but they
hit single after single. That adds up by the end of the year.
In addition, the multiunit tactic gives us significantly more flexibility in
our buying and selling decisions. We can fine-tune our tactics on a much
higher level after adding this method.

CHAPTER 7

Risk
Management

isk management is the second most important factor in trading success. Psychology reigns supreme because you need to have a correct
psychology to make sure you can execute proper risk management,
but you must control the risk in your account if you want to control the
reward in your account. You will not have any idea of how successful you
can be without knowing how unsuccessful you can be. Lacking proper risk
management makes you a gambler, not a speculator. You are out of control
of your investments when you don’t use proper risk management.

R

STOPPING BAD RISK MANAGEMENT
Bad risk management can create stress that leads to bad trading. I have
seen many traders be both financially and psychologically debilitated by a
large loss or a string of losses. How many times have you seen people capitulate after fighting the market by being long and a bear market relentlessly
kills their equity?
Once that bad risk management blows our mind, we are lost as traders.
We will start to do self-destructive things as “double up to catch up.” We
will look to punish a market to make up for our losses. Or we will hesitate
and not put on trades we should put on.
You can have the greatest method in the world but it will be a failure
if you don’t control your risk. All methods take losses. But what if those
losses cause you to be wiped out? You won’t have the money power to

105

106

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

come back to create all those glorious profits that the greatest method will
create.
Bad risk management is perhaps the most common reason for failure
as a forex trader. People tend to overtrade and put on bigger positions than
their equity can handle. They come into forex trading because of some hype
and think they can make a million dollars in the first month. They think that
all they have to do is follow the new system they bought and they can’t go
wrong. They put on a few trades that are way too big for their small equity
and the first few trades go south and they are financially crippled. They are
also likely mentally crippled and think that it is impossible for anyone to
make money in forex.
The hyped system may or may not be garbage. These traders will never
know, because they got blown out so quickly, that they never really gave
the system a real chance to succeed.
As you can see, psychology and risk management complement and support each other. We always want to be cool, calm, and collected when we
trade and that won’t be possible if we are overtrading or have on positions
that are too large or if we have losses that are too large for our mind. We
need to remain rational at all times when we trade. The stakes are too high
to not do otherwise.
How do you feel when you take a large loss? I thought so. I don’t feel
good either. So it is important that we keep our losses to trivial levels. We
want to have losses so small that we can’t remember them the following
day. They should be so trivial that we hardly notice them and they certainly
don’t cause us any mental pain.
Capital preservation is more important than capital appreciation. I
have seen so many traders come to me for training after they have lost
50 percent of their money. Stop and think about this for a minute. They
need to now double their money just to get back to breakeven! That’s not
easy. They could get back to breakeven in just one trade if they were down
only a few percent.
And think about the psychology of the traders who have lost 50 percent
of their funds? Do you think they are approaching the market in a cool,
calm manner? Do you think their minds are blown? What chances do you
give them to double their money?
Risk management can take a good system and make it a bad one. Bad
risk management will destroy a good system.
Good risk management is more important than having a good system.
Bad risk management can turn a profitable system into an unprofitable system, but not vice versa.
Let’s play a game. Let’s assume that you are going to flip a coin. Let’s
further assume that you have $100 and you are going to flip the coin 1,000
times. This is a totally fair game. All we are going to do is to change the
size of the bet.

Risk Management

107

First, let’s assume that we bet $10 on every flip of the coin. That’s
10 percent of our bankroll of $100. What are the chances that we will get
wiped out sometime during our 1,000 coin flips? Turns out that we have
over a 90 percent chance of getting wiped out. The reason is that all we
need is a net of 10 losing trades and we are wiped out. And there is over
a 90 percent chance that we will get that condition sometime during those
1,000 flips.
Now, let’s only bet $1 on each flip. What are the chances now that you
will get wiped out in the 1,000 flips? Turns out to be less than 5 percent
because now we need to get a net of 100 losing coin flips in the 1,000 flips
and the chances of that are very small.
One of the key factors to consider is that the return and risk are
asymmetrical. How can that be when the odds are 50–50 on each coin
flip? Shouldn’t I always end up with roughly $100 at the end of the
game? Nope!
Let’s simplify the game for purposes of demonstration. Let’s assume
that you are going to bet $100 on each coin flip. Unfortunately, you lose the
first flip. There. You’ve lost all your money. You don’t get to play the game
anymore.
Let’s start over. This time you win the first flip so you have $200 in your
account. But then you lose the next two flips. You’re wiped out again and
don’t get to play the game.
Do you see a pattern developing? If you do well, you still have a chance
of getting wiped out. But if you are wiped out, you never get another chance
of doing well. That is why the game is asymmetrical. Each flip is 50–50 but
getting wiped out means that you don’t get to play the game anymore.
That is the situation we have with trading. You may have a good system, but getting wiped out means you don’t get to trade anymore to take
advantage of that good system. But making money in the beginning helps
you from getting wiped out but doesn’t completely eliminate the prospect.
As a result, we need to have proper risk management to make sure that
we can end up with enough of a chance to make money that the chance of
getting wiped out and not getting to play the game is eliminated.
Risk management is really another name for asset allocation. How we
allocate our precious resources is a major determinant of our eventual
profit.
Risk management determines how fast or slow we grow our portfolio.
Our portfolio will grow too slowly if we take too little risk, but we will
have little chance of being wiped out. On the other hand, our portfolio may
grow very quickly if we take big risks, but we run a high chance of getting wiped out. Can we find the point where we have little risk of being
wiped out yet still have a great chance of growing profits in a dramatic
fashion?
Keep reading to find out.

108

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

HOW TO MAKE SURE WE ARE
NEVER WIPED OUT
There was a famous Greek philosopher named Zeno. He developed something that has come to be known as Zeno’s Paradox. I like to use it as an
example of how the methods that I’m going to show you ensure that you
don’t get wiped out.
Zeno presented the following situation: An archer shoots an arrow to
a target. At some point, the arrow reaches a halfway point. Okay, from that
halfway point to the target there is another halfway point. And from that
new halfway point to the target is a farther halfway point. How can the
arrow ever reach the target?
I can’t answer that paradox but I do know that we can use a similar
idea when designing a risk management scheme. We can make sure that
our equity never gets wiped out.

GOOD RISK MANAGEMENT:
FIXED FRACTIONAL
The core technique for risk management is called fixed fractional because
we risk a fixed fraction of our portfolio on every trade. If you always risk a
fixed percentage of your account, you will risk fewer dollars on each trade
as you lose money.
For example, let’s assume that you have $100,000 in your account and
you decide to risk 1 percent on each trade. Assume that you lose the maximum on the first three trades. You will lose $1,000 on the first trade,
which is 1 percent of $100,000. You now have $99,000 in your account.
That means you can only risk $990 on the next trade. You are only allowed
to risk 1 percent of the total equity in your account. You only have $99,000
in your account after the first trade so 1 percent of $99,000 is $990. You
now lose on your second trade, leaving you with $98,010 in your account.
It should now be no surprise that you will only risk $980 on your next
trade.
Just like Zeno’s Paradox, there appears to be an infinite number of
times you can risk 1 percent. Of course, the real world is not so paradoxical. You will eventually run your account down to a level where you cannot
put on any more trades. Nonetheless, the fact that every one of your losing
trades is smaller means that you can withstand a lot of pain before you are
effectively out of the game. This simple method can keep you in the game
for months or years. Hopefully, that amount of time will allow you to get
your trading act together and start to make some money.

Risk Management

109

HOW MANY CONTRACTS SHOULD
I PUT ON?
Suppose you have $100,000 in your trading account and you are risking 1
percent on each trade. You see a great trend analysis trade developing. It
turns out that you will have to risk $750 on the trade per contract. How
many contracts should you put on?
Basically, you take the risk that you are allowed for that currency pair
and divide the risk per contract into that risk. That gives you the number
of contracts that you are allowed.
The rule is that you can only risk 1 percent of your $100,000 on each
trade. That means that you can only put on one contract since you are
allowed to risk $1,000 and each contract is a risk of $750. Thus, risking
two contracts would be $1,500 and that would be too much risk for the
portfolio. So you only do one contract.
Don’t change the stop just because you want to do two contracts. You
should always pick the optimal stop point and then see how many contracts
you are allowed to buy, not the other way round!
The risk management rule is there to make sure you stick to the selfdiscipline necessary to make money in the markets and not get blown out
by a few bad trades.
One of the potential problems with restricting your risk this way is that
you need to have a large bankroll. It is hard to trade forex using standard
contracts without risking at least $750 per contract. That means that you
must have $75,000 in your account to stick to the 1 percent rule. Many
traders do not have that much money in their accounts.
So you have two choices. First is to trade the mini- or even microcontracts that are available from many brokers. This means that you will
be risking $75 on a mini-contract rather than $750 on a standard contract.
Note also that using a mini-contract allows you to take any intermediate
amount of risk up to your risk limit. The second choice is to earn more
money to deposit into your account.

HIGHLY CORRELATED POSITIONS
Based on the risk management rules, you cannot be trading highly correlated pairs as if they were separate positions. For example, EUR/USD,
USD/CHF, and GBP/USD are highly correlated. You should apply the 1 percent criterion to all of your positions in all of these pairs all the time.
For example, you are risking $750 on a position in USD/CHF and you
see an opportunity to enter a similar position in EUR/USD that would be a

110

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

risk of $800. Nope. You are not allowed to do that trade because it is too
highly correlated with the first position. You are more than doubling up
the risk.
What this means is that you should pick the best opportunity in each
group. You can’t put on all the channel breakout trades in all currencies at
the same time. You need to pick the best one of the bunch and pass on the
rest of the trades.
My way of doing this is to put in all the orders and wait for one to be
filled. I then cancel all the other similar orders. For example, I see a channel
breakout trade coming up in EUR/USD, USD/CHF, and GBP/USD. I’ll put
in all three orders. Once I’m filled in one of them, I cancel the orders in the
other two.
Basically, I’m saying that I take the strongest of the bunch and cancel
the rest. My reasoning is that the first one to break out is likely the best
trade of the three so that is the one I want to jump on.

KELLY FORMULA
Now I want to show you how to turbo-charge your returns. The fixed fractional method is an excellent tradeoff between risk and reward. It gives
you a good return for the risk you take. It is not designed to take the least
risk nor is it designed to maximize your profit.
The Kelly Formula, also called the Kelly Criterion, is a very different
risk management method. It is designed to maximize profit but takes much
larger risks than the fixed fractional method.
The Kelly Formula was originated by a Bell Labs scientist named John
Kelly who was trying to maximize the amount of data that could go through
a telecommunications pipe. His boss, Claude Shannon, realized that the
formula could be used for gambling and he applied it to blackjack successfully. My friend Ed Thorpe, most famous for his book Beat the Dealer
(Vintage, 1966), also successfully extended it to the stock market.
But Kelly is also playing with fire. It can also show some massive
losses. It’s hard for most traders to use. So let’s look at the underlying concepts of Kelly. And let’s assume that we are using profitable systems.
First, Kelly grows profits geometrically rather than arithmetically. An
arithmetical growth in equity is a straight line. A geometric growth in equity
is a curved live that accelerates through time.
A geometric curve also means that the returns on a portfolio of trades
is not even. That means that the returns on wins are bigger than losses.
There is a concept called the law of large numbers. A Swiss mathematician, Jakob Bernoulli, developed this in a treatise published in 1713.

Risk Management

111

He proposed that the expectation of a particular series approaches the
ideal the larger the numbers being used. Let me translate. Let’s say that
we have a method that wins 45 percent of the time and the average winner
is 2.2 times the average loser. Those numbers will only be true in the long
run. Perhaps we only make three trades. All of them could be winners or
all could be losers. That is not even close to the expectation of winning
45 percent of the time. However, the law of large numbers says that trade
this method 100,000 times and the number of winners will be very, very
close to the ideal 45 percent.
Let’s look at another concept: expected value. The expected value, or
EV, of a trade is simply the percent chance of winning times the average
size of a winning trade minus the percent chance of losing times the average size of a losing trade.
EV = (%W ∗ AvgWinner) − (%L ∗ AvgLoser)
Simple!
But here’s the key concept: Virtually everybody looks at every trade
equally. I put on a channel breakout trade in EUR/JPY and another trade
in USD/CHF using trend analysis. I look at each of those trades as equal. I
will risk exactly the same for each trade. Perhaps I will risk 0.5 percent on
each of them.
But those two trades are not equal. Perhaps one technique is better
than the other technique. Perhaps one of the markets is in a well-defined
trend and the other is drifting sideways. It makes more sense to weight
better trades with a larger position.
Another way of describing risk management is asset allocation. Where
and how you allocate your assets determines the risk in your portfolio. You
will always want to invest in the best investments with larger positions
than in your worst prospective investments. Normally, these investments
are done based on the trader’s gut: “I like this trade a lot so I think I’ll put
on a double-size position.” Unfortunately, this is not a particularly rational
way to allocate your assets.
You should be allocating resources based on rational criteria. Do you
trade a particular pair better than other pairs? Is one of your trading methods better than the other ones? The answer is always yes.
You should be keeping track of all your trades. That way you can sort
them and generate statistics about your trading. You are going to want to
know what percent of your trades are winners and what percent are losers.
You will also want to know the average size of your winners and losers.
And, finally, you will want to know the greatest loss and greatest win.
With these statistics, we can now start to allocate our risk in a completely
different way.

112

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

The Kelly Formula, instead, allocates risk based on those stats that we
are collecting. Here is the formula for determining how much to bet:
F = (bp − q)/b
Where F is the percentage of the current bankroll to wager, b is the
average winner divided by the average loser, p is the probability of winning,
which is the number of winners divided by the total number of trades, and
q is the probability of losing, which is simply 1 – p.
In plain English, we first take the average size of a winning trade and
divide it by the average size of a losing trade. This is the odds we receive
when we win versus what we give up when we lose, on average. So let’s
say that we make 100 pips on average when we win and lose 50 pips when
we lose. The ratio is 2:1 so we would put in 2 for the b in the formula. P is
the percent of total trades that are winners and q is simply 1 minus p.
So the formula is actually very easy to use. But I’ve made it really simple. Just go to http://investmentmentoringinstitute.com/kelly.php and fill in
the blanks. Press “Calculate It!” and the amount of your bankroll that you
should invest is displayed in red. Check it out!
Now, either use the Web calculator or your physical calculator or take
your shoes off so we can do some calculating.
In general, the longer-term position techniques like channel breakout
and trend analysis have a winning percentage of about 45 percent but the
average winning trade is about 2.3 times the size of the losing trade. Let’s
plug those numbers into the Kelly Formula.
The Formula comes back and tells us that we should risk 22 percent of
our bankroll on each trade. Let me explore this outcome because it reveals
some very interesting concepts.
Basically, the Kelly Formula is telling us that we should put on a
position large enough that we would lose 22 percent of our portfolio if
there was an average loss. This may seem like an extraordinary amount
of risk. And it is. But Kelly is based on maximizing profit, not finding a
balance between risk and reward or trying to get the most conservative
position.
Note that each trade loss would be 22 percent of the remaining portfolio. So we are effectively stopped from getting wiped out but we could
suffer greatly. For example, we have our $100,000 account. I used the example of losing the maximum of 1 percent when using fixed fractional, so a
loss would drop the account down to $99,000. But an average loss on Kelly
would drop the account down to $78,000. Do another losing trade and the
Kelly account would drop to $60,840. And so on.
Notice that I said maximum loss when describing the fixed fractional
but average loss when describing the Kelly. The basic way of using Kelly is
