
and use as his edge. In trading, the unknown variables are all other traders who have the potential to
come into the market to put on or take off a trade.
Each trade contributes to the market's position at any given moment, which means that each trader,
acting on a belief about what is high and what is low, contributes to the collective behavior pattern that
is displayed at that moment. If there is a recognizable pattern, and if the variables used to define that
pattern conform to a particular trader's definition of an edge, then we can say that the market is offering
the trader an opportunity to buy low or sell high, based on the trader's definition. Suppose the trader
seizes the opportunity to take advantage of his edge and puts on a trade. What factors will determine
whether the market unfolds in the direction of his edge or against it? The answer is: the behavior of
other traders!
At the moment he puts a trade on, and for as long as he chooses to stay in that trade, other traders will
be participating in that market. They will be acting on their beliefs about what is high and what is low.
At any given moment, some percentage of other traders will contribute to an outcome favorable to our
traders edge, and the participation of some percentage of traders will negate his edge. There's no way to
know in advance how everyone else is going to behave and how their behavior will affect his trade, so
the outcome of the trade is uncertain.
The fact is, the outcome of every (legal) trade that anyone decides to make is affected in some way by
the subsequent behavior of other traders participating in that market, making the outcome of all trades
uncertain. Since all trades have an uncertain outcome, then like gambling, each trade has to be
statistically independent of the next trade, the last trade, or any trades in the future, even though the
trader may use the same set of known variables to identify his edge for each trade. Furthermore, if the
outcome of each individual trade is statistically independent of every other trade, there must also be a
random distribution between wins and losses in any given string or set of trades, even though the odds
of success for each individual trade may be in the traders favor.
Third, casino owners don't try to predict or know in advance the outcome of each individual event.
Aside from the fact that it would be extremely difficult, given all the unknown variables operating in
each game, it isn't necessary to create consistent results. Casino operators have learned that all they
have to do is keep the odds in their favor and have a large enough sample size of events so that their
edges have ample opportunity to work.
TRADING IN THE MOMENT
Traders who have learned to think in probabilities approach the markets from virtually the same
perspective. At the micro level, they believe that each trade or edge is unique. What they understand
about the nature of trading is that at any given moment, the market may look exactly the same on a
chart as it did at some previous moment; and the geometric measurements and mathematical
calculations used to determine each edge can be exactly the same from one edge to the next; but the

actual consistency of the market itself from one moment to the next is never the same.
For any particular pattern to be exactly the same now as it was in some previous moment would require
that every trader who participated in that previous moment be present. What's more, each of them
would also have to interact with one another in exactly the same way over some period of time to
produce the exact same outcome to whatever pattern was being observed. The odds of that happening
are nonexistent. It is extremely important that you understand this phenomenon because the
psychological implications for your trading couldn't be more important.
We can use all the various tools to analyze the market's behavior and find the patterns that represent the
best edges, and from an analytical perspective, these patterns can appear to be precisely the same in
eveiy respect, both mathematically and visually. But, if the consistency of the group of traders who are
creating the pattern "now" is different by even one person from the group that created the pattern in the
past, then the outcome of the current pattern has the potential to be different from the past pattern. (The
example of the analyst and chairman illustrates this point quite well.) It takes only one trader,
somewhere in the world, with a different belief about the future to change the outcome of any particular
market pattern and negate the edge that pattern represents. The most fundamental characteristic of the
market's behavior is that each "now moment" market situation, each "now moment" behavior pattern,
and each "now moment" edge is always a unique occurrence with its own outcome, independent of all
others. Uniqueness implies that anything can happen, either what we know (expect or anticipate), or
what we don't know (or can't know, unless we had extraordinary perceptual abilities). A constant flow
of both known and unknown variables creates a probabilistic environment where we don't know for
certain what will happen next.
This last statement may seem quite logical, even self-evident, but there's a huge problem here that is
anything but logical or selfevident. Being aware of uncertainty and understanding the nature of
probabilities does not equate with an ability to actually function effectively from a probabilistic
perspective. Thinking in probabilities can be difficult to master, because our minds don't naturally
process information in this manner. Quite the contrary, our minds cause us to perceive what we know,
and what we know is part of our past, whereas, in the market, every moment is new and unique, even
though there may be similarities to something that occurred in the past. This means that unless we train
our minds to perceive the uniqueness of each moment, tiiat uniqueness will automatically be filtered
out of our perception. We will perceive only what we know, minus any information that is blocked by
our fears; everything else will remain invisible.
The bottom line is that there is some degree of sophistication to thinking in probabilities, which can
take some people a considerable amount of effort to integrate into their mental systems as a functional
thinking strategy. Most traders don't fully understand this; as a result, they mistakenly assume they are
thinking in probabilities, because they have some degree of understanding of the concepts. I've worked
with hundreds of traders who mistakenly assumed they thought in probabilities, but didn't. Here is an
example of a trader I worked with whom I'll call Bob. Bob is a certified trading advisor (CTA) who

manages approximately $50 million in investments. He's been in the business for almost 30 years. He
came to one of my workshops because he was never able to produce more than a 12- to 18-percent
annual return on the accounts he managed.
This was an adequate return, but Bob was extremely dissatisfied because his analytical abilities
suggested that he should be achieving an annual return of 150 to 200 percent. I would describe Bob as
being well-versed in the nature of probabilities. In other words, he understood the concepts, but he
didn't function from a probabilistic perspective. Shortly after attending the workshop, he called to ask
me for some advice. Here is the entry from my journal written immediately after that phone
conversation.
9-28-95: Bob called with a problem. He put on a belly trade and put his stop in the market. The market
traded about a third of the way to his stop and then went back to his entry point, where he decided to
bail out of the trade. Almost immediately after he got out, the bellies went 500 points in the direction of
this trade, but of course he was out of the market. He didn't understand what was going on. First, I
asked him what was at risk. He didn't understand the question. He assumed that he had accepted the
risk because he put in a stop. I responded that just because he put in a stop it didn't mean that he had
truly accepted the risk of the trade. There are many things that can be at risk: losing money, being
wrong, not being perfect, etc., depending on one's underlying motivation for trading. I pointed out that
a person's beliefs are always revealed by their actions.
We can assume that he was operating out of a belief that to be a disciplined trader one has to define the
risk and put a stop in. And so he did. But a person can put in a stop and at the same time not believe
that he is going to be stopped out or that the trade will ever work against him, for that matter. By the
way he described the situation, it sounded to me as if this is exactly what happened to him. When he
put on the trade, he didn't believe he would be stopped out. Nor did he believe the market would trade
against him. In fact, he was so adamant about this, that when the market came back to his entry point,
he got out of the trade to punish the market with an "I'll show you" attitude for even going against him
by one tic. After I pointed this out to him, he said this was exactly the attitude he had when he took off
the trade. He said that he had been waiting for this particular trade for weeks and when the market
finally got to this point, he thought it would immediately reverse.
I responded by reminding him to look at the experience as simply pointing the way to something that
he needs to learn. A prerequisite for thinking in probabilities is that you accept the risk, because if you
don't, you will not want to face the possibilities that you haven't accepted, if and when they do present
themselves. When you've trained your mind to think in probabilities, it means you have fully accepted
all the possibilities (with no internal resistance or conflict) and you always do something to take the
unknown forces into account. Thinkine this way is virtually impossible unless you've done the mental
work necessary to "let go" of the need to know what is going to happen next or the need to be right on
each trade. In fact, the degree by which you think you know, assume you know, or in any way need to
know what is going to happen next, is equal to the degree to which you will fail as a trader. Traders

who have learned to think in probabilities are confident of their overall success, because they commit
themselves to taking every trade that conforms to their definition of an edge.
They don't attempt to pick and choose the edges they think, assume, or believe are going to work and
act on those; nor do they avoid the edges that for whatever reason they think, assume, or believe aren't
going to work. If they did either of those things, they would be contradicting their belief that the "now"
moment situation is always unique, creating a random distribution between wins and losses on any
given string of edges. They have learned, usually quite painfully, that they don't know in advance
which edges are going to work and which ones aren't. They have stopped trying to predict outcomes.
They have found that by taking every edge, they correspondingly increase their sample size of trades,
which in turn gives whatever edge they use ample opportunity to play itself out in their favor, just like
the casinos. On the other hand, why do you think unsuccessful traders are obsessed with market
analysis.
They crave the sense of certainty that analysis appears to give them. Although few would admit it, the
truth is that the typical trader wants to be right on every single trade. He is desperately trying to create
certainty where it just doesn't exist. The irony is that if he completely accepted the fact that certainty
doesn't exist, he would create the certainty he craves: He would be absolutely certain that certainty
doesn't exist. When you achieve complete acceptance of the uncertainty of each edge and the
uniqueness of each moment, your frustration with trading will end. Furthermore, you will no longer be
susceptible to making all the typical trading errors that detract from your potential to be consistent and
destroy your sense of self-confidence. For examnle not rlefminff the risk before crRftincr into a trarle is
hv far rhp most common of all trading errors, and starts the whole process of trading from an
inappropriate perspective. In light of the fact that anything can happen, wouldn't it make perfect sense
to decide before executing a trade what the market has to look, sound, or feel like to tell you your edge
isn't working? So why doesn't the typical trader decide to do it or do it every single time?
I have already given you the answer in the last chapter, but there's more to it and there's also some
tricky logic involved, but the answer is simple. The typical trader won't predefine the risk of getting
into a trade because he doesn't believe it's necessary. The only way he could believe "it isn't necessary"
is if he believes he knows what's going to happen next. The reason he believes he knows what's going
to happen next is because he won't get into a trade until he is convinced that he's right. At the point
where he's convinced the trade will be a winner, it's no longer necessary to define the risk (because if
he's right, there is no risk). Typical traders go through the exercise of convincing themselves that
they're right before they get into a trade, because the alternative (being wrong) is simply unacceptable.
Remember that our minds are wired to associate.
As a result, being wrong on any given trade has the potential to be associated with any (or every) other
experience in a trader's life where he's been wrong. The implication is that any trade can easily tap him
into the accumulated pain of every time he has been wrong in his life. Given the huge backlog of
unresolved, negative energy surrounding what it means to be wrong that exists in most people, it's easy

to see why each and every trade can literally take on the significance of a life or death situation. So, for
the typical trader, determining what the market would have to look, sound, or feel like to tell him that a
trade isn't working would create an irreconcilable dilemma. On one hand, he desperately wants to win
and the only way he can do that is to participate, but the only way he will participate is if he's sure the
trade will win. On the other hand, if he defines his risk, he is willfully gathering evidence that would
negate something he has already convinced himself of.
He will be contradicting the decision-making process he went through to convince himself that the
trade will work. If he exposed himself to conflicting information, it would surely create some degree of
doubt about the viability of the trade. If he allows himself to experience doubt, it's very unlikely he will
participate. If he doesn't put the trade on and it turns out to be a winner, he will be in extreme agony.
For some people, nothing hurts more than an opportunity recognized but missed because of self-doubt.
For the typical trader, the only way out of this psychological dilemma is to ignore the risk and remain
convinced that the trade is right. If any of this sounds familiar, consider this: When you're convincing
yourself that you're right, what you're saying to yourself is, "I know who's in this market and who's
about to come into this market. I know what they believe about what is high or what is low.
Furthermore, I know each individual's capacity to act on those beliefs (the degree of clarity or relative
lack of inner conflict), and with this knowledge, I am able to determine how the actions of each of
these individuals will affect price movement in its collective form a second, a minute, an hour, a day, or
a week from now."
Looking at the process of convincing yourself that you're right from this perspective, it seems a bit
absurd, doesn't it? For the traders who have learned to think in probabilities, there is no dilemma.
Predefining the risk doesn't pose a problem for these traders because they don't trade from a right or
wrong perspective. They have learned that trading doesn't have anything to do with being right or
wrong on any individual trade. As a result, they don't perceive the risks of trading in the same way the
typical trader does. Any of the best traders (the probability thinkers) could have just as much negative
energy surrounding what it means to be wrong as the typical trader.
But as long as they legitimately define trading as a probability game, their emotional responses to the
outcome of any particular trade are equivalent to how the typical trader would feel about flipping a
coin, calling heads, and seeing the coin come up tails. A wrong call, but for most people being wrong
about predicting the flip of a coin would not tap them into the accumulated pain of every other time in
their lives they had been wrong. Why? Most people know that the outcome of a coin toss is random. If
you believe the outcome is random, then you naturally expect a random outcome. Randomness implies
at least some degree of uncertainty. So when we believe in a random outcome, there is an implied
acceptance that we don't know what that outcome will be. When we accept in advance of an event that
we don't know how it will turn out, that acceptance has the effect of keeping our expectations neutral
and open-ended. Now we're getting down to the very core of what ails the typical trader. Any
expectation about the markets behavior that is specific, well-defined, or rigid—instead of being neutral

and open-ended—is unrealistic and potentially damaging. I define an unrealistic expectation as one that
does not correspond with the possibilities available from the market's perspective. If each moment in
the market is unique, and anything is possible, then any expectation that does not reflect these
boundary-less characteristics is unrealistic.
MANAGING EXPECTATIONS
The potential damage caused by holding unrealistic expectations comes from how it affects the way we
perceive information. Expectations are mental representations of what some future moment will look,
sound, taste, smell, or feel like. Expectations come from what we know. This makes sense, because we
can't expect something that we have no knowledge or awareness of. What we know is synonymous
with what we have learned to believe about the ways in which the external environment can express
itself. What we believe is our own personal version of the truth. When we expect something, we are
projecting out into the future what we believe to be true.
We are expecting the outside environment a minute, an hour, a day, a week, or a month from now to be
the way we have represented it in our minds. We have to be careful about what we project out into the
future, because nothing else has the potential to create more unhappiness and emotional misery than an
unfulfilled expectation. When things happen exactly as you expect them to, how do you feel? The
response is generally wonderful (including feelings like happiness, joy, satisfaction, and a greater sense
of well-being), unless, of course, you were expecting something dreadful and it manifested itself.
Conversely, how do you feel when your expectations are not fulfilled? The universal response is
emotional pain.
Everyone experiences some degree of anger, resentment, despair, regret, disappointment,
dissatisfaction, or betrayal when the environment doesn't turn out to be exactly as we expected it to be
(unless, of course, we are completely surprised by something much better than we imagined). Here's
where we run into problems. Because our expectations come from what we know, when we decide or
believe that we know something, we naturally expect to be right. At that point, we're no longer in a
neutral or open state of mind, and it's not difficult to understand why. If we're going to feel great if the
market does what we expect it to do, or feel horrible if it doesn't, then we're not exactly neutral or openminded. Quite the contrary, the force of the belief behind the expectation will cause us to perceive
market information in a way that confirms what we expect (we naturally like feeling good); and our
pain-avoidance mechanisms will shield us from information that doesn't confirm what we expect (to
keep us from feeling bad).
As I've already indicated, our minds are designed to help us avoid pain, both physical and emotional.
These pain-avoidance mechanisms exist at both conscious and subconscious levels. For example, if an
object is coming toward your head, you react instinctively to get out of the way. Ducking does not
require a conscious decision-making process. On the other hand, if you clearly see the object and have

time to consider the alternatives, you may decide to catch the object, bat it away with your hand, or
duck. These are examples of how we protect ourselves from physical pain. Protecting ourselves from
emotional or mental pain works in the same way, except that we are now protecting ourselves from
information. For example, the market expresses information about itself and its potential to move in a
particular direction. If there's a difference between what we want or expect and what the market is
offering or making available, then our pain-avoidance mechanisms kick in to compensate for the
differences. As with physical pain, these mechanisms operate at both the conscious and subconscious
levels.
To protect ourselves from painful information at the conscious level, we rationalize, justify, make
excuses, willfully gather information that will neutralize the significance of the conflicting information,
get angry (to ward off the conflicting information), or just plain lie to ourselves. At the subconscious
level, the pain-avoidance process is much more subtle and mysterious. At this level, our minds may
block our ability to see other alternatives, even though in other circumstances we would be able to
perceive them. Now, because they are in conflict with what we want or expect, our pain-avoidance
mechanisms can make them disappear (as if they didn't exist). To illustrate this phenomenon, the best
example is one I have already given you: We are in a trade where the market is moving against us. In
fact, the market has established a trend in the opposite direction to what we want or expect. Ordinarily,
we would have no problem identifying or perceiving this pattern if it weren't for the fact that the market
was moving against our position. But the pattern loses its significance (becomes invisible) because we
find it too painful to acknowledge.
To avoid the pain, we narrow our focus of attention and concentrate on information that keeps us out of
pain, regardless of how insignificant or minute. In the meantime, the information that clearly indicates
the presence of a trend and the opportunity to trade in the direction of that trend becomes invisible. The
trend doesn't disappear from physical reality, but our ability to perceive it does. Our pain-avoidance
mechanisms block our ability to define and interpret what the market is doing as a trend. The trend will
then stay invisible until the market either reverses in our favor or we are forced out of the trade because
the pressure of losing too much money becomes unbearable. It's not until we are either out of the trade
or out of danger that the trend becomes apparent, as well as all the opportunities to make money by
trading in the
All the distinctions that would otherwise be perceivable become perfectly clear, after the fact, when
there is no longer anything for our minds to protect us from. We all have the potential to engage in selfprotective painavoidance mechanisms, because they're natural functions of the way our minds operate.
There may be times when we are protecting ourselves from information that has the potential to bring
up deepseated emotional wounds or trauma that we're just not ready to face, or don't have the
appropriate skills or resources to deal with. In these cases, our natural mechanisms are serving us well.
But more often, our pain-avoidance mechanisms are just protecting us from information that would
indicate that our expectations do not correspond with what is available from the environments
