
9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA
Almost any drunk can stay sober for a few days. Soon, the urge to drink
overwhelms him again and he returns to the bottle. He cannot resist his urge
because he continues to feel and think like an alcoholic. Sobriety begins and
ends inside a person's mind.
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) has a system for changing the way people
think and feel about drinking. AA members use a 12-step program for
changing their minds. These 12 steps, described in the book Twelve Steps
and Twelve Traditions, refer to 12 stages of personal growth. Recovering
alcoholics attend meetings where they share their experiences with other

30

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

recovering alcoholics, supporting each other in their sobriety. Any member
can get a sponsor - another AA member whom he can call for support when
he feels the urge to drink.
AA was founded in the 1930s by two alcoholics - a doctor and a traveling
salesman. They began meeting and helping each other stay sober. They
developed a system that worked so well, others began to join them. AA has
only one goal - to help its members stay sober. It does no fund-raising, takes
no political positions, and runs no promotional campaigns. AA keeps growing thanks only to word of mouth. It owes its success only to its effectiveness.
The 12-step program of AA is so effective that people with other problems now use it. There are 12-step groups for children of alcoholics, smokers, gamblers, and others. I have become convinced that traders can stop losing money in the markets if they apply the key principles of Alcoholics
Anonymous to their trading.

Denial

A social drinker enjoys a cocktail or a glass of wine or beer but stops when
he feels he's had enough. An alcoholic's chemistry is different. Once an
alcoholic takes a drink, he feels an urge to drink more, until he gets drunk.
A drunk often says that he needs to cut down on alcohol, but he cannot
admit that his drinking is out of control. Most drunks deny that they are alcoholics. Try telling an alcoholic relative, friend, or employee that his drinking
is out of control and damaging his life and you will run into a wall of denial.
An alcoholic often says: "My boss fired me 'cause I was hung over and
came in late. My wife took the kids and left 'cause she had no sense to begin
with. My landlord is trying to kick me out of the apartment 'cause I'm a little
behind on the rent. I'm gonna have to cut down on my drinking, and everything will be all right."
This man has lost his family and his job. He is about to lose the roof over
his head. His life is spinning out of control- but he keeps saying that he can
cut down on his drinking. This is denial!
Alcoholics deny their problems while their lives are falling apart. Most of
them nurse the fantasy of being able to control their drinking. As long as an
alcoholic believes that he can "control his drinking," he is headed downhill.
Nothing will ever change, even if he gets a new job, a new wife, and a new
landlord.

,

9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA

31

Alcoholics deny that alcohol controls their lives. When they talk of reducing drinking, they talk about managing the unmanageable. They are like a
driver whose car spins out of control on a mountain road. When the car
careens down a cliff, it is too late to promise to drive carefully. An alcoholic's life careens out of control while he denies he's an alcoholic.
There is a starkparallel between an alcoholic and a trader whose account
is being demolished by losses. He keeps changing trading tactics, acting like
an alcoholic who tries to solve his problem by switching from hard liquor to
beer. A loser denies that he has lost control over his course in the market.

Rock Bottom

A drunk can begin his journey to recovery only after he admits that he is an
alcoholic. He must see that alcohol controls his life and not the other way
around. Most drunks cannot accept this painful truth. They can face it only
after they hit rock bottom.
Some alcoholics hit rock bottom when they develop a life-threatening illness. Others hit rock bottom after being rejected by their family or losing a
job. An alcoholic needs to sink to a point so low, so deep down in the gutter,
so unbearably painful that it finally penetrates his denial.
The pain of hitting rock bottom feels intolerable. It makes an alcoholic see
how deeply he has sunk. This pain penetrates his denial. He sees a stark and
simple choice-either turn his life around or die. Only then is an alcoholic
ready to begin his journey to recovery.
Profits make traders feel powerful and give them an emotional high. They
try to get high again, put on reckless trades, and give back their profits. Most
traders cannot stand the pain of a string of severe losses. They die as traders
afrer hitting rock bottom and wash out of the markets. The few survivors
realize that the main trouble is not with their methods, the trouble is with
their thinking. They can change and become successful traders.

The First Step

An alcoholic who wants to recover has to go through twelve steps - twelve
stages of personal growth. He needs to change how he thinks and feels, how
he relates to himself and others. The first step of AA is the hardest.
The first step an alcoholic has to take is to admit that he is powerless over

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

alcohol. He must admit that his life has become unmanageable, that alcohol
is stronger than he is. Most alcoholics cannot take that step, drop out, and go
on to destroy their lives.
If alcohol is stronger than you, then you can never touch it again, not a sip
for as long as you live. You have to give up drinking forever. Most drunks do
not want to give up that pleasure. They destroy their lives rather than take
the first step of AA. Only the pain of hitting rock bottom can supply the
motivation to take that first step.

One Day at a Time

You have probably seen bumper stickers on cars that say "One day at a time"
or "Easy does it." Those are AA slogans, and people who drive those cars
are probably recovering alcoholics.
Planning for life without alcohol can seem overwhelming. That's why AA
encourages its members to live sober one day at a time.
The goal of every AA member is to stay sober today and go to bed sober
tonight. ~ r a d u a l ldays
~ , become weeks, then months, then years. AA meetings and other activities help each recovering ii!coholic stay sober, one day at
a time.
Recovering alcoholics receive - and give others - invaluable support and
fellowship at these meetings. They are held at all hours, all over the world.
Traders have much to learn from those meetings.

An AA Meeting

One of the best things that a trader can do is go to an AA meeting. I especially recommend it to a trader on a losing streak. Call Alcoholics
Anonymous and ask about the next "open meeting" or "beginners' meeting"
in your area.
A meeting lasts about an hour. You can sit in the back of the room and listen carefully. There is no pressure to speak, and nobody asks for your last
name.
Each meeting begins with a long-term member getting up and speaking
about his or her personal struggle for recovery from alcoholism. Several
other members share their experiences. There is a collection to cover
expenses-most people give a dollar. All you have to do is listen carefully,

10. LOSERS ANONYMOUS

33

and every time you hear the word "alcohol," substitute the word "loss" for it.
You will feel as if the people in the meeting are talking about your trading!

10. LOSERS ANONYMOUS
A social drinker enjoys an occasional drink, but an alcoholic craves alcohol.
He denies that alcohol controls and destroys his life - until he reaches a personal crisis. It may be a life-threatening illness, unemployment, desertion by
a family member, or another unbearably painful event. AA calls it "hitting
rock bottom."
The pain of hitting rock bottom punctures an alcoholic's denial. He sees a
stark choice- to drown or to turn and swim up for air. His first step to recovery is to admit that he is powerless over alcohol. A recovering alcoholic can
never drink again.
Loss is to a loser what alcohol is to an alcoholic. A small loss is like a single drink. A big loss is like a bender. A series of losses is like an alcoholic
binge. A loser keeps switching between different markets, gurus, and trading
systems. His equity shrinks while he is trying to re-create the pleasurable
sensation of winning.
Losing traders think and act like alcoholics, except that their speech is not
slurred. The two groups are so much alike that you can predict what a loser
will do by using alcoholics as a model.
Alcoholism is a curable disease-and so is losing. Losers can change if
they start using the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous.

The Urge to Trade

Successful traders treat drawdowns the way social drinkers treat alcohol.
They have a little and stop. If they take several losses in a row, they take that
as a signal that something is wrong: It is time to stop and rethink their analysis or methods. Losers cannot stop- they keep trading because they are
addicted to the excitement of the game and keep hoping for a big win.
One prominent trading advisor wrote that the pleasure of trading was
higher than that of sex or flying jet aircraft. Just as an alcoholic proceeds
from social drinking to drunkenness, losers take bigger and bigger risks.
They cross the line between taking a business risk and gambling. Many
losers do not even know that line exists.

34

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Losers feel the urge to trade, just as alcoholics feel the urge to drink. They
make impulsive trades, go on trading binges, and try to trade their way out of
a hole.
Losers bleed money from their accounts. Most of them bust out, but some
turn to managing other people's money after they lose their own; still others
sell advisory services, like burned-out drunks who wash glasses in a bar.
Most losers hide their losses from themselves and from everyone else.
They keep shuffling money, keep poor records, and throw away brokerage
slips. A loser is like an alcoholic who does not want to know how many
ounces of liquor he drank.

Into the Hole

A loser never knows why he loses. If he knew, he would have done something about it and become a winner. He keeps trading in a fog. A loser tries
to manage his trading the way an alcoholic tries to manage his drinking.
Losers try to trade their way out of a hole. They switch trading systems,
buy new software, or take tips from a new guru. They act out a rescue fantasy - a charming belief in Santa Claus. Their desperate belief in magic solutions helps many advisors sell their services to the public.
When losses mount and equity shrinks, a loser acts like an alcoholic
threatened with an eviction or a firing. A loser grows desperate and converts
outright positions into spreads, doubles up on losing positions, reverses and
trades in the opposite direction, and so on. Losers get as much good from
these maneuvers as an alcoholic who switches from hard liquor to wine.
A losing trader careens out of control, trying to manage the unmanageable. Alcoholics die prematurely, and most traders bust out of the markets
and never come back. New trading methods, hot tips, and improved software
cannot help you until you learn to handle yourself. You have to change how
you think in order to stop losing and begin your recovery as a trader.
Losers get drunk on losses; they're addicted to losses. Traders prefer profits, but even losses provide plenty of excitement. The pleasure of trading is
very high. Few losers are actively trying to lose - but then few alcoholics are
consciously trying to end up in the gutter.
A loser keeps getting high from trading while his equity shrinks. Trying to
tell him that he is a loser is like trying to take a bottle away from a drunk. A
loser has to hit rock bottom before he can begin to recover.

10. LOSERS ANONYMOUS

35

Rock Bottom

Hitting rock bottom feels horrible. It is painful and humiliating. You hit it
when you lose money you cannot afford to lose. You hit it when you gamble
away your savings. You hit it after you tell your friends how smart you are
and later have to ask them for a loan. You hit rock bottom when the market
comes roaring at you and yells: "You fool!"
Some people hit rock bottom after only a few weeks of trading. Others
keep adding money to their account to postpone the day of reckoning. It
hurts to see a loser in the mirror.
We spend our lifetimes building up self-esteem. Most of us have a high
opinion of ourselves. It hurts a smart and successful person to hit rock bottom. Your first impulse may be to hide, but remember you are not alone.
Almost every trader has been there.
Most people who hit rock bottom die as traders. They slink away from the
market and never look back. Brokerage records indicate that 90 out of 100
people trading today will probably be gone from the markets a year from
now. They will hit rock bottom, crumble, and leave. They will try to forget
trading as they would a bad dream.
Some losers will lick their wounds and wait until the pain fades away.
Then they will return to trading, having learned little. They will be fearful,
and their fear will further impair their trading.
Very few traders will begin the process of change and growth. For these
rare individuals, the pain of hitting rock bottom will interrupt the vicious
cycle of getting high from winning and then losing everything and crashing.
When you admit that you have a personal problem that causes you to lose,
you can begin building a new trading life. You can start developing the discipline of a winner.

The First Step

An alcoholic needs to admit that he cannot control his drinking. A trader
needs to admit that he cannot control his losses. He needs to admit that he
has a psychological problem with the losses and that he is destroying his
trading account. The first step of an AA member is to say: "I am an alcoholic, I am powerless over alcohol." As a trader, you have to take your first
step and say: "I am a loser, I am powerless over losses."

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

A trader can recover using the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous.
Recovering alcoholics struggle to stay sober, one day at a time. Now you
have to struggle to trade without losses, one day at a time.
You may say this is impossible. What if you buy, and the market immediately ticks down? What if you sell short at the bottom tick, and the market
rallies? Even the best traders lose money on some trades.
The answer is to draw a line between a businessman's risk and a loss. A
trader must take a businessman's risk, but he may never take a loss greater
than his predetermined risk.
A storekeeper takes a risk every time he stocks new merchandise. If it
does not sell, he will lose money. An intelligent businessman takes only risks
that will not put him out of business even if he makes several mistakes in a
row. Stocking two crates of merchandise may be a sensible business risk, but
stocking a full trailer is probably a gamble.
As a trader, you are in the business of trading. You need to define your
businessman's risk- the maximum amount of money you will risk on any
single trade. There is no standard dollar amount, just as there is no standard
business. An acceptable businessman's risk depends, first of all, on the size
of your trading account. It also depends on your trading method and pain tolerance.
The concept of a businessman's risk will change the way you manage
your money (see Chapter 10, "Risk Management"). A sensible trader never
risks more than 2 percent of account equity on any trade. For example, if you
have $30,000 in your account, you may not risk more than $600 per trade,
and if you have $10,000, you may not risk more than $200. If your account
is small, limit yourself to trading less expensive markets, or mini-contracts.
If you see an attractive trade but your stop would have to be placed where
more than 2 percent of equity would be at risk-pass that trade. Avoid risking more than 2 percent on a trade the way a recovering alcoholic avoids
bars. If you are not sure how much to risk, err on the side of caution.
If you blame excess commissions on a broker and slippage on a floor
trader, you give up control of your trading life. Try to reduce both, but take
responsibility for them. If you lose even a dollar more than your businessman's risk, including commissions and slippage, you are a loser.
Do you keep good trading records? Poor record-keeping is a sure sign of a
gambler and a loser. Good businessmen keep good records. Your trading
records must show the date and price of every entry and exit, slippage, commissions, stops, all adjustments of stops, reasons for entering, objectives for

10. LOSERS ANONYMOUS

37

exiting, maximum paper profit, maximum paper loss after a stop was hit, and
any other necessary data.
If you bail out of a trade within your businessman's risk, it is normal business. There is no bargaining, no waiting for another tick, no hoping for a
change. Losing a dollar more than your established businessman's risk is like
getting drunk, getting into a brawl, getting sick to your stomach on your way
home, and waking up in the gutter with a headache. You would never want
that to happen.
A Meeting for One

When you go to an AA meeting, you will see people who have not had a
drink in years stand up and say: "Hello, my name is so-and-so, and I am an
alcoholic." Why do they call themselves alcoholics after years of sobriety?
Because if they think they have beaten alcoholism, they will start drinking
again. If a person stops thinking he is an alcoholic, he is free to take a drink,
then another, and will probably end up in the gutter again. A person who
wants to stay sober must remember that he is an alcoholic for the rest of his
life.
Traders would benefit from our own self-help organization-I'd call it
Losers Anonymous. Why not Traders Anonymous? Because a harsh name
helps to focus attention on our self-destructive tendencies. After all,
Alcoholics Anonymous do not call themselves Drinkers Anonymous. As
long as you call yourself a loser, you focus on avoiding losses.
Several traders have argued against what they thought was the "negative
thinking" of Losers Anonymous. A retired woman from Texas, a highly successful trader, described her approach to me. She is very religious and thinks
it would not please the Lord for her to lose money. She cuts her losses very
fast because of that. I thought that our methods were similar. The goal is to
cut losses due to some objective, external rule.
Trading within a businessman's risk is like living without alcohol. A
trader has to admit that he is a loser, just as a drunk has to admit that he is an
alcoholic. Then he can begin his journey to recovery.
This is why every morning before trading I sit in front of the quote screen
in my office and say: "Good morning, my name is Alex, and I am a loser. I
have it in me to do serious financial damage to my account." This is like an
AA meeting- it keeps my mind focused on the first principles. Even if I take

38

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

thousands of dollars out of the market today, tomorrow I will say: "Good
morning, my name is Alex and I am a loser."
A friend of mine joked: "When I sit in front of my quote machine in the
morning, I say, 'My name is John, and I'm gonna rip your throat out."' His
thinking generates tension. "Losers Anonymous" thinking generates serenity.
A trader who feels serene and relaxed can focus on looking for the best and
safest trades. A trader who is tense is like a driver who freezes at the wheel.
When a sober man and a drunk enter a race, you know who is more likely to
win. A drunk may win once in a while thanks to luck, but the sober man is
the one to bet on. You want to be the sober man in the race.

11. WINNERS AND LOSERS
We come to the market from different walks of life and bring with us the
mental baggage of our upbringing and prior experiences. Most of us find that
when we act in the market the way we do in our everyday life, we lose
money.
Your success or failure in the market depends on your thoughts and feelings. It depends on your attitudes toward gain and risk, fear and greed, and
on how you handle the excitement of trading and risk.
Most of all, your success or failure depends on your ability to use your
intellect rather than act out your emotions. A trader who feels overjoyed
when he wins and depressed when he loses cannot accumulate equity
because he is controlled by his emotions. If you let the market make you feel
high or low, you will lose money.
To be a winner in the market you must know yourself and act coolly and
responsibly. The pain of losing scares people into looking for magic methods. At the same time, they discard much of what is useful in their professional or business backgrounds.
Like an Ocean

The market is like an ocean-it moves up and down regardless of what you
want. You may feel joy when you buy a stock and it explodes in a rally. You
may feel drenched with fear when you go short but the market rises and your
equity melts with every uptick. These feelings have nothing to do with the
market - they exist only inside you.

11. WINNERS AND LOSERS

39

The market does not know you exist. You can do nothing to influence it.
You can only control your behavior.
The ocean does not care about your welfare, but it has no wish to hurt you
either. You may feel joy on a sunny day, when a gentle wind pushes your
sailboat where you want it to go. You may feel panic on a stormy day when
the ocean pushes your boat toward the rocks. Your feelings about the ocean
exist only in your mind. They threaten your survival when you let your feelings rather than intellect control your behavior.
A sailor cannot control the ocean, but he can control himself. He studies
currents and weather patterns. He learns safe sailing techniques and gains
experience. He knows when to sail and when to stay in the harbor. A successful sailor uses his intelligence.
An ocean can be useful-you can fish in it and use its surface to get to
other islands. An ocean can be dangerous-you can drown in it. The more
rational your approach, the more likely you are to getwhat you want. When
you act out your emotions, you cannot focus on the reality of the ocean.
A trader has to study trends and reversals in the market the way a sailor
studies the ocean. He must trade on a small scale while learning to handle
himself in the market. You can never control the market but you can learn to
control yourself.
A beginner who has a string of profitable trades often feels he can walk on
water. He starts taking wild risks and blows up his account. On the other hand,
an amateur who takes several losses in a row often feels so demoralized that he
cannot place an order even when his system gives him a strong signal to buy or
sell. If trading makes you feel elated or frightened, you cannot fully use your
intellect. When joy sweeps you off your feet, you will make irrational trades
and lose. When fear grips you, you'll miss profitable trades.
A professional trader uses his head and stays calm. Only amateurs
become excited or depressed because of their trades. Emotional reactions are
a luxury that you cannot afford in the markets.
