
161/396

gardens, or washing dishes, or manufacturing crème de menthe, and you can see how
one man’s idea of heaven might be another’s
of hell. The bosses of the operation, Fathers
Ephraim and Arsenios, escape this grueling
regime roughly five days a month; otherwise
this is the life they lead. “Most people in
Greece have this image of the abbot as a
hustler,” another monk, named Father Matthew, from Wisconsin, says to me in a moment of what I take to be candor. “Everyone
in Greece is convinced that the abbot and
Father Arsenios have their secret bank accounts. It’s completely mad if you think
about it. What are they going to do with it?
They don’t take a week off and go to the
Caribbean. The abbot lives in a cell. It’s a
nice cell. But he’s still a monk. And he hates
leaving the monastery.”
The knowledge that I am meant to be back
in the church at six in the morning makes it
more, not less, difficult to sleep, and I’m out

162/396

of bed by five. Perfect silence: it’s so rare to
hear nothing that it takes a moment to
identify the absence. Cupolas, chimneys,
towers, and Greek crosses punctuate the gray
sky. Also a pair of idle giant cranes: the
freezing of the monks’ assets has halted restoration of the monastery. At 5:15 come the
first rumblings from inside the church; it
sounds as if someone is moving around the
icon screens, the sweaty backstage preparations before the show. At 5:30 a monk grabs
a rope and clangs a church bell. Silence again
and then, moments later, from the monk’s
long dormitory, the beep beep beep of electric alarm clocks. Twenty minutes later
monks, alone or in pairs, stumble out of their
dorm rooms and roll down the cobblestones
to their church. It’s like watching a factory
springing to life in a one-industry town. The
only thing missing are the lunch pails.
Three hours later, in the car on the way
back to Athens, my cell phone rings. It’s

163/396

Father Matthew. He wants to ask me a favor.
Oh no, I think, they’ve figured out what I’m
up to and he’s calling to place all sorts of restrictions on what I write. They had, sort of,
but he didn’t. The minister of finance insisted on checking his quotes, but the monks
just let me run with whatever I had, which is
sort of amazing, given the scope of the lawsuits they face. “We have been reading this
adviser in the American stock market,” says
the monk. “His name is Robert Chapman . . .
” (I’d never heard of him. He turned out to
be the writer of a newsletter about global finance.) His fellow monks, said Father Matthew, were wondering what I thought of
Robert Chapman. Whether he was worth
listening to . . .
THE DAY BEFORE I left Greece the Greek parlia-

ment debated and voted on a bill to raise the
retirement age, reduce government pensions, and otherwise reduce the spoils of
public-sector life. (“I’m all for reducing the

164/396

number of public-sector employees,” an IMF
investigator had said to me. “But how do you
do that if you don’t know how many there
are to start with?”) Prime Minister
Papandreou presented this bill, as he has
presented everything since he discovered the
hole in the books, not as his own idea but as
a nonnegotiable demand of the IMF’s. The
general idea seems to be that while the Greek
people will never listen to any internal call
for sacrifice they might listen to calls from
outside. That is, they no longer really even
want to govern themselves.
Thousands upon thousands of government
employees take to the streets to protest the
bill. Here is Greece’s version of the Tea
Party: tax collectors on the take, publicschool teachers who don’t really teach, wellpaid employees of bankrupt state railroads
whose trains never run on time, state hospital workers bribed to buy overpriced supplies.
Here they are, and here we are: a nation of

165/396

people looking for anyone to blame but
themselves. The Greek public-sector employees assemble themselves into units that resemble army platoons. In the middle of each
unit are two or three rows of young men
wielding truncheons disguised as flagpoles.
Ski masks and gas masks dangle from their
belts so that they can still fight after the inevitable tear gas. “The deputy prime minister
has told us that they are looking to have at
least one death,” a prominent former Greek
minister had told me. “They want some
blood.” Two months earlier, on May 5, during the first of these protest marches, the
mob offered a glimpse of what it was capable
of. Seeing people working at a branch of the
Marfin Bank, young men hurled Molotov
cocktails inside and tossed gasoline on top of
the flames, barring the exit. Most of the
Marfin Bank’s employees escaped from the
roof, but the fire killed three workers, including a young woman four months pregnant.

166/396

As they died, Greeks in the streets screamed
at them that it served them right, for having
the audacity to work. The events took place
in full view of the Greek police, and yet the
police made no arrests.
As on other days, the protesters have effectively shut down the country. The airtraffic controllers have also gone on strike
and closed the airport. At the port of Piraeus,
the mob prevents cruise-ship passengers
from going ashore and shopping. At the
height of the tourist season the tourist dollars this place so desperately needs are effectively blocked from getting into the country. Any private-sector employee who does
not skip work in sympathy is in danger. All
over Athens shops and restaurants close; so,
for that matter, does the Acropolis.
The lead group assembles in the middle of
a wide boulevard a few yards from the
burned and gutted bank branch. That they
burned a bank is, under the circumstances,

167/396

incredible. If there were any justice in the
world the Greek bankers would be in the
streets marching to protest the morals of the
ordinary Greek citizen. The Marfin Bank’s
marble stoop has been turned into a sad
shrine: a stack of stuffed animals for the unborn child, a few pictures of monks, a sign
with a quote from the ancient orator Isocrates: “Democracy destroys itself because it
abuses its right to freedom and equality. Because it teaches its citizens to consider audacity as a right, lawlessness as a freedom, abrasive speech as equality, and anarchy as
progress.” At the other end of the street a
phalanx of riot police stand, shields together,
like Spartan warriors. Behind them is the
Parliament building; inside, the debate presumably rages, though what is being said
and done is a mystery, as the Greek journalists aren’t working, either. The crowd begins
to chant and march toward the vastly outnumbered police: the police stiffen. It’s one

168/396

of those moments when it feels as if anything
might happen. Really, it’s just a question of
which way people jump.
That’s how it feels in the financial markets,
too. The question everyone wants an answer
to is: Will Greece default? There’s a school of
thought that says they have no choice: the
very measures the government imposes to
cut costs and raise revenues will cause what
is left of the productive economy to flee the
country. The taxes are lower in Bulgaria, the
workers more pliable in Romania. But
there’s a second, more interesting, question:
Even if it is technically possible for these
people to repay their debts, live within their
means, and return to good standing inside
the European Union, do they have the inner
resources to do it? Or have they so lost their
ability to feel connected to anything outside
their small worlds that they would rather just
shed the obligations? On the face of it, defaulting on their debts and walking away

169/396

would seem a mad act: all Greek banks
would instantly go bankrupt, the country
would have no ability to pay for the many necessities it imports (oil, for instance), and the
government would be punished for many
years in the form of much higher interest
rates, if and when it was allowed to borrow
again. But the place does not behave as a collective; it lacks the monks’ instincts. It behaves as a collection of atomized particles,
each of which has grown accustomed to pursuing its own interest at the expense of the
common good. There’s no question that the
government is resolved to at least try to recreate Greek civic life. The only question is:
Can such a thing, once lost, ever be recreated?

III
IRELAND’S
ORIGINAL SIN

When I flew to Dublin in early November
2010 the Irish government was busy helping
the Irish people come to terms with their
loss. It had been two years since a handful of
Irish politicians and bankers had decided to
guarantee all the debts of the biggest Irish
banks, but the people were only now getting
their minds around what that meant for
them. The numbers were breathtaking. A
single bank, Anglo Irish, which, two years
before, the Irish government claimed was

171/396

suffering from a “liquidity problem,” confessed to losses of 34 billion euros. To get a
sense of how “34 billion euros” sounds to
Irish ears, an American thinking in dollars
needs to multiply it by roughly one hundred:
$3.4 trillion. And that was for a single bank.
As the sum total of loans made by Anglo
Irish Bank, most of it to Irish property developers, was only 72 billion euros, the bank
had lost nearly half of every dollar it
invested.
The two other big Irish banks, Bank of Ireland and, especially, Allied Irish Banks
(AIB), remained Ireland’s dirty little secret.
Both older than Ireland itself (the Bank of
Ireland was founded in 1783; Allied Irish was
formed in a merger of three banks founded
in the 1800s), both were now also obviously
bust. The Irish government owned most of
the two ancient banks, but revealed less
about them than they had about Anglo Irish.
As they had lent vast sums not only to Irish

172/396

property developers but also to Irish home
buyers, their losses were obviously vast—and
similar in spirit to the losses at the upstart
Anglo Irish. Even in an era when capitalists
went out of their way to destroy capitalism,
the Irish bankers had set some kind of record
for destruction. Theo Phanos, whose London
hedge fund has interests in Ireland, says that
“Anglo Irish was probably the world’s worst
bank. Even worse than the Icelandic banks.”
shared some
things in common with Iceland’s. It was created by the sort of men who ignore their
wives’ suggestions that maybe they should
stop and ask for directions, for instance. But
while the Icelandic male used foreign money
to conquer foreign places—trophy companies
in Britain, chunks of Scandinavia—the Irish
male used foreign money to conquer Ireland.
Left alone in a dark room with a pile of
money, the Irish decided what they really
wanted to do with it was buy Ireland. From
IRELAND’S FINANCIAL DISASTER

173/396

each other. An Irish economist named Morgan Kelly, whose estimates of Irish bank
losses have been the most prescient, has
made a back-of-the-envelope calculation that
puts the property-related losses of all Irish
banks at roughly 106 billion euros. (Think
$10.6 trillion.) At the rate money flows into
the Irish treasury, Irish bank losses alone
would absorb every penny of Irish taxes for
the next four years.
In recognition of the spectacular losses, the
entire Irish economy has almost dutifully
collapsed. When you fly into Dublin you are
traveling, for the first time in fifteen years,
against the traffic. The Irish are once again
leaving Ireland, along with hordes of migrant
workers. In late 2006 the unemployment
rate stood at a bit more than 4 percent; now
it’s 14 percent, and climbing toward rates not
experienced since the mid-1980s. Just a few
years ago Ireland was able to borrow money
more cheaply than Germany; now, if it can

174/396

borrow at all, it will be charged interest rates
6 percent higher than Germany, another
echo of a distant past. The Irish budget deficit—in 2007 the country had a budget surplus—is now 32 percent of its GDP, the
highest by far in the history of the euro zone.
Professional credit analyst firms now judge
Ireland the third most likely country in the
world to default. Not quite as risky for the
global investor as Venezuela, perhaps, but
riskier than Iraq. Distinctly third world, in
any case.
Yet when I arrived, Irish politics had a
frozen-in-time quality. In Iceland, the
business-friendly conservative party had
been quickly tossed out of power, and the
women had booted the alpha males out of
the banks and government. In Greece the
corrupt, business-friendly, every-Greek-forhimself conservative party was also given the
heave-ho, and the new government is attempting to create a sense of collective

175/396

purpose, or at any rate persuade the citizens
to quit cheating on their taxes. (The new
Greek prime minister is not merely upstanding but barely Greek.) Ireland was the first
European country to watch its entire banking
system fail, and yet its business-friendly conservative party, Fianna Fáil (pronounced
“Feena Foil”), remained in office up until
February 2011. There’s no Tea Party movement, no Glenn Beck, no serious protests of
any kind. The only obvious change in the
country’s politics has been the role played by
foreigners. The new bank regulator, an Englishman, came from Bermuda. The Irish government and Irish banks are crawling with
American investment bankers and Australian management consultants and faceless
Euro-officials, referred to inside the Department of Finance simply as “the Germans.”
Walk the streets at night and, through restaurant windows, you see important-looking
men in suits, dining alone, studying

176/396

important-looking papers. In some new and
strange way Dublin was now an occupied
city: Hanoi, circa 1950. “The problem with
Ireland is that you’re not allowed to work
with Irish people anymore,” an Irish property developer told me. He was finding it difficult to escape hundreds of millions of euros
in debt he would never be able to repay.
Ireland’s regress is especially unsettling because of the questions it raises about Ireland’s former progress: even now no one is
quite sure why the Irish did so well for themselves in the first place. Between 1845 and
1852 the country experienced the single
greatest loss of population in world history:
in a nation of 8 million, 1.5 million people
left. Another million Irish people starved to
death, or died from the effects of hunger. Inside of a decade the nation went from being
among the most densely populated in
Europe to one of the least. The founding of
the Irish state in 1922 might have offered

177/396

some economic hope—they now had their
own central bank, their own economic
policies—but right up until the end of the
1980s the Irish had failed to do what economists expected them to do: catch up with
their neighbors’ standard of living. As recently as the 1980s 1 million Irish people, in
a nation of a mere 3.2 million, lived below
the poverty line.
WHAT HAS OCCURRED in Ireland since then is

without precedent in economic history. By
the start of the new millennium the Irish
poverty rate was under 6 percent, and Ireland was the second richest country in the
world, according to the Bank of Ireland. How
did that happen? A bright young Irishman
who got himself hired by Bear Stearns in the
late 1990s and went off to New York or London for five years returned feeling poor. For
the better part of the past decade there’s
been quicker money to be made in Irish real
estate than in American investment banking.

178/396

How did that happen? For the first time in
history people and money longed to get into
Ireland rather than out of it. The most dramatic case in point are the Poles. The Polish
government keeps no official statistics on the
movement of its workforce, but its Foreign
Ministry guesstimates that, since their admission to the European Union, a million
Poles have left Poland to work elsewhere—and that, at the peak, in 2006, a
quarter of a million of them were in Ireland.
For the United States to achieve a proportionally distortive demographic effect it
would need to hand green cards to 17.5 million Mexicans.
HOW DID ANY of this happen? There are many

theories: the elimination of trade barriers,
the decision to grant free public higher education, a low corporate tax rate introduced in
the 1980s, which turned Ireland into a tax
haven for foreign corporations. Maybe the
most intriguing was offered by a pair of

179/396

demographers at Harvard, David E. Bloom
and David Canning, in a 2003 paper called
“Contraception and the Celtic Tiger.” Bloom
and Canning argued that a major cause of
the Irish boom was a dramatic increase in
the ratio of working-age to non–working-age
Irishmen, brought about by a crash in the
Irish birthrate. This in turn had been mainly
driven by Ireland’s decision, in 1979, to legalize birth control. That is, there was an inverse correlation between a nation’s fidelity
to the Vatican’s edicts and its ability to climb
out of poverty: out of the slow death of the
Irish Catholic Church arose an economic
miracle.
The Harvard demographers admitted their
theory explained only part of what had
happened in Ireland. And at the bottom of
the success of the Irish there remains, even
now, some mystery. “It appeared like a miraculous beast materializing in a forest clearing,” writes the preeminent Irish historian R.

180/396

F. Foster, “and economists are still not entirely sure why.” Not knowing why they were
so suddenly so successful, the Irish can perhaps be forgiven for not knowing exactly how
successful they were meant to be. They’d
gone from being abnormally poor to being
abnormally rich without pausing to experience normality. When, in the early 2000s,
the financial markets began to offer virtually
unlimited credit to all comers—when nations
were let into the dark room with the pile of
money, and asked what they would like to do
with it—the Irish were already in a peculiarly
vulnerable state of mind. They’d spent the
better part of a decade under something very
like a magic spell.
A few months after the spell was broken,
the short-term parking lot attendants at
Dublin Airport noticed that their daily take
had fallen. The lot appeared full; they
couldn’t understand it; then they noticed the
cars never changed. They phoned the Dublin

181/396

police, who in turn traced the cars to Polish
construction workers, who had bought them
with money borrowed from the big Irish
banks. The migrant workers had ditched the
cars and gone home. A few months later the
Bank of Ireland sent three collectors to Poland to see what they could get back, but they
had no luck. The Poles were untraceable. But
for their cars in the short-term parking lot,
they might never have existed.
MORGAN KELLY IS a professor of economics at

University College Dublin, but he did not,
until recently, view it as his business to think
much about the economy under his nose. He
had written a handful of highly regarded academic papers on topics regarded as abstruse
even by academic economists (“The Economic Impact of the Little Ice Age”). “I only
stumbled on this catastrophe by accident,”
he says. “I had never been interested in the
Irish economy. The Irish economy is tiny and
boring.” Kelly saw house prices rising madly,

182/396

and heard young men in Irish finance to
whom he had recently taught economics try
to explain why the boom didn’t trouble them.
And the sight and sound of them troubled
him. “Around the middle of 2006 all these
former students of ours working for the
banks started to appear on TV!” he says.
“They were now all bank economists and
they were nice guys and all that. And they
were all saying the same thing: ‘We’re going
to have a soft landing.’”
The statement struck him as absurd on the
face of it: real estate bubbles never end with
soft landings. A bubble is inflated by nothing
firmer than people’s expectations. The moment people cease to believe that house
prices will rise forever, they will notice what
a terrible long-term investment real estate
has become, and flee the market, and the
market will crash. It was in the nature of real
estate booms to end with crashes—just as it
was perhaps in Morgan Kelly’s nature to

183/396

assume that if his former students were cast
on Irish TV playing the financial experts,
something was amiss. “I just started
Googling things,” he said.
Googling things, Kelly learned that more
than a fifth of the Irish workforce was now
employed building houses. The Irish construction industry had swollen to become
nearly a quarter of Irish GDP—compared to
less than 10 percent or so in a normal economy—and Ireland was building half as
many new houses a year as the United Kingdom, which had fifteen times as many people
to house. He learned that since 1994 the average price for a Dublin home had risen
more than 500 percent. In parts of Dublin
rents had fallen to less than 1 percent of the
purchase price; that is, you could rent a
million-dollar home for less than $833 a
month. The investment returns on Irish land
were ridiculously low: it made no sense for
capital to flow into Ireland to develop more

184/396

of it. Irish home prices implied an economic
growth rate that would leave Ireland, in
twenty-five years, three times as rich as the
United States. (“A price/earnings ratio above
Google’s,” as Kelly put it.) Where would this
growth come from? Since 2000, Irish exports had stalled and the economy had become consumed with building houses and offices and hotels. “Competitiveness didn’t
matter,” says Kelly. “From now on we were
going to get rich building houses for each
other.”
The endless flow of cheap foreign money
had teased a new trait out of a nation. “We
are sort of a hard, pessimistic people,” says
Kelly. “We don’t look on the bright side.” Yet
since the year 2000 a lot of people had behaved as if each day would be sunnier than
the last. The Irish had discovered optimism.
Their real estate boom had the flavor of a
family lie: it was sustainable so long as it
went unquestioned and it went unquestioned

185/396

so long as it appeared sustainable. After all,
once the value of Irish real estate came untethered from rents, there was no value for it
that couldn’t be justified. The 35 million
euros Irish entrepreneur Denis O’Brien paid
for the impressive manor house on Dublin’s
Shrewsbury Road sounded like a lot until the
real estate developer Sean Dunne’s wife paid
58 million euros for the four-thousandsquare-foot fixer-upper just down the street.
But the minute you compared the rise in
prices to real estate booms elsewhere and at
other times, you reanchored the conversation; you biffed the narrative. The comparisons that sprung first to Morgan Kelly’s mind
were with the housing bubbles in the Netherlands in the 1970s (after natural gas was discovered in Holland) and Finland in the
1980s (after oil was found off its coast), but it
almost didn’t matter which examples he
picked: the mere idea that Ireland was not
sui generis was the panic-making thought.
