
Trading ETFs: Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis, Second Edition
by Deron Wagner
Copyright © 2012 Deron Wagner

CHAPTER 6

Supplementing the Basics
Now that you understand the essential methodology behind the top-down strategy,
this chapter will discuss additional chart patterns and technical indicators that can
supplement the basic concepts. Some traders may already be familiar with the patterns and indicators discussed in this chapter but may have never applied them to the
analysis ofexchange-traded funds.
Using Multiple Time Frames for Conﬁrmation

Regardless of whether you are a short-term day trader or a long-term position trader,
the use of multiple time frames for technical conﬁrmation is one more tool you can
add to your ETF trading arsenal in order to shift the odds more in your favor.
Upon selecting the best ETF for a new trade entry, one ﬁnal step is to compare its
chart pattern on several time frames. If you’re a long-term trader, you may want to use
the hourly, daily, and weekly charts. Intraday traders could similarly use the 5-minute,
15-minute, and hourly charts. The best possible trade setups will show conﬁrmation
across all time frames.
For a long setup, this might mean the ETF is showing support of its uptrend line on
the hourly chart, consolidating near the highs on the daily chart, and nearing the lower
channel support of its weekly uptrend line. If all the time frames conﬁrm one another in
this manner, your odds for a proﬁtable trade are much higher. Nevertheless, conﬂicting
signals occasionally occur, as when one chart looks bullish but the other looks bearish or
maybe is looking a bit shaky. This might happen when an ETF has broken below support of its hourly uptrend line, but is coming into support of its 50-day moving average
(MA), or its primary intermediate-term uptrend line.
When chart patterns conﬂict with one another, the important thing to remember
is that the longer time frame always holds more sway than the shorter one. Therefore, if the
hourly chart doesn’t look too hot, but the daily chart looks great, the daily chart will generally hold more weight. Similarly, a weekly chart holds more weight than a daily chart.
In my early years as a trader, I often found myself in a position that I thought
looked pretty good on the chart on which I based my analysis. The stock would often
have broken out above a major area of resistance, volume was high, and the MAs on
69

70

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

my chart were all in line. Despite everything looking good, the position would often
attempt to rally and then ﬁzzle out just as quickly. It took me quite a long time to ﬁgure
out what the problem was. I was simply failing to look at charts of the more signiﬁcant,
longer time frames. There was a lack of conﬁrmation on multiple time frames.
If you ﬁnd yourself in a position in which the shorter time frame looks good, but
the longer time frame does not conﬁrm it, I suggest being more conservative with
regard to taking proﬁts. Rather than maximizing gains through the use of trailing
stops (see Chapter 8), consider selling into strength when the ETF tests resistance on
its longer time frame chart. Short positions should be closed into weakness on a test
of the longer-term support levels, even if the shorter-term charts still look bearish.
Understanding Consolidations

When an ETF is oscillating in a choppy, indecisive range within the context of a
broad market that is also in a sideways range, it’s really a matter of chance as to which
direction the ETF will eventually resolve itself. However, periods of price volatility
contractions near the highs or lows of a trading range tell a different story. These are
known as consolidations and can be either bullish or bearish, depending on where in
the range they lie.
If an ETF is bouncing around in a sideways range of 3 to 4 points and suddenly
spends a week or more within a much tighter range of 1 to 2 points, check to see if
that consolidation is also near the upper or lower end of the overall trading range.
If near the top of a range, it is known as a “bullish consolidation,” which will usually resolve itself ﬁrmly to the upside. If near the bottom of a range, it’s a “bearish
consolidation,” which will typically lead to lower prices. Identifying these periods
of consolidation creates trading opportunities that often lead to swift, short-term
moves in one direction or the other. You want to buy the bullish consolidations as
soon as they move above the high of the recent range, or sell short the bearish consolidations when they fall below the lows of the recent range.
Periods of consolidation occur not only within sideways ranges, but also within
the context of established trends. In an uptrend, an ETF typically corrects by pulling
back (retracing) from its highs, touching a key support level such as the MA or trendline, and then moving higher in the direction of the established trend. Nevertheless,
ETFs showing a lot of relative strength may not pull back when the broad market
does. Instead, they often enter a period of price consolidation known as a “correction
by time.” A pullback, the more common form of an ETF digesting its gains, is known
as a “correction by price.”
Of the two, a correction by time is more bullish because it indicates the demand
is so strong that traders did not even sell the position when the overall market dipped
lower. Instead, the buyers merely dried up, but supply did not increase. The ﬁrst subsequent move higher in the overall market normally causes the ETF that is correcting
by time to surge higher, above the range of consolidation. An ETF that has pulled
back should also move higher, but will have overhead supply to contend with from the

71

Supplementing the Basics

retracement off the high. That is, whenever a stock pulls back from the high, investors
who bought at higher levels will be looking to sell into the strength of any bounce
toward their original entry price, which creates what is known as “overhead supply.”
In downtrends, the opposite scenario is equally bearish. With consolidations, there are
a few points to be aware of.
The longer the period of consolidation, the stronger the eventual breakout will be.
Furthermore, the longer the consolidation, the more likely the trend will resolve itself
in that direction. While bullish consolidations are forming, institutions are accumulating (or distributing shares during bearish consolidations). This creates a thick layer
of price support that acts as a base to propel the position higher when the breakout
comes.
The longer the consolidation, the more likely the subsequent breakout will “stick”
(hold at the highs without retracing back below the pivotal breakout level). Shorter
periods of consolidation have a higher tendency to fail their breakout attempts.
Therefore, you want to search for ETFs that have been consolidating for at least several weeks, and then buy the ETF on the breakout above the range. Chapters 9 and
10 will walk you through numerous actual trade examples in which this played out.
Short Selling the Head-and-Shoulders Chart Pattern

Although technical stock traders have been familiar with the head-and-shoulders
(H&S) chart pattern for years, many do not realize the pattern works just as effectively
with ETFs. Over the years, my most proﬁtable ETF short sales were often the result
of capitalizing on this pattern. First, begin by looking at the basic diagram of a headand-shoulders pattern in Figure 6.1.
A head-and-shoulders pattern is a bearish reversal chart pattern that often marks
the top of an uptrend and predicts a sell-off in a particular index or ETF. The left
shoulder and head are formed as the index is rallying; at this point the pattern does not
yet indicate anything bearish. However, the ﬁrst indication that the buying momentum may be fading is when the neckline is formed on the right side of the head. Rather

FIGURE 6.1 Head-and-Shoulders Pattern (Bearish)

Head
Left shoulder

Right shoulder

Neckline

72

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

than setting a higher low on the previous rally of the head, the index sells off all the
way down to the prior low. When this occurs, people who bought near the top (the head)
are now trapped in the long position. Then, as another wave of buyers attempts to
rally the index, the people who are trapped long at the top sell into the rally in an
attempt to “just break even.” This weakens the index even more, which prevents the
achievement of a higher high, and also forms the right shoulder. As the index comes
back down once again and tests the prior low, this usually marks a break of the uptrend
line. At this point, everyone who bought on the left shoulder, head, and right shoulder
are now trapped and out of the money on their positions. As such, they begin to sell,
causing a break of the neckline, which subsequently attracts new short sellers. In turn,
this often leads to a rapid and volatile collapse of the price due to selling momentum.
Although the most ideal entry point for shorting an H&S pattern can be debated,
I prefer to enter after the right shoulder has formed and the price starts heading back
down to the neckline. Entering before the right shoulder is formed is not advisable, as
there is not yet enough conﬁrmation that the uptrend has broken. Selling short positions too soon will inevitably lead to a greater percentage of “stop outs” (when you are
forced to close the trade at a loss) than you would prefer. Nevertheless, a short entry
during the formation of the right shoulder provides you with a very positive risk/
reward ratio because a relatively tight stop can be placed just over the top of the head,
thereby creating much greater proﬁt potential on a downward move than the risk of
getting stopped out if the pattern does not follow through. If the H&S fails to move
back down to the neckline and follow through, losses are reduced because of shorting
at a low-risk price.
The other school of thought is that it’s better to wait for a deﬁnitive break of the neckline before selling short. The beneﬁt of waiting for such conﬁrmation is that the pattern
will have a greater chance of actually following through to the downside, but the negative
is that stops must be given more wiggle room: The protective stop-losses must be placed
further away from the actual market price to prevent closing the trade at the least ideal
place. This diminishes the risk/reward ratio.
When an H&S drops below the neckline (which, by the way, is sometimes slightly
ascending or descending), the predicted sell-off amount is equal to the distance from
the top of the head down to the neckline. So, if the price at the top of the head is
$100 and the price at the neckline is $90, the predicted drop would be equal to $10
($100 – $90) below the neckline. Since the neckline is $90, the predicted sell-off
would be a target price of $80. This guideline is handy for determining a price target
for taking proﬁts when selling short this pattern.
Although H&S patterns follow through a majority of the time, there are many
occasions when the pattern fails, meaning that it never drops below the neckline after
forming the right shoulder. The pattern is said to have failed when the price rallies
above the high of the head, after forming the right shoulder. When this happens, be
sure to quickly cut losses if short. Failed H&S patterns tend to have very powerful
upward moves because all the traders who sold the pattern must close their short
positions. Also, buyers who were previously shaken out reenter their positions on the
breakout above the high. This leads to failed H&S patterns being great long setups

73

Supplementing the Basics
FIGURE 6.2 Failed Head-and-Shoulders Pattern

Stop-loss on
short sale!
Be alert!

due to the sudden reversal of momentum that results from the simultaneous closing of
short positions and bulls reentering their position over the highs. Figure 6.2 illustrates
failure on an H&S pattern.
As always, volume is a great indicator to assist you in determining the probability
of the H&S properly following through to the downside. As with every other type of
chart pattern, volume is one of the most reliable indicators, and this pattern is no
different. Speciﬁcally, you are looking for lighter volume during the formation of the
right shoulder rather than during the formation of the left shoulder. If volume on
the right shoulder is signiﬁcantly less than that on the left shoulder, it tells you that
fewer buyers are interested in moving the market back up. This increases the probability of the price at least coming back down to test the neckline. Conversely, increasing
volume on the right shoulder is often a warning sign that the bearish pattern may not
follow through, putting you on the alert with short positions if the price nears the top
of the head.
The amount of time it takes an ETF to complete the breakdown of the H&S pattern is largely dependent on the time frame of the setup. For example, an H&S pattern
that sets up on a 5-minute intraday chart will usually follow through and complete the
sell-off within a few hours. An H&S on an hourly chart will usually require several
days to a week to complete the predicted drop. An H&S on a daily chart will typically
take several weeks to follow through. Therefore, if you are selling short an H&S on a
daily chart, be sure to allow the setup a signiﬁcant amount of time and price volatility. Otherwise, stops might be triggered prematurely. H&S patterns that occur on
the hourly time frame have a higher reliability of following through. These setups are
often the source of ETF short sales during bearish markets or reversal periods.
If you ﬂip the chart of an H&S upside down, you will see a bullish pattern known
as an “inverse head and shoulders.” The psychology behind why the pattern works is
the opposite of what I described earlier. As with the bearish H&S pattern, you can
take long entries on an inverse H&S during the formation of the right shoulder. Stops
should be just below the bottom of the head (or closer), and the predicted upward
move also should be equal to the distance from the head to the neckline. Figure 6.3 is
an illustration of the inverse H&S pattern.

74

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 6.3 Inverse Head-and-Shoulders Pattern (Bullish)

Neckline
Left
shoulder

Right
shoulder
Head

Figure 6.4 is a clear example of an H&S pattern in the S&P 500 SPDR (SPY) that
followed through to the downside. The chart was originally created on September 16,
2002, while the right shoulder was being formed. Note that I have removed the usual
MAs so that you can more easily see the H&S pattern.
When I initially analyzed this chart, SPY had already formed the right shoulder
and was testing the neckline of the pattern. Although it was a good sign that SPY
had already moved down to the neckline, one disadvantage was that the neckline was
ascending. In a perfect H&S pattern, the neckline would be horizontal. An ascending
FIGURE 6.4 S&P 500 SPDR (SPY) H&S, July–September 2002
SPY – Daily

S&P 500 SPDR
head-and-shoulders pattern

100.00
Head
Right
shoulder

Left
shoulder

95.00

90.00
89.32
85.00
Neckline (ascending)
80.00

A
Jul

Source: TradeStation

B
Aug

C
Sept

100,000,000.00
70,000,000.00
41,131,300.00
41,131,300.00

75

Supplementing the Basics

neckline is somewhat bullish because it indicates traders did not drive the price all the
way back down to the lows of the left shoulder. Conversely, a descending neckline is
more bearish because the low of the left shoulder was violated on the ﬁrst test of its
support.
On the bearish side, the volume patterns were promising. During the formation
of the left shoulder, notice how volume was relatively heavy, coming in above its
50-day MA (A). Then, when the head and right shoulder were being formed, volume
dropped off signiﬁcantly (B and C, respectively). Lighter volume at points B and C
shows reluctance on the part of institutions to support the market when it attempted
to recover after the formation of the left shoulder. Overall, there was enough going
for the pattern that I anticipated good odds of breaking the neckline and following
through to the downside.
If the SPY chart (Figure 6.4) broke the neckline, the predicted downside price
target would be roughly equivalent to the distance from the top of the head down to
the neckline. As the neckline was ascending, you could not get a very concise measurement. Still if you had measured from the top of the head down to the neckline at the
point that preceded the formation of the right shoulder, the price target would have
worked out to be in a range of about 10 points ($97–$87). Ten points below the neckline value of $87 gave a projected price target of approximately $77. Fast-forwarding
one month later, take a look at what happened (Figure 6.5).

FIGURE 6.5 S&P 500 SPDR (SPY) Complete Follow-Through, July–October 2002
SPY – Daily
Head

98.00
96.00

Right
shoulder

Left
shoulder

94.00
92.00
90.00
88.29
88.00
86.00
84.00

Neckline (ascending)

82.00
Perfect downside follow-through
in the head-and-shoulders pattern

80.00
78.00

77.33

A
Aug

Source: TradeStation

100,000,000.00
70,000,000.00
47,563,900.00

C

B
Sept

Oct

76

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 6.6 iShares Russell 2000 Index (IWM) H&S, September–November 2007
IWM – Daily
Head
From September to November of
2007, IWM perfectly followed
through on the break of its
descending neckline.

Right
shoulder

Left
shoulder
73.24

85.00
84.00
83.00
82.00
81.00
80.00
79.00
78.00
77.00
76.75
76.00
75.00
74.00
73.00
150,000,000.00
112,702,200.00

Sept

Oct

Nov

Source: TradeStation

As you can see, SPY fell all the way down to the projected target of $77 and then
reversed sharply after forming a double bottom with the July 2002 low. Coincidentally,
the October low also marked the end of the 2000–2002 bear market.
If you sold short SPY around the middle of the right shoulder and placed a protective stop above the top of the head, the trade would have netted you a gain of
approximately 14 points, while limiting initial risk to around 6 points. This translates
into a reward/risk ratio of more than 2 to 1, the minimum ratio to look for with all
long and short setups. By taking only trades with a reward/risk ratio of at least 2 to 1,
you can have a batting average of 50 percent or less but still consistently be a net
proﬁtable trader.
A very similar instance of a head-and-shoulders pattern that followed through
perfectly is shown on the daily chart of the iShares Russell 2000 Index Fund (IWM)
from September through November 2007 (Figure 6.6). The left shoulder formed in
September, while both the head and right shoulder formed in October. By the end of
November, IWM had fallen all the way to its predicted downside target, the distance
from the top of the head down to the neckline. This also coincided with a perfect test
of the prior low from September 2007 (the dashed horizontal line).
The 200-Day Moving Average Brick Wall

When analyzing intraday, daily, and weekly charts, the MAs that come into play
the most are the 20-day and 50-day MAs. The 20-day MA shows the price trend
in the short term, and the 50-day MA shows the overall bias in the intermediate
term. Even more important is the 200-day MA, which shows the long-term bias of
the position.

77

Supplementing the Basics

As mentioned earlier, the longer the time frame of the chart interval, the more
bearing and weight the pattern will have on your analysis of the direction of the market. The same is true of MAs. A 50-day MA matters more than a 20-day MA, while a
200-day MA is more important than a 50-day. Many institutions use program trading
to automatically begin buying when stocks or ETFs retrace to a 50-day MA. This is
even more the case with the 200-day MA, because this is considered to be a gauge of
the overall ETF’s long-term health.
It’s an amazing concept, but the 200-day MA simply acts like a brick wall whenever a stock, ETF, or index runs into it. It doesn’t matter whether it’s a test of support
from above or a rally into resistance from below. Either way, a position will rarely
move through the 200-day MA on the initial test. Unless the dominant trend is really
strong, it generally requires multiple tests of the 200-day MA before a position bursts
through. This is not only with the 200-day MAs on the daily charts, but on the intraday and long-term weekly charts as well. Figure 6.7, a daily chart from mid-2007 of
the iShares Russell 2000 (IWM), is a great example of the power of the 200-day MA.
The shorter-term 20- and 50-day MAs have been removed so that you can more easily
see the 200-day MA.
Isn’t it uncanny how the 200-day MA acted perfectly like a brick wall on every rally
attempt in IWM until the ETF ﬁnally popped above it in mid-September?
After IWM broke out above the 200-day MA, the prior resistance of the 200-day
MA became the new support level. The most basic tenet of technical analysis is that
a prior area of resistance will become the new support after the resistance is broken.
Figure 6.7 is a great example of this. At the letter A, you see that the 200-day MA
became the new support.

FIGURE 6.7 iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) Daily Chart
IWM – Daily

Resistance of the 200-day MA
is as solid as a rock here.
A

iShares Russell 2000 index

85.00
84.13
84.00
83.00
82.00
81.00
80.38
80.00
79.00
78.00
77.00
76.00
75.00
74.00
300,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
92,101,848.00
92,101,848.00

Jul

Source: TradeStation

Aug

Sept

Oct

78

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 6.8 Semiconductor Index ($SOX) Weekly Chart
$SOX – Weekly
Even on the longer-term weekly time interval,
the 200-MA still acts like a brick wall for support
or resistance. From 2004 through mid-2005, the
$SOX tried five times before finally breaking
out above its 200-week MA.

550.00

500.00
498.85
462.78
450.00

A

2004

Apr

Jul

Oct

2005

Apr

400.00

Jul

Source: TradeStation

Even on the long-term weekly time frame, the 200-period (200-week in this
case) MA works with reliability. If you look at the chart of the Semiconductor Index
($SOX) in Figure 6.8, you’ll see that the 200-week MA ﬁrst acted as major resistance,
and then became support.
From the beginning of 2004 through March 2005, the $SOX tried, but failed ﬁve
times, to break out above resistance of its 200-week MA. It ﬁnally broke out above it
in July 2005, at which point the prior resistance again became the new support.
On August 3, 2007, I entered a new short position in the S&P MidCap 400
when the index fell below its 200-day MA. Rather than selling short the S&P MidCap
SPDR (MDY), I bought the inversely correlated UltraShort MidCap400 ProShares
(MZZ). Like all the other ETFs in the ProShares UltraShort family, MZZ is designed
both to move in the opposite direction of the S&P MidCap 400 Index and to move
at a 2 to 1 ratio. As such, MZZ rallied 5.8 percent that day, while the S&P MidCap
400 index dropped 2.9 percent. The daily chart in Figure 6.9 illustrates how MZZ
