
enough to live on for the rest of your life to enough to buy a very good sports car.
The reaction of the company’s investors and shareholders to the calamity would, in not a few cases, literally
determine their fate.
Many longtime shareholders had panicked and talked themselves into selling, which is how the stock got to
$2 in the first place. Whoever was buying from them took a gamble on GEICO’s fate.
Ben Graham, now age eighty-two, did nothing and kept his stock. Graham’s cousin Rhoda and her husband,
Bernie Sarnat, talked to the dean of the University of Chicago business school. He told them to sell it, since
stocks that cheap rarely recover. They decided—au contraire—that a stock that had sunk so low was too
cheap to sell. What would they gain by selling? They had little to lose by keeping it. So they did nothing.44
Likewise, Lorimer Davidson never sold a share.45
Leo Goodwin Jr., the son of GEICO’s founder, sold and destituted himself. Shortly thereafter, his son, Leo
Goodwin III, died of a drug overdose, a presumed suicide.46
Buffett did not own the stock, but with GEICO trading at $2 a share, he had sniffed out another situation like
American Express. Here, however, the company didn’t have a franchise strong enough to pull it out of the
ditch. GEICO needed a tow truck. Buffett felt that only a brilliant, energetic manager had any chance of
turning the situation around. He wanted to meet Byrne and size him up before committing any money to the
stock. He had Katharine Graham call Byrne; after overcoming Byrne’s initial resistance, she set up the
meeting.
***
Buffett waited at Graham’s Georgetown house after a Post board dinner for Byrne to arrive. “This is risky,”
he told Don Graham. “It could go completely out of business. But in insurance it’s very hard to get an edge,
and they have an edge. If they got the right person in to run it, I think he could turn it around.”47
In came Byrne, red-faced, effervescent, forty-three years old, like a firecracker exploding. The two men sat
down by the fireplace in Graham’s high-ceilinged library. Buffett questioned Byrne for a couple of hours. Of
all the Irish-Americans who would ever swing through Buffett’s orbit, Byrne had the greatest gift of blarney,
and “by a wide margin,” Buffett says. “I was excited and babbling on and on and on,” says Byrne. “Warren
asked a lot of questions about how I thought we were going to stay out of insolvency and what my plans
would be after that.”
For Buffett, “the question was whether Byrne really was cool, unflappable, and professional, or whether he
just didn’t know what was going on.”48 He decided that Byrne “understood insurance very well and had the
analytical abilities. And he was a leader and a promoter. GEICO needed an analytical leader to figure out
how to solve its problem and it needed a promoter to make that sale to all the constituencies that were
involved.”49
The next morning, Buffett met up with George Gillespie, the lawyer who had sold him the Post stock,
because the two men were on the board of Pinkerton’s, the detective company, and there was a board
meeting that day.50 “George,” he said, “it’s pretty uncharacteristic of me, but today I bought some stock that
really might be worthless tomorrow.” He had just called Bill Scott back in the office and placed an order for
half a million shares of GEICO for Berkshire, leaving another order to buy millions more as stock became
available. Scott put together a huge block trade, buying $4 million worth of GEICO for him.51
Buffett had waited years for the chance to buy GEICO at the right price. The tow truck had arrived, but
GEICO still did not have reinsurance, it needed capital, and both depended on the goodwill of Max Wallach,

the regulator.52 But now a new phenomenon took hold. Buffett’s margin of safety was his mere presence as
an investor. Having Buffett as a backer—a now-legendary investor whose company already owned a
successful insurer—gave Byrne a powerful card to play with the regulators.53 In addition, “General
McDermott, the head of USAA, wrote a letter” to other insurers, says Byrne. The United States Automobile
Association sold insurance only to military officers and behaved accordingly. Within the insurance industry,
it was fabled, General Robert McDermott almost revered. He supposedly wrote that “in the military we never
leave people behind; we have a fallen eagle here.”54
Buffett went to see Wallach to do what he could to convince the crusty old public servant to ease up on the
June deadline. But assembling the reinsurance deal was like convincing two dozen shivering children to hold
hands and jump into a lake.55 To pull it off, the story Byrne was selling was that the worthless former
management, befoulers of GEICO, had been tossed out; that what was left of the termite-riddled house was
now clean; that the seasoned Jack Byrne, rescuer of Travelers, had helicoptered in to restore the damage; and
so confident was the infallible Warren Buffett in Jack Byrne that he had plunked down a whopping $4
million on the stock.
Nonetheless, when Byrne started hitting the banks on Wall Street, “people were walking out in the middle of
lunch,” he says. “I got kicked out of everywhere.” Then Sam Butler took him down to Salomon Inc. An old,
respected specialist bond house, Salomon had never done an equity deal but craved to enter the lucrative
business of underwriting stocks. John Gutfreund, an influential Salomon executive, sent a junior research
analyst, Michael Frinquelli, and his sidekick, Joe Barone, to Washington to check GEICO out. “I kept them
waiting for an hour and a half, so they were furious,” says Byrne. “But I talked till the sun came up. And they
were very blank-faced, but on the way to the airport, the company driver heard them talking, and he told me
they were very, very enthused on the way back.”56
“The insurance industry can’t afford to let these guys go down,” Frinquelli told Gutfreund. “It would be a
terrible black eye on the industry, and these assholes will not tolerate that.”57 But when Byrne and Butler
arrived at Salomon’s offices for his last-ditch attempt to raise the money, Gutfreund opened with a bruising
remark: “I don’t know who’d ever buy that fucking reinsurance treaty you’re trying to sell.”
“You don’t know any fucking thing you’re talking about,” said Byrne right back.58
Displays of testosterone out of the way, Byrne made a passionate speech, citing “God and the national
interest” among reasons why Salomon should raise the money, and referring to Buffett’s investment. As
Byrne waxed about GEICO’s prospects and approached liftoff, Gutfreund fiddled with a long, expensive
cigar. Finally, wrung out and crestfallen, Byrne ground to a halt. Then Butler said his piece. Byrne thought,
from Gutfreund’s demeanor, that they had failed. Then Gutfreund pointed at Byrne and said to Butler, “I will
do this underwriting. I feel you’ve got the right guy, but you’ve got to keep him quiet.”59
Salomon agreed to underwrite a $76 million convertible stock offering by itself. No other investment bank
would participate and share the risk. GEICO had to consent to an SEC decree in which it neither admitted
nor denied the SEC’s conclusion that it had failed to disclose its losses to the shareholders—the mere
description of which in a public offering prospectus would tend to poison the deal.60 To get the financing
done, Salomon had to convince investors that GEICO would survive, yet the financing was what would
enable GEICO to survive. The deal reeked of desperation, and investors could smell it. GEICO was getting
such bad press, Byrne said, that if he had walked across the Potomac River, the headlines would have
screamed, “Byrne Can’t Swim.”61
Buffett, the ace in the hole, was unperturbed by these events. When the offering looked as if it was not going
to go off, he simply went to New York and met with Gutfreund, saying he stood ready to buy the whole
deal—at a price. Having a backup buyer strengthened Salomon’s hand, but Gutfreund also got the impression
that Buffett wouldn’t mind if the deal failed and he ended up buying all the stock.62 For Buffett, this was the
ultimate no-risk deal. Naturally, the backup price he insisted on was low. Salomon told Byrne unequivocally

that, given Buffett’s ceiling, the convertible offering would sell no higher than $9.20 per share, not $10.50 as
Byrne wanted.
Buffett wanted as much of the stock as could be had. He asked Salomon to buy all that was available for him
once the stock started trading. Buffett’s willingness to buy after the offering bolstered Salomon’s ability to
market the deal. Otherwise, Salomon would have had to jam the stock down its customers’ throats.
Indeed, once the self-fulfilling prophecy of the sage of Omaha took hold, there was more demand for the
stock than shares to be had.63 Buffett got only a quarter of the deal. Within a few weeks, after a total of
twenty-seven reinsurers came forward to provide the required reinsurance, the common stock had
quadrupled and was trading around $8 a share. And GEICO’s savior, John Gutfreund, became one of a tiny
handful of modern Wall Street figures whom Buffett genuinely admired.
But GEICO was still not fixed. Byrne needed a thirty-five percent rate increase in New York—and speedily
got it.64 In New Jersey, Byrne went to the decaying old capitol of Trenton to plead with Commissioner James
Sheeran, a handsome ex-Marine who prided himself on being tough. Byrne marched into the commissioner’s
office with a copy of the company’s license in his pocket and told Sheeran that GEICO must have a rate
increase.
“He had a sour-ass, little wizened actuary at his side who had been fired by some insurance company and had
a bone to pick,” says Byrne. Sheeran said his numbers didn’t justify a rate increase. “I did all the arm-waving
and stuff that I could, and Mr. Sheeran was intractable.” Byrne pulled the license out of his pocket and threw
it on Sheeran’s desk, saying, “I have no choice but to turn in the license,” or something to that effect but
containing more four-letter words.65 He then drove back to the office with tires screeching, sent out
telegrams to thirty thousand policyholders canceling their insurance, and fired two thousand New Jersey
employees in a single afternoon, before Sheeran could go to court and get an injunction to stop him.66
“It showed everybody, all audiences, I was serious about this,” recalls Byrne. “And that I was going to fight
for the life of this company no matter what, including walking out of a state, which wasn’t done back then.”
Byrne’s impalement of New Jersey had exactly that effect. Everybody knew he was serious.
“It was like he had trained all his life for that position. It was like he’d been genetically designed for that
particular period of time. If you’d searched the country, you could not have found a better battlefield
commander. He had to assemble a team of people, he had to chop thousands of heads, and he had to change
the thinking of those heads that stayed around. It was a Herculean job. Nobody could have done it better
than Jack. He was a tough, disciplined thinker about pricing and reserves and he demanded rational
business principles and actions. Everybody knew exactly what GEICO was all about, and he worked
extraordinary hours focused on a single objective. He was always interested in what made sense rather
than what had been done in the past.”
Byrne walked through GEICO’s door each morning, sailed his hat fifty feet up to the upper floor of the
atrium, and hollered hello to the secretaries.67 “If I don’t whistle by the graveyard, who is going to?” he
asked. “If I don’t dance, who’s going to dance?” He had a way of making people feel tah-riffic about the
place where they went to work every morning, despite the career-threatening status of their employer. He
chopped forty percent of the company’s customers, sold half of its profitable life-insurance affiliate to raise
cash, and withdrew from all but seven states plus the District of Columbia. Byrne seemed to run on rocket
fuel. He called his executives into meetings at the Sheraton and Westin hotels near Dulles Airport and
questioned them for fifteen hours at a stretch, sometimes for days at a time.68 He interrupted GEICO’s
human-resources manager at the podium during a meeting by saying, “You’re out,” and named his successor
from the audience that very moment. His attitude was: “You’re not running a public library here, you’re
trying to save a company.”69
“Jack was unmerciful on me,” says Tony Nicely, who had worked for GEICO since he was eighteen years
old. “He liked picking on young, aggressive people. But he taught me a lot and I will always be indebted to

him. He taught me to think of the business as a whole, not separate functions like underwriting or investing. I
learned the importance of a disciplined balance sheet.”
Byrne told his workers if they couldn’t meet a certain sales figure, they would have to hoist his 240 pounds
on their shoulders into a sedan chair like a Roman emperor and bear him into company meetings for a year.70
They made the numbers. Wearing a huge chef’s hat and a giant shamrock, “I cooked Irish dinners for them,”
he says. “Colcannon, which is turnips and potatoes and sour milk. It tastes terrible. I’d have these big kettles,
and I’d pound these turnips, saying, ‘Oh, this is going to be wonderful!’”
Buffett grabbed Byrne and his wife, Dorothy, and immediately pulled them into his circle of friends. Now,
between GEICO, Washington Post meetings, Pinkerton’s board meetings, West Coast trips for Blue Chip and
Wesco, business trips to New York, board meetings for Munsingwear, a board that he had joined in 1974, and
Kay Parties, he was traveling much of the time. Buffett decided that he needed help in the office. Pushed by
Big Susie, one of her tennis friends approached Warren about a job as a sort of general apprentice. Dan
Grossman, a bright Yale graduate with a Stanford business degree, even offered to work for free. Buffett
didn’t take him up on that, but latched on to Grossman with his usual intensity. Some thought that since
neither of his sons wanted to work in the business, he saw in Grossman the chance at a surrogate son,
someone who could potentially succeed him.
Buffett remodeled the office in order to install Grossman next door to himself. Gladys ran interference while
Buffett spent hour after hour with him, explaining float, reviewing financial models of insurance companies,
outlining regulatory filings, telling Grossman his stories, and leafing through the old Moody’s Manuals. He
played hours of tennis and handball with Grossman and added him to the Graham Group, where Grossman
became friendly with many people.71 Warren had found yet another object of obsession.

41
And Then What?
Omaha • 1977

Susie’s friends would say that she created a separate life for herself within her marriage as a way to
accommodate Warren’s obsessions. As one put it, Warren’s “real marriage was to Berkshire Hathaway.”
There was no getting around that fact. However uneasily, however, their routine had worked for them. At
least, that is, it worked for them until another of Buffett’s obsessions—with Katharine Graham—reached the
point that it began to push Susie offstage. That was when she finally took action.
Warren now spent much of his time elephant-bumping at black-tie events in New York and Washington with
Graham, or staying at her house for her Kay Parties. Despite his residual awkwardness and cackling laugh, he
was meeting a circle of powerful, celebrated friends and acquaintances of Kay’s that opened his eyes to a
new world. “I met Truman Capote,” he says about the author of Breakfast at Tiffany’s and In Cold Blood,
who had thrown the legendary Black and White Ball in Graham’s honor at the Plaza Hotel in New York; the
event became known as the “party of the century.” Capote had been a confidant of many rich international
society women.
“He would come down to her place and sit there, this little guy all kind of hunched down on the sofa,
talking in this voice you couldn’t believe. But he knew all the secrets of all of them. He really did know
them, because they all talked to him. He was terribly canny. The one person he really liked was Kay. Unlike
the rest, he just didn’t feel she was a phony, I think.”
Buffett had even been summoned by former British ambassador Walter Annenberg, who owned Triangle

Publications, which held, among other lucrative properties, the Philadelphia Inquirer and Buffett’s
childhood favorite, the Daily Racing Form.
“Walter read about me in the Wall Street Journal in 1977. I got this letter that read, ‘Dear Mr. Buffett,’
and he invited me to Sunnylands,” his California estate. Having heard stories about the famously
thin-skinned ambassador from Tom Murphy as well as from Kay Graham, who had reason to know about
how easily offended he was, Buffett was intrigued. Annenberg’s father featured in many of the stories.
Besides the publishing interests that he had bequeathed to his son, Moe Annenberg had also left him a legacy
of scandal and shame, having gone to prison for tax evasion in connection with a racing wire he ran that
telegraphed horse-race results to bookies all over the country. Of dubious legality, it was linked to organized
crime, and added to his reputation for having mobster connections. Reportedly to save his son from
prosecution along with him, Moe Annenberg copped a plea and was led into jail wearing a homburg hat and
chains. Walter was later to say that his gaunt, pain-racked father, dying of a brain tumor in St. Mary’s
Hospital, whispered as his last few words, “My suffering is all for the purpose of making a man out of you.”1
Whether this scene was real or imagined, Walter would later act as though he believed it.
Consumed by a drive to redeem his family’s honor, Walter was now responsible for the support of his mother
and his sisters. He learned the publishing business through trial by fire and proved a gifted entrepreneur. He
dreamed up Seventeen magazine, then a booklet-size magazine called TV Guide, a brilliant conception that
fed the public’s appetite for information about television schedules, shows, and stars. By the time he met
Buffett, he had not only become a great business success story but had reached the pinnacle of social
respectability after Richard Nixon appointed him ambassador to England’s Court of St. James’s. Yet even
though he restored the family name, he never overcame the personal scars of his legacy.
Buffett arrived at Sunnylands filled with curiosity to meet Annenberg. The two already had a connection;
Annenberg was the brother of Aye Simon, the “spoiled, spoiled” widow of Ben Rosner’s former partner Leo
Simon—the same Aye Simon whom Rosner had decided to screw when he had sold Associated Retailing to
Buffett too cheap, because she was no longer his partner. On the one occasion that Buffett had met her, Aye
Simon had entertained him in her vast art-filled apartment in New York City. Maids tiptoed back and forth
carrying silver trays of cucumber sandwiches; Aye explained to Buffett that her “Pop,” Moe Annenberg,
once had his goons, known as “the boys,” “take a few shots at Leo” to improve his attitude toward Moe. You
can still see the bullet holes on a building on a certain corner of Michigan Avenue in Chicago, she told
Buffett. Aye then asked for her son to join the Buffett partnership. Warren, “envisioning bullets” if he turned
in a year of bad results, had “tap-danced” his way out of the situation.
Her brother, Walter, had spent decades establishing a reputation for propriety about as different from the
image of bullets on Michigan Avenue as you could get. Sunnylands was a vast, opulent oasis in the desert in
Rancho Mirage, California. Amid a garden filled with the images of Mayan sun gods, Rodin’s bronze
sculpture of Eve stood in a reflecting pool, covering her face in shame. Hundreds of floating bromeliads
gazed up at her from the water beneath her feet. At Sunnylands, Annenberg had entertained Prince Charles,
hosted Frank Sinatra’s fourth wedding, and given his friend Richard Nixon peace and quiet to write his last
State of the Union address.
“He had a courtly way about him and was very formal. We went outside in back by the pool, and Walter sat
down. He was beautifully dressed and looked as though everything he was wearing had been bought that
morning. He was about seventy at the time, and I was about forty-seven. And he said, in a nice, kind
manner, as if he were talking to a young man he was trying to help, ‘Mr. Buffett, the first thing you should
understand is, nobody likes to be criticized.’ That was setting the ground rules for getting along.”
Nothing could be easier for Buffett. “I said, ‘Yes, Mr. Ambassador. I’ve got it. Don’t worry about that one.’
“And then he started in on ‘Essentiality.’
“‘There are three properties in the world,’ he said, ‘that have the quality of ‘Essentiality.’ They are the
Daily Racing Form, the TV Guide, and the Wall Street Journal. And I own two out of three.’

“What he meant by ‘Essentiality’ was that, even during the Depression, he saw the Racing Form being sold
for two and a half bucks down in Cuba.”
The Racing Form had that quality because there was no source of better or more complete information about
handicapping horses.
“It sold a hundred fifty thousand copies a day, and it had for about fifty years. It cost more than two bucks,
and it was essential. If you were headed to the racetrack and were a serious racing handicapper, you
wanted the Racing Form. He could charge whatever he wanted, and people were going to pay it. It’s like
selling needles to addicts, basically.
“So every year, Walter would go in and say, ‘Mirror, mirror, on the wall, how much should I raise the price
of the Racing Form this fall?’
“And the mirror would always say, ‘Walter, charge another quarter!’”
This was when you could buy the entire New York Times or Washington Post for a quarter. And yet, thought
Buffett, the New York Times and the Washington Post were great businesses! That meant the Daily Racing
Form was an incredible business.
Annenberg enjoyed owning two of the Essentialities, but he wanted to own all three. The visit to Sunnylands
was the beginning of a reel that he and Buffett would dance from time to time: talking about whether and
how they could buy the Wall Street Journal together.
But “the real reason that he had me out there was to send a message to Kay.”
The Annenbergs and the Grahams had once been friends.2 Then, in 1969, during the confirmation hearing for
Annenberg’s appointment as ambassador to Great Britain, the Post’s muckraking columnist, Drew Pearson,
penned a column saying that Annenberg’s fortune “was built up by gang warfare” and repeated an
unsubstantiated rumor that his father had paid $1 million a year in protection money to mob boss Al
Capone.3 Annenberg, enraged, accused Graham of using her paper as a political weapon against President
Nixon, the man who had restored the Annenberg family to respectability by taking the risk of nominating him
for the ambassadorship. “President Nixon may have had his flaws,” Annenberg said later, “but he paid me
the highest honor that anyone ever paid the family.”4
The morning of his confirmation hearing, Annenberg read another Pearson column that described at length
his editorial vindictiveness at the Philadelphia Inquirer. He clutched his chest and his face turned purple. His
wife thought he was having a heart attack.5
Annenberg called Graham to ask for a retraction. She tried to soothe his feelings, but said she never
interfered with the editorial page.
That evening, after a stressful day of hearings in which Walter had had to defend himself one by one against
the points made in the Pearson columns, the Annenbergs reluctantly went to Graham’s Georgetown mansion
to attend a dinner party for fifty guests to which they had been invited many weeks before. Upon entering the
gilded splendor of Graham’s drawing room, Annenberg—who cared deeply about protocol and who was well
primed to take offense that night—did indeed take offense when Graham seated someone else next to herself
and seated him between two of her friends, Evangeline Bruce, wife of the outgoing British ambassador David
Bruce, and Lorraine Cooper, the wife of a prominent senator.
Annenberg’s prickliness about anything he took as a slight resembled in many ways his friend Nixon’s lack of
perspective. He and Nixon also shared an unfortunate inability to charm and disarm.6 Thus, a feud that had
been brewing between Mrs. Annenberg and Vangie Bruce over the decoration of the ambassadorial residence
soon escalated and overshadowed the meal.7 Compounding this, Mrs. Cooper offended Annenberg by
