
26. ¢. In scenario 2, the last two candle lines form a dark cloud cover, which

27.

is a potential top reversal signal. In scenario 3, a series of small real bod-
jes typifies a market that is running out of steam. In scenario 1, although
the last candle 1s a hanging man line, we would need bearish confir-
mation of that line to turn negative. Scenario 4 shows a serles of rela-
tively tall white candles with higher highs, lows, and closes and therefore
no signs of losing bullish momentum.

d. The theory of the bullish counterattack 1s that the market should open
robustly lower than the prior session and close unchanged from that
prior session. Such a close on the second session proves that although
the market opened sharply lower, the bears could not sustain control of
the market into the close. In Exhibit 3.10, the only scenario that had a
sharply lower opening was 3.


SECTION TWO

The Harami and Harami Cross.
Morning and Evening Stars

formed by a combination of single candle lines. First, we'll look at an in-

teresting two-candle pattern called the hararmi, and a variation on that pat-
tern known as a haram) cross. Then we'll delve into a powerful three-candle
pattern—the star pattern—renowned for calling bottom and top reversals.
The star pattern incorporates spinning tops and doji. As you remember, we
discussed the shooting star before. Now we'll explore morning stars, evening
stars, and stars that include a doji, called morning doji stars and evening doji
stars.

I: this section, we're going to discuss more candle patterns that are

In this section you will learn... .

The importance of the haram) and harami cross

The differences between the harami and harami cross

The power underpinning the harami cross

How to differentiate between the hararn) and the engulfing pattern
How the harami pattern compares to the Western inside day

The criteria for morning and evening stars

How morning and evening stars call bottom and top reversals
How volume activity intensifies star signals

hey terms to watch for:

Harami

Harami cross
Petrifying pattern
Inside day

Star

Morning star
Evening star


#2 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

In previous sections, we talked about single candle lines called spinning tops.
These small real lines are components in the reversal pattern referred to as
the karamé.

As shown in Exhibit 3.11, the first real body of this pattern is an unusu-
ally long black or white real body. The next candle consists of a small real
body, which is completely within the prior real body.

The color of the real bodies in this pattern 1s unimportant: They can be
opposite or the same.

As you can see, like all candle patterns we've discussed so far, the hararm\
is a reversal pattern. The Japanese say that when the harami pattern (Exhibit
3.1 LA) appears, a preceding rally or downtrend 1s losing its breath. The bear-
ish harami tells us that despite the bullish white real body that moved the
market higher, the tiny real body that follows indicates uncertainty and in-
decision. As you leamed in previous sections, the limited price range of the
small real body—especially when it follows a real body with a wide price
range—shows that trend velocity has weakened.

On the other hand, when a bullish harami (Exhibit 3.11B) appears in a de-
cline or downtrend, the selling pressure demonstrated by the first long, real

Bearish harami pattern Bullish harami pattern

OO

| i.

A B
EAGEBIT 3.41 Harami

[S| SIDE LIGHT

The term harami is derived from a Japanese word that means pregnant. The first can-
dle has a large body (the mother) with the small real body (the baby) inside it.



The Power of Candle Patterns ao

| SIDE LIGHT

If both the first and second candles of a harami pattem are white, it is called a white
white harami. If the first is black and the second is white, it is called a black-white
harami. | just call them both harami since the colors of the real bodies are not signif-

icant in this pattem.

body in the pattern is apparent. Then the second tiny real body forms.
The bears suddenly lose momentum, they are unable to close the market at
or below the prior candle’s close. Uncertainty sets in, as the harami foretells
a possible reversal and trend break. Do you understand how this pattern tells
you an important story about market environment, with its accompanying
change of sentiment? If the second real body ts a doj) instead of a spinning
top, it is called a haramé cross (Exhibit 3.12).

Next, we'll discuss an intriguing pattern known as the star. Indeed, this
pattern is a star when it comes to calling top and bottom reversals!

A star \s a small real body (think spinning top) that gaps away from the
long real body preceding it in an uptrend or downtrend. The third candle in
the formation also should gap away from the real body of the star, leaving the
star's real body isolated at the top or bottom of an uptrend or downtrend. Ide-
ally, the real bodies should not overlap, although the star's real body ean in-
trude into the prior eandle’s shadow.

The star’s real body represents a tug-of-war between the bulls and bears.
It’s a similar concept to that of the harami—a strong move in an uptrend or
downtrend, directly followed by an indecisive time period. The star repre-
sents a stronger Initial surge in the prevailing trend, however, before opposite
forees arrive to quell it.

Bearish harami cross Bullish harami cross

' 1

EXBIBIT 3.42 Harami Crosses


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

The star is the middle portion of two candle patterns called the morning
star and evening star (Exhibit 3.13). The mornéng star 1s a bottom reversal
pattern that derives its picturesque name from Mercury, the morning star
that appears just before sunrise. Just as the morning star precedes daylight,
the morning star candle pattern potentially presages higher prices.

Three candle lines form this pattern. First, in the context of a downtrend,
a long, black candle develops, assuring the bears that they continue to be in
command. Then a small real body or spinning top appears, gapping down at
the open of its session and delighting the confident bears. The star (the mid-
dle portion of the morning star) completes its formation in a tight price range,
without rising back to close into the prior black real body, although it may rise
to an intraday high that infringes on the black candle’s lower shadow. The
final candle of the morning star pattern is a white real body that moves deeply
into the first session's black candle. This panics the bears, as the white candle
proves that the bulls have taken control and reversed the downtrend.

The moming star’s bearish counterpart is the evening star. Three candle
lines make up this top reversal signal. In the context of an uptrend, a long

| | ——
ce ee
ot ft 1 '

| | +
| of
Li | |

Morning doji star Evening doji star
EXGEBIT 3.1 | Moming and Evening Stars


The Power of Candle Patterns 25

af | SIDE LIGHT

Certain volume signals infuse even more power into the star pattern. For example,
imagine a setup in which light volume develops on the first candle line, followed by
heavy volume on the third candle line. The light volume tells you that the force pro
pelling the initial trend was weakening. The star materializes, showing uncertainty.
Strong volume shooting into the third candle fuels the force that ignites the new
trend.

white candle appears, convincing the bulls that the rally will continue. Then
the star appears in the form of a small real body that classically gaps up from
the white candle’s closing price. The star's real body (black or white) re-
mains isolated as the next candle confirms the trend top by gapping away
from the star and producing a long, black real body that pushes into the white
eandle's real body. The final candle seals the fate of the bulls as the bears
grab control and push the market downward.

If the middle portion of either the morning or evening star is a doji in-
stead of a spinning top, the pattern is called a morning doji star or evening
doji star (Exhibit 3.13).

The valuable haram), harami cross, and star patterns offer you more re-
versal patterns to place in your trader’s toolbox. Your ability to recognize
these patterns on charts of any time frame will add to your trend forecasting
and money-management skills,

In the next two sections of this chapter, we'll discuss more candle pat-
terns that signal top and bottom reversals. We'll also explore an entirely dif-
ferent concept, that of candles in continuation patterns. First, though, please
complete the questions that follow. Be sure to check the answers that follow
the questions for added information.

CHECK VOUR UNDERSTAADING

Questions for Chapter Three, Section Two: The Haraml and
Haraml Cross, Morning and Evening Stars
1. The harami is a signal.
a. bullish reversal ¢. continuation
b. bearish reversal 4. bullish or bearish reversal


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

. The hararmi pattern is

a. asmall real body followed by a long real body.

b. a small real body that must form inside the prior long real body.

¢. two consecutive small real bodies

d. Both b and e

. Which statement is true about the color of the real bodies for a hararnt?
a. Both sessions must have the same-color real bodies.

b. Both sessions can have the same-color real bodies.

¢. The first session must be black, and the second session must be white.
d. Both sessions must have opposite-color real bodies.

. Anengulfing pattern consists of a long real body wrapping around a small
real body. Which candlestick pattern has the reverse scenario—that Is, a

long real body followed by a small real body?

a. A plercing pattern

b. Adark cloud cover

c. Aharami pattern

4d. Both a and b

. What ts the difference between the haram) and the harami cross?

a. They are the same.

b. The harami cross has same-color real bodies.

¢. The harami cross forms with a doji as the second candle instead of a
small real body.

d. The harami cross must come after an uptrend.

. What is the difference between a Western inside day and a harami

pattern?

a. They are the same.

b. A harami requires that the open-close range be within the prior ses-
sion's open-close range, whereas an inside day requires a high-low
range within the prior session's high-low range.

¢. Aharami requires a low that is below the prior session's low, but an In-
side day requires the low to be above the prior session's low.

d. None of the above

. From the list that follows, choose four conditions needed for a morning
star.



The Power of Candle Patterns a7

10.

12.

1. Uptrend.
2. Downtrend.

3. The first candle of the pattern is black.

4. The first candle of the pattern is white.

5. The second candle of the pattern is white.

6. The second candle of the pattern is either black or white.

7. The third candle of the pattern is white.

&. The third candle of the pattern is black.

From the list In question 7, choose four conditions required for an
evening star.
A morning star pattern 1s a potential
a. top reversal signal.

b. bearish continuation signal.

c. bullish continuation signal.

4. bottom reversal signal.

When an evening or moming star pattern develops, the second real body
of that pattern must be

a. black
b. white.
c. small.

4. large.

. Which part of the evening or moming star pattern represents the star

portion?

a. The first candle line

b. The second candle line

c. The third candle line

4d. The fourth candle line

Which session of the evening star pattern represents the reversal?
a. The first session

b. The second session

c. The fourth session

4d. None of the above


aE

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

13. If the star portion of the evening star is a doji, that pattern becomes
a. an evening doji star.
b. a tweezers top.
¢. aharam) cross.
d. atri-star.
14. In Exhibit 3.14, which is(are) evening star(s)?
a3
b.4
cl
d. Both 3 and 4

4

15. In Exhibit 3.15, which is(are) harami patterns?
a. All
b. None
c. Both 2 and3
4.2

?

1 2 3 4
EXBIBIT 3.15 Question 15


The Power of Candle Patterns no

Answers for Chapter Three, Section Two: The Haraml and
Harami Cross, Morning and Evening Stars

1. d. The harami can be either a potential top reversal or a bottom reversal
signal. In the context of an uptrend, the pattern appears as an unusually
long, white real body immediately followed by a small real body (black or
white). This represents a potentially bearish harami. On the flipside, ina
descending market, a long black real body forms first, followed by a
small real body (black or white), again encompassed by the larger real
body's price range. This represents a bullish haram.

2. b. Aharami pattern can take place during an uptrend or downtrend. In an
uptrend, a long white real body 1s followed by a spinning top that forms
within the prior candle’s real body. In a downtrend, a long, black real
body is followed immediately by a spinning top that forms within the
longer candle's real body.

3. b. The second real body of the harami pattern can be white or black. For
example, if a white real body is the first portion of the harami, and a
small, white real body ts the next session, the Japanese refer to this as a
white-white harami.

4. ¢. The harami is the reverse of an engulfing pattern. Whereas an engulf-
ing pattern presents a long candle engulfing the previous real body, the
harami emerges as an unusually long real body followed by a very small
real body. After a downtrend, the appearance of a hararm) shows, as It is
expressed in Japan, that the decline is exhausting itself. A harami topping
an advance shows that the market has a poor chance of rising.

5. ¢. The harami cross is sometimes called the petrifying pattern. Because
it forms with a doji as the second candle, this pattern often portrays more
likelihood of a reversal than the traditional hararni.

6. b. Although the inside day and the haram appear similar, the harami has
amiajor advantage in that it may give a signal not available with the West-
em inside session. Specifically, the inside session requires that the cur-
rent session's high-low range is within the prior session's high-low range.
However, the harami requires only that the current session's real body be
within the prior session's real body, even if the current session's high is
above the prior session's high or the current session's low falls below the
prior session's low. This means that the harami may provide a reversal
signal that is not apparent with the Western inside day.

7. 2, 3, 6, 7. The moming star is a three-candlestick bottom reversal pat-
tern. It is made up of a tall, black real body followed by a small real body.


12.

13.

14.

15.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

The small real body gaps lower than the prior real body. The third session
is a white real body that moves well within the first eandle’s black real
body.

1, 4, 6, 8. The evening star is a three-candlestick pattern. The criteria for
this pattern include a market In an uptrend. Then a long, white candle ap-
pears, followed by a small real body. The small real body can be either
black or white and ideally should not touch the real body of the first can-
die. The third candle of this pattern 1s a black real body that ideally does
not touch the second real body. The third candle closes well into the
white candle line that made up the first candle of this pattern.

d. In the context of a downtrend, the morning star is a three-candlestick
reversal signal. The first candle, a long, black real body, shows that the
bears are still in control. The second candle is a small real body that
shows the bears are losing momentum. This small real body should not
touch the prior black candle. The final turning signal and completion
of the morning star pattern arrives with the third candle, which should be
a tall, white candle that moves well into the first candle's real body.

c. In both the evening and the moming star, the middle candle line must
be a spinning top or dojt. The color of the spinning top is not relevant.
b. In both the evening and morning star pattern, the second session, or
spinning top, 1s referred to as the star.

d. The third black candle, which moves well into the first candle’s white
real body, completes the session.

a. If a doji appears as the second candle line (instead of a spinning top)
ina morning or evening star pattern, it is renamed a morning doji star or
evening doji star.

d. Seenarios 3 and 4 are evening stars. The color of the middle portion
(the small real body) of an evening star can be black or white. Scenario 1
is not a classic evening star because in an ideal evening star the second
real body should not be touching the first real body. In scenario 2, al-
though the grouping of candle lines is correct for an evening star, the last
candle should be black, not white.

a. These are all examples of harami patterns. The definition of a hararnt
pattern is a small real body within a prior unusually long real body. The
color of the real body does not matter. Even if the shadows of the second
session of the hararmi are outside the real body of the first session, it is
still a harami if the real body of the second session is within the real
body of the first session.


SECTION THREE

Picturesque Storytellers: Tweezers,
Crows, and Soldiers

tell us more about the mood and manner of market environment. Al-

though the recent price action of a chart is important, earlier price history
ean also contribute to our assessment of future price movement. The stories
eandle patterns tell us, present and past, all add to our ability to evaluate po-
tential opportunities that will contribute to our success as traders and
investors.

Now, on to the candle patterns known as tweezers, crows, and soldiers.
The knowledge you've acquired in previous sections will make the following
patterns easy to understand.

I: this section, we'll continue to explore interesting candle patterns that

In this section you will learn... .

The construction of the candle pattern the Japanese call tweezers

How tweezers signal trend changes on long-term charts

How tweezers incorporate other candle patterns

The definition of three black crows and the signal they give

The pattern known as three advaneing soldiers and variations on the
pattern

* Caveats pertaining to three advancing soldiers

hey terms to watch for:

Tweezers

Tweezers top

Tweezers bottom

Three black crows

Three advancing soldiers

|


92 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

The candle pattern known as tweezers consists of two or more candle lines
with matching highs or lows. The name 1s derived from the appearance of
their formation. The tweezers top occurs in a rising market when two or
more consecutive highs match each other, thus giving the Image of the two
prongs of a tweezers (Exhibit 3.16). (Since tweezers pinch, the connotation
is that the trend ts getting pinched.) A tweezers bottom takes place in a de-
elining market, when two successive lows are equal.

Ideally, the tweezers pattern should develop with the first session incor-
porating a long real body. In a declining market, this would probably be a
long black candlestick; in a rising market, it would finalize as a long white
candlestick.

The second session 1s interesting because it has many variations. It's
best—but not absolutely necessary—when this session forms with a small
real body. You are already familiar with the candle lines that may provide this
component. For example, a tweezers top might finish with a hanging man, a

Tweezers top Tweezers top Tweezers top
and hanging man and harami cross and dark cloud cover

rT OF

Tweezers bottom Tweezers bottom Tweezers bottom
and hammer and harami and piercing pattern

|
ra 1 ll

EX\BIBIT 3.16 Tweezers Tops and Tweezers Bottoms



The Power of Candle Patterns ei

shooting star, or a dark cloud cover pattern. A tweezers bottom could culmi-
nate with a hammer, harari cross, or piercing pattern.

With the first long real body and the second smaller real body integrating
two consecutive highs, the tweezers top tells us that the bullish force of the
long white candle began to dissipate with the small real body of the second
eandile line. Also, since the second candle cannot make a higher high than the
first candle, the tweezers top adds to the outlook of a slakening of demand.

The tweezers bottom begins with a long black real body carrying the
happy bears to victory. But the next candle, with the same lows and often
completed with a small real body, switches victory to uncertainty. As buying
bulls start nibbling, the bear's failure to press the second session to a lower
low intensifies their angst. Naturally, the next candle will help confirm the
potential reversal.

We assign little importance to two consecutive highs or lows shown ona
daily or intraday chart unless other defining signals are present. In and of
themselves, they are not noteworthy.

If you are a long-term trader or investor, you probably study weekly and
monthly charts to obtain a longer perspective. So, as opposed to shorter time
frames of intraday and daily charts, tweezers tops and bottoms that appear
on weekly and monthly charts potentially indicate Important reversal sig-
nals. For example, if a declining stock finished the current week by suecess-
fully holding last week's low, it could be the start of a base for a future rally.
Conversely, if a 15-minute candle on an intraday chart successfully holds at
the prior candle’s low, itis not as significant.

The next candle pattern appears only at high price levels, or in the con-
text of a mature uptrend. The Japanese gave it the quaint name, three black
crows. Also called three winged crows, the three black crows pattern consists
of three black candles that should close at or near their lows (Exhibit 3.17).

Three black crows

EXGIBIT 3.17 Three Black Crows


4

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

{4 SIDE LIGHT

The Japanese refer to the opposite of the three black crows pattern as three advanc-
ing white soldiers, or three white soldiers. Again, as with other candle pattems, there
is a military connection.

The first candle appears near the top of an uptrend that’s already starting to
roll over, or move down. Each session's open should ideally take place within
the previous session's real body.

The three black crows pattern sends useful signals for longterm traders
and investors. By the time the pattern concludes with the completion of the
third black candle, it's already obvious that the market has fallen significantly
from its recent high. Were you holding a prospective long-term position and
a three black crows pattern appeared on a weekly chart, in conjunction with
other indicators, it might warn you to take partial or all profits.
