
31
The Scaffold Sways the Future
Omaha • 1967–1968

The greatest wave of riots, lootings, and burnings since the Civil War swept the country during the summer
of 1967. Afterward, Dr. Martin Luther King said, “Many more riots of the kind we had last summer and we
shall be in danger of a right-wing takeover of the fascist type!”1 Privately angry at the movement’s lack of
progress, King still refused to endorse violent resistance; some activists felt that the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee and Dr. King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference should have mounted a
much more confrontational response to the ugly force of nightsticks and cross burnings they faced that
summer.
Omaha’s nonviolent activists counted the Buffetts—both of whom were now influential in town—among
their informal network. Rackie Newman, the wife of Warren’s best friend in Omaha, Nick Newman, was
working with Susie to pressure the YMCA and the boards of other organizations to give a fairer share of
money to their branches in impoverished areas. Through the United Methodist Community Center, run by an
African-American friend, Rodney Wead,2 Susie and Rackie sent black kids to summer camp and set up an
interracial dialogue group for local high school students.3 Wead had become a frequent presence in the
Buffett house. John Harding, who ran Buffett’s back office, collected thousands of signatures for an
open-housing petition. Nick Newman helped bring Warren directly into the struggle by sponsoring his
participation in various local civil-rights groups. Warren’s role was not to labor, but to speak. He, Newman,
and Harding testified before the legislature in Lincoln on open housing. For her part, Susie went out and at
least a few times actually bought houses, fronting for blacks who wanted to move into white neighborhoods.4
Recently, Warren had been introduced to Joe Rosenfield, who ran the Younkers chain of department stores
based in nearby Des Moines.5 Rosenfield was well connected in both local and national politics and shared
the Buffetts’ political views. He was also a trustee of Grinnell College, which sat like a tiny radical island in
the middle of the farming hamlet of Grinnell, Iowa.6 Its liberal-minded students tended to go into social
services after graduation, and the school was focusing its funding on increasing its African-American
enrollment.
Eighty-some years after its founding in 1846, Grinnell had nearly gone broke, but in the quarter century since
Rosenfield had taken over the endowment, he had built it to nearly $10 million.7 He had a keen wit, as well
as an edge of sadness about him, having lost his only son in a tragic accident; Susie Buffett quickly developed
a special relationship with him. Given all their shared interests, Rosenfield naturally wanted to involve the
Buffetts with Grinnell, his most important cause.
In October 1967, the college was presenting a three-day fund-raising convocation on “the liberal arts college

in a world of change” and had assembled a brilliant panoply of 1960s culture in its speakers’ roster
—including author Ralph Ellison, whose novel Invisible Man had won a National Book Award; social
biologist Ashley Montagu, who had questioned the validity of race as a biological concept; communications
theorist Marshall McLuhan, who had popularized the idea of a media-driven “global village” contemporary
artist Robert Rauschenberg; and Fred Friendly, the retired former president of CBS News. But the speaker
they were all waiting for was Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.8 Nobel Peace Prize winners were not everyday
visitors to Iowa. Rosenfield had invited the Buffetts to the convocation; they were among the five thousand
people who packed themselves into Darby Gymnasium for that Sunday morning’s program.
King flew in with the president of Morehouse College, who was going to introduce him. They were hours
late; state troopers, deputies, police, and private security guards had been standing on alert since before ten
a.m., ready for trouble. As they waited, the audience grew hungry and restless.
Finally King strode to the podium, dressed in his preacher’s robes. He had chosen the theme of “Remaining
Awake During a Revolution,” and his resonant voice rang out with a quote from poet James Russell Lowell’s
“The Present Crisis,” the anthem of the civil-rights movement.
Truth forever on the scaffold,
Wrong forever on the throne:
Yet that scaffold sways the future,
And behind the dim unknown,
Standeth God within the shadow
Keeping watch above His own.9
He spoke of the meaning of suffering. Inspired to nonviolent resistance by Gandhi, King invoked the lessons
of the Sermon on the Mount. Blessed are the persecuted, it said, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
As touched as she was by Dr. King’s powerful words, Susie must also have been deeply moved by the way he
transfixed her husband.10 Buffett had always responded to powerful, charismatic orators. Now he saw King
standing before him: moral courage in the flesh, a man who had been beaten and imprisoned, put in shackles
and sentenced to hard labor, stabbed and clubbed for his beliefs, a man who had carried a movement on the
strength of his ideas for nearly a decade despite enraged opposition, violence, and limited success. King had
once described the power of nonviolence, which “has a way of disarming the opponent. It exposes his moral
defenses. It weakens his morale and at the same time it works on his conscience…. Even if he tries to kill
you, you develop the inner conviction that some things are so precious, that there are some things so dear,
some things so eternally worthful, that they are worth dying for. If an individual has not discovered
something that he will die for, he isn’t fit to live. When one discovers this, there is power in this method.”11
King was a prophet, a man who saw a vision of glory, of evil exposed through visible suffering, of people
roused from sleep by the sight of horrors. He called his followers to nail themselves to his vision, to lift it up
behind them and drag it through the streets. Christianity, he said, has always insisted that the cross we bear
precedes the crown we wear. One of his lines, which he repeated in many of his speeches, struck Buffett’s
heart and pierced his reason.12
“The laws are not to change the heart,” he said, “but to restrain the heartless.”
“With that great voice of his, he just rumbled that out, and then went on and used that as a theme.”
***
Susie had often told her husband that there was more to life than sitting in a room making money. That
October 1967, in the throes of the civil-rights struggle, he had written a special letter to the partners, which

showed that something in his thoughts had changed. This letter went out a little earlier than the annual report
he wrote to the partners each year, and it laid out his strategy without revealing the year’s pending results.
After describing the “hyper-reactive pattern of market behavior against which my analytical techniques
have limited value,” he went on to say: “My own personal interests dictate a less compulsive approach to
superior investment results than when I was younger and leaner…. I am out of step with present conditions.
On one point, however, I am clear. I will not abandon a previous approach whose logic I understand
(although I find it difficult to apply) even though it may mean forgoing large, and apparently easy, profits
to embrace an approach which I don’t fully understand, have not practiced successfully, and which,
possibly, could lead to substantial permanent loss of capital.”
He also brought up another reason for this “less compulsive approach”: Personal goals, he said, had begun to
intrude: “I would like to have an economic goal which allows for considerable noneconomic activity…. I am
likely to limit myself to things which are reasonably easy, safe, profitable, and pleasant.”
Buffett then stunned his partners by dropping his stated goal of beating the market by ten points a year to
beating it by just five points a year—or to earning nine percent, whichever was less. If they could find better
results elsewhere, he said, they should go, and he wouldn’t blame them.
He knew that this was taking a risk. Some of the hot new mutual funds were doing much better than the
partnership, doubling their money in a year. Each January, the partners could add money to the
partnership—or take it out. Many other skippers were forecasting sunnier skies.
Yet his timing in announcing that he was cutting the goal worked in his favor. The Dow produced an
unusually poor year in 1966.13 Some of the partners, shaken by the market’s roiling, had advised him to sell
stocks. He paid attention neither to the market nor to advice, and the partnership beat the Dow by thirty-six
points, the best record in its ten-year history. “If you can’t join ’em, lick ’em,” he wrote.14 So, it was not a
bad time to be offering his partners the chance to take their money elsewhere.
One side effect of this strategy would be to test their trust in him. They would be making their decision
without knowing the actual results of his latest year—and for 1967 he was about to report his second stellar
year in a row. If they stayed in, it would be because of that trust and because they were willing to accept his
more modest goal. Beating the market by five points a year, compounded over any long-term period, would
produce stupendous wealth.*25 Even Ben Graham had beaten the market by just 2.5 percent a year. Buffett’s
revised goal of nine percent put a floor on their results that was still two percent or more better than owning
an average bond. That consistency, year after year, and not losing money, would lead to a stunning result.
Sticking with him, an investor took only a modicum of risk, could achieve these extraordinary returns, and do
so safely. Nevertheless, by lowering his target, Buffett had just taken his partners down a peg
psychologically, and the results reflected that.
For the first time, instead of investors rushing to put more money into the partnership, they pulled out a net
$1.6 million of capital in January 1968. Yet it was a fraction of what might have been. Less than one in thirty
dollars had gone elsewhere. And when he reported his 1967 results a few weeks later, Buffett Partnership,
Ltd. had advanced thirty-six percent—versus the nineteen percent rise in the Dow. Thus, in two years, a
dollar in Buffett’s stewardship grew more than sixty cents, while a dollar in the Dow was still a measly dollar.
He wished the departing partners Godspeed with what might be perceived as the subtlest trace of irony: “This
makes good sense for them, since most of them have the ability and motivation to surpass our objectives and
I am relieved from pushing for results that I probably can’t attain under present conditions.”15
“Financial genius is a rising market,” as Kenneth Galbraith would later say.16
Now Buffett had more time to pursue the personal interests he had spoken about, and less pressure—at least
in theory. After King’s speech, Rosenfield easily recruited Buffett to become a Grinnell trustee. Given
Buffett’s dislike of committees and meetings, this signified how much he had been touched by the
convocation—as well as how close he had grown to Rosenfield. Naturally, he went straight onto the finance

committee, where he found the trustees to be a group of like-minded men. Bob Noyce, who ran a company
called Fairchild Semiconductor, which made electronic circuits—something about which Buffett knew little
and had even less interest—was chairman. Noyce, a former Grinnell graduate who had once been expelled
from school for stealing a pig to roast at a luau—a serious offense in a pig-farming state—had the aura of a
man who knew what he was about.17 Yet “he was really a regular guy. He didn’t seem like a scientist at
all,” says Buffett. Above all, Noyce had an overarching hatred of hierarchy and a love of the underdog, in
keeping with the guiding spirit of Grinnell.
Buffett seemed to feel a sense of urgency to do something more for civil rights too. He felt he could best
serve the cause by using his brains and financial savvy behind the scenes. Rosenfield began to introduce
Buffett around the Democratic Party power network. Buffett started to get involved with Iowa’s Democratic
Senator Harold Hughes and with Gene Glenn, who was running for the Senate.
Then, in March 1968, the most controversial man in America, former Alabama Governor George Wallace,
arrived at the Omaha City Auditorium to campaign for President.18
More than five thousand people crammed into a room designed to seat 1,400 to see the man who had run for
governor seven years before on the platform “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation
forever.”19 It took less than eight minutes for his supporters to collect the signatures to place him on the
Nebraska ballot. The odor of stink bombs filled the air. When Wallace began to speak, demonstrators pelted
the platform with sticks, bits of placards, paper drinking cups, and stones.20 Chairs flew, nightsticks cracked,
blood splattered, and the police sprayed the crowd with Mace. As the melee spilled out along 16th Street,
rioters pulled drivers out of cars and beat them. People started throwing Molotov cocktails, flames raced
through the neighborhood, sidewalks filled with broken glass, and looters pawed through the stores. Hours
later the violence passed, and calm finally began to descend. Then an off-duty policeman shot and killed a
sixteen-year-old black boy inside a pawnshop, mistaking him for a looter.21
Over the next few days, high school students walked out of class, smashing windows and setting fires.22 A
few days later, police and snipers armed with automatic weapons traded shots and arrested several people,
including members of the Omaha Black Panthers.23
The racial violence continued all that summer, even as Susie never stopped going to the North Side. She
trusted in her excellent relations with the community and discounted the personal danger; Warren was not
always aware of the details of what she was doing but did feel that at times she went too far in putting others’
interests before her own. His own horror of violence and fear of mob rule had roots that went back a
generation.
Howard Buffett had recounted over and over to his children a scene he had witnessed when he was sixteen
years old—a day when thousands of people converged on the Douglas County Courthouse, broke in and
attempted to lynch the mayor of Omaha, and beat, castrated, and lynched an elderly black man who had been
accused of rape. Afterward they dragged his body through the streets, shot bullets into it, lynched it again,
and set it afire. The Courthouse Riot became the most shameful episode in Omaha’s history. Howard missed
seeing much of the violence, but witnessed the lynch mob turning a streetlamp into an improvised scaffold,
and the mayor of Omaha hanging by a noose around his neck before being rescued in the nick of time.24 The
memory haunted him for the rest of his life.25 He had seen with his own eyes the speed with which ordinary
people, formed into a mob, could act out the lowest depths of human nature.
King’s warning earlier that year about mass social unrest potentially leading to fascism required no
explanation to Warren Buffett. His own commitment to siding with the underdog went beyond instinct and
rested partly on this train of logic. Many people thought such a thing was inconceivable in the United States,
but the seemingly impossible happened time and again. The law is not to change the heart, King said, but to
restrain the heartless. And who are they, the heartless? That he did not say.
A few weeks later, King flew to Memphis to speak at the Masonic temple. He reflected on a woman who had

stabbed him in New York City and the persistent rumors that an assassin was waiting for him. “I don’t know
what will happen now,” he told the audience. “We’ve got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn’t
matter with me now, because I’ve been to the mountaintop.” The next day, April 4, as he stood on the
balcony of the Lorraine Motel preparing to lead a march of sanitation workers, he was fatally shot in the
neck.26
Grief, rage, and frustration poured out of black communities across America, turning urban centers into fiery
combat zones.
At this time, tens of thousands of students were demonstrating against the Vietnam War on college campuses.
The Vietcong had launched the Tet Offensive, attacking a hundred South Vietnamese cities. Americans had
been horrified by a photograph of a South Vietnamese police chief shooting a Vietcong guerrila in the head
point-blank, an image that for the first time changed the Communists from an abstraction to human beings.
The U.S. government had just eliminated most draft deferments, finally putting the sons of the upper middle
class at risk of being drafted. Public sentiment turned decisively against the war. By the time King was shot,
the country felt as though revolution could erupt at any moment.
In their various ways, many people decided they were fed up, and done with being put down. Buffett’s friend
Nick Newman abruptly announced that he would no longer attend meetings at clubs that discriminated
against Jews as members.27 Warren, too, was moved to take action. Since his Graham-Newman days, he had
broken away from the segregated 1950s culture and the anti-Semitism of his family’s elder generation to
forge friendships and business connections with a wide circle of Jewish people. He even seemed to feel a
sense of personal identification with Jews, some thought; their status as outsiders fit with his own sense of
maladjustment and his alignment with the underdog. Some time before, Buffett had quietly resigned from the
Rotary Club, repelled by the bigotry he saw as a member of its membership committee. But he never told
anyone the reason. Now he made it his personal project to sponsor a Jew—his friend Herman Goldstein—for
membership in the Omaha Club.
Since one of the rationales that institutions like the Omaha Club used to defend their exclusionary policies
was that “they have their own clubs that don’t admit us,” Buffett decided to ask Nick Newman to nominate
him for the all-Jewish Highland Country Club.28 Some of its members objected, using the same logic
employed by the Omaha Club: Why take in gentiles when we had to establish our club because their clubs
wouldn’t have us?29 But a couple of rabbis got involved and an Anti-Defamation League spokesman
appeared on Buffett’s behalf.30 Once accepted, Buffett quietly stormed the Omaha Club, armed with his
Jewish country-club membership. Herman Goldstein was voted in, and the long-standing religious barrier to
membership there finally toppled.
Buffett had devised a clever solution, a way to get the club to do the right thing without confronting anyone.
It avoided the thing he dreaded, but it also reflected his reasoning—probably correct—that marching and
demonstrations would not change the minds of well-off businessmen.
It also worked because he was now a well-known figure in Omaha. He was no longer an upstart; he had
clout. The man who had once had to work to get off the blacklist of the Omaha Country Club had
singlehandedly effected what was perhaps the most significant organizational change since its founding in one
of Omaha’s most elite institutions.
Yet Buffett wanted to play more than just a local role. With his money, he knew he could have an impact at
the national level, for 1968 was an election year, and it would take a lot of money to try to unseat an
incumbent President—Lyndon Johnson—in favor of an antiwar candidate.
Vietnam was the central issue of the campaign, and Eugene McCarthy, the liberal Senator from Minnesota,
was initially the only Democrat willing to run in the primaries against Johnson.
The campaign had started in New Hampshire, where a McCarthy “children’s crusade” against the war sent
nearly ten thousand young activists and college students to knock on almost every door in the state in heavy

snow. He won forty-two percent of the New Hampshire vote, a strikingly strong showing against an
incumbent President. Many students, blue-collar workers, and antiwar voters considered McCarthy a hero.
Buffett became treasurer of his Nebraska campaign, and he and Susie attended a campaign event, she smiling
broadly in an eye-catching dress and mob cap that she had had made out of fabric striped with McCarthy’s
name.
Then Johnson announced that he would not run again and John F. Kennedy’s brother Robert Kennedy
entered the race. He and McCarthy raced through a bitter primary battle in which there was no clear frontrunner until Kennedy won the California primary, giving him a decisive lead in delegates. But on the night of
his victory, he was shot by an assassin, dying twenty-four hours later, and Johnson’s Vice President, Hubert
Humphrey, announced his candidacy. He captured the nomination at a tumultuous Democratic convention in
Chicago marked by battles between police equipped with nightsticks and Mace and rioting antiwar protesters.
Buffett then supported Humphrey against the Republican Richard Nixon, who won the election. In later
years, McCarthy switched parties several times and made several erratic independent runs for President,
undermining his credibility as a serious politician.
Buffett was notably loyal to his close friends. His enthusiasm for more distant acquaintances, and especially
for public figures was fickle, however, waxing and waning with their stature in others’ eyes. In his insecurity,
he worried constantly about how associating with others reflected on him. Eventually he regretted and
downplayed his association with McCarthy. But his involvement in politics and his commitment of money
signaled a sea change in Buffett’s life. For the first time he had made room for something besides investing, a
“noneconomic activity” with roots in his family’s past and one that stretched toward the unknowable future.

32
Easy, Safe, Profitable, and Pleasant
Omaha • 1968–1969

In January 1968, Buffett had issued a call to his fellow Grahamites, summoning them together for the first
time as a meeting of the faithful in the middle of a stock market gone mad. “[T]here has been a tremendous
change in attitude in the last few years, and I think the gang that is assembling in La Jolla is about all that
is left of the old guard,”1 he wrote, inviting Graham’s former students Bill Ruane, Walter Schloss, Marshall
Weinberg, Jack Alexander, and Tom Knapp. He also invited Charlie Munger, whom he had introduced to
Graham, as well as Munger’s partner, Roy Tolles, and Jack Alexander’s partner, Buddy Fox. Ed Anderson,
who had left Munger’s partnership to become a partner in Tweedy, Browne, was on the guest list, too, as was
Sandy Gottesman, who, Buffett told Graham, is “a good friend of mine and a great admirer of you.” Lastly,
he said, “I think you probably remember Henry [Brandt], who works very closely with us.”2
Fred Stanback, Buffett’s partner in deals like Sanborn Map and the best man at his wedding, was too busy to
attend. A few years after Warren had finished at Columbia, he and Miss Nebraska 1949, Vanita Mae Brown,
had reunited for dinner in New York. They made it a sort of double date by bringing along Susie and Fred,
who had met Vanita at least once before through Warren. She was then Vanita Mae Brown Nederlander,
having been briefly married to a member of the Nederlander family, theater owners who were part of an
American entertainment dynasty. After the dinner, Fred, Warren’s most introverted friend, became, as
another friend put it, “putty in her hands,” as if to prove the old maxim that opposites attract. Initially, their
marriage probably seemed like a sort of charming postscript to Warren’s career at Columbia: a couple
brought into the Buffetts’ circle from that era. He did have a tendency to arrange his friends’ lives, asking
them to partner with him, putting them on his companies’ boards, and in general wrapping them into his life
through ties of various kinds. Two friends married may have felt almost like a compliment to him, but it
turned out to be the worst decision Fred ever made in his life.
