
www.pdfdummies.com

175

176 Part IV: Finding Patterns
1. SUPPORT LINE BROKEN
2. TEST OF
HIGHEST HIGH

Figure 10-3:
Classic
break of
support.

PREVIOUS SIGNIFICANT LOW
3. PREVIOUS LOW BROKEN

If you grasp the 1-2-3 concept, congratulations! You have just met the most
irksome, vexatious phenomenon in technical analysis — the pullback. It is
also called a retracement or correction. This usage can get confusing because
retracement and correction have specific meanings in other contexts, so you
stick to the word pullback to be safe.
The pullback is usually characterized by a roughly sideways movement that
occurs after a trendline breakout and very often, just before it, too. The pullback is a symptom of congestion, aptly describing the market participants milling around like people on a crowded sidewalk trying to dodge one another and
impeding progress in both directions as a result. Another term for a sideways
price movement is consolidation, referring to market participants consolidating their ideas about the security being traded. Consolidation often — but not
always — precedes a breakout of the trendline.
Congestion and consolidation describe the same thing — trendless prices
trading in a range. Often the range is defined by a previous high or low.
Consolidations often precede and follow a breakout. If you see a period
of sideways price movement and can’t find the trend, widen your chart
to include more data and switch to a longer time frame (such as weekly).
Chances are you are about to get or have just gotten a breakout.

Playing games with support
and resistance lines
The chief issue with support and resistance is that the line itself becomes the
focus of attention, rather than the trend. People make decisions about buying
and selling because of what happens to the line — without anything real actually happening within the underlying trend.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines
Support and resistance lines occur so often on charts, and nowadays so many
people are aware of them, that to some extent they become self-fulfilling
prophecies. A large number of people draw and respect the same lines. Some
people want to defend the price because they own the security and want to see
it survive a test of support so that more buyers are encouraged and it can rise
some more.
Others want the price to fall so they can buy the security more cheaply, or to
cover a short position. In some instances, the big players in a market know
where the small players have placed their buy or sell orders, because as
amateurs, they select the obvious support or resistance levels. The professionals can then pick off the amateurs for a quick buck. As I note above, the
pros may push the price under a support line just to spook the amateurs into
selling. You end up going through a tricky and complicated train of thought
whereby you don’t place your order at an obvious level because that’s
exactly where the big guys expect you to — and then you miss an entry or
exit at the best level.
Drawing good and valid trendlines isn’t enough. You also want to study how
often the crowd that trades your specific security chickens out at a resistance
level or breaks support by a hair only to take the price up afterward. It’s not the
line that counts — what counts is the crowd psychology that created the line.

Drawing Internal Trendlines
Wouldn’t it be nice to know the “true” trendline? This line would reveal the
hidden trendedness of the prices without at the same time alerting everybody and his brother to attack or defend specific levels.
Such a line does exist. It’s a line that goes through the center of the price
series rather than along its edges, like support and resistance (see the section “Following the Rules with Rule-Based Trendlines” earlier in this chapter). How do you draw a straight line through the center of each price bar?
Technically, you can’t, as least not on any chart where the prices jump
around at all.
But scientists have a solution to jumpiness: To “fit” a line that minimizes
the distance from itself to each price close along the line. The best-fit line is
named the linear regression line, linear referring to line and regression referring to the mathematical calculation. You don’t need to know how the line is
calculated to be able to use it. You probably can’t explain an auto transmission, either, but you can still drive your car.

www.pdfdummies.com

177

178 Part IV: Finding Patterns
You can’t draw an accurate linear regression without first performing a complex statistical calculation. Spreadsheet software and all charting packages
come with the linear regression already built in. Don’t shoot yourself in the
foot trying to do the calculations yourself when you could just as easily be sipping a latté while a program does it for you.

Rules for drawing a linear regression
This section is a short one — you have no rules. Figuring out where to start
and where to end a linear regression line is the first big obstacle in using the
line in a practical way to help you make trading decisions. The simple answer
is to start it at an obvious high or low, meaning that you need to look backward at the historical data on the chart to see where the current move began.
This history check can be trickier than it sounds. You can get very different
slopes, depending on how tightly you want the data to fit to the line. Seeing a
welter of slopes covering up your chart can get very frustrating. Stick with it —
pare back the surplus lines until you get one that looks the best to your eye.
Where do you end a linear regression? This takes some practice with other
indicators, such as a gap, a giant outside day, a moving average crossover, a
change in momentum, or even a nontechnical development.
You may see charts by self-appointed gurus that show a linear regression and
advice that prices are “mean reverting” and exhibit a “central tendency,” meaning that a big variation away from the linear regression line will automatically
correct back to the linear regression. This is nonsense. I am not aware of any
reputable trading system that features the linear regression as a trading tool.

Identifying trendedness
In Figure 10-4, the linear regression line doesn’t actually go through the
center of each price bar. In fact, some price bars are quite far away from the
line. But if you look more closely, you can see that no other line gets you as
close to Point A and to Point B at the same time. Only one linear regression
exists for any set of prices on the chart. Despite its somewhat intimidating
name, the linear regression should have you breathing a sigh of relief right
now because nothing is subjective or judgmental about it. It’s “science.”
Everybody gets the identical line if they are given the same chart and the
same starting and ending points.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines

A

B
Figure 10-4:
Simple
linear
regression.

A linear regression is the true, pure trendline. This is wonderful news. If you
accept the core concept of technical analysis, that a trend will continue in the
same direction, at least for a while, then you can extend the true trendline and
obtain a forecast. In some software packages, a linear regression extension is
called exactly that — a time-series forecast. This tool is tremendously useful.
You have created a high-probability forecast for the upcoming period that
gives you perspective on what to expect.
If someone says, for example, that the price of Blue Widget stock is going
from $5 to $10 in one month, you can take the current linear regression line
and extend it out one month to evaluate whether that forecast has any relationship to reality, or is silly hype. That’s the good news.
The bad news is that the linear regression line can slope this way or that
way or no way (horizontal), depending on where you start and stop drawing. If you take a V-shaped price series like the one in Figure 10-5 and draw
a single linear regression line, you get . . . garbage. Unless you have a very
long holding period in mind, this chart shows two trends, and you need two
linear regressions to reflect that. This conundrum leads to the common-sense
observation that the less daylight between the line and the price points on
the chart, the better the fit and the more likely it is that extending the line is
a valid technique.

www.pdfdummies.com

179

180 Part IV: Finding Patterns
You can draw linear regression lines that are totally useless. They’ll still be
scientifically accurate in that they depict the best fit possible to the data,
and everyone else will get the same result. However, they won’t advance the
cause of making a profit in the market or preventing a loss.

Figure 10-5:
Invalid
linear
regression.

How to use the linear regression
The linear regression does not take the place of support and resistance lines.
It should be viewed as a supplement and confirming indicator to identify the
trend. If you select a good starting point, the linear regression delivers pure
trend. Unlike support and resistance lines (see the section “Following the
Rules with Rule-Based Trendlines” in this chapter), the linear regression line
doesn’t have any trading rules associated directly with it, but visually, the
linear regression line is the most informative.
If you draw a support or resistance line whose slope varies dramatically from
your linear regression line, one of them is wrong. In a similar vein, if the line
has a very steep slope and no other linear regression line on charts of the
same security has such a steep slope, you can deduce that the price movement is statistically abnormal. It is unsustainably fast and likely to come to a
sad end when traders start taking profit.
This crash and burn is exactly what happened in the NASDAQ in March 2000,
the “tech wreck.” Look at Figure 10-6.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines
NASDAQ (2,200.96, 2,202.40, 2,179.51, 2,190.31, -0.55005)

5500
5400
5300
5200
5100
5000
4900
4800
4700
4600
4500
4400
4300
4200
4100
4000
3900
3800
3700
3600
3500
3400
3300
3200
3100
3000
2900
2800
2700
2600
2500
2400
2300
2200
2100
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
-100
-200
-300

TRUE LINEAR REGRESSION TRENDLINE ENDED AT START OF BUBBLE

TRUE LINEAR REGRESSION TRENDLINE EXTENDED BY HAND INTO THE
FUTURE

Figure 10-6:
Anatomy of
a bubble.
1980 1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

The linear regression line from the low in October 1998 to the peak in March
2000 is so steep (and unprecedented) that anyone with an ounce of technical
savvy could tell it was going to blow out and come crashing down — exactly
as gurus were predicting. That doesn’t mean people shouldn’t take advantage
of rising prices. It does mean that they shouldn’t have expected high and
rising prices forever and should’ve placed trailing stops every day to lock in
the extraordinary gains. See Chapter 5 for a discussion of stops.
Here’s an interesting way to draw a linear regression:
1. When you suspect that the price is accelerating (in either direction)
at an abnormally high speed, first you draw a true linear regression.
from the beginning of the data series but stop it at the point where
the abnormality — the bubble — begins. You can see this only in hindsight, but it doesn’t take a lot of hindsight.
2. Extend the line by hand, cutting off the bubble. The extension of the
trendline becomes a more realistic forecast, because we know that bubbles always burst.
Anyone drawing this linear regression trendline extension before March 2000
(the market high) had a pretty good idea of where the market would land
after the bubble burst. Yes, this is a highly subjective process, and it doesn’t
always work. But it gets you thinking about the overall trend of the security
or the market index.

www.pdfdummies.com

181

182 Part IV: Finding Patterns
You can do some really dumb things when using the linear regression line. For
example, a linear regression line that is very far away from some of the prices
on the chart is probably not valid. Also, if you extend a line out into the indefinite future, you get a fantasy, not a forecast. The market is a collection of
human beings, not a science project. Prices simply don’t move in a straight
line indefinitely.
The linear regression could save your bacon someday, like it saved many
technical traders in the Nasdaq crash of 2000 and the S&P crash in 2007. See
Figure 10-6, showing the linear regression line from the lowest low in 2002 to
the highest high of 2007. I also put the 200-day moving average on this chart
(see Chapter 12). Anyone who didn’t buy in 2003 when the price diverged
from the downsloping linear regression, and then sell everything at the beginning of 2008, was not paying attention.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11

Transforming Channels
into Forecasts
In This Chapter
▶ Getting to know channel drawing
▶ Letting channels help you make money
▶ Discovering breakouts
▶ Finding out about the regression channel
▶ Distrusting the channel — pivot point support and resistance

D

rawing a straight-line trendline and extending it out into the future
suggests what the price may be in days to come. Actually, a trendline
suggests only the general neighborhood of future prices. If the trendline is a
support line, you expect the price not to fall below it, but that doesn’t tell you
anything about how high it may go. With a linear regression line, you expect
future prices to cluster around the line, but some outliers are always possible. In short, common sense tells you that you can’t forecast future prices
to the penny.
While nobody can create a pinpoint forecast, we can forecast the range of
probable future prices. Range refers to the same high-low range of the price
bar described in Chapters 6 through 8, only encompassing a larger number of
price bars in a series — weeks and months rather than only a few days.
In this chapter, I describe the straight-line channel and its forecasting capabilities. I show you two ways to build a straight-line channel forecast and outline how to interpret the information you see on the chart. I also talk about
using pivot point analysis to draw horizontal support and resistance, for use
either in nondirectional situations or with trend channels.

www.pdfdummies.com

184 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Diving into Channel-Drawing Basics
A channel is a pair of straight-line trendlines (see Chapter 10) encasing a
price series. It consists of one line drawn along the top of a price series and
another line, parallel to the first, along the bottom of the price series.
The purpose of the channel is to train your eye to accept prices within its
borders as on the trend and to detect prices outside its borders as off the trend
(and perhaps ending the trend). In other words, the channel is a wider measure of trending behavior than a single line. As long as prices remain within
the channel, you deduce that the trend is still in place.
Depending on the raw material of your price bars, you can either
✓ Start with a top line connecting at least two highs, and draw the bottom
line parallel to it.
✓ Start with the bottom line connecting at least two lows, and draw the
top line parallel to that.
✓ Draw a linear regression line, and draw the top and bottom of the channel at equal distances on either side of it.
How do you know when a high or low is obvious and the right place to start a
trendline? An obvious high or low is named a swing point, because it’s the last
highest high or lowest low in a series of higher highs or lower lows. The trend
may seem to continue for a few more bars after the highest high or lowest
low. You don’t always get a sharp, clear-cut reversal exactly at the swing bar.
But a few days after a swing bar, the reversal or swing point becomes visually
obvious. Can you mistakenly identify a swing point? You bet. When drawing
trendlines, you have to resign yourself to erasing a lot.
You can draw channels to enclose every part of every price bar in the series,
or you can draw the channels to allow some minor breaking of the lines. (In
the section “Neatness counts” later in the chapter, I describe the pros and
cons of allowing minor breakage.) Whatever your starting point (top, bottom,
or linear regression) and whether you encase some or all the price series,
consider the top line of the channel to be resistance and the bottom line of
the channel to be support (see Chapter 10 for definitions of these terms).
Constructing a channel by drawing parallel support and resistance lines organizes your vision. You expect future price highs not to exceed the top of the
channel (resistance) and upcoming price lows not to exceed the bottom of the
channel (support). The parallel lines tell you the maximum probable future
price range. Note that word probable. Channels are visually compelling and
can seduce you into thinking that the forecast range must occur. It’s all too
easy to start drawing channels and forget that they’re only a forecast. A zillion
factors can come out of the blue and knock your trend off the rails.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts
Channels, whether hand drawn or software drawn, aren’t always as neat and
tidy as the examples I use in the following sections. Some securities never
offer the opportunity to draw a tidy channel, and some securities offer a tidy
channel only some of the time. But the longer a tidy channel lasts, the more
confident you can feel that you have correctly identified a trend.

Drawing channels by hand
Figure 11-1 is a model-perfect channel, but you may be astonished at how
often you can draw a channel like this on a real security. Here’s how you do it:
1. Start by connecting the two lows at the lower left. This is the support line.
Notice that they’re the two relative lows because a bar with a higher low
comes in between.
2. With your ruler or through the magic of software, extend that line into
the future.
3. To form the top of the channel, you have to wait for the next relative high.
A relative high can be seen only after you get an intervening lower high
(got that?). On the chart, the highest high is the last of three higher
highs. You go back to the highest high and start a line parallel to the
support line from it. This is the resistance line.
4. Extend the resistance line into the future.

RESISTANCE LINE
EXTENSION STARTS HERE

SUPPORT LINE
Figure 11-1:
A model
channel.

TWO LOWS CONNECTED

www.pdfdummies.com

185

186 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Why are the lines parallel?
When you draw a support line connecting a
series of lows, you often see a parallel resistance
line that mysteriously connects the highest highs.
This is so common that most charting software
programs have a standard command — “create
parallel line.” No one knows why support and
resistance lines are so often parallel. Here are
a few explanations:
✓ This kind of orderliness appears when the
high-low trading range is stable. Volume is
steady, too. An orderly crowd promotes an
orderly channel. Market participants know
where the price is relatively high — at the top
of the channel. They expect no more gains at
this point and are prepared to sell at the top
to put their money to better use in some other
security. Die-hard buyers, in turn, see when
the price is relatively cheap — down around
the support line. They add to their position,
propelling the price upward.

channel. They rely on the security alternating between support and resistance, and
the perceived cycle is the basis of their trading plan. This often works, at least for short
periods, as long as you don’t project the
price bouncing off the support or resistance
line several cycles into the future. In other
words, don’t get cocky. You never know
when fresh news is going to come along and
cause prices to break the channel.
✓ Humans have an innate need to impose
order on a chaotic universe — or market.
Parallel lines don’t always appear, of
course, but they appear often enough that
observers speak of trading ranges with a
certain air of authority. When you hear of
a trading range, this kind of parallel support
and resistance channel is usually what the
commentator has in mind.

✓ Many technical analysts perceive a cyclical
quality to the ebb and flow of prices within a

Note that sometimes you later get a higher high and have to shift the entire
resistance line up, keeping it parallel. Oddly, a high proportion of new highs
stop at the old resistance line, even though some stop at the new resistance
line, too. It’s like having two equally valid resistance lines. To be on the safe
side, consider the farther-away channel line as the more-important one. The
same thing is true of a second, farther-away support line.
On the chart in Figure 11-1, the extension lines are gray. At the time they’re
first drawn, the extended lines are hypothetical support and hypothetical
resistance. Hypothetical means not proven.
The lines stop being hypothetical and become actual support and resistance
when the next high or low touches the extended line but doesn’t break it,
validating the extension process. The circles in Figure 11-1 mark where the
next high and low occur in this price series — and they occur at the hypothetical support and resistance lines. You know that you’ve drawn your channel
line correctly when a third relative high or low makes a touch of the line but
doesn’t cross it, making that touch a confirmation point.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts

Letting software do the drawing
Another way to capture the collective habit of market participants is to draw
the linear regression line, as I describe in Chapter 10, and then to build a
channel on either side of it. Instead of drawing the support and resistance
lines by hand and extending them out, you let the software do the drawing.
See the later section “Riding the regression range,” for information on how
the channel is calculated mathematically.
Whichever way you draw the channel, apply the same expectations about the
collective behavior of the market participants, and assume that future relative highs and relative lows are going to fall within the same range. The principle of extending support and resistance lines is the same whether you draw
them by hand or use the linear regression as an anchor.
