
leader of every stunt or business venture in which he had ever been involved. He couldn’t play the part of the
echo.
“It was miserable. The thing about crew is, you can’t coast or fake it. You have to put your oar in the water
at exactly the same time as everybody else. You can be unbelievably tired but you have to match the pace,
and it must be done in unison. It’s an incredibly grueling sport.” He came back to the dorm every afternoon
sweating, head bowed, hands bloodied and blistered, and dropped crew as soon as he could.
Warren was looking for a different kind of team. He wanted Chuck to sell used golf balls with him, but
Chuck was too busy trying to study and maintain his social life. Warren also suggested that Chuck join him in
a pinball business. He didn’t need Chuck’s money or labor, and it wasn’t even clear what Chuck’s role would
be. But Warren, a one-man bandwagon, wanted someone to whom he could talk about his businesses, always
and endlessly. If Chuck became a partner, it would make him part of Warren’s world.
He had always been good at this Tom Sawyering, but for once, he failed with Chuck. Still, he wanted Chuck
as a friend as well as a business partner. He invited Chuck to visit him in Washington. Leila was astonished
when Chuck ate everything she offered him, even oatmeal. “Warren won’t eat anything,” she said. “He
won’t eat this, he won’t eat that. He always makes me fix something special for him.” Chuck was amused to
find that Warren had his mother so well trained.
To Chuck, Warren seemed an odd mix of immature kid and brilliant prodigy. In many of his classes, he
simply memorized what the professor said, not needing to look at a textbook.15 He flaunted obnoxious feats
of memory by quoting page numbers and passages back in class and correcting his teachers on their text
citations.16 “You forgot the comma,” he said to one.17
In an accounting course, the proctors had not even finished passing out the exam papers to the
two-hundred-odd students when Warren, showing off, stood up and turned in his paper. He was done. Chuck,
sitting on the other side of the room, was frustrated. Wharton was no picnic; a quarter of the class would
flunk out. But Warren cruised through with no apparent effort, leaving him as much time as he wanted to
drum his hands and sing Mammy, my little Mammy, all night long.
Chuck liked Warren well enough, but it all finally got to him.
“He moved out on me. One morning I woke up and Chuck was gone.”18
At term’s end that summer, Warren—who would never have thought he’d actually be glad to return to
Washington—went home. Leila was in Omaha helping Howard campaign for reelection. So the Buffett kids,
who had rarely gotten any relief from their parents’ austere regimen, experienced a glorious summer of
freedom. Bertie was a camp counselor. Doris had a job at Garfinkel’s, where she was shocked that the store
asked your religion on the job application and blacks could shop only on the first floor, where no clothing was
sold.19
Washington was then the most segregated city in the United States. Blacks could not work as streetcar
conductors or motormen or at anything other than the most menial jobs. They could not enter the YMCA, eat
in most restaurants, rent hotel rooms, or buy theater tickets. Dark-skinned diplomats had to be chaperoned,
embarrassed and scandalized by a provincialism like no place else in the world. “I would rather be an
Untouchable in the Hindu caste system than a Negro in Washington,” one foreign visitor said.20 The
Washington Post, referred to by some right-wingers as “The Uptown Communist Sheet,” had been on a
crusade about racism for some time,21 and President Truman had desegregated the military and was pushing
for civil-rights reforms. But change was slow.
Warren, who did not read the liberal Post, paid little attention to Washington’s racism. He was both unaware
and immature, too absorbed in his own insecurity, his stunts, and his businesses. He returned that summer to
his duties as relief circulation manager for the conservative Times-Herald. He still had the borrowed Ford
and once again used it to deliver papers if he had to fill in for one of his paperboys, using the running board

technique he had perfected earlier. He also reunited with his pal Don Danly. They thought about buying a fire
engine together as their latest stunt, but instead found a 1928 Springfield Rolls-Royce Phantom I Brewster
coupe for $350 in a junkyard in Baltimore. It was gray, weighed more than a Lincoln Continental, and was
adorned with little bud vases. The car had two sets of instruments, so the lady in back—the employer—could
see how fast the chauffeur was driving. The starter was broken, so Don and Warren took turns cranking it
until it finally started up, then they drove it the fifty miles or so back to Washington. It belched smoke,
leaked oil, and lacked taillights and license plates, but when they were stopped by a cop, Warren kept
“talking and talking and talking” until he wiggled their way out of a ticket.22
They put the Rolls in the garage underneath the Buffett house and started the motor up. The house
immediately filled with acrid smoke, so they pulled it back out and up the steep driveway onto the street.
They worked on it Saturday after Saturday. “Danly did all the work,” according to Doris, tinkering with the
pipes and doing the welding, “and Warren watched admiringly and encouraged it along.”
When they decided to paint the car, Don and his girlfriend, Norma Thurston, bought something called a
Pad-o-Paint, which smeared on the color with a sponge. They painted the car dark blue; it looked really good
to them. 23 Naturally, word had gotten around, so they rented it out, thirty-five bucks a pop.
Then Warren had an idea for a stunt. He wanted to be seen in the car. Danly dressed up like a chauffeur,
Warren put on the raccoon coat, and the two cranked and cranked to start the car, then drove downtown
with platinum-blond Norma. As Danly lunged about under the hood, pretending to fix the motor, Warren
directed him with a cane and Norma draped herself over the hood like a movie star. “It was Warren’s idea,”
says Norma. “He was the more theatrical one. We were going to see how many people would look at us.”
Norma knew that Warren had never really dated in high school and needed help with girls, so she set him up
with her cousin, Bobbie Worley. They dated chastely that summer, going to movies and playing bridge,
Warren barraging her with an endless series of brainteasers and riddles.24
When fall came, he left Bobbie behind and returned to Penn as an eighteen-year-old sophomore. He now had
two roommates, his fraternity brother Clyde Reighard and a freshman who was assigned to them, George
Oesmann. The year before, he had Tom Sawyered Clyde into acting as the front man for a business venture
that went nowhere, but during their short-lived partnership, the two had become friends.
Warren had not changed much since his freshman year, but he had much more in common with Clyde than
he had with Chuck Peterson. Clyde was amused by Warren’s tennis shoes and T-shirts and dirty khaki pants,
and he took it in stride when Warren needled and taunted him about his grades. While “he didn’t make me
any smarter,” says Reighard, “he did make me use what I had more efficiently.” Indeed, Warren was a
master at using what he had efficiently, his own time especially. He rose early in the morning, ate chicken
salad at the dorm for breakfast, then headed off to classes.25 After sleepwalking through his freshman year,
he had finally found one class he liked: Professor Hockenberry’s Industry 101, which discussed different
industries and the nuts and bolts of running a business. “It was textiles, it was steel, it was petroleum. I can
still remember that book. I got a lot of stuff from it. I can remember talking about the laws of capture in
petroleum, and the Bessemer processes in steel. I devoured that book. That was really interesting to me.”
But his suitemate Harry Beja, a grind who sweated through Hockenberry’s class alongside Warren, resented
the way he tobogganed ahead effortlessly.26
It was the same in business law, taught by Professor Cataldo, who “had very close to a photographic mind.
He would quote cases at length. I can still remember Hadley versus Baxendale and Kemble versus Farren.
So I would do the same thing back to him on the exams, which entertained him to no end. I would quote from
his stuff in answering questions, whether applicable or not. And he just ate it up.”
Helped by his prodigious memory, Warren was free to do as he pleased for much of the day. At lunchtime, he
dropped by the Alpha Sig house, an old three-story mansion with a spiral staircase, where Kelsen, the black
houseman, cooked, cleaned, and, in his white jacket, gave the place a degree of dignity. A bridge game went
on twenty-four hours a day in a corner alcove, and Warren would sit down and play a few hands.27 His taste

for practical jokes continued unabated. He occasionally enlisted one of his fraternity brothers, Lenny Farina,
to pose for attention-getting photographs out on the street while he pretended to pick Lenny’s pocket or shine
his shoes.28
Meanwhile, in a scam reminiscent of sending poor old Kerlin into a water trap naked wearing a gas mask, he
and Clyde had told their third roommate, George, that he looked “run-down and puny and would never
attract girls unless he developed muscles.” They finally maneuvered George into buying himself some
barbells. “And then we used to bang these barbells up and down while Harry Beja was studying down below.
We had great fun taunting him by banging these barbells on the floor.”29
By college, however, the evidence had become convincing. Warren had begun to give up on the idea of
becoming a strongman. “After a while, I decided my bones were wrong. My clavicles were not long enough.
It’s your clavicles that determine how broad-shouldered you’ll be, and you can’t do much about your
clavicles. That’s why I got disgusted and eventually quit. I decided that if I was going to have girl-like
muscles anyway, then to hell with it.”
Girl-like muscles did not attract girls, and Warren had still not gone out on any dates since he arrived at Penn.
Saturdays were big fraternity party days, with prefootball luncheons and postgame cocktail parties, dinners,
and evening dances. Warren wrote a letter to Bobbie Worley, asking her to come up for a weekend and
saying, in effect, that he had fallen in love. Bobbie liked him and was touched by his letter, but did not return
his feelings. She would have enjoyed the weekend but said no because she felt it was wrong to lead him on.30
Warren had one date, with Ann Beck, a Bryn Mawr girl. He had worked at her father’s bakery shortly after
moving to Washington, when he was in eighth grade and she was “just a little girl with long blond hair.” Ann
had been voted the most bashful girl at her high school, and the day she and Warren spent together was like a
shyness contest: They walked around Philadelphia in awkward silence.31 “We were probably the two shyest
people in the whole United States.” Warren had no idea how to make small talk; when stressed, he emitted
small grunts instead.32
Sometimes Warren and Clyde took the borrowed Ford coupe and drove off to the suburbs in search of
movies about mummies, Frankenstein, vampires, or anything macabre.33 Since hardly anybody had a car at
that time, his fraternity brothers were impressed.34 That was the irony: Warren was the only one with a car to
make out in, but nobody to make out with. He passed on the Ivy Ball and the Inter-Fraternity Ball. He always
skipped the Alpha Sig Sunday tea dances and never had a date at the fraternity house.35 His face would flush
and he would stare at his shoes if anyone talked about sex.36 He was out of his element at such a
hard-partying school, where the college fight song was “Drink a Highball.”
“I tried drinking because I was in a fraternity where about half my dues were going to buy alcohol for
these parties. I felt I was getting screwed. But I just didn’t like the taste. I don’t like beer. And I can behave
silly enough without it. I mean, I was right there with the rest—the drinkers didn’t have anything on me
when it came to being silly.”
But even without a date on his arm or a glass in his hand, Warren sometimes showed up at his fraternity’s
Saturday night parties. He was able to draw a little crowd by sitting in a corner and lecturing on the stock
market. He had a wit and an arresting way of talking. His Alpha Sig brothers deferred to his opinion when it
came to money and business; they respected his deep, if one-sided, knowledge of politics. They decided he
had some “politician in him” and gave him a paddle with his nickname: the Senator.37
Warren had joined the Young Republicans as a freshman because he was attracted to a girl who was a
member. But instead of becoming her boyfriend, he became the group’s president when he was a sophomore.
Warren took over at an exciting time—the fall of a presidential election year. In 1948, the Republicans were
supporting Thomas F. Dewey against the weak incumbent Harry Truman, who had become President on
FDR’s death.

The Buffetts had grown to hate Truman. Though he had created what was known as the “Truman Doctrine”
of containment, which was meant to prevent the spread of Communism, Howard, like many conservatives,
felt that Truman and General George C. Marshall, his Secretary of State, were playing palsy-walsy with
Soviet premier Stalin.38 Moreover, Truman had implemented the Marshall Plan, which sent eighteen million
tons of food to Europe after World War II, and Howard was one of seventy-four Congressmen who had
voted against it. Convinced that the Marshall Plan was another version of Operation Rat Hole and that the
Democrats were wrecking the economy, Howard started buying gold chain bracelets for his daughters so they
could feed themselves when the day came that the dollar was worthless.
Howard was running for reelection to his fourth term that year. Even though Warren had been present when
Howard was hissed and booed after he’d voted for passage of the Taft-Hartley “slave labor” bill, he, like the
rest of the family, considered Howard’s Congressional seat relatively safe. Nonetheless, Howard had placed
his reelection in the hands of a campaign manager for the first time—family friend Dr. William Thompson.
Well-known and admired in Omaha, Thompson knew the pulse of the town and was a psychologist to boot.
Day after day as the campaign progressed, people in Omaha would come up and say, “Congratulations,
Howard, you’re in again, and I worked for you,” as if the election were over.
Dewey, too, appeared to be a shoo-in. The polls showed that Truman was trailing him badly—in fact, so
badly that the Roper organization, a polling research firm, simply stopped taking polls. Truman ignored this,
and for months had been traveling around the country speaking from the back of his train on a “whistle-stop”
tour, advocating what he called his “Fair Deal” policy: universal health insurance, broad-based civil-rights
legislation, and the repeal of Taft-Hartley. He had whistle-stopped in Omaha, marched in a parade, and
dedicated a park, looking as cheerful as if he hadn’t read the newspapers predicting his defeat.39
As Election Day approached, in happy anticipation of his father’s reelection and of Dewey’s victory, Warren
made arrangements with the Philadelphia Zoo to ride an elephant down Woodland Avenue on November 3.
He envisioned it as a sort of triumphal march, like Hannibal entering Sardinia.
But on the morning after Election Day, Warren had to cancel his stunt. Not only had Truman won the 1948
election, but his father had lost. The voters had thrown Howard Buffett out of Congress. “I’d never ridden
an elephant before. When Truman beat Dewey, the elephant went down the tube. And my dad lost an
election for the first time in four campaigns. That was a really lousy day.”
***
Two months later, just a few days before the Buffetts left Washington at the end of Howard’s term, Warren’s
great-uncle Frank died. Frank had boomed “IT’S GOING TO ZERO!” about every stock down at Harris
Upham when Warren was a boy, and when his will was read, the family discovered that he owned
government bonds and nothing else.40 He had outlived “the gold-digger,” and the terms of his will placed the
bonds in a restricted trust that required that, upon maturing, they could only be reinvested in more U.S.
government bonds. As if to convince his nephew and trustee, Howard, Frank had also apparently left various
family members subscriptions to Baxter’s Letter, a doomsday sheet that preached that government bonds
were the only safe investment. Frank meant to be at peace in the afterlife, the only Buffett (so far) to arrange
that his opinions would resound from the grave.
But Howard, of course, dreaded inflation and believed that government bonds could turn into worthless
paper. Overcoming his scruples, he went to work to break the terms of Frank’s will and got a judge to
approve some technical changes so the money could eventually be invested in stocks.41
These events took place during what Leila called the “worst winter in years.” Blizzards buried the Midwest
and hay had to be airlifted to Nebraska from surrounding states for weeks during the freeze to keep the
snowbound livestock from dying on their feet.42 The winter of the haylift became emblematic of the Truman
victory. Howard, who had never gotten rich, now had two kids in college and another about to start. He went

back to work at his old firm, now known as Buffett-Falk, but his partner Carl Falk, who had been handling
his clients during his absence in Washington, was not interested in sharing them now. Striding around
downtown Omaha with the bitter snow pelting his face, Howard tried to drum up new clients. But his long
absence meant that his writings were the way most people knew him now, and articles like “Human Freedom
Rests on Gold Redeemable Money” had given him the reputation of an extremist.43 In the spring of 1949, he
went out into the countryside and knocked on farmhouse doors in search of a new clientele.44
As for Warren, his father’s defeat left him heartsick, but also offered him an excuse for leaving the East
Coast. He was bored at school and hated Philadelphia so much that he had nicknamed it “Filthy-delphia.”45
At the end of the spring semester he headed back home for good, so relieved that he signed his letters
“Ex-Wharton Buffett.” He rationalized this by saying that enrolling at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln,
where he would spend the last years of his college career, would be cheaper than Penn.46 He gave the little
Ford coupe back to David Brown, its tires threadbare. It was Brown’s problem to figure out how to replace
them, since tires were still rationed.47 Warren wanted only one memento of Penn. On the way out the door,
he and Clyde flipped a coin to see who got to keep their treasured copy of S.J. Simon’s Why You Lose at
Bridge. Warren won.

15
The Interview
Lincoln and Chicago • 1949–Summer 1950

The first thing Warren did on returning to Nebraska in that summer of 1949 was get a job in newspapers,
managing country circulation for the Lincoln Journal. He and his friend Truman Wood, who was Doris’s
boyfriend, went halves on a car. Warren felt comfortable in Lincoln, going to university classes in the
morning, then driving around managing his route in the afternoon. In his spare moments he called on the local
newspaper editors and talked business, politics, and journalism. Supervising rural paperboys was a serious
job, for he was now the boss. Fifty young boys in six rural counties reported to “Mr. Buffett.” The challenges
of management suddenly became clear when he hired a minister’s daughter in the town of Beatrice, thinking
she would be a responsible paper carrier. The three paperboys in Beatrice promptly quit: He’d turned it into a
sissy job.
Warren spent part of his time that summer in Omaha, selling men’s furnishings at JC Penney’s. His spirits had
begun to revive. He bought a ukulele to compete with the uke-playing boyfriend of a girl he was pursuing, but
wound up holding only the ukulele instead of the girl.
Penney’s, however, was a good place to work. The employees put on an unofficial pep rally in the basement
every morning where Warren, clad in a cheap suit, played his new ukulele—off the clock—while everyone
sang, before heading off to his seventy-five-cents-an-hour job in men’s furnishings. Penney’s called him back
over the Christmas holidays, improbably putting him to work selling menswear and Towncraft shirts. Looking
at racks filled with products about as comprehensible to him as a French restaurant menu, he asked his
manager what to tell the customers about the clothes. “Just tell them it’s a sort of worsted,” Mr. Lanford said.
“Nobody knows what a worsted is.” Warren never did learn what a worsted was, but at JC Penney’s he sold
nothing but.*11
In the fall, he had moved into a furnished house on Pepper Avenue in Lincoln, which he shared with Truman
Wood, and started full time at the University of Nebraska. He liked the teachers better than at Penn and he
enrolled with a heavy course load, studying accounting with Ray Dein, the best professor he had had thus far.

That year Warren revived his golf ball business, this time with a college friend from Penn, Jerry Orans, as a
partner. He would drive down to the Omaha train station and pick up the golf balls from his old supplier,
Half-Witek.1 Orans acted as his East Coast distributor, but in fact Warren had always wanted partners for the
sake of partnership alone; in every business venture, he looked to friends to partner with him. (Needless to
say, in Warren’s partnerships, he was always the senior partner.) He was also investing and got the idea of
shorting stock in the automaker Kaiser-Frazer. This company produced its first cars in 1947, but saw its share
of the auto market fall from nearly one out of every twenty cars to fewer than one out of every hundred in
less than a year. “Dear Pop,” he wrote his father on Nebraska Cornhusker stationery. “If there isn’t a trend
line apparent in those percentages, I’m no statistician.” Kaiser-Frazer had lost $8 million during the first six
months, “so even with phony bookkeeping the loss will probably run more.”2 He and Howard shorted the
stock together.
Back at school, he went down to the broker Cruttenden-Podesta’s office and asked a stockbroker, Bob
Soener, where the stock was trading. Soener looked at the chalkboard and said, “Five bucks.” Warren
explained that he had shorted the stock, borrowing shares to sell. If the price dropped, as he expected, he
could buy the stock back, return the shares, and keep the difference. Since Warren thought Kaiser-Frazer
was going bust, if he had sold the shares at five bucks, he could buy them back for pennies and make nearly
five dollars on each share.
I’ll show this young whippersnapper, thought Soener. “You’re not old enough to short a stock legally,” he
said. “Oh yes,” Warren said, “I did it in my older sister Doris’s name.” He explained why the stock was going
to zero and laid out the evidence.3 “And he cut my feet right out from under me,” says Soener. “I had no
retort whatsoever.”
Warren waited for the Kaiser-Frazer idea to work. And waited. He started hanging around CruttendenPodesta while he waited. He was convinced the idea would work. It was so obvious that Kaiser-Frazer would
eventually go broke. Meanwhile, he and Soener became friends.
In the spring of 1950, Warren was close to finishing college. After three years of study, he only needed to
take a few classes at summer school to graduate. And then he made a decision that completely reversed his
path to date. After high school he had felt fully qualified to achieve his goal of becoming a millionaire by age
thirty-five with no further education. But now that he was close to graduating, at the point when most people
are done studying and ready to go to work, Warren prepared to put work aside. He had fixed his ambitions on
attending the Harvard Business School. Throughout his entire educational history he had shown little interest
in formal schooling—as opposed to learning—and considered himself largely self-taught. Harvard, however,
offered him two important things: prestige and a network of future connections. He had just seen his father
thrown out of Congress and his career as a stockbroker crushed, in part because he had tended to isolate
himself by sacrificing relationships for the sake of rigid ideals. So perhaps it was not surprising that Warren
chose Harvard.
He was so certain that Harvard would choose him that he was already urging his friend “Big Jerry” Orans to
“Join me at Harvard.”4 Furthermore, he wasn’t even going to have to pay for all of his tuition.
“One day I read in the Daily Nebraskan a little item that said, ‘The John E. Miller Scholarship will be
awarded today.5 Applicants should go to Room 300 at the Business Administration building.’ And it
provided five hundred dollars*12 to go to the accredited school of your choice.
“I went to Room 300, and I was the only guy who showed up. The three professors there kept wanting to
wait. I said, ‘No, no. It was three o’clock.’ So I won the scholarship without doing anything.”
Enriched with this nugget mined from the college newspaper, Warren rose in the middle of the night to catch
the train to Chicago, where his Harvard interview would take place. He was nineteen, two years younger than
the average college graduate, and younger still than the average business-school student. His grades were
good but not stellar. Despite being the son of a U.S. Congressman, he was using no connections to try to get
