
rendered miserable by the persecution of her neighbours. It is recorded of many poor
women, that the annoyances they endured in this way were so excessive, that they
preferred death. Sir George Mackenzie, the Lord Advocate, at the time when witch-trials
were so frequent, and himself a devout believer in the crime, relates, in his "Criminal
Law," first published in 1678, some remarkable instances of it. He says, "I went, when I
was a justice-depute, to examine some women who had confessed judicially: and one of
them, who was a silly creature, told me, under secrecy, that she had not confessed
because she was guilty, but being a poor creature who wrought for her meat, and being
defamed for a witch, she knew she should starve; for no person thereafter would either
give her meat or lodging, and that all men would beat her and set dogs at her; and that,
therefore, she desired to be out of the world; whereupon she wept most bitterly, and upon
her knees called God to witness to what she said." Sir George, though not wholly
elevated above the prejudices of his age upon this subject, was clearsighted enough to see
the danger to society of the undue encouragement given to the witch-prosecutions. He
was convinced that three-fourths of them were unjust and unfounded. He says, in the
work already quoted, that the persons who were in general accused of this crime, were
poor ignorant men and women, who did not understand the nature of the accusation, and
who mistook their own superstitious fears for witchcraft. One poor wretch, a weaver,
confessed that he was a warlock, and, being asked why, he replied, because "he had seen
the devil dancing, like a fly, about the candle!" A simple woman, who, because she was
called a witch, believed that she was, asked the judge upon the bench, whether a person
might be a witch and not know it? Sir George adds, that all the supposed criminals were
subjected to severe torture in prison from their gaolers, who thought they did God good
service by vexing and tormenting them; "and I know," says this humane and enlightened
magistrate, "that this usage was the ground of all their confession; and albeit, the poor
miscreants cannot prove this usage, the actors in it being the only witnesses, yet the judge
should be jealous of it, as that which did at first elicit the confession, and for fear of
which they dare not retract it." Another author, ["Satan's Invisible World discovered," by
the Rev. G. Sinclair.] also a firm believer in witchcraft, gives a still more lamentable
instance of a woman who preferred execution as a witch to live on under the imputation.
This woman, who knew that three others were to be strangled and burned on an early day,
sent for the minister of the parish, and confessed that she had sold her soul to Satan.
"Whereupon being called before the judges, she was condemned to die with the rest.
Being carried forth to the place of execution, she remained silent during the first, second,
and third prayer, and then, perceiving that there remained no more but to rise and go to
the stake, she lifted up her body, and, with a loud voice, cried out, "Now all you that see
me this day, know that I am now to die as a witch, by my own confession, and I free all
men, especially the ministers and magistrates, of the guilt of my blood. I take it wholly
upon myself. My blood be upon my own head. And, as I must make answer to the God of
heaven presently, I declare I am as free of witchcraft as any child. But, being delated by a
malicious woman, and put in prison under the name of a witch, disowned by my husband
and friends, and seeing no ground of hope of ever coming out again, I made up that
confession to destroy my own life, being weary of it, and choosing rather to die than to
live." As a proof of the singular obstinacy and blindness of the believers in witches, it
may be stated, that the minister who relates this story only saw in the dying speech of the

unhappy woman an additional proof that she was a witch. True indeed is it, that "none are
so blind as those who will not see."
It is time, however, to return to James VI, who is fairly entitled to share with Pope
Innocent, Sprenger, Bodinus, and Matthew Hopkins the glory or the odium of being at
the same time a chief enemy and chief encourager of witchcraft. Towards the close of the
sixteenth century, many learned men, both on the Continent and in the isles of Britain,
had endeavoured to disabuse the public mind on this subject. The most celebrated were
Wierus in Germany, Pietro d'Apone in Italy, and Reginald Scot in England. Their works
excited the attention of the zealous James, who, mindful of the involuntary compliment
which his merits had extorted from the devil, was ambitious to deserve it by still
continuing "his greatest enemie." In the year 1597 he published, in Edinburgh, his famous
treatise on Demonology. Its design may be gathered from the following passage in the
introduction. "The fearful abounding," says the King, "at this time, and in this country, of
these detestable slaves of the devil, the witches, or enchanters, hath moved me, beloved
reader, to despatch in post this following treatise of mine, not in any wise, as I protest, to
serve for a show of mine own learning and ingene (ingenuity), but only (moved of
conscience) to press thereby, so far as I can, to resolve the doubting hearts of many; both
that such assaults of Satan are most certainly practised, and that the instrument thereof
merits most severely to be punished, against the damnable opinions of two, principally in
our age, whereof the one, called Scot, an Englishman, is not ashamed, in public print, to
deny that there can be such thing as witchcraft, and so maintains the old error of the
Sadducees, in denying of spirits. The other, called Wierus, a German physician, sets out a
public apology for all these crafts-folks, whereby procuring for them impunity, he plainly
betrays himself to have been one of that profession." In other parts of this treatise, which
the author had put into the form of a dialogue to "make it more pleasant and facile," he
says, "Witches ought to be put to death, according to the law of God, the civil and
imperial law, and the municipal law of all Christian nations: yea, to spare the life, and not
strike whom God bids strike, and so severely punish in so odious a treason against God,
is not only unlawful, but doubtless as great a sin in the magistrate, as was Saul's sparing
Agag." He says also, that the crime is so abominable, that it may be proved by evidence
which would not be received against any other offenders, -- young children, who knew
not the nature of an oath, and persons of an infamous character, being sufficient witnesses
against them; but lest the innocent should be accused of a crime so difficult to be
acquitted of, he recommends that in all cases the ordeal should be resorted to. He says,
"Two good helps may be used: the one is, the finding of their mark, and the trying the
insensibleness thereof; the other is their floating on the water; for, as in a secret murther,
if the dead carcass be at any time thereafter handled by the murtherer, it will gush out of
blood, as if the blood were crying to Heaven for revenge of the murtherer, (God having
appointed that secret supernatural sign for trial of that secret unnatural crime); so that it
appears that God hath appointed (for a supernatural sign of the monstrous impiety of
witches) that the water shall refuse to receive them in her bosom, that have shaken off
them the sacred water of baptism, and wilfully refused the benefit thereof; no, not so
much as their eyes are able to shed tears (threaten and torture them as you please), while
first they repent (God not permitting them to dissemble their obstinacy in so horrible a

crime). Albeit, the womenkind especially, be able otherwise to shed tears at every light
occasion, when they will; yea, although it were dissembling, like the crocodiles."
When such doctrines as these were openly promulgated by the highest authority in the
realm, and who, in promulgating them, flattered, but did not force the public opinion, it is
not surprising that the sad delusion should have increased and multiplied, until the race of
wizards and witches replenished the earth. The reputation which he lost by being afraid
of a naked sword, he more than regained by his courage in combating the devil. The Kirk
showed itself a most zealous coadjutor, especially during those halcyon days when it was
not at issue with the King upon other matters of doctrine and prerogative.
On his accession to the throne of England, in 1603, James came amongst a people who
had heard with admiration of his glorious deeds against the witches. He himself left no
part of his ancient prejudices behind him, and his advent was the signal for the
persecution to burst forth in England with a fury equal to that in Scotland. It had
languished a little during the latter years of the reign of Elizabeth; but the very first
Parliament of King James brought forward the subject. James was flattered by their
promptitude, and the act passed in 1604. On the second reading in the House of Lords,
the bill passed into a committee, in which were twelve bishops. By it was enacted, "That
if any person shall use, practise, or exercise any conjuration of any wicked or evil spirit,
or shall consult, covenant with, or feed any such spirit, the first offence to be
imprisonment for a year and standing in the pillory once a quarter; the second offence to
be death."
The minor punishment seems but rarely to have been inflicted. Every record that has been
preserved, mentions that the witches were hanged and burned, or burned without the
previous strangling, "alive and quick." During the whole of James's reign, amid the civil
wars of his successor, the sway of the Long Parliament, the usurpation of Cromwell, and
the reign of Charles II, there was no abatement of the persecution. If at any time it raged
with less virulence, it was when Cromwell and the Independents were masters. Dr.
Zachary Grey, the editor of an edition of "Hudibras," informs us, in a note to that work,
that he himself perused a list of three thousand witches who were executed in the time of
the Long Parliament alone. During the first eighty years of the seventeenth century, the
number executed has been estimated at five hundred annually, making the frightful total
of forty thousand. Some of these cases deserve to be cited. The great majority resemble
closely those already mentioned, but two or three of them let in a new light upon the
popular superstition.
Every one has heard of the "Lancashire witches," a phrase now used to compliment the
ladies of that county for their bewitching beauty; but it is not every one who has heard the
story in which it originated. A villainous boy, named Robinson, was the chief actor in the
tragedy. He confessed, many years afterwards, that he had been suborned by his father
and other persons to give false evidence against the unhappy witches whom he brought to
the stake. The time of this famous trial was about the year 1634. This boy Robinson,
whose father was a wood-cutter, residing on the borders of Pendle Forest, in Lancashire,
spread abroad many rumours against one Mother Dickenson, whom he accused of being a

witch. These rumours coming to the ears of the local magistracy, the boy was sent for,
and strictly examined. He told the following extraordinary story, without hesitation or
prevarication, and apparently in so open and honest a manner, that no one who heard him
doubted the truth of it: -- He said, that as he was roaming about in one of the glades of the
forest, amusing himself by gathering blackberries, he saw two greyhounds before him,
which he thought at the time belonged to some gentleman of the neighbourhood. Being
fond of sport, he proposed to have a course, and a hare being started, he incited the
hounds to run. Neither of them would stir. Angry at the beasts, he seized hold of a switch,
with which he was about to punish them, when one of them suddenly started up in the
form of a woman, and the other, of a little boy. He at once recognised the woman to be
the witch Mother Dickenson. She offered him some money to induce him to sell his soul
to the devil; but he refused. Upon this she took a bridle out of her pocket, and, shaking it
over the head of the other little boy, he was instantly turned into a horse. Mother
Dickenson then seized him in her arms, sprang upon the horse; and, placing him before
her, rode with the swiftness of the wind over forests, fields, bogs, and rivers, until they
came to a large barn. The witch alighted at the door; and taking him by the hand, led him
inside. There he saw seven old women, pulling at seven halters which hung from the roof.
As they pulled, large pieces of meat, lumps of butter, loaves of bread, basins of milk, hot
puddings, black puddings, and other rural dainties, fell from the halters on to the floor.
While engaged in this charm they made such ugly faces, and looked so fiendish, that he
was quite frightened. After they had pulled, in this manner enough for an ample feast,
they set-to, and showed, whatever might be said of the way in which their supper was
procured, that their epicurism was a little more refined than that of the Scottish witches,
who, according to Gellie Duncan's confession, feasted upon dead men's flesh in the old
kirk of Berwick. The boy added, that as soon as supper was ready, many other witches
came to partake of it, several of whom he named. In consequence of this story, many
persons were arrested, and the boy Robinson was led about from church to church, in
order that he might point out to the officers, by whom he was accompanied, the hags he
had seen in the barn. Altogether about twenty persons were thrown into prison; eight of
them were condemned to die, including Mother Dickenson, upon this evidence alone, and
executed accordingly. Among the wretches who concocted this notable story, not one was
ever brought to justice for his perjury; and Robinson, the father, gained considerable
sums by threatening persons who were rich enough to buy off exposure.
Among the ill weeds which flourished amid the long dissensions of the civil war,
Matthew Hopkins, the witch-finder, stands eminent in his sphere. This vulgar fellow
resided, in the year 1644, at the town of Manningtree, in Essex, and made himself very
conspicuous in discovering the devil's marks upon several unhappy witches. The credit he
gained by his skill in this instance seems to have inspired him to renewed exertions. In
the course of a very short time, whenever a witch was spoken of in Essex, Matthew
Hopkins was sure to be present, aiding the judges with his knowledge of "such cattle," as
he called them. As his reputation increased, he assumed the title of "Witchfinder
General," and travelled through the counties of Norfolk, Essex, Huntingdon, and Sussex,
for the sole purpose of finding out witches. In one year he brought sixty poor creatures to
the stake. The test he commonly adopted was that of swimming, so highly recommended
by King James in his "Demonologie." The hands and feet of the suspected persons were

tied together crosswise, the thumb of the right hand to the toe of the left foot, and vice
versa. They were then wrapped up in a large sheet or blanket, and laid upon their backs in
a pond or river. If they sank, their friends and relatives had the poor consolation of
knowing they were innocent, but there was an end of them: if they floated, which, when
laid carefully on the water was generally the case, there was also an end of them; for they
were deemed guilty of witchcraft, and burned accordingly.
Another test was to make them repeat the Lord's prayer and creed. It was affirmed that no
witch could do so correctly. If she missed a word, or even pronounced one incoherently,
which in her trepidation, it was most probable she would, she was accounted guilty. It
was thought that witches could not weep more than three tears, and those only from the
left eye. Thus the conscious innocence of many persons, which gave them fortitude to
bear unmerited torture without flinching, was construed by their unmerciful tormentors
into proofs of guilt. In some districts the test resorted to was to weigh the culprit against
the church Bible. If the suspected witch proved heavier than the Bible, she was set at
liberty. This mode was far too humane for the witch-finders by profession. Hopkins
always maintained that the most legitimate modes were pricking and swimming.
Hopkins used to travel through his counties like a man of consideration, attended by his
two assistants, always putting up at the chief inn of the place, and always at the cost of
the authorities. His charges were twenty shillings a town, his expenses of living while
there, and his carriage thither and back. This he claimed whether he found witches or not.
If he found any, he claimed twenty shillings a head in addition when they were brought to
execution. For about three years he carried on this infamous trade, success making him so
insolent and rapacious, that high and low became his enemies. The Rev. Mr. Gaul, a
clergyman of Houghton, in Huntingdonshire, wrote a pamphlet impugning his
pretensions, and accusing him of being a common nuisance. Hopkins replied in an angry
letter to the functionaries of Houghton, stating his intention to visit their town; but
desiring to know whether it afforded many such sticklers for witchcraft as Mr. Gaul, and
whether they were willing to receive and entertain him with the customary hospitality, if
he so far honoured them. He added, by way of threat, that in case he did not receive a
satisfactory reply, "He would waive their shire altogether, and betake himself to such
places where he might do and punish, not only without control, but with thanks and
recompence." The authorities of Houghton were not much alarmed at his awful threat of
letting them alone. They very wisely took no notice either of him or his letter.
Mr. Gaul describes in his pamphlet one of the modes employed by Hopkins, which was
sure to swell his revenues very considerably. It was a proof even more atrocious than the
swimming. He says, that the "Witch-finder General" used to take the suspected witch and
place her in the middle of a room, upon a stool or table, cross-legged, or in some other
uneasy posture. If she refused to sit in this manner, she was bound with strong cords.
Hopkins then placed persons to watch her for four-and-twenty hours, during which time
she was to be kept without meat or drink. It was supposed that one of her imps would
come during that interval, and suck her blood. As the imp might come in the shape of a
wasp, a moth, a fly, or other insect, a hole was made in the door or window to let it enter.
The watchers were ordered to keep a sharp look-out, and endeavour to kill any insect that

appeared in the room. If any fly escaped, and they could not kill it, the woman was guilty;
the fly was her imp, and she was sentenced to be burned, and twenty shillings went into
the pockets of Master Hopkins. In this manner he made one old woman confess, because
four flies had appeared in the room, that she was attended by four imps, named
"Ilemazar," "Pye-wackett," "Peck-in-the-crown," and "Grizel-Greedigut."
It is consoling to think that this impostor perished in his own snare. Mr. Gaul's exposure
and his own rapacity weakened his influence among the magistrates; and the populace,
who began to find that not even the most virtuous and innocent were secure from his
persecution, looked upon him with undisguised aversion. He was beset by a mob, at a
village in Suffolk, and accused of being himself a wizard. An old reproach was brought
against him, that he had, by means of sorcery, cheated the devil out of a certain
memorandum-book, in which he, Satan, had entered the names of all the witches in
England. "Thus," said the populace, "you find out witches, not by God's aid, but by the
devil's." In vain he denied his guilt. The populace longed to put him to his own test. He
was speedily stripped, and his thumbs and toes tied together. He was then placed in a
blanket, and cast into a pond. Some say that he floated; and that he was taken out, tried,
and executed upon no other proof of his guilt. Others assert that he was drowned. This
much is positive, that there was an end of him. As no judicial entry of his trial and
execution is to be found in any register, it appears most probable that he expired by the
hands of the mob. Butler has immortalized this scamp in the following lines of his
"Hudibras:""Hath not this present Parliament
A lieger to the devil sent,
Fully empower'd to treat about
Finding revolted witches out?
And has he not within a year
Hang'd threescore of them in one shire?
Some only for not being drown'd,
And some for sitting above ground
Whole days and nights upon their breeches,
And feeling pain, were hang'd for witches;
And some for putting knavish tricks
Upon green geese or turkey chicks;
Or pigs that suddenly deceased
Of griefs unnatural, as he guess'd;
Who proved himself at length a witch,
And made a rod for his own breech."
In Scotland also witch-finding became a trade. They were known under the designation
of "common prickers," and, like Hopkins, received a fee for each witch they discovered.
At the trial of Janet Peaston, in 1646, the magistrates of Dalkeith "caused John Kincaid,
of Tranent, the common pricker, to exercise his craft upon her. He found two marks of
the devil's making; for she could not feel the pin when it was put into either of the said

marks, nor did the marks bleed when the pin was taken out again. When she was asked
where she thought the pins were put in her, she pointed to a part of her body distant from
the real place. They were pins of three inches in length." [Pitcairn's "Records of
Justiciary."]
These common prickers became at last so numerous, that they were considered nuisances.
The judges refused to take their evidence, and in 1678 the privy council of Scotland
condescended to hear the complaint of an honest woman, who had been indecently
exposed by one of them, and expressed their opinion that common prickers were common
cheats.
But such an opinion was not formed in high places before hundreds of innocent persons
had fallen victims. The Parliaments had encouraged the delusion both in England and
Scotland; and, by arming these fellows with a sort of authority, had in a manner forced
the magistrates and ministers to receive their evidence. The fate of one poor old
gentleman, who fell a victim to the arts of Hopkins in 1646, deserves to be recorded. Mr.
Louis, a venerable clergyman, upwards of seventy years of age, and who had been rector
of Framlingham, in Suffolk, for fifty years, excited suspicion that he was a wizard. Being
a violent royalist, he was likely to meet with no sympathy at that time; and even his own
parishioners, whom he had served so long and so faithfully, turned their backs upon him
as soon as he was accused. Placed under the hands of Hopkins, who knew so well how to
bring the refractory to confession, the old man, the light of whose intellect had become
somewhat dimmed from age, confessed that he was a wizard. He said he had two imps,
that continually excited him to do evil; and that one day, when he was walking on the
sea-coast, one of them prompted him to express a wish that a ship, whose sails were just
visible in the distance, might sink. He consented, and saw the vessel sink before his eyes.
He was, upon this confession, tried and condemned. On his trial the flame of reason
burned up as brightly as ever. He denied all that had been alleged against him, and crossexamined Hopkins with great tact and severity. After his condemnation, he begged that
the funeral service of the church might be read for him. The request was refused, and he
repeated it for himself from memory, as he was led to the scaffold.
A poor woman in Scotland was executed upon evidence even less strong than this. John
Bain, a common pricker, swore that, as he passed her door, he heard her talking to the
devil. She said in defence, that it was a foolish practice she had of talking to herself, and
several of her neighbours corroborated her statement; but the evidence of the pricker was
received. He swore that none ever talked to themselves who were not witches. The devil's
mark being found upon her, the additional testimony of her guilt was deemed conclusive,
and she was "convict and brynt."
From the year 1652 to 1682, these trials diminished annually in number, and acquittals
were by no means so rare as they had been. To doubt in witchcraft was no longer
dangerous. Before country justices, condemnations on the most absurd evidence still
continued, but when the judges of the land had to charge the jury, they took a more
humane and philosophical view. By degrees, the educated classes (comprised, in those
days, within very narrow limits), openly expressed their unbelief of modern witchcraft,
