
Open Interest

Volume

plush shia, sida 7

RRS tam Prited using TradeStation ©
Figure 3.8 A daily line chart of a Treasury Bond futures contract. The
vertical bars along the bottom measure the total daily volume. The solid line
along the middle represents the total outstanding open interest for the
Treasury Bond futures market.

Total Versus Individual Volume and Open
Interest Numbers in Futures

Futures chart services, along with most futures technicians, use
only the total volume and open interest figures. Although figures
are available for each individual delivery month, the total figures
for each commodity market are the ones that are used for fore-
casting purposes. There is a good reason for this.

In the early stages of a futures contract's life, volume and
open interest are usually quite small. The figures build up as the
contract reaches maturity. In the last couple of months before
expiration, however, the numbers begin to drop again.
Obviously, traders have to liquidate open positions as the con-


44 Chapter 3

tract approaches expiration. Therefore, the increase in the num-
bers in the first few months of life and the decline near the end
of trading have nothing to do with market direction and are just
a function of the limited life feature of a commodity futures con-
tract. To provide the necessary continuity in volume and open
interest numbers, and to give them forecasting value, the total
numbers are generally used. (Stock charts plot total volume fig-
ures, but do not include open interest.)

Volume and Open Interest Reported a Day
Late in Futures

Futures volume and open interest numbers are reported a day
late. Therefore, the chartist must be content with a day’s lag in
obtaining and interpreting the figures. The numbers are usual-
ly reported during the following day’s trading hours, but too
late for publication in the day’s financial newspapers. Estimated
volume figures are available, however, after the markets close
and are included in the following morning’s paper. Estimated
volume numbers are just that, but they do at least give the.
futures technician some idea of whether trading activity was
heavier or lighter the previous day. In the morning paper,
therefore, what the reader gets is the last day’s futures prices
along with an estimated volume figure. Official volume and
open interest numbers, however, are given for the day before.
Stock chartists don’t have that problem. Volume totals for
stocks are immediately available.

The Value of Individual Volume and Open
Interest Numbers in Futures

The individual open interest numbers in futures do provide valu-
able information. They tell us which contracts are the most liquid
for trading purposes. As a general rule, trading activity should be lim-
ited to those delivery months with the highest open interest. Months
with low open interest numbers should be avoided. As the term
implies, higher open interest means that there is more interest in
certain delivery months.


Chart Construction 45

WEEKLY AND MONTHLY
BAR CHARTS

We've focused so far on the daily bar chart. However, be aware
that a bar chart can be constructed for any time period. The intra-
day bar chart measures the high, low, and last prices for periods as
short as five minutes. The average daily bar chart covers from six
to nine months of price action. For longer range trend analysis,
however, weekly and monthly bar charts must be used. The value
of using these longer range charts is covered in Chapter 8. But the
method of constructing and updating the charts is essentially the
same. (See Figures 3.9 and 3.10.)

On the weekly chart, one bar represents the price activity
for the entire week. On the monthly chart, each bar shows the

(*UDX) Us Dollar index 7 -

06/0592

~~ T02

| qt A \y -

\ le

i
3 ‘34 85, 36 ‘7 Be
~ “302 1 16pen Ported unig Fade Sion © Ono Resch ie” F897

Figure 3.9 A weekly bar chart of the U.S. Dollar Index. Each bar repre-
sents one week’s price data. By compressing the price data, the weekly chart
allows for chart analysis of longer range price trends, usually in the vicinity
of five years.


46 Chapter 3

foer31/82 (UDX) Us Dollar index ~~ 02/27/98]
|
| Monthly Bar Chart
i h wo |
| | wo
i
fi | .
ial | \
ry! \ w
Mi #110
, ‘h My N | ‘yl i F Hy a a
i I" \ TL Hy i
iy My ydi .
("Bee ewes ae _

Figure 3.10 A monthly bar chart of the U.S. Dollar Index. Each bar rep-
resents one month's price data. By compressing the data even further, the
monthly chart allows chart analysis for periods as long as twenty years.

entire month’s price action. Obviously, weekly and monthly charts
compress the price action to allow for much longer range trend
analysis. A weekly chart can go back as much as five years and a
monthly chart up to 20 years. It’s a simple technique that helps the
chartist study the markets from a longer range perspective—a valu-
able perspective that is often lost by relying solely on daily charts.

CONCLUSION

Now that we know how to plot a bar chart, and having intro-
duced the three basic sources of information—price, volume, and
open interest—we’re ready to look at how that data is interpreted.
Remember that the chart only records the data. In itself, it has lit-


Chart Construction 47

tle value. It’s much like a paint brush and canvas. By themselves,
they have no value. In the hands of a talented artist, however,
they can help create beautiful images. Perhaps an even better
comparison is a scalpel. In the hands of a gifted surgeon, it can
help save lives. In the hands of most of us, however, a scalpel is
not only useless, but might even be dangerous. A chart can
become an extremely useful tool in the art or skill of market fore-
casting once the rules are understood. Let’s begin the process. In
the next chapter, we'll look at some of the basic concepts of trend
and what I consider to be the building blocks of chart analysis.


ncepts of Trend

DEFINITION OF TREND

The concept of trend is absolutely essential to the technical
approach to market analysis. All of the tools used by the chartist—
support and resistance levels, price patterns, moving averages,
trendlines, etc.—have the sole purpose of helping to measure the
trend of the market for the purpose of participating in that trend.
We often hear such familiar expressions as “always trade in the
direction of the trend,” “never buck the trend,” or “the trend is
your friend.” So let’s spend a little time to define what a trend is
and classify it into a few categories.

In a general sense, the trend is simply the direction of the
market, which way it’s moving. But we need a more precise defi-
nition with which to work. First of all, markets don’t generally
move in a straight line in any direction. Market moves are char-
acterized by a series of zigzags. These zigzags resemble a series of
successive waves with fairly obvious peaks and troughs. It is the
direction of those peaks and troughs that constitutes market trend.
Whether those peaks and troughs are moving up, down, or side-

49


50 Chapter 4

ways tells us the trend of the market. An uptrend would be defined
as a series of successively higher peaks and troughs; a downtrend is
just the opposite, a series of declining peaks and troughs; hori-
zontal peaks and troughs would identify a sideways price trend.
(See Figures 4.1a-d.)

Figure 4.la
Example of an
uptrend with
ascending peaks

and troughs.

Figure 4.1b
Example of a
downtrend with
descending peaks
and troughs.

Figure 4.1c
Example of a
sideways trend
with horizontal
peaks and
troughs. This
type of market is
often referred to

as “trendless.”



Basic Concepts of Trend 51

03/17/94 (*BTW) Dow 20 Bonds 02/27/98

Daily Line Chart

Sideways Trend

pee
lee
re7
aad
85,
aM SRA A Mam a

Figure 4.1d Example of a downtrend turning into an uptrend. The first
portion to the left shows a downtrend. From April 1996 to April 1997, the
market traded sideways. During the summer 1997, the trend turned up.

TREND HAS THREE DIRECTIONS

We've mentioned an uptrend, downtrend, and sideways trend for
a very good reason. Most people tend to think of markets as being
always in either an uptrend or a downtrend. The fact of the mat-
ter is that markets actually move in three directions—up, down,
and sideways. It is important to be aware of this distinction
because for at least a third of the time, by a conservative estimate,
prices move in a flat, horizontal pattern that is referred to as a
trading range. This type of sideways action reflects a period of equi-
librium in the price level where the forces of supply and demand
are in a state of relative balance. (If you'll recall, Dow Theory
refers to this type of pattern as a line.) Although we've defined a
flat market as having a sideways trend, it is more commonly
referred to as being trendless.


$2 Chapter 4

Most technical tools and systems are trend-following in
nature, which means that they are primarily designed for markets
that are moving up or down. They usually work very poorly, or
not at all, when markets enter these lateral or “trendless” phases.
It is during these periods of sideways market movement that tech-
nical traders experience their greatest frustration, and systems
traders their greatest equity losses. A trend-following system, by
its very definition, needs a trend in order to do its stuff. The fail-
ure here lies not with the system. Rather, the failure lies with the
trader who is attempting to apply a system designed for trending
markets into a nontrending market environment.

There are three decisions confronting the trader—whether
to buy a market (go long), sell a market (go short), or do nothing
(stand aside). When a market is rising, the buying strategy is
preferable. When it is falling, the second approach would be cor-
rect. However, when the market is moving sideways, the third choice—
to stay out of the market—is usually the wisest.

TREND HAS THREE
CLASSIFICATIONS

In addition to having three directions, trend is usually broken
down into the three categories mentioned in the previous chap-
ter. Those three categories are the major, intermediate, and near
term trends. In reality, there are almost an infinite number of
trends interacting with one another, from the very short term
trends covering minutes and hours to superlong trends lasting 50
or 100 years. Most technicians, however, limit trend classifica-
tions to three. There is a certain amount of ambiguity, however,
as to how different analysts define each trend.

Dow Theory, for example, classifies the major trend as being
in effect for longer than a year. Because futures traders operate in
a shorter time dimension than do stock investors, 1 would be
inclined to shorten the major trend to anything over six months
in the commodity markets. Dow defined the intermediate, or sec-
ondary, trend as three weeks to as many months, which also
appears about right for the futures markets. The near term trend
is usually defined as anything less than two or three weeks.


Basic Concepts of Trend 53

Each trend becomes a portion of its next larger trend. For
example, the intermediate trend would be a correction in the major
trend. In a long term uptrend, the market pauses to correct itself
for a couple of months before resuming its upward path. That sec-
ondary correction would itself consist of shorter waves that would
be identified as near term dips and rallies. This theme recurs many
times—that each trend is part of the next larger trend and is itself
comprised of smaller trends. (See Figures 4.2a and b.)

In Figure 4.2a, the major trend is up as reflected by the ris-
ing peaks and troughs (points 1, 2, 3, 4). The corrective phase (2-
3) represents an intermediate correction within the major
uptrend. But notice that the wave 2-3 also breaks down into three
smaller waves (A, B, C). At point C, the analyst would say that the
major trend was still up, but the intermediate and near term
trends were down. At point 4, all three trends would be up. It is
important to understand the distinction between the various
degrees of trend. When someone asks what the trend is in a given
market, it is difficult, if not impossible, to respond until you know

1

Figure 4.2a Example of the three degrees of trend: major, secondary, and
near term. Points 1, 2, 3, and 4 show the major uptrend. Wave 2-3 represents
a secondary correction within the major uptrend. Each secondary wave in tum
divides into near term trends. For example, secondary wave 2-3 divides into
minor waves A-B-C.


54 Chapter 4

12/08/95 (*DWI X) Dow Industrials 11/28/97

Three Degrees of Trend

Short Trend Is Down

Major Trend Is Up

+8000
+5500

1 MALARIA PORUAARA? RAURRORIO AAO OA RIORRORS CORRE ORE LORRY"
"SRE Son Pred aig Vion © mage Rasa, TORT

Figure 4.2b = The major trend (over a year) is up during 1997. A short
term correction occurred during March. An intermediate correction lasted
from August to November (three months). The intermediate correction broke
down into three short term trends.

which trend the person is inquiring about. You may have to
respond in the manner previously discussed by defining the three
different trend classifications.

Quite a bit of misunderstanding arises because of different
traders’ perceptions as to what is meant by a trend. To long term
position traders, a few days’ to a few weeks’ price action might be
insignificant. To a day trader, a two or three day advance might
constitute a major uptrend. It’s especially important, then, to
understand the different degrees of trend and to make sure that
all involved in a transaction are talking about the same ones.

As a general statement, most trend-following approaches
focus on the intermediate trend, which may last for several
months. The near term trend is used primarily for timing purpos-
es. In an intermediate uptrend, short term setbacks would be used
to initiate long positions.


Basic Concepts of Trend 55

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

In the previous discussion of trend, it was stated that prices move
in a series of peaks and troughs, and that the direction of those
peaks and troughs determined the trend of the market. Let’s now
give those peaks and troughs their appropriate names and, at the
same time, introduce the concepts of support and resistance.

The troughs, or reaction lows, are called support. The term
is self-explanatory and indicates that support is a level or area on
the chart under the market where buying interest is sufficiently
strong to overcome selling pressure. As a result, a decline is halt-
ed and prices turn back up again. Usually a support level is iden-
tified beforehand by a previous reaction low. In Figure 4.3a,
points 2 and 4 represent support levels in an uptrend. (See Figures
4.3a and b.)

Resistance is the opposite of support and represents a price
level or area over the market where selling pressure overcomes buy-
ing pressure and a price advance is turned back. Usually a resis-

Resistance

Resistance } Support

fe oe a ee ewe eee ee rw a

Support

Figure 4.3a Shows rising support and resistance levels in uptrend. Points
2 and 4 are support levels which are usually previous reaction lows. Points 1
and 3 are resistance levels, usually marked by previous peaks.


56 Chapter 4

2 Resistance

Figure 4.3b Shows support and resistance in a downtrend.

tance level is identified by a previous peak. In Figure 4.3a, points
1 and 3 are resistance levels. Figure 4.3a shows an uptrend. In an
uptrend, the support and resistance levels show an ascending pat-
tern. Figure 4.3b shows a downtrend with descending peaks and
troughs. In the downtrend, points 1 and 3 are support levels
under the market and points 2 and 4 are resistance levels over the
market.

In an uptrend, the resistance levels represent pauses in that
uptrend and are usually exceeded at some point. In a downtrend,
support levels are not sufficient to stop the decline permanently,
but are able to check it at least temporarily.

A solid grasp of the concepts of support and resistance is
necessary for a full understanding of the concept of trend. For an
uptrend to continue, each successive low (support level) must be
higher than the one preceding it. Each rally high (resistance level)
must be higher than the one before it. If the corrective dip in an
uptrend comes all the way down to the previous low, it may be an
early warning that the uptrend is ending or at least moving from
an uptrend to a sideways trend. If the support level is violated,
then a trend reversal from up to down is likely.


Basic Concepts of Trend 57

Each time a previous resistance peak is being tested, the
uptrend is in an especially critical phase. Failure to exceed a pre-
vious peak in an uptrend, or the ability of prices to bounce off the
previous support low in a downtrend, is usually the first warning
that the existing trend is changing. Chapters 5 and 6 on price pat-
terns show how the testing of these support and resistance levels
form pictures on the charts that suggest either a trend reversal in
progress or merely a pause in the existing trend. But the basic
building blocks on which those price patterns are based are sup-
port and resistance levels.

Figures 4.4a-c are examples of a classic trend reversal.
Notice, in Figure 4.4a, that at point 5 prices failed to exceed the
previous peak (point 3) before turning down to violate the previ-
ous low at point 4. This trend reversal could have been identified
simply by watching the support and resistance Jevels. In our cov-
erage of price patterns, this type of reversal pattern will be identi-
fied as a double top.

How Support and Resistance Levels Reverse
Their Roles

So far we've defined “support” as a previous low and “resistance”
as a previous high. However, this is not always the case. This leads
us to one of the more interesting and lesser known aspects of sup-
port and resistance—their reversal of roles. Whenever a support or

Figure 4.4a Example
of a trend reversal. The
failure of prices at point
5 to exceed the previous
peak at point 3 followed
by a downside violation
of the previous low at
point 4 constitutes a
downside trend reversal.
This type of pattern is
called a double top.

Resistance



Resistance

Figure 4.4b Example of a bottom reversal pattern. Usually the first sign
of a bottom is the ability of prices at point 5 to hold above the previous low
at point 3. The bottom is confirmed when the peak at 4 is overcome.

08/22/97 (*PSE) Pacific High Tech Index 02/27/98
! Daily Bar Chart

310

ia
i ih oom |

| lu on

280
)
Support >) supper

Figure 4.4c Example of a bottom reversal. During January 1998 prices
retested the December support low and bounced off it, forming a second sup-
port level. The upside penetration of the middle resistance peak signaled a
new uptrend.


Basic Concepts of Trend 59

resistance level is penetrated by a significant amount, they reverse their
roles and become the opposite. In other words, a resistance level
becomes a support level and support becomes resistance. To
understand why this occurs, perhaps it would be helpful to dis-
cuss some of the psychology behind the creation of support and
resistance levels.

The Psychology of Support and Resistance

To illustrate, let’s divide the market participants into three cate-
gories—the longs, the shorts, and the uncommitted. The longs
are those traders who have already purchased contracts; the
shorts are those who have already committed themselves to the
sell side; the uncommitted are those who have either gotten out
of the market or remain undecided as to which side to enter.

Let’s assume that a market starts to move higher from a
support area where prices have been fluctuating for some time.
The longs (those who bought near the support area) are delight-
ed, but regret not having bought more. If the market would dip
back near that support area again, they could add to their long
positions. The shorts now realize (or strongly suspect) that they
are on the wrong side of the market. (How far the market has
moved away from that support area will greatly influence these
decisions, but we'll come back to that point a bit later. ) The shorts
are hoping (and praying) for a dip back to that area where they
went short so they can get out of the market where they got in
(their break even point).

Those sitting on the sidelines can be divided into two
groups—those who never had a position and those who, for
one reason or another, liquidated previously held long posi-
tions in the support area. The latter group are, of course, mad
at themselves for liquidating their longs prematurely and are
hoping for another chance to reinstate those longs near where
they sold them.

The final group, the undecided, now realize that prices are
going higher and resolve to enter the market on the long side on
the next good buying opportunity. All four groups are resolved to
“buy the next dip.” They all have a “vested interest” in that sup-


60 Chapter 4

port area under the market. Naturally, if prices do decline near
that support, renewed buying by all four groups will materialize
to push prices up.

The more trading that takes place in that support area, the
more significant it becomes because more participants have a
vested interest in that area. The amount of trading in a given sup-
port or resistance area can be determined in three ways: the
amount of time spent there, volume, and how recently the trad-
ing took place.

The longer the period of time that prices trade in a support or
resistance area, the more significant that area becomes. For example,
if prices trade sideways for three weeks in a congestion area before
moving higher, that support area would be more important than
if only three days of trading had occurred.

Volume is another way to measure the significance of support
and resistance. If a support level is formed on heavy volume, this
would indicate that a large number of units changed hands, and
would mark that support level as more important than if very lit-
tle trading had taken place. Point and figure charts that measure
the intraday trading activity are especially useful in identifying
these price levels where most of the trading took place and, con-
sequently, where support and resistance will be most likely to
function.

A third way to determine the significance of a support or resis-
tance area is how recently the trading took place. Because we are deal-
ing with the reaction of traders to market movement and to posi-
tions that they have already taken or failed to take, it stands to
reason that the more recent the activity, the more potent it
becomes.
