
catch the change in trend of the market.
Protective stops are used by traders as a last resort to get out of the market. There are many
methods of formulating protective stops; many of them use average true range as a key
component in the calculation. Protective stops are discussed in this chapter for traders who
normally opt for taking greater risks. The application and the method of using protective stops
are subject to the personality of each trader and his or her trading strategy. There are no hard
and fast rules. If a trader has designed his trading system to take care of trade entries and exits,
there is no need to use another indicator as a reminder.

CHAPTER 7

Applied Systems

There is not going to be any disagreement when it is said that the market is complex and
chaotic. Sometimes the market rises dramatically and sometimes it falls drastically. A rising
market is followed by a declining market that is again followed by a rising market, and the cycle
repeats again and again. But these cycles do not happen or repeat in uniformity. There is no
reliable way to predict precisely when the next direction of the cycle will take place or how long
it will last. Prediction of a longer-term cycle is made even more difficult by movements of
smaller cycles. Elliott Wave practitioners believe these cycles are the result of psychological
reactions of market players. Economists maintain that all these movements and cyclical
patterns are caused by economic factors. Financial astrologists believe these cycles are
influenced by various planetary movements. Yet, in its chaotic behavior, the market seems to
conceal elements of order, displayed at times in symmetrical and harmonic patterns.
These patterns become the catalyst for technical analysis, which is based on the premise that
prices tend to move in trends. Simply put, this means that once a trend of the share price is
established, the next move of the share price is more likely to continue in the same direction. In
other words, if a share price is firmly established in a bull trend, the share price is more likely to
continue increasing rather than decreasing in the next trading period. Most technical trading
strategies are based on this assumption. Every trader needs a trending market to make money.
If there is no trend after a trade has been executed, there will not be any profit.
With today’s developed technologies and high-speed computers, more and more equity
funds are turning to programmed system trading using superfast computers to catch the trend
by employing complex algorithmic information to churn revenue and profits.
Having a trading system helps to alleviate fear and tension, reducing the burden of
discretionary decisions and the anticipation of price reversals or breakouts. A good trend
system is one that generates reliable trend signals most of the time. It will help us to respond
quickly to price actions.
The trading method introduced in this chapter is not a fully automated trading system. It is a
discretionary trend system. The method’s core system is based on crossovers of price and
various moving averages and the synchronization of moving average crossovers to reflect
trends in progress and probable change in trend. The trading method includes two additional
indicators: a volume indicator for additional confirmation of trend breakouts, and a momentum
indicator to depict the velocity of trend.

CATCHING THAT TREND
Catching the trend, whether it is an uptrend or a downtrend, is the key to profits because, if we
can catch it, half of our work is completed. However, understanding the forces at work in
trending and non-trending markets, and the transition from one phase to the other phase, is
the most difficult task. An uptrend means a series of higher highs and higher lows. Each high is
followed by a higher high and each low is followed by a higher low. A downtrend means a series
of lower highs and lower lows. Each high is followed by a lower high and each low is followed
by a lower low. Defining whether a trend exists will be subject to the trading time frame of the
trader. For instance, let’s assume a scenario in which a stock closes at its high of $10 with an
opening of $10, and that its low for the day is $9. The trading time is four hours. With the stock
opening and closing at $10, it would appear that there is no trend for the day. However, if we
look at the minute chart, there will be a downward trend and an upward trend in a period of
four hours’ trading time. At the opening bell, sellers push the price downward to $9, the low of
the day, where it finds support from buyers, who push the price upward to close at the high to
form a dragonfly doji bar. This example is an illustration of intraday trends and it exemplifies
that trend is valid only for the relative time frame in which it occurs.
Market prices tend to behave irregularly at different periods. A market tends to move from a
well-defined trend to a period of congestion, and then from a period of congestion back to a
well-defined trend. Each phase of movement between a well-defined trend and the congestion
period provides clues to the traders for the next phase. At times, the clues are obvious, and at
times they are hidden from our naked eyes, making it harder to see the next directional
movement from the evolving patterns, which are generally formed at periods of congestion.
When the market is not trending, continually making new highs or new lows, and when the
spreads between highs and lows are narrow, there is no margin of profit to be made if slippage
and commission are taken into account. In such non-trending or sideways markets, moving
averages are often relatively flat and price movements may fluctuate between two points in a
relatively horizontal movement that can last for a long period of weeks to months. A sideways
market usually occurs at a price support level where accumulation takes place, or at a price
resistance level where distribution takes place. Such price patterns take place when buyers and
sellers are more or less in balance, with neither side in control. Trading becomes difficult and
the best thing to do is sit back and wait for the development of the next trending phase.
Irrespective of the different types of price formations, the most important rule in market
trading is to never commit any trade against the trend. If the trend of the stock price is headed
downward, then it is not safe to buy that stock until the trend has changed direction. However,
many ambitious traders still habitually trade against the trend in an attempt to get in at the
exact bottom of the market or get out at the exact top of the market. This is too high a risk to
take and the extra dollar is not worth the loss that will eventually squeeze the trader out of
subsequent price movements. Whatever may be said, the habit is still common among traders,
and there is a price to pay for being ambitious. Using a trade system is helpful. A trade should
only be made when there is a signal from the trading system that the trend has changed
direction. In other words, act in accordance with what has happened and do not act in
anticipation of what will happen. Perhaps there will be losses for a few points but, on the other
hand, catching 80 percent of every trend movement will greatly improve trading results in the
long run. And as for the balance 20 percent, it is better left for lucky traders and ambitious
daydreamers. In the systems and various indicators introduced in this book, intraday data are
ignored. We will not be dealing with minute charts or hourly charts. We will be using end-of-

day data only and will focus on the daily and weekly charts.

BUILT-IN COLOR TREND INDICATOR
Acting on the trend means we should be a buyer when the trend is up and a seller when the
trend is down. Most of us, when we are trading, hope to identify the trend early and benefit to
the full extent of the trend by employing various mathematical tools. There have been many
trend systems developed but one of the easiest market tools to identify trend is moving
averages. In a strong trending market, moving averages work very well. It is during the nontrending market that moving average systems falter.
Figure 7.1
shows two weekly charts of the same stock. The left panel shows the common candlestick
chart, and the right panel shows the candlesticks with a built-in color (BIC) trend indicator.
FIGURE 7.1
The left panel is the normal weekly candlestick chart, in which the candlestick is blue when the
day close is higher than the opening price. The right panel also shows the weekly candlestick
chart of the same stock, except it incorporates a built-in color trend indicator.

In
Figure 7.1
, price movement that is deemed to be bullish is shown by a blue candle, bearish movement
by a red candle, and neutral candles are colored in black and dark red. When the candlestick is
neutral, the indicator is undecided as to the continuity of the bull or bear trend as there is a
probability of a change in trend.
When the stock, as in
Figure 7.1
, uses the BIC trend indicator, the blue candlesticks will be hollow if the price closes higher
than the opening price, and filled if the price closes lower than the opening price. When price is
assumed to be heading in a downward trend, the red candlesticks will be hollow if the price
closes higher than the opening, and filled if the price closes lower than the opening price. When
the price is probably going through a change of trend from bullish to bearish or bearish to
bullish, the candlesticks will be either in black or dark red. Hollow black or dark red candles
reflect closing prices that are higher than opening prices, and filled black or dark red candles
reflect closing prices that are lower than opening prices.
Let’s look at

Figure 7.1
again. The stock went through a period of consolidation before breaking its previous high of
$1.42 with a strong hollow blue candle. During the period of consolidation, the system color
reflected an inherent bullish trend. The candlesticks were mostly colored in blue, with
occasional dark red candles. At point A, although the price showed a dip, the general trend was
still deemed bullish. At point B, although the price showed a strong rally, the candlesticks color
system did not support the rally, and the two candles were both red. The rally was short-lived.
The concept of the BIC trend indicator is based on the intersecting crossovers of three
moving averages. These three moving averages form a set of short-term moving averages
consisting of two 5-day moving averages and a 13-day moving average. The purpose of the BIC
trend indicator is to signal when there is a probable correction of price movements by
displaying neutral-colored (black or dark red) candlesticks. When such color signals occur, the
indicator is telling that the continuing trend is facing resistance. However, such signals are not
to be used as an entry or exit signal system. We have to double-check with the corresponding
price patterns and the signals from other supporting indicators, such as momentum and
volume indicators, for confirmation.
Weekly charts are used to recognize the market structure and to identify the trend that is in
progress. They are used as preparatory trade positioning prior to using the daily charts for the
execution of trade entries and exits. In short, a trader should first refer to the weekly charts to
identify probable market structure and trend, and second, use the daily charts for timing of
execution of trades. The rule is to trade in the trending direction of the next higher time frame
of the daily price, that is, weekly. The objective is to trade when the daily and weekly are
trending in tandem. Weekly charts will simplify the reading of trend; they clear away a lot of
noise inherent in short-term fluctuations while providing meaningful clues with respect to
potential longer-term trend perspective.

SUPPORTING MOVING AVERAGES
Continuing with the example of the weekly chart, we shall enhance it with further supporting
indicators, including two additional sets of moving averages and a volume indicator, as shown
in
Figure 7.2
.
FIGURE 7.2
Reading of the weekly chart is improved with the additional supporting indicators of a set of
mid-term moving averages, a set of longer-term moving averages, and a volume indicator.
Through trial and error, it was found that a 63-week moving average line correlates closely with
the support and resistance levels of this stock.

Before going into reading
Figure 7.2
, traders need to know how the weekly chart is constructed in the system. Each bar of the
weekly chart represents the price range of the trading days of that week. If the week has three
trading days, the bar represents the range of the three days. The opening price of the weekly
bar is the opening price of the first trading day in the week, the closing price is the closing price
of the last trading day of the week, the high represents the highest price of the week, and the
low represents the lowest price of the week.
Thus, each weekly bar is a summary of the trading days of the week, from Monday to Friday,
and trying to find which day in the coming week will be the best day to buy or sell would be
difficult. Weekly bars may often be very volatile, and for those who do their trading based on
signals generated by weekly charts, it is important to have the ability to stay with the longerterm trend and patiently sit through the volatile period. Price dictates all movements of trend,
and there is no one system that is able to predict precisely and constantly where the price will
be heading in the next period. Thus, the system recommends traders use weekly charts as
treasure maps, and as a means of getting on the right path.
Now, let’s look at the upper panel of
Figure 7.2

, which shows the weekly price movements with BIC trend indicator and four moving average
lines. The first pair of average lines shows the medium-term moving averages, consisting of a
fast average in red (RMA) and a slow average in black (BMA). The second pair of average lines
shows the longer-term averages, consisting of the 21-week moving average and the 63-week
moving average. The lower panel is the percentage ratio indicator of 2-week volume moving
average to 10-week volume moving average. There are also two horizontal lines, a 100 percent
line and a 150 percent line. If we assume the 2-week average volume is 110 percent, which is
above the 100 percent line, it means the 2-week average volume is greater than the 10-week
average volume by 10 percent. When the 2-week average volume is above 150 percent, it
means the 2-week average volume is greater than the 10-week volume by at least 50 percent.
This is an extreme level, which functions similarly to the overbought/oversold concept. When
the 2-week volume average goes beyond 150 percent, it is justifiable to take a second look at
the chart, because something interesting may be brewing.
Please note that all weekly charts and daily charts included in the book as examples have
been adjusted for the relative period of suspension in trading of shares. References to dates in
weekly charts will mean the week-ending dates.
Figure 7.2
displays price bars from July 4, 2008, to October 15, 2010, a period of approximately 126
weeks. Prices declined from the level of approximately $1.45 in early July 2008 to a low of $0.48
in late October 2008, where they finally found firm support to make a bullish trend reversal.
The stock then rallied to a new high level of $3.30 in late January 2010. Under heavy selling
pressure, prices could not sustain the new highs and headed down in a zigzag A-B-C correction
to new low levels of approximately $2.19, where support from renewed buying appeared.
The bullish five-wave run from the low in October 2008 to the high in October 2010 lasted
approximately 65 weeks. The system will not be making any suggestion for trading entry or exit
points from the weekly chart, but will highlight such points as positive and negative areas. All
executions of trades have to be made from the patterns of the daily chart, whose trend should
be in tandem with the weekly chart; that is, the daily and weekly should both have positive
trending patterns. Look at the weekly, trade on the daily.
In the upper panel of
Figure 7.2
, there are nine black-circle markers (referred to as B1, B2, and so forth) and six black-circle
markers (referred to as V1, V2, and so forth) in the lower panel.
B1 indicated a probable change of trend or a pause of continuing downtrend when the
candlesticks turn to black (neutral position). Volume was below the 10-week average but
moved in small increments as prices started to become more resilient. Price initially hugged
closely to the RMA line until the fourth black bar, when it made a thrust above the RMA and
BMA lines. Please note that the fast RMA average did not cross above the slow BMA average
until B2, with increasing volume going above the 100 percent line. The 100 percent line is the
10-week volume average line. The colors of the candlesticks then changed to blue and
remained blue throughout the consolidation period. Although the volume had not shown much
zest, this was the first indication of a positive area since the decline.
At B3, the strength for the price support improved, and trade continued in a narrow range,
staying above the BMA and 21-week line. The two signal lines, the RMA and BMA lines, crossed
the 21-week line. Volume indicated strong demand moving toward the 150 percent line. See
the black-circle marker (V1) at the volume indicator. A price pattern of a small bullish cup-andhandle formation formed. The BMA and RMA lines were trending upward and the gap between
the two averages and the 21-week line widened and were more visible. This was the second

positive area.
Price continued to trade upward. Weekly bars were showing longer-range bars and more
noticeable hollow bars representing strong weekly closing prices. At V2, volume in correlation
with the upward trend went above 150 percent for the first time since the decline, and at B4,
both BMA and RMA crossed above the 63-week average, indicating a bull trend was in progress.
Though at B4 there was one bearish bar, it did not penetrate below the 63-week line. The 21week line and BMA average showed the strong support of buyers at this price level. B5
witnessed the crossing of the 21-week line from below to above the 63-week line, while the 63week line was moving in a flat direction. This was the third positive area. Note also another
macro bullish cup-and-handle pattern was being formed.
Prices went into a 14-week consolidation and broke the high of $1.42 and the resistance line
on October 23, 2009, supported the following week by a powerful thrust with significant
volume going above the 150 percent line. Interestingly, in hindsight, it proves the greatest
amount of volume generally occurs at the halfway mark of the trend (see V3). Cross-checking
with MetaStock Fibonacci Retracement plots will also show the retracement is at about the 50
percent level, where the high volume is concentrated.
Prices continued to rally but volume was not supportive. Volume was moving in the opposite
direction. It was decreasing. Price reached the peak of $3.37 for the week, which showed a
bearish spinning top pattern candlestick, representing an indecisive tussle between the bulls
and bears, and engulfing the previous week’s bar. The following bars turned to dark red,
indicating a likely change in trend as in B6. However, the RMA did not cross below the BMA.
Prices renewed the rally but failed to hold on to the gain and declined again at B7. Note that
the bar color changed to dark red, RMA and BMA merged, and prices crossed below both
averages. This was the first negative area after the bullish rally. Prices tried to regain their
thrust, as in B8, but failed again as bars turned red and RMA crossed below BMA. This was the
second negative area. At B9, prices fell below both the RMA and BMA and the 21-week line.
The bears had taken control. This was the third negative area. Note that volume was increasing
quietly as at V4 in the negative areas, and at the two similar bearish patterns of dark cloud
cover candlesticks, as marked at (1) and (2).
At V5, an alert was sounded when volume went above 150 percent and the two average
lines, RMA and BMA, converged, indicating a probable trend reversal. At point (3), a bullish
piercing candlestick was formed. The bullishness was confirmed by the following week’s dark
red candlestick as price crossed above RMA, BMA, the 21-week line, and the 63-week line.
Bullish sentiment continued with upsurge of volume as at V6, and prices held firmly above all
averages, indicated by blue candlesticks. This was the first positive area after the zigzag
correction.
In the preceding paragraphs, we have detailed the trend system using moving averages
covering a bullish impulse trend, bullish and bearish reversals, and an A-B-C correction.
Although the chart showed a positive indication of a probable new trend in the making, as at
the last bar of the weekly chart, it should not be presumed that such trend will rally to a new
high.

TRADE ON DAILY SIGNALS
There is no question that spotting the beginning and end of a profitable trend, and the staying
with the trend during its course, is the most difficult task. A trend can be disrupted by many
other trends of different time periods because each time frame attracts different groups of
interacting players. This results in convergence and divergence of the trend through different
time periods.
Trends of very short time periods will be difficult to trade. In order to improve their
performance, successful traders adjust their trading time frame to match their preferred
holding period. The purpose is to separate the trend for the specific trading time frame from
disrupting noises as much as possible. Risk is defined as the amount of money that a trader is
willing to risk, and reward is the anticipated return multiple of the risk. It means if a trader is
prepared to take a loss of $1 on his trade, it would be worth the risk to expect a return of $3. If
a risk of $1 is assumed to be a loss of 10 percent, the projected reward should assume to fetch
a return of 30 percent. The 3:1 reward to risk ratio is a good ratio to use particularly for Hong
Kong stocks, which tend to go into consolidation after a rise of 30 percent. However, the risk to
reward ratio is subject to the personal decision of each trader. Trading time frame analysis of
setup position will identify opportunity and risk in most cases. For example, when a promising
setup appears on the weekly chart, a trader should check it to identify the major support and
resistance levels that may have an impact on the 3:1 reward to risk ratio, and then use the daily
chart to time the trade execution. This is an efficient and safe approach to trading.
For easy reference, let’s recapitulate the preceding weekly chart in
Figure 7.3
(from June 12, 2009, to October 15, 2010) so as to work with the daily chart in
Figure 7.4
(from October 5, 2009, to October 15, 2010) for timing of trade execution. A momentum
oscillator is added to both the weekly and daily charts as a supporting indicator to the system.
FIGURE 7.3
The weekly chart captures the bullish crossover of the medium-term average lines, as at EOW
October 23, 2009.
