
Remember the old market saying, “The trend is your friend.” Suecessful
trading entails staying on the right side of the trend (although most find this
is easier said than done). Trend change or reversal signals are the market’s
way of warning. It means market psychology ts in transformation and you
need to adjust your trading style to reflect that environment change.

For example, if you see a reversal signal, you might consider initiating a
new position only if that signal is in the direction of the major trend. Say your
stock has been climbing in a strong uptrend. Then, it either consolidates side-
ways for a few sessions or moves down (retraces) to prior support. At this
time you get a bullish candle signal. Since the major trend has been up, one
ean use the bullish candle signal to initiate a long position. A bullish candle
signal in a bear trend should be used either to cover shorts or as an alert that


The Essentials 21

ass

When | say a bearish or bullish reversal with the candlesticks, it does not imply that
the market will reverse from down to up (in the case of a bullish reversal) or from up
to down (with a bearish reversal). It just means that the market has gone from up to
neutral (with a bearish candle signal) or from down to neutral (in the case of a bull-
ish candle signal). In other words, with these reversal signals, the odds of atum have
increased but are not assured.

KEY POINT

the market may rally and to use that rally to sell since the major trend is
down.

Trend reversals or shifts are a modification in market psychology. In a
strong uptrend, such as you see in Exhibit 1.5A, the bulls are in control.
Shoulder-to-shoulder, optimistic bulls turn out in foree, buying available sup-
ply and supporting ever-rising prices of stock XYZ. When a retracement, or
sideways consolidation oecurs (as it does from 1 to 2), the bulls stand aside,
tucking their shares in their pockets. The stock rests for a time, then resumes
its climb upward. Three shifts In psychology took place during each of these
three movements In stock XYZ's strong uptrend.

In Exhibit 1.5B, the same bulls propelled XYZ higher with gusto. The mar-
ket tops out at 3 (of course, we don't know tt is a top until a few sessions
later, when the stock descends). Again, those with long positions may have

| 3
1 | |
| | | |
| | | | |
| | | |
| 2 | |
| | |
| |
A B
Trend reversal signal — Trend reversal signal —
trand resumes trend breaks down
after correction

EXBIBIT £.5 Top Reversals


22

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

taken some or all of their profits. This time, however, the retracement turned
into a trend reversal, barely stopping along the way.

Points 1, 2, and 3 in Exhibit 1.5 are reversals, and, as we don't know the
extent of the move after the reversal starts, the candles will often be the first
clue of a change in trend.

Besides scanning for possible trend changes, another critical component
is asking, “Where are support and resistance?” Support and resistance on a
chart can take multiple forms. It may be a prior high or low depicted in a
price level or pattern. It may appear as a Western indicator, such as a trend
line, moving average, or something as basic as the most recent high or low.

We know that a market often tops out at, or near, the same price range at
which it pulled back at a previous time. It may also fall to a prior low price,
then bounce off of that support level. If a candle signal confirms a support
line, it would increase the potential bullish implications of that candle signal
more than if that candle signal did not confirm support. Conversely, if a bear-
ish candle signal emerges at a resistance zone, the chances of a tumaround
have increased. As such, the rule }s that the more technical signals—whether
they are candle or Western or a combination of both—the more likely 1s a re-
versal. An example is shown in Exhibit 1.6 in which a bullish candle signal
ealled a hammer (discussed later) confirms a support line.

In Section One of this chapter, we talked about the importance of the
market's daily close. Let's take this a step further. Like most technical ana-
lysts, the Japanese place great emphasis on a security's closing price, espe-
ctally if that price closes above resistance or below support. Think of it this
way: If a stock, for instance, closes above a prior high, it means market par-
ticipants are willing to pay more for it right then, and they are willing to hold
it overnight. That means they are committed, and commitment is an ex-
tremely important factor in the movement of the financial markets. An intra-
day break of support or resistance does not have the same significance as a
severing of support or resistance on a close.

Say you are studying a dally chart of a stock. Imagine it had moved side-
ways in a basing mode between #40 and $50 for the last five weeks or so.

Support area ---------- ee
x

EXBIBIT 6.6 © Candle Signal Confirming Support


The Essentials 23

fA] SIDE LIGHT

In the context of support and resistance comes a simple and powerful technique
(which, by the way, is not based on Japanese candlestick charts) that | have called the
change of polarity principle. This concept applies perfectly to a core principle of
technical analysis: Old resistance becomes new support, and old support becomes
new resistance. Although this term is not generally applied to the concept, | believe
it describes it well. On a chart of any time frame, you can often see how that once a
markets breaks over a multitested resistance area, the prior resistance area is con-
verted into new support. In contrast, markets that fall through prior support have
trouble climbing back through it again since that previous support is frequently con-
verted into resistance (see Exhibit 1.7).

Suddenly, the bulls wrest control of the market, and the stock closes at $53.
Do you see how important that closing price 1s? It means people are willing
to buy and hold the stock at a higher price. The market has established new
demand for the stock.

Conversely, if a market trades sideways in a box range (as the Japanese
eall consolidation patterns) for some period of time, then breaks down to
close below that support area, it means that buyers were unwilling to step in
and hold the price at that level. The bears are in control, and that market may
fall to lower prices. If, however, a session's candle broke price support by
dipping below it, but then closed inside the box range, that 1s not as bearish.
This sort of session tells you that buyers stepped in before the close, and de-
mand was strong enough to push the price back into the prior box range by
session's end.

Now you understand how valuable tool candle formations are in the con-
text of trend reversals, along with components inherent in those reversals,
support and resistance.

Old resistance becomes Prior support becomes
new support. new resistance,

EXBIBIT £.7 Change of Polarity


24

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

In the next section, you'll learn about powerful candle lines called spin-

ning tops and doji and how potent they can be. We'll also discuss additional
in-depth market psychology as revealed by candles. Deciphering market psy-
chology accurately 1s a vital part of your future success as a traden/investor.

CHECK VOUR UNDERSTANDING

Review Questions for Chapter One, Section Three:
Basic Market Strategies

Which 1s most true?

a. All candlestick signals are reversals.

b. Most candlestick signals are reversal signals.

c. All candlestick signals are continuation signals.
d. Most candlestick signals are continuation signals.
Candle charts provide

a. early reversal signals.

b. hints of a false breakout.

¢. hints that the momentum may be changing.

d. All of the above.

. Which of the following Western technical tools can be used on a candle

chart?

a. Moving average
b. Volume

¢. Oscillators

d. All of the above

. In candlestick trading, when we talk about a break of resistance on a

daily chart, we mean

a. aclose above a resistance area.

b. an intraday break above resistance by at least 19%.
¢. an intraday break above resistance by at least 3%.
d. aclose above the prior session's real body.

. A box range in Japanese terminology is the same as a Western

a. triangular trading range.


The Essentials 25

b. ascending triangle.
c. lateral trading range.
c. bull flag,
6. Which ts false? Candle charts are best used
a. as a stand-alone tool.
b. on daily charts.
c. on weekly charts.
d. Both b and e.

Answers for Chapter One, Section Three:
Basic Market Strategies

1. b. This is a major advantage of candle charts. They often send out rever-
sal signals in as few as one, two, or three sessions. Some continuation
signals exist, but most of the candlestick signals show bottom or top
reversals,

2. d. Among the major advantages of candle charts is that we can use indi-
vidual candle lines, or combinations of candle lines (called candlestick
patterns), to obtain reversal signals in as little as one, two, or three ses-
sions. We can also use the shape of the candle line to see if a breakout is
likely to be sustainable. For example, a small real body or doji at a new
high could give us a little clue that the bulls are not in complete control,
and the rally may not be sustainable. We also use spinning tops to gauge
whether the market's trend might be in the process of changing.

3. d. One of the most powerful aspects of candle charts is that because they
use the same data as bar charts (i.e., the open, high, low, and close), all
Western bar charting techniques (1.e., moving averages, volume, and so
on) can be used on candle charts.

4. a. To most effectively confirm a break above resistance, I most often rec-
ommend a close above a resistance area. Conversely, to confirm a break
of support, I like to see a close under a support area.

5. c. A box range ts the same as a lateral or consolidated trading environ-
ment, in Western technicals. The name is derived from the fact that such
price action resembles a box.

6. a. Candlestick charting tools are most potent when combined with other
technical tools, such as trend lines, moving averages, and volume.


PS CHAPTER TWO
Single
Candle Lines

SECTION ONE
Spinning Tops and High Wave Candles

to one candle as a candle line.) Section One focuses on spinning tops and
high wave candles. Section Two reveals the potency of the doji. In Section
Three, we'll explore bullish and bearish belt-hold lines.

Many candle signals consist of two and three candle patterns, but we can
obtain volumes of valuable information from single candle lines. Don't let the
simplicity of single candle lines fool you: They send compelling signals as to
who ts winning the battle between the bulls and bears.

l n this very important chapter, we'll focus on single candle lines. (We refer

In this section you will learn...

¢ Interpreting market psychology, as indicated by small real bodies and
long shadows

* Identifying and distinguishing between spinning tops and high wave
eandles

* How to use spinning tops and high wave candles in a box range

* How to identify the hammer and the hanging man

* The importance of candle signals in the context of trends

27


28 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

hev terms to watch for:

* Spinning tops

* High wave candles
* Hammer

* Hanging man

* Shooting star

GETTING STARTED

Candle charts indicate early trend reversal, but they also have the advantage
of displaying the foree underpinning the move. Since nearly every candle line
has a story to tell about the market's mood and manner, we'll start with how
to use real bodies to gauge the force of the trend.

You may remember from a previous discussion that the Japanese call the
eandle’s real body the essence of the price movement. Indeed, the length of
the real bodies, In relation to their shadows, furnishes you with unique In-
sights into the psychology of the stock market. Obviously, a tall white real
body reflects a session when the bulls are dominant, whereas a black real
body shows that the bears have greater control. However, when the real body
shrinks (the real body can be black or white), it 1s a strong hint that the prior
trend may be losing steam.

Aspinning top (see Exhibit 2. 1A) is the picturesque Japanese term for a
eandle with a small real body, either black or white. Spinning tops may have
upper and lower shadows—or none at all. The important identifying trait of
these candle lines ts their diminutive real body. Later, you'll learn how spin-
ning tops are components of candle formations such as morning and evening

‘Ty

Spinning tops ~— High wave candles
A 5
EXBEBIT 2.1 Spinning Tops and High Wave Candles


Single Candie Lines 29

For a small real body the color is not important. The diminutive size of the real body
sends out the warning signal, not the color.

KEY POINT

stars, harami, hammers, and shooting stars. In Section Two, we'll talk about
a spinning top that has no real body, called a dojt.

A small real body shows that the bulls and bears are battling it out in a
tug-of-war, with neither the bulls or bears being able to take dominant con-
trol. Selling pressure (bears) pushes the real body down, but buying pressure
(bulls) keep it from being a long black real body. In the other scenario for a
spinning top, demand is stepping in but supply is counterattacking and, in
doing so, keeps the market from forming a tall white candle.

Spinning tops have a sort of cousin named high wave candles. Higk wave
candles also have diminutive real bodies, either white or black. To qualify as
a high wave, however, these candle lines must not only have small real bod-
les but also long upper and lower shadows. The shadows of the high wave
eandles need not be the same size, but both the upper and lower shadows
have to be unusually long.

If spinning tops translate into indecision on the part of the bulls and
bears, high wave candles indicate downright confusion. As you can see by
studying Exhibit 2.1B, the long upper shadows mean that some time after the
session's open, buying pressure thrust the security's price to an extended
high. During the same session, selling pressure drove the price to a pro-
tracted low. Yet, by the session's close, the price returned almost to the open-
ing price. That's confusion!

Now, take spinning tops and high wave candles into the context of an
uptrend or downtrend on a chart. In a solid uptrend, a market might rise, but
the shape of the candle lines during the ascent is an important clue about the
sustainability of the advance. Long white real bodies are like a green light

a

A high wave candle has the name because the Japanese compare the very extended
upper and lower shadows to large ocean waves. Once again we get a sense of the pic-
torial representation the Japanese give to the names of the candle signals.



THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

showing that the prior rally is going strongly. However, if there are small real
bodies (either black or white) during an ascent, caution is warranted from
the long side. This is because the small real bodies imply that the bulls have
less than full control—in spite of the advancing prices. Such spinning tops
are a warning not to follow this market from the long side. Spinning tops be-
come even more consequential in a market that is becoming overextended
and perhaps nearing resistance: A trend shift or reversal may be in the offing.

Conversely, if you see spinning tops moving sideways in a consolidation
pattern or box range, they are not signaling a trend reversal or shift. The
market is simply resting until it breaks up, or down, from that price zone. As
such, spinning tops and high wave candles have no trading implications
within a box range environment.

Three candle lines that contain spinning tops are the hammer, the hang-
ing man, and the shooting star. These candle lines are shown in Exhibit 2.2.
Let's first focus on the hammer and hanging man, since they have the same
shape. We will then address the shooting star.

The hammer and hanging man candle lines have small real bodies (either
black or white), and these real bodies have to be at or near the highs of the
session. Another criterion 1s that they need very long lower shadows (at least
two to three times the height of the real body). Because of their identical
shape, you identify them depending on where they appear in an uptrend or
downtrend. As you can see in Exhibit 2.24, a hammer will appear at or near
the bottom of a decline, either brief or extended; thus the name hammer,
which suggests that the market is hammering out a base. The hanging man
(see Exhibit 2.2B) has the same shape as the hammer, except that it comes
after an uptrend, preferably at a new high for the move. Because of the hang-

Hammer Hanging man Shooting star
A B c
Real bodies can be black or white
EXGEBIT 2.2 Hammer, Hanging Man, and Shooting Star


Single Candle Lines is |

| .
[334

With the hanging man's bullish lower shadow, one might think that this line can only

be bullish. Although the bullish shadow is a positive, the hanging man's small real
body shows that there is some hesitation. And the long lower shadow, while it is a
plus, shows that at some time during the session the market had sold off.

ing man's bullish long lower shadow one must wait for a close under the
hanging man's real body before becoming bearish.

The shooting stars a top reversal line, just like the hanging man. A shoot-
ing star, however, displays a long upper shadow, and its small real body ts at
or near the lows of the session. We can see how the name describes the line,
as it appears to be a shooting star, complete with long tail, soaring across the
sky. The Japanese say that the shooting star shows “trouble overhead.” Be-
cause of the shooting star’s bearish long upper shadow, we don't need as
much bearish confirmation with that line as we do with a hanging man.

As shown in Exhibit 2.2C, the shooting star 1s a bearish reversal signal, so
it must appear during a rally. Shooting star real bodies can be either white or
black.

A shooting star tells you that the market 1s rising in an uptrend and 1s per-
haps becoming overbought. Finally, the bulls refuse to pay any more. The
shooting star forms as the session opens near, or at, what will turn out to be
the low. It rises, but the bulls cannot sustain the demand. Bears come in and

The Japanese have an all-encompassing description for candle lines that form with
long lower shadows and small real bodies near the top of their range: wmbrella lines.
In one Japanese book there was a line that looked like a hammer. The text related to

this figure said, “Buy from below and sell from above.” As with most candlestick wis-
dom in the original, this text required some mental gymnastics. | finally deduced that
the author meant that we should feel bullish with a hammer shape line after a falling
market (‘buy from below") and bearish after a rising market (‘sell from above"). De
ciphering these secrets of the Orient presented a real challenge!

Source: *Analysis of Stock Price In Japan." Tokyo: Nippon Technical Analysts Association, 1986,
pg. 82.



32 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

drive the price back down. Remember, a long upper shadow on any candle
means selling pressure.

As you learn and review the different candle formations, you can see
how each candle line tells a story. With small real bodies indicating indeci-
sion, long real bodies showing definite opinion, and buying and selling pres-
sure being revealed by lower and upper shadows, it’s no wonder your skill at
reading candle charts will add to your success as a trader or Investor.

In Section Two, we'll talk about a candle similar to a shooting star, called
a gravestone dojt. Its appearance in the context of an extended rally is more
menacing than that of a shooting star. As a matter of fact, doji In general
broadcast extremely important signals.

For now, though, please proceed with the questions that follow. Don't
forget to read over the answers that follow. They contain information that
will add to your store of knowledge.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Questions for Chapter Two, Section One: Spinning Tops and
High Wave Candles
1. A long lower shadow on a daily chart shows that
a. the market pulled from its highs by the end of the day.
b. the market bounced from its lows by the end of the day.
¢. the bulls and the bears are In balance.
a. the bears are in control.
2. The is another name for a small real body.
a. counterattack pattern
b. shaven head
¢. spinning top
d. shaven bottom
3. To be considered a spinning top candlestick line, the real body has to be
a. white.
b. black or white.
¢. black.
d. no color, since it’s a doji.


Single Candie Lines 3

4. What statement best defines a high wave candle?
a. The real body must be black.
b. The real body must be white.
c. There must be a long upper and lower shadow.
d. There must be a large real boxy.
5. What does a high wave candle imply?
a. The market is confused.
b. The bulls are in charge.
c. The bears are in charge.
d. There is complete balance between bulls and bears.
6. Which of these are essential for a hammer?
a. A downtrend
b. Along upper shadow
c. A tall white candle
d. Both a and b
7. Which statement or statements best describes a hammer?
a. The high has to be near the close of the session.
b. The lower shadow should be no more than one and one-half times the
height of the real body.
c. It must appear in a lateral trading range.
a. Both b and e.
8. The color of a hammer's real body is
a. black.
b. white.
c. plaid.
d. either black or white.
®. What differentiates the hammer from the hanging man?
a. The color of the real body.
b. The hanging man has no upper shadow, whereas the hammer can have

along upper shadow.
¢. The trend preceding the hammer or hanging man.

4. Harnmers ean be used in all time frames; the hanging man ts used only
for daily charts.


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

10. Use the following list (a. to k.) to answer the two questions marked A and
B below.

a. The market js in an uptrend.

b. The market is in a downtrend.

c. Along upper shadow at least two or three times the height of the real
body.

d. A long lower shadow at least two or three times the height of the real
body.

. A black real body.

A white real body.

. Either a black or white real body.

. Little or no upper shadow.

Little or no lower shadow.

j. Along, black real body.

k. A long, white real body.
A From the list above, choose the four criteria needed for a hammer:
