800 marks before it) will probably crumble sooner or later.” Newsweek wrote
that the 900 barrier had reached “almost mystical significance in the minds of
many observers.” In 1966, when the 1,000 level loomed, Time wrote, “At week’s
end the average had reached 986.13, less than 14 points from the 1000 mark
that the Street considers a mystical number. Even though that number may be
more mystical than meaningful, the date of the breakthrough will appear in
history books of decades, or perhaps even centuries, to come—and the date
is not far off.”26 The market appears to have raced to just under 1,000, but it
would not pass the magic number for a long time. Although the Dow was
not then computed on a minute‑by‑minute basis, it finally rose above 1,000 (if
computed using the highs for the day) in January 1966. It was not until 1972,
the eve of the stock market crash, that the Dow closed above 1,000, and even
then, it stayed above 1,000 only briefly.
The Dow did not rise solidly above 1,000 until 1982, and, if one computes
a real stock price, it did not rise above the 1966 high in real terms—and stay
above it—until January 1992, twenty‑six years later.27 The period from January
1966 to January 1992 was one of low returns, confined as it was (with no capital
gain) to income from dividends; the average annual real stock market return
was only 4.1% per year.28 These are signs consistent with a notion that the
market was in some sense “reaching” toward 1,000 in 1966, and that it became
relatively overpriced.

136

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

New Era Thinking during the Bull Market of the 1990s
I have already described some of the new era thinking that characterized the
1990s in Chapter 4. Here I make just a few additional observations and then
contrast the new era thinking of the more recent Millennium Boom and the
Ownership-Society Boom with that during the new eras described in this chapter.
As with all major stock market booms, there were writers during the 1990s
who offered new era theories to justify the market. Michael Mandel, writing in
Business Week in 1996 in an article titled “The Triumph of the New Economy,”
listed five reasons for his belief that the market was not crazy: increased
globalization, the boom in high‑tech industries, moderating inflation, falling
interest rates, and surging profits.29
A prominent theory during this boom was that low inflation makes for a
strong market outlook. In the 1990s, theories about inflation dominated discussion of the market outlook just as they did in the 1960s, but now the prevalent
theory had been reversed. In the 1990s, it was thought that if inflation were to
break out, the market would go down rather than up. The idea that the stock
market is a good investment because it is a hedge against inflation (that is, it
will go up if there is an outbreak of inflation) was dead.
Why did people in the 1990s think that inflation would push the market
down, whereas in the 1960s they thought it would push it up? In the 1990s,
investors may have been reacting to literature published by economists
showing that economies do more poorly during sudden outbursts of very
high inflation. In fact, these studies do not show much of a relation between
moderate or long‑run inflation and real economic performance; over the
relevant range, they would suggest that the 1960s‑era theory was right—that
the real value of the stock market should be relatively immune to news of
inflation, and that the stock market should move with consumer prices, not
against them.30 More likely, people in the 1990s were reacting to the fact
that the stock market had in recent years moved against inflation, rather
than with it.
Many of the same themes that appeared in the 1920s, 1950s, and 1960s after
stock market booms were repeated in the 1990s.
Roger Bootle, in his 1998 book The Death of Inflation, argued that the “inflationary era,” during which “managed capitalism” and strong labor unions had
induced an inflationary spiral, was drawing to a close. In “managed capitalism,” “prices were decided, not determined by the interplay of interpersonal
supply and demand.” Now, Bootle declared, we were entering the “zero era,”
brought on by global capitalism, privatization, and the decline of labor unions,
all of which made it impossible for prices to be decided by committee.31
Steven Weber, with his 1997 article “The End of the Business Cycle” in the
public policy journal Foreign Affairs, argued that macroeconomic risks were

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

137

lower now: “Changes in technology, ideology, employment and finance, along
with the globalization of production and consumption, have reduced the
volatility of economic activity in the industrialized world. For both empirical and theoretical reasons in advanced industrial economies the waves of
the business cycle may be becoming more like ripples.” Weber presented a
number of reasonable‑sounding arguments. For instance, he noted that the
economy has come to be dominated by the service sector in a way that it was
not thirty years ago, and he pointed out that service employment has always
been more stable than industrial production.32
Downsizing and restructuring—terms describing so‑called managerial
revolutions in the 1980s—were thought then to be important reasons for the
growth of profits since 1982. The thought that they are still sources of profit
growth lingers in some people’s minds today. Yet there has also been substantial skepticism about these managerial revolutions, as exemplified by the
comic strip Dilbert, which dwells on petty labor‑management conflicts in the
new era economy.
The statistics on the growth of labor productivity made some impressive
gains in the United States in the late 1990s. This helped confirm, in many
people’s minds, the advantages that the Internet and other new forms of
high technology were offering to the economy, and was seen as justifying
the appreciation in the stock market. And yet the high productivity growth
in the late 1990s was partly a data error: the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
revised the 1998–2000 growth figures substantially downward in 2001, well
after the stock market boom.33 Moreover, even to the extent that the productivity growth numbers were good, people read far too much into them.
The numbers became a justification for admiring the Internet, when in fact
the growth of productivity then had nothing to do with the fledgling new
Internet, which was not yet a significant factor in the overall economy. Even
beyond this, people didn’t realize how tenuous the historical relation between
productivity growth and stock market gains really is.34 Productivity growth
hasn’t been a reason to expect the stock market to do well. But the story in
the 1990s that the reported productivity growth justified and explained the
spectacular stock market appreciation was too good for stock market boosters
and the news media to pass up.
It should be noted that not all stories in the media in the 1990s were slanted
toward new era thinking compared with stories during earlier episodes of
high pricing. I could not find 1990s accounts that were as expansively and
breathlessly optimistic as some in 1901 or 1929, and although there was much
optimism in the media in the 1990s, it was usually a matter of background
presumption rather than bold assertion. There appears to have been a media
attitude change, and optimistic hyperbole was out in the 1990s, just as it is
still out of fashion today in the second decade of the twenty-first century.

138

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

If anything, many writers in the 1990s seemed rather more influenced by
concerns about market overpricing and speculative mania. In fact, many media
accounts in the mid‑ to late 1990s focused on what they considered the craziness of investors. For example, a Fortune story in April 1996 told of reporters
stopping random people on the street and asking them for stock tips. They
stopped a policeman, a Starbucks barista, a carpenter on a billboard crew, and
an ID checker at a fitness club, and all of them offered expansive stock recommendations. They could not find a shoeshine boy, but otherwise their experience mirrored that of Bernard Baruch before the crash of 1929, who remarked
that he had received stock tips from the shoeshine boy and interpreted that
as a sign of market excess.35 Articles with titles like “Gamblers High: Is This
a Market Where Yesterday’s Yardsticks Don’t Apply?” or “It’s Tulip Time on
Wall Street” or “Say Goodbye to the Last Bear” abounded. The possibility
that the stock market boom was a speculative bubble was certainly thrust
before the minds of readers in the 1990s. But the evidence in the markets is
that the public in the 1990s found these possibilities at best mildly amusing;
they were far more swept up in the new era thinking symbolized for them
by the coming of the new millennium.

Some New Era Thinking in Real Estate Booms
Real estate booms are driven by new era thinking just as much as are stock
market booms. Price-to-price feedback may be in a sense the primary driver
of a real estate boom, but a new era story contributes as well, or may appear
as part of the feedback. As we have noted, national booms in large countries
appear to be a new thing, but there are plenty of examples from long ago of
regional real estate booms, and these have their regional new era stories.
A real estate boom covering a substantial area of California occurred in the
1880s, peaking in 1887. The boom was primarily in Los Angeles, San Diego,
and Santa Barbara, sparsely populated then and so of little significance to the
United States as a whole. This boom appears to have been connected with the
rapid development at the time of railroads, which were just making much of
this land more accessible. The boom was apparently precipitated by a rate
war between the Santa Fe and the Union Pacific railroads, which made it
suddenly very cheap to travel to and from Southern California. The railroads
also, with hopes of recouping their investment in trackage, financed a legion
of promoters who attracted people to migrate to the region by extolling the
wonderful climate and brilliant future of southern California. They were a
success: “Los Angeles was a crowded, seething city of promoters, amateur
and professional; hotels bulged with occupants, prices soared to astronomic
levels, and everywhere—on the streets, in print, in homes and clubs—the
incessant topic was land, the land of southern California.”36 The boom was

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

139

followed by a collapse in prices in 1888–89: “Persons who had been talking
‘land and climate’ for two years now regretted intensely the lack of a stable
industrial basis for southern California’s economy. Worried citizens looked
back upon their frenzied existence during 1887 and began to realize that
‘never, perhaps, did a community more completely lose its sense of values
and proportion.’”37 The story of the boom of the 1880s serves to remind us
that people were capable of worrying that available land was getting scarce
even more than 100 years ago. The difference then was only that the story
didn’t spread nationally. California already had circumstances then that set
it apart, and apparently no one thought the boom would spread nationwide.
In the early twentieth century, another remarkable regional home price bubble
occurred in Florida, especially in the Miami area, peaking in 1925. It seemed to
be driven by a new era story that after World War I people with the new wealth
and automobiles of the Roaring Twenties were just discovering the possibility
of commuting to Florida for the winter, and the land was selling fast. People
who believed this story might feel some urgency to buy. Another precipitating
factor for this bubble was the 1924 Florida constitutional amendment prohibiting income and inheritance taxes, a factor encouraging wealthy retirees to
relocate to Florida, as well as an extensive advertising campaign by the Miami
Chamber of Commerce. There was also the story, for fun-loving people, of the
“Florida lifestyle” with so many speakeasies and gambling casinos. The fact
that many celebrities were making the area their home, including even gangster
Al Capone, gave this story some news­worthiness, as well as credibility. This
bubble is famous for the “binder boys” who persuaded would-be home­buyers
all over the country to pay a binder fee to buy Florida land, and who then
were able to sell the binders. The bubble ended abruptly after a 1926 hurricane
reminded people of some Florida dangers, and when newspapers around the
country turned on the bubble and recounted stories of gullible people who had
been persuaded to buy land they had not even seen that later turned out to be
unusable, even under water.38
Like the 1880s land boom in southern California, the 1925 Florida boom
was intrinsically regional. There were stories that genuinely excited people,
but they did not, could not, extend to the country as a whole.
In the closing decades of the twentieth century, we began to see rather strong
regional real estate booms in the United States, as well as other countries, and
these covered a large enough part of their respective countries that they began
to affect the national home price indices. The causes of these movements are
harder to see. In the last decades of the twentieth century, the booms appear to
have been broader in geographical scope and tied up with broader sentiment,
political issues, or issues about the economic base of the area.
In the United States, there were two major regional home price booms that
were big enough that they had an effect on the national home price index that

140

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

was plotted in Figure 3.1, a boom in California in 1975–80 and a boom in the
northeastern United States in 1984–88, which eventually carried over into
California in 1986–89.
Real (inflation-corrected) home prices in the entire state of California rose
60% between 1975 and 1980, before falling in the mid-1980s.39 A factor driving this boom was a relatively sudden appearance of a political movement
advancing environmental interests in California, which created more stringent
zoning laws and building restrictions. California had grown with relatively
few zoning restrictions, but, starting around in the 1960s, Californians decided
collectively to do something about this. The effect was to make California,
around the 1970s, one of the most difficult places in the country to build new
houses.40
This political change limited the supply of new homes, so that the safety
valve that had prevented price increases from taking place was no longer so
effective. It was viewed by some critics as a victory for the haves versus the
have-nots, the people who already owned homes versus those who did not.
This victory was widely appreciated and served to boost the value of existing homes.
Another factor driving this bubble was Proposition 13, a voter referendum
in June 1978 that produced a change in the California constitution that had the
immediate effect of cutting property taxes by more than half and guaranteed
that property taxes would remain lower. This was another political move that
was viewed as increasing the value of property by cutting taxes on it. The
fact that voters had put Proposition 13 in place despite dire warnings about
the consequences of lower tax revenues from established political figures was
viewed as the harbinger of a new economic era.
Both the enhanced zoning standards and Proposition 13 were signals of a
new era when existing individual property rights would be more respected,
and when one might imagine that one’s real estate investments would become
more valuable. It was one of the beginnings of the ownership society—one
that, along with the election of Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom,
boosted the career of California governor Ronald Reagan, soon to become
president of the United States based on his new message, and would later
spread to much of the world.
One wonders, though, how the California boom of the 1970s could have
happened then, given that mortgage rates were setting new record highs,
reaching over 10% in the same year as the fastest home price increase: 1978.
Such high mortgage rates would certainly seem to have the effect of putting
a damper on a bubble, because they would mean that homebuyers would
have to make very large mortgage payments if they bought an expensive
house. In 1978, with such high interest rates, purchasing a house worth
four years’ income would result in interest payments alone amounting to

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

141

over 40% of one’s income, very difficult for most families to budget. But this
boom should dispel any notions that real estate booms are always stopped
by high interest rates.
One of the explanations of how this could have happened in the 1970s is
that homeowners, upset with the high interest rates, used the political process
to challenge due-on-sale clauses in mortgages with lower interest rates and
thereby avoid paying the higher interest rates.41 During the 1970s boom, and
for a couple of years thereafter, assumable mortgages shielded the housing
market from the effects of high interest rates. Also, during the late 1970s, a
new institution called “creative financing” appeared and flourished.42
This resulted in the first U.S. regional real estate boom large enough to have
a real impact on the national home price numbers. It was interrupted by the
severe recessions of the early 1980s.
Another home price boom appeared in the northeastern United States in
the mid-1980s, with its epicenter in Boston. In 1985 alone, home prices in the
Boston metropolitan area went up 38%.
It is hard to identify any local factor that explains the Boston real estate
boom. In a 1986 study, Karl Case reviewed all of the fundamental factors that
might be driving a boom in Boston home prices and concluded that nothing
had changed very much in Boston in recent years: “While the economy is
healthy and income is growing, market ‘fundamentals’ do not seem to offer
an adequate explanation for the very rapid increase in home prices in the
Boston area since 1983.”43
Low interest rates were often cited by the media as responsible for producing the boom. Indeed, interest rates were lower in the late 1980s than they had
been in the early 1980s. But lower interest rates cannot directly account for the
boom in Boston, since the boom was regional, not national, and the interest
rates were lower everywhere. The best one can say about lower interest rates
as a factor leading to the Boston boom is that they were permissive, reducing
the barriers to a bubble that was precipitated by something else. By the way,
mortgage rates were even lower in the mid-1990s, when Boston prices were
falling, than they were during the boom of the 1980s.
The remarkable home price boom in Boston in the mid-1980s had a new
era story connected with it as well, but again not a suddenly new story. It
is true that in the 1980s, Boston was emerging as a high-tech powerhouse,
but it had apparently been doing that for decades. It appears, though, that a
story of Boston as a high-tech center was emerging that had word-of-mouth
potential that was contagious. The personal computer revolution that was just
then putting a computer on everyone’s desk would increase the contagion
of any stories relating to computers. Wang Laboratories, Digital Equipment
Company, Data General Corporation, and Lotus Corporation made Boston a
world center for computers.44

142

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

What matters most for the contagion is how the story looked to people
who lived in Boston, who bought the property. Local people saw the construction in 1985 of the massive new Lotus Corporation headquarters in East
Cambridge and a boom in construction along Route 128. A story developed
that Boston was a rival to Silicon Valley in California. Boston would even beat
Silicon Valley. One Boston observer remarked in 1985: “In Boston, there’s a
great deal of history and variety of cultural roots that shape people’s view of
the world. There was nothing in Silicon Valley before Silicon Valley except
for orchards.”45 The story mixed local pride with some facts about the new
industry in the area to tell a new era story. The economic success came to be
called the “Massachusetts Miracle,” and the story had sufficient resonance
that Michael Dukakis, the governor of Massachusetts who tried to claim
credit for this boom, was nominated by the Democratic Party in 1988 to run
for president of the United States.
The story has substantial plausibility to it, for indeed the trend for the last
decades of the twentieth century had been for cities with highly skilled or
educated populations to grow somewhat faster.46 The precipitating factor for
the Boston boom of the 1980s indeed did substantially affect fundamental
value in that city, although the feedback generated by this boom apparently
overshot fundamental value, resulting in a fallback in home prices in the 1990s.
The 1980s boom in Boston was not confined to Boston, but to some extent
covered the entire northeastern United States. In fact, it went far beyond the
United States, for a similar boom was happening across the Atlantic from
Boston, in London, and in other cities around the world. It is plausible that the
same kind of new era story that drove Boston, tied as it is to the emerging idea
that a city with a highly educated and sophisticated populace has a unique
future in today’s world, may be transposed to other glamor cities as well.
We have already covered, in Chapter 4, a number of precipitating factors
that have contributed to the home price boom since the late 1990s, and some
of these could be classified as “new era” theories. It should also be noted that
there is a sort of new era theory that is becoming attached specifically to
vacation or second-home properties, which may account for the rapid price
increases for these properties in many places around the world since 2000.
It is widely thought that the advent of the Internet, the cell phone, and the
mobile office has made it easy for working people to travel to some rather
remote sanctuaries and continue to do their work. There has been a pre­
sumption that once Baby Boomers started retiring around 2008, they would
want to move out of the city to beautiful places. It is sometimes also said that,
as standards of living continue to rise, the increasingly large number of newly
wealthy people will want to buy second homes in scenic places, such as ocean
fronts or mountain tops, which are inherently scarce, because the supply of
such properties cannot be increased. Flaunting one’s wealth by building bigger
