
- 108 -

John Grisham

The Broker

New York or New Jersey; not from Texas or the South, or Appalachia, or
New Orleans. As vast sections of the country were eliminated, Marco was
beginning to think of California. And he was beginning to get very nervous.
The lying would soon start, and he hadn't practiced enough.
"And where are you from?" he asked.
"Last stop was Austin, Texas. That was thirty years ago. Name's Rudolph."
"Good morning, Rudolph, a pleasure. I'm Marco." They were in
kindergarten where only first names were needed. "You don't sound Texan."
"Thank God for that," he said with a pleasant laugh, one that barely revealed
his mouth. "Originally from San Francisco."
The waiter leaned in and Rudolph ordered black coffee, then something else
in rapid Italian. The waiter had a follow-up, as did Rudolph, and Marco
understood none of it.
"What brings you to Bologna?" Rudolph asked. He seemed anxious to chat;
probably rare that he cornered a fellow North American in his favorite cafe.
Marco lowered his booklet and said, "Just traveling around Italy for a year,
seeing the sights, trying to pick up some of the language."
Half of Rudolph's face was covered with an unkempt gray beard that began
fairly high up the cheekbones and sprang in all directions. Most of his nose
was visible, as was part of his mouth. For some odd reason, one that no one
would ever understand because no one would ever dare ask such a ridiculous
question, he had developed the habit of shaving a small round spot under his
lower lip and comprising most of his upper chin. Other than that sacred
ground, the wild frizzy whiskers were allowed to run free and apparently go
unwashed. The top of his head was pretty much the same-acres of untouched
bright gray brush sprouting from all around the beret.
Because so many of his features were masked, his eyes got all the attention.
They were dark green and projected rays that, from under a set of thick
sagging eyebrows, took in everything.
"How long in Bologna?" Rudolph asked.
"Got here yesterday. I have no schedule. And you, what brings you here?"
Marco was anxious to keep the conversation away from himself.

- 109 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The eyes danced and never blinked. "I've been here for thirty years. I'm a
professor at the university."
Marco finally took a bite of his cheese sandwich, partly out of hunger, but
more importantly to keep Rudolph talking.
"Where's your home?" he asked.
Following the script, Marco said, "Toronto. Grandparents immigrated there
from Milan. I have Italian blood but never learned the language."
"The language is not hard," Rudolph said, and his coffee arrived. He grabbed
the small cup and thrust it deep into the beard. Evidently it found his mouth.
He smacked his lips and leaned forward a bit as though he wanted to talk.
"You don't sound Canadian," he said, and those eyes appeared to be
laughing at him.
Marco was struggling under the labor of looking, acting, and sounding
Italian. He'd had no time to even think about putting on Canadian airs. How,
exactly, does one sound Canadian? He took another bite, a huge one, and
through his food said, "Can't help that. How did you get here from Austin?"
"A long story."
Marco shrugged as if he had plenty of time.
"I was once a young professor at the University of Texas law school. When
they found out I was a Communist they began pressuring me to leave. I
fought them. They fought back. I got louder, especially in the classroom.
Communists didn't fare too well in Texas in the early seventies, doubt if
much has changed. They denied me tenure, ran me out of town, so I came
here to Bologna, the heart of Italian communism."
"What do you teach here?"
"Jurisprudence. Law. Radical left-wing legal theories."
A powdered brioche of some sort arrived and Rudolph ate half of it with the
first bite. A few crumbs dropped from the depths of his beard.
"Still a Communist?" Marco asked.
"Of course. Always. Why would I change?"
"Seems to have run its course, don't you think? Not such a great idea after
all. I mean, look at what a mess Russia is in because of Stalin and his legacy.
And North Korea, they're starving there while the dictator builds nuclear
warheads. Cuba is fifty years behind the rest of the

- 110 -

John Grisham

The Broker

world. The Sandinistas were voted out in Nicaragua. China is turning to free
market capitalism because the old system broke down. It really doesn't work,
does it?"
The brioche had lost its appeal; the green eyes were narrow. Marco could
see a tirade coming, probably one laced with obscenities in both English and
Italian. He glanced around quickly and realized that there was a very good
chance the Communists had him outnumbered in the Bar Fontana.
And what had capitalism done for him?
Much to his credit, Rudolph smiled and shrugged and said with an air of
nostalgia, "Maybe so, but it sure was fun being a Communist thirty years
ago, especially in Texas. Those were the days."
Marco nodded at the newspaper and said, "Ever read papers from home?"
"Home is here, my friend. I became an Italian citizen and haven't been back
to the States in twenty years.1'
Backman was relieved. He had not seen American newspapers since his
release, but he assumed there had been coverage. Probably old photos as
well. His past seemed safe from Rudolph.
Marco wondered if that was his future-Italian citizenship. If any at all. Fastforward twenty years, and would he still be drifting through Italy, not
exactly glancing over his shoulder but always thinking about it?
"You said 'home,'" Rudolph interrupted. "Is that the US. or Canada?"
Marco smiled and nodded to a far-off place. "Over there, I guess." A small
mistake, but one that should not have been made. To quickly shift to another
subject, he said, "This is my first visit to Bologna. Didn't know it was the
center of Italian communism."
Rudolph lowered his cup and made a smacking sound with his partially
concealed lips. Then with both hands he gently pawed his beard backward,
much like an old cat slicking down his whiskers. "Bologna is a lot of things,
my friend," he said, as if a lengthy lecture was starting. "It's always been the
center of free thought and intellectual activity in Italy, thus its first
nickname, la dotta, which means the learned. Then it became the home of
the political left and received its second nickname, la rossa, the red. And the
Bolognesi have always been very serious about their food. They believe, and
they're probably

- 111 -

John Grisham

The Broker

right, that this is the stomach of Italy. Thus, the third nickname of la grassa,
the fat, an affectionate term because you won't see many overweight people
here. Me, I was fat when I arrived." He patted his stomach proudly with one
hand while finishing off the brioche with the other.
A frightening question suddenly hit Marco: Was it possible that Rudolph
was part of the static? Was he a teammate of Luigi and Ermanno and
Stennett and whoever else was out there in the shadows working so hard to
keep Joel Backman alive? Surely not. Surely he was what he said he was-a
professor. An oddball, a misfit, an aging Communist who'd found a better
life somewhere else.
The thought passed, but it was not forgotten. Marco finished his little
sandwich and decided they'd talked enough. He suddenly had a train to catch
for another day of sightseeing. He managed to extricate himself from the
table and got a fond farewell from Rudolph. "I'm here every morning," he
said. "Come back when you can stay longer."
"Grazie," Marco said. "Arrivederci."
Outside the cafe, Via Irnerio was stirring to life as small delivery vans began
their routes. Two of the drivers yelled at each other, probably friendly
obscenities Marco would never understand. He hustled away from the cafe
just in case old Rudolph thought of something else to ask him and came
charging out. He turned down a side street, Via Capo di Lucca-he was
learning that they were well marked and easy to find on his map-and
zigzagged his way toward the center. He passed another cozy little cafe, then
backtracked and ducked inside for a cappuccino.
No Communists bothered him there, no one seemed to even notice him.
Marco and Joel Backman savored the moment-the delicious strong drink, the
warm thick air, the quiet laughter of those doing the talking. Right now not a
single person in the world knew exactly where he was, and it was indeed an
exhilarating feeling.
At Marco's insistence, the morning sessions were beginning at eight, not
thirty minutes later. Ermanno, the student, still needed long hours of hard
sleep but he couldn't argue with his pupil's intensity. Marco arrived for each
lesson with his vocabulary lists thoroughly memorized, his situational
dialogues perfected, and his urgent desire

- 112 -

John Grisham

The Broker

to absorb the language barely under control. At one point he suggested they
begin at seven.
The morning he met Rudolph, Marco studied intensely for two uninterrupted
hours, then abruptly said," Vbrrei vedere l'universita." I'd like to see the
university.
"Quando?" Ermanno asked. When?
"Adesso. Andiamo a fare una passeggiata." Now. Let's go for a walk.
"Penso che dobbiamo studiare." I think we should study.
"Si. Possiamo studiare a camminando." We can study while we re walking.
Marco was already on his feet, grabbing his coat. They left the depressing
building and headed in the general direction of the university.
"Questa via, come si chiama?" Ermanno asked. What's the name of this
street?
"E Via Donati," Marco answered without looking for a street sign.
They stopped in front of a small crowded shop and Ermanno asked, "Che
tipo di negozio e questo?" What kind of store is this?
"Una tabaccheria." A tobacco store.
"Che cosa puoi comprare in questo negozio?" What can you buy here?
"Posso comprare molte cose. Giornali, riviste, francobolli, sigarette." I can
buy many things. Newspapers, magazines, stamps, cigarettes.
The session became a roving game of name that thing. Ermanno would point
and say, "Cosa e quelio?" What's that? A bike, a policeman, a blue car, a city
bus, a bench, a garbage can, a student, a telephone booth, a small dog, a
cafe, a pastry shop. Except for a lamppost, Marco was quick with the Italian
word for each. And the all-important verbs-walking, talking, seeing,
studying, buying, thinking, chatting, breathing, eating, drinking, hurrying,
driving-the list was endless and Marco had the proper translations at his
disposal.
A few minutes after ten, and the university was finally coming to life.
Ermanno explained that there was no central campus, no American-style
quadrangle lined with trees and such. The Universita degli Studi was found
in dozens of handsome old buildings, some five

- 113 -

John Grisham

The Broker

hundred years old, most of them packed end to end along Via Zamboni,
though over the centuries the school had grown and now covered an entire
section of Bologna.
The Italian lesson was forgotten for a block or two as they were swept along
in wave of students hustling to and from their classes. Marco caught himself
looking for an old man with bright gray hair- his favorite Communist, his
first real acquaintance since walking out of prison. He had already made up
his mind to see Rudolph again.
At 22 Via Zamboni, Marco stopped and gazed at a sign between the door
and a window: facolta di giurisprudenza.
"Is this the law school?" he asked.
"Si."
Rudolph was somewhere inside, no doubt spreading left-wing dissent among
his impressionable students.
They ambled on, in no hurry as they continued to play name that thing and
enjoy the energy of the street.

- 114 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The lezione-a-piedi-lesson on foot-continued the next day when Marco
revolted after an hour of tedious grammar straight from the textbook and
demanded to go for a walk.
"Ma, deve imparare la grammatica," Ermanno insisted. You must learn
grammar.
Marco was already putting on his coat. "That's where you're wrong,
Ermanno. I need real conversation, not sentence structure."
"Sono io l'insegnante." I am the teacher.
"Let's go. Andiamo. Bologna is waiting. The streets are filled with happy
young people, the air is alive with the sounds of your language, all just
waiting for me to absorb." When Ermanno hesitated, Marco smiled at him
and said, "Please, my friend. I've been locked in a small cell about the size of
this apartment for six years. You can't expect me to stay here. There's a
vibrant city out there. Let's go explore it."
Outside the air was clear and brisk, not a cloud anywhere, a gorgeous winter
day that drew every warm-blooded Bolognese into the streets for errands and
long-winded chats with old friends. Pockets of intense conversation
materialized as sleepy-eyed students greeted each other and housewives
gathered to trade the gossip. Elderly gentlemen

- 115 -

John Grisham

The Broker

dressed in coats and ties shook hands and then all talked at once. Street
merchants called out with their latest bargains.
But for Ermanno it was not a walk in the park. If his student wanted
conversation, then he would certainly earn it. He pointed to a policeman and
said to Marco, in Italian of course, "Go to that policeman and ask directions
for the Piazza Maggiore. Get them right, then repeat them to me."
Marco walked very slowly, whispering some words, trying to recall others.
Always start with a smile and the proper greeting. "Buon giorno,' he said,
almost holding his breath.
"Buon giorno," answered the policeman.
"Mi pud aiutare?" Can you help me?
"Certamente." Certainly.
"Sono Canadese. Non parlo molto bene." I'm Canadian. I don't speak Italian
very well.
"Allora." Okay. The policeman was still smiling, now quite anxious to help.
"Dov'e la Piazza Maggiore?"
The policeman turned and gazed into the distance, toward the central part of
Bologna. He cleared his throat and Marco braced for the torrent of
directions. Just a few feet away and listening to every sound was Ermanno.
With a beautifully slow cadence, he said in Italian, and pointing of course
the way they all do, "It's not too far away. Take this street, turn at the next
right, that's Via Zamboni, follow it until you see the two towers. Turn on Via
Rizzoli, and go for three blocks."
Marco listened as hard as possible, then tried to repeat each phrase. The
policeman patiently went through the exercise again. Marco thanked him,
repeated as much as he could to himself, then unloaded it on Ermanno.
"Non c'e male," he said. Not bad. The fun was just starting. As Marco was
enjoying his little triumph, Ermanno was searching for the next unsuspecting
tutor. He found him in an old man shuffling by on a cane and with a thick
newspaper under his arm. 'Ask him where he bought the newspaper," he
instructed his student.
Marco took his time, followed the gentleman for a few steps, and when he
thought he had the words together he said, "Buon giorno, scusi." The old
man stopped and stared, and for a moment looked as

- 116 -

John Grisham

The Broker

though he might lift his cane and whack it across Marco's head. He did not
offer the customary "Buon giorno."
"Dov'e ha comprato questo giornale?" Where did you buy this newspaper?
The old man looked at the newspaper as if it were contraband, then looked at
Marco as if he'd cursed him. He jerked his head to the left and said
something like, "Over there." And his part of the conversation was over. As
he shuffled away, Ermanno eased beside Marco and said in English, "Not
much for conversation, huh?"
"I guess not."
They stepped inside a small cafe, where Marco ordered a simple espresso for
himself. Ermanno could not be content with simple things; instead he
wanted regular coffee with sugar but without cream, and a small cherry
pastry, and he made Marco order everything and get it perfect. At their table,
Ermanno laid out several euro notes of various denominations, along with
the coins for fifty cents and one euro, and they practiced numbers and
counting. He then decided he wanted another regular coffee, this time with
no sugar but just a little cream. Marco took two euros and came back with
the coffee. He counted the change.
After the brief break, they were back on the street, drifting along Via San
Vitale, one of the main avenues of the university, with porticoes covering
the sidewalks on both sides and thousands of students jostling to early
classes. The street was crammed with bicycles, the preferred mode of getting
around. Ermanno had been studying for three years in Bologna, so he said,
though Marco believed little of what he heard from either his tutor or his
handler.
"This is Piazza Verdi," Ermanno said, nodding to a small plaza where a
protest of some sort was stuttering to a start. A longhaired relic from the
seventies was adjusting a microphone, no doubt prepping for a screeching
denunciation of American misdeeds somewhere. His cohorts were trying to
unravel a large, badly painted homemade banner with a slogan not even
Ermanno could understand. But they were too early. The students were hah0
asleep and more concerned with being late for class.
"What's their problem?" Marco asked as they walked by.
"I'm not sure. Something to do with the World Bank. There's always a
demonstration here."

- 117 -

John Grisham

The Broker

They walked on, flowing with the young crowd, picking their way through
the foot traffic, and headed generally to il centro.
Luigi met them for lunch at a restaurant called Testerino, near the university.
With American taxpayers footing the bill, he ordered often and with no
regard for price. Ermanno, the broke student, seemed ill at ease with such
extravagance, but, being an Italian, he eventually warmed to the idea of a
long lunch. It lasted for two hours and not a single word of English was
spoken. The Italian was slow, methodical, and often repeated, but it never
yielded to English. Marco found it difficult to enjoy a fine meal when his
brain was working overtime to hear, grasp, digest, understand, and plot a
response to the last phrase thrown at him. Often the last phrase had passed
over his head with only a word or two being somewhat recognizable when
the whole thing was suddenly chased by another. And his two friends were
not just chatting for the fun of it. If they caught the slightest hint that Marco
was not following, that he was simply nodding so they would keep talking
so he could eat a bite, then they stopped abruptly and said, "Che cosa ho
detto?" What did I say?
Marco would chew for a few seconds, buying time to think of something-in
Italian dammit!-that might get him off the hook. He was learning to listen,
though, to catch the key words. Both of his friends had repeatedly said that
he would always understand much more than he could say.
The food saved him. Of particular importance was the distinction between
tortellini (small pasta stuffed with pork) and tortelloni (larger pasta stuffed
with ricotta cheese). The chef, upon realizing that Marco was a Canadian
very curious about Bolognese cuisine, insisted on serving both dishes. As
always, Luigi explained that both were exclusively the creations of the great
chefs of Bologna.
Marco simply ate, trying his best to devour the delicious servings while
avoiding the Italian language.
After two hours, Marco insisted on a break. He finished his second espresso
and said goodbye. He left them in front of the restaurant and walked away,
alone, his ears ringing and his head spinning from trie workout.

- 118 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He made a tvvo-block loop off Via Rizzoli. Then he did it again to make
sure no one was following. The long porticoed walkways were ideal for
ducking and hiding. When they were thick with students again he crossed
Piazza Verdi, where the World Bank protest had yielded to a fiery speech
that, for a moment, made Marco quite happy he could not understand Italian.
He stopped at 22 Via Zamboni and once again looked at the massive wooden
door that led to the law school. He walked through it and tried his best to
appear as if this was his turf. No directory was in sight, but a student bulletin
board advertised apartments, books, companionship, almost everything, it
seemed, including a summer studies program at Wake Forest Law School.
Through the hallway, the building yielded to an open courtyard where
students were milling around, chatting on cell phones, smoking, waiting for
classes.
A stairway to his left caught his attention. He climbed to the third floor,
where he finally located a directory of sorts. He understood the word
"uffici," and followed a corridor past two classrooms until he found the
faculty offices. Most had names, a few did not. The last belonged to
Rudolph Viscovitch, so far the only non-Italian name in the building. Marco
knocked and no one answered. He twisted the knob but the door was locked.
He quickly removed from his coat pocket a sheet of paper he'd taken from
the Albergo Campeol in Treviso and scribbled a note:
Dear Rudolph: I was wandering around the campus, stumbled upon your
office and wanted to say hello. Maybe Til catch you again at the Bar
Fontana. Enjoyed our chat yesterday. Nice to hear English occasionally.
Your Canadian friend, Marco Lazzeri
He slid it under the door and walked down the stairs behind a group of
students. Back on Via Zamboni, he drifted along with no particular
destination in mind. He stopped for a gelato, then slowly made his way back
to his hotel. His dark little room was too cold for a nap. He promised himself
again that he would complain to his handler. Lunch had cost more than three
nights' worth of his room. Surely Luigi and those above him could spring for
a nicer place.

- 119 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He dragged himself back to Ermanno's cupboard-sized apartment for the
afternoon session.
Luigi waited patiently at Bologna Centrale for the nonstop Eurostar from
Milano. The train station was relatively quiet, the lull before the five o'clock
rush hour. At 3:35, precisely on schedule, the sleek bullet blew in for a quick
stop and Whitaker bounced off.
Since Whitaker never smiled, they barely said hello. After a cur- son'
handshake was complete, they walked to Luigi's Fiat. "How's our boy?"
Whitaker asked as soon as he slammed the door.
"Doing fine," Luigi said as he started the engine and drove away. "He's
studying hard. There's not much else for him to do."
"And he's staying close?"
"Yes. He likes to walk around the city, but he's afraid to venture too far.
Plus, he has no money."
"Keep him broke. How's his Italian?"
"He's learning rapidly." They were on the Via dell' Indipendenza, a wide
avenue that was taking them directly south, into the center of the city. "Very
motivated."
"Is he scared?"
"I think so."
"He's smart, and he's a manipulator, Luigi, don t forget that. And because
he's smart, he's also very frightened. He knows the danger."
"I told him about Critz."
"And?"
"He was bewildered."
"Did it scare him?"
"Yes, I think so. Who got Critz?"
"I'm assuming we did, but you never know. Is the safe house ready?" "
"Yes."
"Good. Let's see Marcos apartment."
Via Fondazza was a quiet residential street in the southeast section of the old
city, a few blocks south of the university section. As in the rest of Bologna,
the walkways on both sides of the street were covered with porticoes. Doors
to the homes and apartments opened directly onto the sidewalks. Most had
building directories on brass
