
Are there any fixed relationships?

There used to be. For instance, you could pretty much predict the
bond market with the stock market and vice versa. Now, it seems that
the relationships only matter when traders decide to fixate on them.
However, they’re still worth watching.

You mentioned you check to see if the stocks you are interested in are
optionable. What are you looking for here?

If the options are cheap enough, occasionally, I might just buy options
versus the underlying stock or, I know that I might be able to use
them to hedge, should I be blessed with a profit. I also look to see if
there is a large open interest in a particular strike, especially when ex-
piration is near.

Some traders stress the importance of writing down market stats, forc-
ing them to recognize market conditions. Do you do a similar exercise
daily?

This is a wonderful exercise. One of the most successful traders I

know wakes up early each morning and fills out a sheet of about 50
market statistics. He has done this religiously for the past 30 years.

In the past, I used to keep daily stats. In fact, I have tons of notebooks
full of market data lying around my office collecting dust. I would rec-
ommend anyone getting started to do similar exercises. Due to time
constraints, I now lean on my computer to keep the database for me. I
will note any anomalies or extremes in my trading journal.

Such as?

If the VIX is at an extremely low level historically, I’ make a note of it
and take notes on what it has done in the past during similar condi-
tions. Things like this often become an early warning system.



CHAPTER 1 5

MORE EXAMPLES

MONEY-MANAGEMENT EXAMPLES

191


a
192 Chapter 15

On 07/14/2000, Immunex Corp. (IMNX) sets up as a simple four-bar
deep pullback.

FIGURE 15.1

IMMUNEX CORP-Daily 07/20/2000 C=54.937 2.998 | 49

1. An entry on 07/15/2000 is triggered at 57 15/16, 1/16 above the prior
day’s high.

2. Because the low of the formation is more than 5% away from the en-
try, a protective stop is placed at 54 15/16 for a 3-point risk (approxi-
mately a 5% risk).

3. IMNX rallies over 3 points to 60 15/16 and we exit half of our posi-
tion.

4, The protective stop is moved up to breakeven (57 15/16, the same as
the entry), and we are stopped out for a scratch on the remainder of
the position. —

5. The market gaps lower and trades below our original entry. As you
can see, if money management was not used, this overall profitable
trade would have resulted in a loss.



|
More Examples 193

On 07/20/2000, Viratra (VRTA) sets up as a simple three-bar pullback.

FIGURE 15.2

Viratra Corp-Daily 07/28/2000 C=64.875 -10.125

_ 7 — 7 4 AN ty

1. An entry at 74 7/16 is triggered, 1/16 above the prior day’s high.

2. Set a protective stop at 71 1/16, 1/16 below the low of the setup for a
risk of 3 3/8 points.

3. VRTA hits our profit target of 77 15/16. We exit half of our position
for a profit of 3 3/8 and move our protective stop on the remaining
shares to breakeven (1). Note: On such a wide-range bar, you might
want to exit additional shares.

4. The stock trades at 74 7/16 and we are out for a scratch on the re-
maining shares.

5. The stock implodes. As you can see, what could have been a losing
trade is modestly profitable due to money management.



a
194 Chapter 15

Anadigics (ANAD) sets up as a Double Top Knockout (DT-KO).

FIGURE 15.3

Anadigics Inc-Daily. 02/22/2000 ¢=90.906 6.694. Lagg

Anadi ith -L90

1. The stock triggers an entry at 52 1/16.

2. The low of the setup bar is more than 5% away from our entry, so we
place our protective stop at 49 7/16 for a risk of approximately 5% (2
5/8 points).

3. The stock rallies to 54 11/16 and we lock in half of the profits for a 2
5/8-point gain.

4. We move our stop to breakeven (the same as the entry).

5. Trail a stop higher. Here we used a simple two-bar low. As swing
traders we would look to continue to scale out of the position as it
continues to move in our favor and would likely have been out by the
end of the seventh day. For those willing to stay in the market for ex-
tended periods, you could have trailed a stop on a piece of the posi-
tion. In this case, this simple trailing-stop technique would have kept
you in for a 38-point run.



More Exaniples

TREND QUALIFIERS
AND SETUP EXAMPLES

FIGURE 15.4

195

Lehman Bros-Daily 08/07/2000. C=127.000 -2625 | 4ag
vo } iN es | {* — Ltt0
eee 7 (| et Sa a L100
ft |
fants

MS aS. DOA STE ANS

eee ee oe

Lehman Brothers, a stock in a strong uptrend, forms a High-Level Mi-
cro Double Bottom.

The stock breaks to new highs on an expansion of range.

c. The stock gaps to new highs—another momentum clue.

a rw

_

New highs again.

The stock begins to pull back forming a three-bar pullback and a Sim-
ple Pullback.

The stocks resumes its uptrend on an expansion of range
New highs.

A four-bar deep pullback (Snapback).

High-Level Micro Double Bottom.



LE
196 Chapter 15

FIGURE 15.5

Genome Therapeutics C-Daily 06/21/2000 C=37.000

a. Genome Therapeutics (GENE) has a wide-range bar higher and strong
close.

b. The stock gaps to a two-month high.

c. A Bow Tie forms: the moving averages converge and then spread out
again combined with a lower low.

d. Positive slope in the moving averages.

e. An entry for the Bow Tie, which is also a simple three-bar pullback
from highs.



a
More Examples 197

FIGURE 15.6

Transwitch Corp-Daily 02/29/2000 C=58.750 |

a. Transwitch (TXCC) forms a high-level “running saucer.”
b. Double Top Knockout.

c. The trend resumes... Daylight.

d. Positive slope in the moving averages.

e. Simple four-bar pullback.



a
198 Chapter 15

FIGURE 15.7

PMC-Sierra-Daily.. 03/10/2000. .C=248.437..+.187.......... ee

|

a. PMC-Sierra makes new highs and forms a high-level micro cup and
handle.

b. This also sets up as a Double Top Knockout.

c. Trend Knockout.

d. Positive slope on moving averages and Daylight.
e. Trend Knockout

f. Simple three-bar pullback.

g. Trend Knockout

h. Trend Knockout



More Examples 199

FIGURE 15.8

Viratra Corp-Daily 03/06/2000 C=99.912 426.997

a. Viratra Corp., a stock in a strong uptrend, makes a new high.
b. Three-bar pullback.

c. Positive slope in 10-SMA, 20-EMA and 30-EMA. Also, Daylight (ows
greater than moving averages).

d. New High.

e. Simple six-bar pullback.

f. Simple three-bar pullback.
g. Trend Knockout.



LE
200 Chapter 15

FIGURE 15.9

Genome Therapeutics ¢ rp-Daily 03/02/2000 —_

a. Daylight.
b. Wide-range bar higher/base breakout.

c. Three-bar pullback.

d. Another pullback.

e. Daylight, positive slope.
f. Trend Knockout (TKO).
g. TKO.



More Examples 201

FIGURE 15.10

a. Daylight.

b. Positive slope in moving averages and 10-SMA > 20-EMA > 30-EMA
(proper order).

c. Bow Tie entry, new two-month high on expansion of range.
d. Another new high.

e. Simple three-bar pullback.

f. High-Level Micro Double Bottom.

New two-month high on expansion of range.

= ae

Deep pullback (Snapback).



ee
202 Chapter 15

Here we have an example in the Technology SPDRs (“Spiders”).

FIGURE 15.11

Technology Sector - XLK-Daily 12/30/1999

a. The Tech Spiders (XLK) form a cup.
b. Daylight (ows greater than moving averages).

c. Moving averages converge and then spread out forming a Bow Tie.
Also, moving averages now in proper uptrend order
(10-SMA>20-EMA>30-EMA).

d. Bow Tie entry.
e. Simple three-bar pullback.
Trend Knockout (TKO).

ima

Another Trend Knockout. Very similar to Double Top Knockout.

z a9

Base breakout.



CHAPTER 1 6

MORE THOUGHTS

oeeoesoeenoe od ee RP eee we eFeoeeeeaweae#k#eaeaoeerkae,a

Why write this book?

It's funny. Trading is about the only profession in which you get criti-
cized for writing a book. I suppose it’s because the business is a com-
petitive one and not a cooperative one. I’ll admit that I did write it for
the obvious reasons: ego and money. It would be great to be known
as an authority on swing trading. Making some money in the process
doesn’t hurt either. However, there’s something over and above the
obvious. I have struggled for years to become a successful trader.
There were times during extended drawdowns when I felt completely
worthless. In spite of all my formal education, during these periods I
felt like about all I was good for was flipping burgers. Knowing how
painful this is, I would hate to see any struggling trader go through
this process. My intent was to write a complete manual that any
trader serious about being successful could follow. Also, though it was
not my original intent, soon after I began writing, this manual became
a manual for me. It forced me to realize when I was violating my own
rules. Putting everything down in writing cemented the process. In
fact, 90% of my losing trades while writing this book occurred when I
didn’t follow my own rules.

203



a
204 Chapter 16

Q. Are you worried that someone will come in, take your patterns and
eradicate the edge?

A. My patterns are all designed for swing trades. Large traders and insti-
tutions can’t make money on this time frame. Due to their size, they
have to scale in over a period of days to weeks. Also, if someone has
achieved the status of a “large trader” or institution, chances are they
have their own ways of doing things. They’re not going to run out
and read a book and apply the concepts. One last point: most people
when they read about a method don’t follow it to a “T.” They put
their own twist on it.

Q. What would you suggest to a beginner who’s dedicated to learning
how to trade?

A. First and foremost, they should learn as much as possible about
money management. Memorize the drawdown charts. Know that if
you lose half of your money, it’ll take a 100% gain to get back to
breakeven. Look at charts, lots of charts. Find something simple and
stick with it. Also, be optimistic but realistic. Some of the best money
managers in the world, on average, only return between 20% and 30%
per year, but do so with very minimal drawdowns year in and year
out.

Q. Are there any traits in beginning traders that would suggest to you
that they will eventually become successful?

A. We're all setup junkies, so most that approach me have questions
about patterns and charts. However, when someone asks me a money
management question, I have the utmost respect for him or her. I im-
mediately think, now here’s a guy (or gal) who’s going to be success-
ful. Hard work is also vitally important. Trading, on the surface, looks
like the complete life of leisure. You click a few keys, rake in the cash
and then go sit on your yacht to count your money. In reality, it’s a lot
of hard work. I have yet to meet a successful trader who puts in fewer
hours than those in the corporate world. I was once at a seminar sur-
rounded by six traders who were dying to know how I go about find-
ing stocks to trade. I explained to them that I first tool through about
600 charts after the close. Four of the “traders” looked at each other,
shook their heads and walked off. I suppose they expected me to say,
“Oh, I run a magic scan and then I’m off to the beach.” The two re-
maining individuals began to berate me with questions: “What chart-
ing software do you use?” “Who is your data vendor?” “How fast is



a
More Thoughts 205

your computer?” “How big are your monitors?” and so on and so
forth. If I had to put money on who would be successful out of the
six, I think I know which two to bet on.

Q. You have many setups. Do you trade them all?

A. Obviously, everything doesn’t set up every day. But, yes, unlike many
who publish patterns for the sake of publishing, I use every pattern in
this manual either directly in trading or in helping me develop a game
plan for trading.

Q. What setups do you mostly focus on?

A. I focus mostly on the basics, which is covered in the first section of the
manual. In fact, this probably makes up about 90% of what I do. The
rest is based on more advanced concepts.

Q. Referring to your advanced techniques. Are there any patterns that
you will almost always take?

A. On the more rare patterns, such as the Double Top Knockout, I'll
watch for entries. I suppose this is because not too many stocks set up
at any given time making it easy to track. Also, I'll strongly consider
any pattern that sets up as a combination such as a shallow pullback
in a low volatility situation.

Q. Do you trade every day?

A. Because I write a nightly analysis for TradingMarkets.com, I’m forced
to do my homework. Through this, I can usually find something
worthwhile. However, if I encounter a string of losses, I’ll back way
off and possibly even quit for a while until I can figure out if it’s me
or the markets.

Q. What percentage of your trades are correct?

A. In trading the results are skewed. It can get really streaky. There are
times when I will go weeks on end and 90% to 100% of my trades are
winners. Other times, it’s just the opposite. You have to realize that
the majority of your profits come from the minority of trades. If I had to
come up with an average, I’d say about 50% to 60%. But, I no longer
worry about being right, instead I focus on making money.

Q. Your examples show exactly where to get in and exactly where to
place your protective stops. Can you elaborate more on what to do af-



a
206 Chapter 16

ter you've entered and placed your stops? In other words, how to
manage the position.

A. The secret to position management is taking half of your profits once
they are equal to or greater than your initial risk and then moving
your stop to breakeven (2-for-1 Money Management). This will gener-
ate income for your account. This income is vital to long-term sur-
vival, as it will help to cover the inevitable and often frequent small
losses associated with swing trading.

Q. Okay, suppose you are fortunate enough to have taken half profits
and you have moved your stop on your remaining shares to
breakeven. How do you manage the remainder of the position?

A. You're in a great place from both a psychological and financial posi-
tion once you have moved your stop to breakeven. This is the easy
part. I look to do two things: continue to scale out and trail stops. If
I’m lucky enough to get a parabolic move (e.g., a sharp move higher
in a long position) then by all means, I take most, if not all of it.

Q. You didn’t talk much about trailing stops. Can you elaborate?

A. _ It’s really not rocket science. One of my favorite techniques is to trail a
stop below the lowest low of the prior two bars (for longs). So if on
Monday the low is 98 and the low for Tuesday is 100, then going into
Wednesday, I'll ratchet my stop up to 97 15/16, right below the lowest
of the two prior days. I have an example of this under More Examples
(Chapter 15).

Q. What about time stops?

A. After five or six days I find my patience starts to wane. I’m usually
out by the seventh day unless I’m fortunate enough to be in a strong
trend. At this point, I'll continue to trail a stop.



CHAPTER 1 7

READY, SET, WAIT!

esoeseesese 8 8b 8B ee oe ww ee ow ew oe es ow ew ee 8

This manual is the culmination of over 10 years of research, market analy-
sis and trading. I strongly believe that I have included everything that a
swing trader needs in order to take on the markets and be successful. This is
not to say that you should run out and try all of the methods and concepts
immediately. Ease into it, especially if you are fairly new to trading. Study
each pattern and setup in this book. If it makes sense to you, research it and
find historical setups. Which ones worked? Which ones didn’t? What were
the market dynamics at that time? What were the sector dynamics? Is there
a modification to the setup that would lend itself more to your style of trad-
ing? Are there money-management techniques you could implement that
would allow you to control risk or capture larger profits? Once you’ve done
your homework, then paper trade method(s). Be a realist and carefully doc-
ument your records—timestamp your “trades” or use a tracking service.

After you have completed the above due diligence, make sure you go
through one final checklist before jumping into the markets:

What is the setup?
Where is your entry?
Where is your protective stop?

Wherg will you look to scale out?

207


LS
208 Chapter 17

What is the overall market doing?
Are there any systems that are triggering?
Is there momentum?
Are there any setups that are triggering?
What is the sector doing?
Is there momentum?
Are there any setups that are triggering?
Are you focused, free of distractions and of sound body and mind?

After you have answered all of the above, you should be ready to face
the markets.



CHAPTER 1 8

CLOSING THOUGHTS

As I complete this manual in late 2000, many of the biggest and best names
associated with a “buy and hold” portfolio have been decimated. Home De-
pot, Intel, Microsoft and America Online are down over 50% from their
highs; Yahoo! and AT&T have lost over 60% of their value since the begin-
ning of the year; Lucent (LU) has lost over 70% of its value during the same
period and Apple Computer is 80% off its highs. The list goes on and on.

My method of swing trading allows you to a) participate in the best
names at the most opportune times and b) when wrong, avoid being
caught in debacles such as those listed above.

Best of luck with your trading!

Dave Landry

PS. Protective stops on every trade!

209




APPENDIX

FORMULAS

While the following formula for historical volatility may be of use to a mathema-
tician, you should ideally have a software program calculate this for you.

CALCULATING HISTORICAL VOLATILITY

Let Length = length of volatility to be calculated
and In = natural logarithm

Historical Volatility(length) = standard deviation(In(close/ yesterday's
close),length) * 100 * square root (256).
In English:
1. Divide today’s close by yesterday’s close.
2. Take the natural log of #1.

3. Take the standard deviation of #2 for length desired (the number of
trading days, ie. 50)

4. Multiply #3 by 100.

5. Multiply #4 by the square root of the number of trading days in 1 year
(around 256).

211


212 Appendix

GLOSSARY

The following terms are used throughout this manual. Even if you are a
more advanced trader, you might want to skim this chapter to see how
they are defined for purposes of this manual.

Average Directional Movement Index (ADX)—Developed by Welles
Wilder, this formula is used to measure the strength of a market but not
its direction. The higher the reading, the stronger the trend, regardless if
it is up or down. It is calculated based on the Positive Directional Move-
ment Index (+DMI) and Minus Directional Movement Index (-DMI). See
+DMI, -DMI, “Capturing Trends Through ADX” in this appendix for
more information.

Bar Chart—-Shows the open, high, low and close of a market.

High

Open “Close

N\

Low

Downtrend—A series of lower lows and lower highs.

Lower

par

/
|

+DMI—see Plus Directional Movement Index.

i



LE
Appendix 212

-DMI—see Minus Directional Movement Index.

Exponential Moving Average—A moving average that gives higher
weighting to more recent prices.

Fading—Trading contrary to the trend.

Gap Down—Today’s open is less than yesterday’s low.

Yesterday's
Low
Today's Open

Gap Up—Today’s open is greater than yesterday's high.

Today's Open

Yesterday's _
High

Higher High—Today’s high is greater than yesterday's high.



214 Appendix

Higher Low—Today’s low is greater than yesterday’s low.

Historical Volatility—A statistical measurement of how much prices
have fluctuated in the past. It can be used to measure risk and potential
reward. See Chapter 4, Stock Selection, Section Three, Volatility and the
Appendix for more details.

Initial Protective Stop—An order placed right after a trade is entered to
help control risk.

Lap Down—Today’s open is less than yesterday’s close but not less than
yesterday’s low.

Today's Open

Yesterday

Lap Up—Today’s open is greater than yesterday’s close but not greater
than yesterday’s high.

Today's Open

Yesterday

Limit Order—An order to buy or sell at a specified price.



Appendix 215

Long—A position that seeks to profit if the market rises. To buy.
Lower High—Today’s high is less than yesterday’s high.

Lower Low—Today’s low is less than yesterday’s low.

Market Order—An order to be executed immediately at the asking price
for buys and at the bid price for sales.

Minus Directional Movement Index (-DMI)—A component used in the
calculation of ADX that measures the downward movement of a market.
If it is greater than the Positive Directional Movement, it suggests a
downtrend.

Moving Average—The average price of a stock over a given period. For
instance, a 10-day moving average would be the sum of those prices di-
vided by 10. See Chapter 3, Trend Qualifiers for more details.

Outside Day—Today’s high is greater than yesterday's high and today’s
low is less than yesterday's low.

nN

Yesterday —< Today



LE
216 Appendix

Pivot High—A high surrounded by two lower highs. Can also be two
equal (or in rare cases three) highs surrounded by two lower highs.

or

Pivot Low—A low surrounded by two higher lows. Can also be two
equal (or in rare cases three equal) lows surrounded by two higher lows.

Poor Close—The market closes in the bottom 25% of its range.
High.

rp Bottom 25%

Low



Appendix

Plus Directional Movement Index (+DMI)—A component used in the
calculation of ADX that measures the upward movement of a market. If
it is in greater than the Negative Directional Movement Index (-DMD), it
suggests an uptrend.

Protective Buy Stop-—Used to help control losses when shorting stocks.
The order is placed above the current price of the stock. It becomes a mar-
ket order if the stock trades at or above the specified price.

Protective Sell Stop—Used to help control losses when buying stocks.
The order is placed below the current price of a stock. It becomes a mar-
ket order if the stock trades at or below the specified price.
