
opportunity to buy such a large bundle of distressed assets had never arisen so quickly in his career.
The next day, the Gates party went ashore at low tide to view the hundreds of brown grizzly bears that
frequented Pack Creek. Jon Corzine, the head of Goldman Sachs, called Buffett on his satellite phone but
kept being cut off. “The phone didn’t work because of these half-mile-high rock walls on either side of the
boat. The captain would point out, Look, there’s a bear. I was saying, To hell with the bear. Let’s get back
where I can hear the satellite phone.”
Two or three hours went by with Buffett held incommunicado as the party spent the afternoon crossing
Frederick Sound so they could view the humpback whales. Corzine stewed in New York before he regained
brief—and final—contact with Buffett. By the time Buffett resignedly trudged off to view a slide show on
Alaskan marine wildlife that evening, Corzine had gathered that he could make a bid, as long as the
investment had nothing to do with, and was not managed by, John Meriwether.
On Monday, Buffett remained out of touch and Corzine grew pessimistic about working out a bid. He had
begun to talk with Peter Fisher, who ran trading activities at the Federal Reserve, and was drawing together
Long-Term’s creditors to negotiate a joint bailout. The Federal Reserve had held a conference call at which
its chairman, Alan Greenspan, spoke of an “international financial maelstrom” that must be causing
“considerable breakage to crockery somewhere.”31 Hope began to stir that the Fed would cut interest rates.
Meanwhile, Long-Term lost another half billion dollars; the banks picking over its books were using what
they learned against it.32 The fund now had less than a billion dollars of capital left. The irony was the $2.3
billion it had paid out to its own investors a year before in order to increase the share of the fund owned by
its partners. If it had that money now, Long-Term might have been in a position to survive on its own.
Instead, it had a hundred dollars of debt for every dollar of capital—a ratio no sane lender would ever
entertain.
Buffett was en route to Bozeman, Montana, with the Gates party, but Corzine had reached him earlier that
morning and gained permission to enlist a large insurer, AIG, which owned a derivatives business, to join the
bid. Its chairman, Hank Greenberg, was on friendly terms with Buffett. AIG had the experience and the team
to replace Meriwether as manager, and Greenberg’s powerful presence would balance out Buffett’s—and it
might make Buffett’s bid more palatable to Meriwether.
The next morning, forty-five bankers arrived at the Fed, as summoned, to discuss a bailout of the customer
that had bullied them so relentlessly for the past four years. Long-Term had them over a figurative barrel
once again, for if it went down, other hedge funds would go down with it. As one domino fell after another, a
global financial meltdown was a real possibility—a repeat of Salomon. This was the warning that Buffett and
Munger had been repeating at their shareholder meetings since 1993. Some of the banks now feared for their
survival unless they helped save the fund. They were reluctantly contemplating putting more money into
Long-Term—money that would only go to pay Long-Term’s debts—on top of money they had already
invested in the fund and lost. When Corzine told them Buffett was also bidding, the idea that he was going to
come in and buy it to make a killing went down poorly, even though he would be bailing everybody out.
Somehow, Buffett always won. People found it irksome. New York Federal Reserve Bank President William
McDonough called Buffett to find out if he was serious. About to board a bus for Yellowstone National Park,
Buffett told McDonough that, yes, indeed, he was ready to make a bid and could do so on short notice. He
couldn’t see why the Federal Reserve would be orchestrating a bailout when Berkshire, AIG, and Goldman
Sachs, a group of private buyers, stood ready to solve the whole problem without government assistance. He
called Long-Term around eleven o’clock New York time on a crackly satellite phone and said, “I want you to
know, I’m going to bid for the entire portfolio. You’ll hear from my representatives, but I want you to know
it’s coming from me, and I hope you’ll take it seriously.”
“I didn’t want to hold the bus up, so I went along. It was killing me. And Charlie was in Hawaii. I still knew
the basic positions that were involved, and I knew these spreads were really getting more and more
extreme. On that Wednesday morning, it was changing by the hour.”
An hour later, Goldman faxed a single page to Meriwether offering to buy the fund for $250 million. As part

of the deal, Meriwether and his partners would be fired. If Meriwether accepted, AIG, Berkshire, and
Goldman would put another $3.75 billion into Long-Term, with Berkshire funding most of that. To minimize
the chance of Long-Term shopping the bid to gin up a higher offer, Buffett had given them only an hour to
decide.
By then, Long-Term had just over $500 million left, and Buffett was bidding just under half that. After
paying off debt and losses, Meriwether and his partners would be wiped out, their nearly $2 billion of capital
gone. But the document had been drafted by Goldman with a mistake in it. It offered to buy LTCM, the
management company, instead of its assets, which Meriwether knew was what Buffett wanted. Meriwether’s
lawyer said he needed his partners’ consent to sell the entire portfolio rather than the management
company.33 Long-Term asked for a temporary emergency investment pending receipt of the approvals. But
they couldn’t reach Buffett on his phone. If they’d reached him, he said later, he would have taken that deal.
While everybody else on the Gold Rush trip was looking at hot springs, Buffett was dialing and redialing the
satellite phone in Yellowstone, trying to call Corzine at Goldman and Hank Greenberg at AIG. The phone
didn’t work. He had no idea what was going on back in New York.
The people at Long-Term did not know what was going on in the room with the bankers, where McDonough
was in a quandary. He had an offer from the Berkshire-Goldman-AIG consortium but no deal. It was hard to
justify government involvement in orchestrating a bailout when there was a viable private bid on the table.
Finally, he told the assembled bankers that the other bid had failed for “structural reasons.” Buffett was not
there to make a counterargument. The Federal Reserve brokered a deal in which fourteen banks put up a
total of $3.6 billion. Only one bank, Bear Stearns, refused to participate, earning the long-lasting enmity of
the rest. Meriwether’s crew negotiated an arrangement for themselves that they considered slightly better
than “indentured servitude.”34
That night at the Lake Hotel, Buffett found out what had happened. He felt that Meriwether didn’t want to
sell to him. If he had wanted to, he would have found a way. Perhaps it had weighed on Meriwether’s mind
that, as one of the fund’s partners said, “Buffett cares about one thing. His reputation. Because of the
Salomon scandal he couldn’t be seen to be in business with J.M.”35 Meriwether had certainly gotten a better
deal from the bailout than he would have with Buffett.
The next day, as they boarded the bus to visit Old Faithful geyser, Buffett was still turning over in his mind
whether there was some way to undo it. Gates had a treat in store. When they arrived in Livingston,
Montana, in early afternoon to board a nine-car private train fitted out with burnished wood and polished
leather that Gates had rented, Sharon Osberg was waiting along with Fred Gitelman, a low-key computer
programmer and bridge player. Gates had flown them in. While everyone else was admiring the cliffs and
waterfalls of the Wind River Canyon, the foursome retired to an upstairs lounge with a transparent dome for
a twelve-hour bridge marathon. Periodically, Buffett’s phone rang and he talked with someone in New York
about Long-Term as the spectacular scenery rolled past. It still might not be too late to unwind the impending
bailout and resurrect a private deal. But it wasn’t working out.36 At least the bridge distracted him.
The next morning, after a final round of bridge, the train rolled to a halt and dropped Osberg and Gitelman
off in Denver, then continued through Devil’s Hole Canyon and Dead Man’s Gulch. Over the next few days,
as the others went white-water rafting and mountain biking and the train wound its leisurely way to the Napa
Valley via the Grand Canyon, Buffett read about the rescue in the newspapers and gradually lost hope of
participating.
Only seven years after the regulators had contemplated letting Salomon fail—with all the consequences that
that potentially entailed—the Federal Reserve had now engineered the bailout of a private investment firm,
an unprecedented intervention in the market to avoid a similar event. Afterward, the Fed slashed interest
rates three times in seven weeks to help keep the financial stumble from paralyzing the economy. It was by
no means certain that any such paralysis would occur, but the stock market took off like a screaming
banshee.37 Long-Term’s partners and most of the staff worked for a year for $250,000—pauper’s wages for
people used to making millions a year—to unwind the fund’s positions and pay back most of the emergency
creditors.38 Hilibrand, in debt for $24 million, signed the employment contract with tears streaming down his

cheeks.39 Still, nobody starved, even though Eric Rosenfeld had to auction off Long-Term’s wine collection.
Most of them got good jobs afterward. Meriwether made a comeback to start a smaller, less leveraged fund,
taking some of his team. People thought the partners had gotten off light, considering that they had nearly
sent the whole financial world into a seizure. And Buffett considered it one of the great missed opportunities
of his life.
Eric Rosenfeld had an insight. Maybe models didn’t work when the world went mad. For that you needed a
lot of capital, the kind that Berkshire Hathaway offered. After all, if you were going to bet by a hundred
billion or more in favor of risk, you needed a partner, even a parent, one with so much capital that it
essentially undid the leverage, somebody to provide a big umbrella in a storm.40 By implication, maybe they
would have been better off being owned by somebody like Berkshire Hathaway. But that would have meant
giving up their ownership…. You couldn’t have it both ways. If you wanted Berkshire to take the risk and
put up the money, to it went the gains.
To think otherwise was unrealistic—that somehow risk could be laid off to someone else without also giving
up the rewards. But that point of view was growing and beginning to dominate the financial markets of the
late 1990s. It would have profound consequences over time.
It is hard to overstate the significance of a central-bank-led rescue of a private money manager. If a hedge
fund, however large, was too big to fail, then what large financial institution would ever be allowed to
collapse? The government risked becoming the margin of safety.41 No serious consequences had come about
in the end from the derivatives near-meltdown. The market afterward seemed to behave as if no serious
consequences ever could. This threat, the so-called “moral hazard,” was a chronic worry of regulators. But
the world would always be full of people who loved risk. When it came to business, Buffett’s veins were
filled with ice, but plenty of other people’s pulsed with adrenaline much of the time. Some of them had even
been members of his own family.

52
Chickenfeed
Decatur, Illinois, and Atlanta • 1995–1999

Howie and Devon were on the lam. He had walked out of the office at ADM on a Friday knowing he would
never return. A pack of reporters had been camped out in their driveway ever since. He and Devon started
packing. They sneaked out of Decatur at dawn on Sunday on a rented prop plane to fly to Chicago, where
they met family friend Don Keough, who was giving them a ride to Sun Valley on his private jet. Since
reporters weren’t allowed inside the Allen conference, Howie thought they would be safe.
He had been pacing the floor for ten days, ever since Mark Whitacre, an excitable manager he knew at
ADM, suddenly confessed to him that he was acting as an FBI mole. Whitacre told him that the FBI was
going to arrive at Howie’s house at six o’clock on Tuesday night for an interview. Now Howie knew why
Whitacre kept showing up at work for several days in a row in the same greenish polyester suit: He had been
wearing a wire. Ever since Whitacre made his confession, he’d been calling every day, blathering his
anxieties at Howie, who tried to disentangle himself. Howie hadn’t busted Whitacre, but he could tell from
the panic in Whitacre’s voice that he must be cracking under the stress.
That Tuesday night, Devon tried to fix dinner with shaking hands. When the doorbell rang, Howie wanted to
throw up. In came a guy in a suit—who told him he was not a target. Three hundred FBI agents were fanned
out across the country, interviewing other people about price-fixing of an ADM product called lysine that

was used in chicken feed.
Howie was terrified but had made up his mind to be completely forthcoming with the FBI. He said he didn’t
trust Dwayne Andreas, who had put him in charge of funneling requests for political contributions, a role,
given Andreas’s history, that might have made anybody’s stomach churn.1 He told the agent that the
previous fall Andreas had rebuked him when he raised ethical questions about providing entertainment to a
Congressman. Howie didn’t know anything about price-fixing, however.
The second the FBI agents left, Howie called his father, flailing, saying, I don’t know what to do, I don’t have
the facts, how do I know if these allegations are true? My name is on every press release. How can I be the
spokesman for the company worldwide? What should I do, should I resign?
Buffett refrained from the obvious response, which was that, of his three children, only Howie could have
wound up with an FBI agent in his living room after taking his first job in the corporate world. He listened to
the story nonjudgmentally and told Howie that it was his decision whether to stay at ADM. He gave only one
piece of advice: Howie had to decide within the next twenty-four hours. If you stay in longer than that, he
said, you’ll become one of them. No matter what happens, it will be too late to get out.
That clarified things. Howie now realized that waiting was not a way to get more information to help him
decide, it was making the decision to stay. He had to look at his options and understand as of right now what
they meant.
If he resigned and they were innocent, he would lose friends and look like a jerk.
If he stayed and they were guilty, he would be viewed as consorting with a gang of criminals.
The next day Howie went in, resigned, and told the general counsel that he would take legal action against
the company if they put his name on any more press releases. Resigning from the board was a major event.
For a director to resign was like sending up a smoke signal that said the company was guilty, guilty, guilty.
People at ADM did not make it easy for Howie. They pushed for reprieve, they asked how he could in effect
convict them without a trial. Howie held firm, however, and got out.
Two days later, when the announcement of his resignation became public, the reporters camped out on his
doorstep. The name Buffett attached to a scandal was like red meat to rottweilers. The wisdom of moving
fast was even more apparent now that he and Devon had to manage a getaway from their own home.
But Howie soon found that despite the absence of reporters, who were excluded from the event, even Sun
Valley was not safe. One of the first people he saw in the lobby of the Sun Valley Lodge was another ADM
board member. This man, who would be around all weekend, poked him in the chest and said, “You’ve just
made the biggest mistake of your life.”2
He couldn’t have been more wrong. Howie had just saved himself from being associated with a disaster in
which three top executives, including the vice chairman Michael Andreas, would go to prison in the biggest
price-fixing case in American history.3 ADM paid an enormous fine to settle with the government, and its
reputation took a hit that would shadow it for years.
Now, however, the contretemps had left Howie out of a job. Big Susie, who was concerned about him and
also about Susie Jr., who was getting divorced from Allen, swung into action and convinced Warren to begin
a tradition of giving each of the kids a million dollars once every five years on their birthdays, starting then.
Buffett not only went along but bragged on himself for beginning this tradition. He had begun to loosen up
significantly when it came to money. Susie’s allowance had expanded dramatically. At her behest, Buffett
bought another house in Laguna next to the first, known as the “dormitory,” to house all the children and
grandchildren and visitors.4 Susie’s Pacific Heights apartment, up a million stairs with no elevator but with an
amazing view of the Golden Gate Bridge and Alcatraz, had been transformed to feature white lacquered
walls and carpeting in her trademark sunny yellow. Almost every inch of space was covered with things she

had purchased, collected from her travels, or been given by friends. There were paintings and masks created
by artist friends, a Chinese altar cloth, a Balinese tapestry, Tiffany glass, souvenirs and tchotchkes of all
kinds, some expensive, many cheap and offbeat. They filled her walls, cabinets, closets, and drawers to
overflowing.
The effect struck observers, depending on their perspective, as colorful, beautiful, and a wonderful reflection
of Susie’s personality, or a chaotic magpie’s nest of things. Susie was always lobbying for more space; along
with the second apartment she had convinced Warren to buy her on the ground floor of her building,
unknown to him, she had also begun to rent storage rooms around San Francisco to house her ever-expanding
collections.
Susie’s ministry to the sick and dying seemed to compound as rapidly as her collections. She had carried on
her work with AIDS sufferers through the 1990s. Then her sister Dottie began a battle with terminal cancer.
All through Dottie’s earlier struggles—with alcoholism, with health and marital problems, with the death of
her son Billy—Susie had been by her side. Susie stayed in Omaha to nurse her sister through her last months
and days. When Dottie finally died, another person Susie had not, in the end, been able to save, it was the
greatest loss she had suffered since her nephew’s terrible death by overdose. And Susie was now the last
person alive from her original family.
In summer 1996, she had to help Warren deal with the death of his ninety-two-year-old mother. Even in her
later years, Leila had never stopped berating the family. She could still work Doris over on the phone or
during a visit, barely stopping for breath for an hour or more, sending Doris into tears and ending with “I’m
glad we had this little talk.” Warren himself continued to avoid Leila, having relegated most of the caretaking
to Susie Jr. He spoke much more often and more fondly of Rose Blumkin than he ever did of his mother.
When Astrid and Sharon Osberg took him out to visit Leila, he was a “wreck,” and the two women would
talk to Warren’s mother while he sat by anxiously, not participating in the conversation. As Leila’s memory
faded, her story mostly wound down to the 381/2 wonderful years with Howard and one other topic that
seemed to have lodged itself in her mind during Warren’s infancy: “Isn’t it a shame about the little Lindbergh
baby?” she would ask. “Isn’t it a shame?”
After Leila died—on Warren’s sixty-sixth birthday—the family assembled for a funeral, their grieving
complicated by a cauldron of mixed emotions. She went to rest as the person she had been; any hopes of
what she could have become had things been different went to the grave along with her.
“I cried a lot when my mother died. It wasn’t because I was sad and missed her. It was because of the waste.
She had her good parts, but the bad parts kept me from having a relationship with her. My dad and I never
talked about it. But I really regret the waste of what could have been.”
With both his parents gone, Warren was the senior member of his family, the watchkeeper at that thin
boundary between life and death. It was his sisters, however, whose lives were most affected by Leila’s
death. They were surprised to find themselves inheriting a sizable amount of Berkshire stock from their
mother, more than they had originally owned themselves, along with the first distribution from their father’s
trust set up by their brother years before. Bertie had kept all her Berkshire stock from the beginning, and had
her own philanthropic interests. She had always tended to contribute her energy and effort quietly, behind the
scenes and did not want to play a leading role. And Doris now had real money again, for the first time since
the “naked puts” debacle had wiped her out in 1987. For Doris, her mother’s death was a new beginning. She
set up her own foundation, the Sunshine Lady Foundation, and started her giving with the Edith Stahl Kraft
Outstanding Teacher Award, named after their aunt Edie—and modeled on the Omaha teacher awards
named after their aunt Alice that her brother’s foundation gave out.
Warren’s sisters were now rich. Two of his children also had a little money, thanks to Susie’s persuasiveness
about the million-dollar birthday gifts. Buffett had never demanded an accounting of the huge amounts it
took to fund Susie’s largesse, although he scratched his head and wondered what on earth she did with all the
money. The tax complication of the large gifts to their children, however, required that she give Warren a
history of her gift-giving. He had always been proud of her generosity, although not always pleased about
those who benefited from it. He was now particularly displeased by some of her larger gifts, which flew in the
