Media Cultivation of Debate
In an attempt to attract audiences, the news media try to present debate
about issues on the public mind. This may mean creating a debate on topics

103

T HE N E W S M E D I A

that experts would not otherwise consider deserving of such discussion. The
resulting media event may convey the impression that there are experts on all
sides of the issue, thereby suggesting a lack of expert agreement on the very
issues that people are most confused about.
Over the years, I have been called by news people asking me whether
I would be willing to make a statement in support of some extreme view.
When I declined, the next request would sometimes be to recommend another
expert who would go on record in support of the position.
Five days before the 1987 stock market crash, the MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour
featured Ravi Batra, author of The Great Depression of 1990: Why It’s Got to
Happen, How to Protect Yourself. This book took as its basic premise a theory
that history tends to repeat itself in exact detail, so that the 1929 crash and
the subsequent depression had to repeat themselves. Despite Batra’s significant scholarly reputation, this particular book of his is not one that would be
viewed with any seriousness by most reputable scholars of the market. But it
had been on the New York Times best‑seller list for fifteen weeks by the time
of the crash. On the NewsHour, Batra confidently predicted a stock market
crash in 1989 that would “spread to the whole world”; after it, he declared,
“there will be a depression.”4 Batra’s statements, made as they were on a
highly respected show, may—even though they predicted a crash two years
thence—have contributed in some small measure to an atmosphere of vulnerability that brought us the crash of 1987. Although Batra’s appearance on the
NewsHour just before the crash might be considered a coincidence, one must
keep in mind that predictions of stock market crashes are actually quite rare
on national news shows. The proximity of his appearance to the actual crash
is at the very least highly suggestive.
Should the media be faulted for presenting debates on topics of little merit?
One can argue that they ought to focus on a variety of topics of interest to
general audiences, so that the public can refine their views. Yet in doing so, the
media seem often to disseminate and reinforce ideas that are not supported
by real evidence. If news directors followed only their highest intellectual
interests in judging which views to present, the public might indeed find its
consciousness constructively broadened. But that is apparently not how the
media see their mission—nor do competitive pressures encourage them to
rethink the matter.

Reporting on the Market Outlook
There is no shortage of media accounts that try to answer our questions
about the market today, but there is a shortage in these accounts of relevant
facts or considered interpretations of them. Many news stories in fact seem
to have been written under a deadline to produce something—anything—to

104

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

go along with the numbers from the market. The typical such story, after
noting the remarkable bull market, focuses on very short‑run statistics.
It generally states which groups of stocks have risen more than others in
recent months. Although these stocks are described as leaders, there is no
good reason to think that their performance has caused the bull market.
The news story may talk about the “usual” factors behind economic growth,
such as the Internet boom, in glowing terms and with at least a hint of
patriotic congratulation to our powerful economic engine. The article then
finishes with quotes from a few well‑chosen “celebrity” sources, offering
their outlook for the future. Sometimes the article is so completely devoid
of genuine thought about the reasons for the bull market and the context
for considering its outlook that it is hard to believe that the writer was other
than cynical in his or her approach.
What are the celebrity sources quoted as saying in these articles? They
typically give numerical forecasts for the Dow in the near future, tell stories
or jokes, and dispense their personal opinions. For example, when Abby
Joseph Cohen of Goldman Sachs & Co. coined a quotable phrase—as with
her warnings against “FUDD” (fear, uncertainty, doubt, and despair) or her
phrase “Silly Putty Economy”—it was disseminated widely. Beyond that,
the media quote her opinions but pay no critical attention to her analysis. In
fact, although she no doubt has access to a formidable research department
and performs extensive data analysis before forming her opinions, they are
ultimately reported as just that—her opinions. Of course, she should not be
faulted for this, for it is the nature of the sound‑bite‑driven media that superficial opinions are preferred to in‑depth analyses.

Record Overload
The media often seem to thrive on superlatives, and we, their audience, are
confused as to whether the price increases we have recently seen in the stock
market are all that unusual. Data suggesting that we are setting some new
record (or are at least close to doing so) are regularly stressed in the media,
and if reporters look at the data in enough different ways, they will often find
something that is close to setting a record on any given day. In covering the stock
market, many writers mention “record one‑day price changes”—measured
in points on the Dow rather than percentage terms, so that records are much
more likely. Although the media have become increasingly enlightened about
reporting in terms of points on the Dow in recent years, the practice still
persists among some writers.
This record overload—the impression that new and significant records
are constantly being set—only adds to the confusion people have about the
economy. It makes it hard for people to recognize when something truly

T HE N E W S M E D I A

105

and importantly new really is happening. It also, with its deluge of different
indicators, encourages an avoidance of individual assessment of quantitative
data—a preference for seeing the data interpreted for us by celebrity sources.

Do Big Stock Price Changes Really Follow Big News Days?
Many people seem to think that it is the reporting of specific news events, the
serious content of news, that affects financial markets. But research offers far
less support for this view than one would imagine.
Victor Niederhoffer, while he was still an assistant professor at Berkeley in
1971 (before he became a legendary hedge fund manager), published an article
that sought to establish whether days with news of significant world events
corresponded to days that saw big stock price movements. He tabulated all
very large headlines in the New York Times (large type size being taken as a
crude indicator of relative importance) from 1950 to 1966; there were 432 such
headlines. Did these significant‑world‑event days correspond to big movements in stock prices? As the standard of comparison, Niederhoffer noted
that the S&P Composite Index over this period showed substantial one‑day
increases (of more than 0.78%) on only 10% of the trading days, and substantial
one‑day decreases (of more than 0.71%) on only another 10% of the trading
days. Of the 432 significant‑world‑event days, 78 (or 18%) showed big price
increases, and 56 (or 13%) showed big decreases. Thus such days were only
slightly more likely to show large price movements than other days.5
Niederhoffer claimed that, on reading the stories under these headlines,
he thought it unlikely that many of the world events reported would have
had much impact on the fundamental value represented by the stock market.
Perhaps what the media thought was big national news was not what was
really important to the stock market. He speculated that news events that
represented crises were more likely to influence the stock market.
Defining a crisis as a time when five or more large headlines occurred
within a seven‑day period, Niederhoffer found eleven crises in the sample
interval. These were the beginning of the Korean war in 1950, the capture of
Seoul by the Communists in 1951, the Democratic National Convention of
1952, Russian troops’ threatening Hungary and Poland in 1956, the Suez crisis
of 1956, Charles de Gaulle’s taking office as French premier in 1958, the entry
of U.S. marines into Lebanon in 1958, Russian premier Nikita Khrushchev’s
appearance at the United Nations in 1959, Cuban tensions in 1960, the Cuban
arms blockade in 1962, and President John Kennedy’s assassination in 1963.
During these crises, so defined, 42% of the daily price changes were “big”
changes, compared with 20% for other, “normal,” time periods. Thus, the crisis
periods were somewhat, but not dramatically, more likely to be accompanied
by big stock price changes.

106

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

Note that there were only eleven such weeks of “crisis” in the whole seven­
teen years of Niederhoffer’s sample. Very few of the aggregate price movements in the stock market show any meaningful association with headlines.

Tag‑Along News
News stories occurring on days of big price swings that are cited as the causes
of the changes often cannot, one suspects, plausibly account for the changes—
or at least not for their full magnitude. On Friday, October 13, 1989, there was
a stock market crash that was clearly identified by the media as a reaction to a
news story. A leveraged buyout deal for UAL Corporation, the parent company
of United Airlines, had fallen through. The crash, which resulted in a 6.91%
drop in the Dow for the day, had begun just minutes after this announcement,
and so it at first seemed highly likely that it was the cause of the crash.
The first problem with this interpretation is that UAL is just one firm, accounting for but a fraction of 1% of the stock market’s total value. Why should the
collapse of the UAL buyout have such an impact on the entire market? One
interpretation at the time was that the deal’s failure was viewed by the market
as a watershed event, portending that many other similar pending buyouts
would also fail. But no concrete arguments were given in support of this view;
rather, dubbing it a watershed seemed to have been nothing more than an effort
to make sense after the fact of the market’s move in response to the news.
To try to discover the reasons for the October 13, 1989, crash, survey
researcher William Feltus and I carried out a telephone survey of 101 market
professionals on the Monday and Tuesday following the crash. We asked:
“Did you hear about the UAL news before you heard about the market drop
on Friday afternoon, or did you hear about the UAL news later as an explanation for the drop in the stock market?” Only 36% said they had heard about
the news before the crash; 53% said they had heard about it afterward as an
explanation for the drop; the rest were unsure when they had heard about
it. Thus it appears that the news story may have tagged along after the crash,
rather than directly caused it, and therefore, it was not as prominent as the
media accounts suggested.
We also asked the market professionals to interpret the news story. We
queried:
Which of the following two statements better represents the view you held last
Friday:
1. The UAL news of Friday afternoon will reduce future takeovers, and so the
UAL news is a sensible reason for the sudden drop in stock prices.
2. The UAL news of Friday afternoon should be viewed as a focal point or
attention grabber, which prompted investors to express their doubts about
the market.

T HE N E W S M E D I A

107

Of the respondents, 30% chose 1 and 50% chose 2; the rest were unsure. Thus,
they were mostly reacting to the news as an interpretation of the behavior of
investors.6 It may be correct to say that the news event was fundamental to this
stock market crash, in that it represented a “story” that enhanced the feedback
from stock price drops to further stock price drops, thereby preserving the
feedback effect for a longer period than would otherwise have been the case.
Yet it was unlikely to have been its cause.

The Absence of News on Days of Big Price Changes
We can also look at days of unusually large price movements and ask whether
there were exceptionally important items of news on those days. Following up
on Niederhoffer’s work, in 1989, David Cutler, James Poterba, and Lawrence
Summers compiled a list of the fifty largest U.S. stock market movements, as
measured by the S&P Index, since World War II, and for each, they tabulated
the explanations offered in the news media. Most of the so‑called explanations
do not correspond to any unusual news, and some of them could not possibly
be considered serious news. For example, the reasons given for large price
movements included such relatively innocuous statements as: “Eisenhower
urges confidence in the economy,” “further reaction to Truman victory over
Dewey,” and “replacement buying after earlier fall.”7
Some would argue that perhaps we should not expect to see prominent
news on days of big price changes, even if markets are working perfectly. Price
changes in a so‑called efficient market occur, so the argument goes, as soon
as the information becomes public; they do not wait until the information is
reported in the media. (This is a topic to which I return in Chapter 11.) Thus,
it is not surprising, according to this line of reasoning, that we often do not
find new information in the newspaper on the day of a price change: earlier
information, appearing to the casual observer as tangential or irrelevant, has
already been interpreted by perceptive investors as significant to the fundamentals that should determine share prices.
Another argument advanced to explain why days of unusually large stock
price movements have often not been found to coincide with important news is
that a confluence of factors may cause a significant market change, even if the
individual factors themselves are not particularly newsworthy. For example,
suppose certain investors are informally using a particular statistical model
that forecasts fundamental value using a number of economic indicators. If
all or most of these particular indicators point the same way on a given day,
even if no single one of them is of any substantive importance by itself, their
combined effect will be noteworthy.
Both of these interpretations of the tenuous relationship between news
and market movements assume that the public is paying continuous attention

108

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

to the news—reacting sensitively to the slightest clues about market fundamentals, constantly and carefully adding up all the disparate pieces of
evidence. But that is just not the way public attention works. Our attention
is much more quixotic and capricious. Instead, news functions more often
as an initiator of a chain of events that fundamentally change the public’s
thinking about the market.

News as the Precipitator of Attention Cascades
The role of news events in affecting the market seems often to be delayed, and
to have the effect of setting in motion a sequence of public attentions. These attentions may be to images or stories, or to facts that may already have been well
known. The facts may previously have been ignored or judged in­­consequential,
but they can attain newfound prominence in the wake of breaking news. These
sequences of attention may be called cascades as one focus of attention leads
to attention to another, and then another.
At 5:46 a.m. on Tuesday, January 17, 1995, an earthquake measuring 7.2 on
the Richter scale struck Kobe, Japan; it was the worst earthquake to hit urban
Japan since 1923. The reaction of the stock markets of the world to this event
provides an interesting case study, since in this case we know without doubt
that the precipitating event, the earthquake, was truly exogenous and not itself
generated by human activity or business conditions—not a response to a subtle
hint of economic change nor the result of a confluence of unusual values of
conventional economic indicators. In the Cutler‑Poterba‑Summers list of media
explanations for the fifty largest postwar movements in the S&P Index in the
United States, discussed earlier, not a single one of the explanations referred
to any substantial cause that was definitely exogenous to the economy.8
The earthquake took 6,425 lives. According to estimates by the Center
for Industrial Renovation of Kansai, the total damage caused by the earthquake was about $100 billion. The reaction in financial markets was strong,
but delayed. The Tokyo stock market fell only slightly that day, and prices
of construction‑related companies generally rose, reflecting the expected
increased demand for their products and services. Analysts reported at that
time that the probable effects of the earthquake on corporate value were as
yet ambiguous, since the wave of rebuilding after the quake might stimulate
the Japanese economy.
The biggest reaction to the earthquake did not come until a week later. On
January 23, the Japanese Nikkei index fell 5.6% on no apparent news except the
gradual unfolding of numerous news accounts of earthquake damage. Over
the ten days following the earthquake, the Nikkei lost over 8% of its value. If
viewed as the direct result of the earthquake damage alone, the loss of value
would be an overreaction.

T HE N E W S M E D I A

109

What was going on in investors’ minds over the ten days following the
earthquake? Of course, there is no rigorous way to find out. We know only that
during this period, the Kobe earthquake dominated the news, created new and
different images of Japan, and may have led to very different impressions about
the Japanese economy. Moreover, the quake sparked discussions about the risk
of an earthquake centered in Tokyo. Despite the fact that geological evidence
suggesting that Tokyo is at risk for a major earthquake was already known,
greater attention was now focused on this potential problem. The damage that
an earthquake of the severity of the 1923 quake could cause to modern‑day
Tokyo was put at $1.25 trillion by Tokai Research and Consulting, Inc.9
Even more puzzling than the direct effect of the Kobe earthquake on the
domestic Japanese markets was its effect on foreign stock markets. On the day
that the Nikkei fell 5.6%, the FTSE 100 index in London fell 1.4%, the CAC‑40 in
Paris fell 2.2%, and the DAX in Germany fell 1.4%. The Brazilian and Argentine
stock markets both fell about 3%. These diverse countries around the world
suffered no earthquake damage on this occasion.
The best interpretation of the effects of the Kobe earthquake on the stock
markets of the world is that news coverage of the earthquake, and of the accompanying stock market declines, engaged the attention of investors, prompting
a cascade of attentions that brought to the fore some more pessimistic factors.
Another market reaction to news illustrates how media attention may,
through a cascade of attentions, lead many investors to eventually take seriously news that would normally be considered nonsense and irrelevant.
A sequence of news stories about Joseph Granville, a flamboyant market
forecaster, appears to have caused a couple of major market moves. The only
substantive content of these media stories was that Granville was telling his
clients to buy or sell, and that Granville himself was influential.
Granville’s behavior easily attracted public attention. His investment seminars were bizarre extravaganzas, sometimes featuring a trained chimpanzee
playing Granville’s theme song, “The Bagholder’s Blues,” on a piano. He once
showed up at an investment seminar dressed as Moses, wearing a crown and
carrying tablets. Granville made extravagant claims for his forecasting ability.
He said he could forecast earthquakes and once claimed to have predicted
six of the past seven major world quakes. He was quoted by Time magazine
as saying, “I don’t think that I will ever make a serious mistake in the stock
market for the rest of my life,” and he predicted that he would win the Nobel
Prize in economics.10
The first Granville episode took place on Tuesday, April 22, 1980. With the
news that he had changed his recommendation from short to long, the Dow
rose 30.72 points, or 4.05%. This was the biggest increase in the Dow since
November 1, 1978, a year and a half earlier. The second episode occurred
on January 6, 1981, after Granville’s investor service changed from a long

110

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

recommendation to a short recommendation. The Dow took its biggest dive
since October 9, 1979, over a year earlier. There was no other news on either
of these occasions that might appear responsible for the market change, and
on the second occasion, both the Wall Street Journal and Barron’s squarely
attributed the drop to Granville’s recommendation.
Can we be sure that media reporting of Granville and his supposed powers
of prognostication caused these changes? Many people wondered whether the
Granville effect was not just a coincidence that the news media exaggerated.
We can be sure that a sequence of news stories about Granville’s pronouncements, with their substantial word‑of‑mouth potential, had a cumulative effect
on national attention, and that public reactions to his pronouncements and
to market declines at the time of his announcements were fundamentally
altered by this cascade.11

News during the Crash of 1929
The role of the news media in causing the stock market crash of 1929 has been
debated almost since the crash itself. In fact, the puzzle facing historians and
economists has been, by some interpretations, that just before the crash there
was no significant news at all. Ever since, however, people have wondered
how this record stock market crash could get under way with no news. What
common concerns were on the minds of sellers that caused so many of them
to try to sell at the same time?
The Monday, October 28, 1929, stock market crash was the biggest single‑day
drop (measured between the closing price the previous trading day and the
closing price on the day) in the Dow until the October 19, 1987, crash. On
October 28, 1929, the Dow fell 12.8% in one day (13.01% measured from the
high to the low on that day). The second‑biggest drop in history (until 1987)
occurred the following day, when the Dow dropped 11.7% (15.9% measured
from the high to the low on that day). The combined close‑to‑close drop in
those two days in 1929 was 23.1%. What news had arisen that might rationally
account for such a sizable stock market decline?
On reading the major newspapers over that weekend and on the morning of Tuesday, October 29, one is easily led to conclude that nothing of any
consequence for the fundamentals of the market was happening. Indeed, that
was the conclusion reported in the newspapers themselves. On the morning of
October 29, newspapers around the country carried an Associated Press story
that said in part, “In the absence of any adverse news developments over the
week‑end, and in the face of the optimistic comments on business forthcoming
from President Hoover and leading industrial and banking executives, Wall
Street’s only explanation of today’s decline was that a careful checking up of
accounts over the week‑end disclosed numerous weak spots, which had been
