
path, picking mid-range P/E stocks using the P/E of the Hang Seng Index or relative sector index
as a benchmark. There is no single answer in the market. Additional analysis could include
relative studies of the stock’s dividend yield (see
Figure 1.2
) and business outlook and its market capitalization among the stocks in the same industry.
FIGURE 1.2
Hang Seng Index with the monthly yield for the past 16 years.

In
Figure 1.3
, the highs of the Index are marked H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, H6, and H7; and the lows are marked
L1, L2, L3, and L4. For the past 16 years, the Index’s P/E ratios have risen seven times to the
approximate multiple of 20, four of which occasions (H1, H2, H3, and H6) caused major
declines. H4 and H7 tops have produced smaller corrections compared with other tops. The
Index managed to hold on to its levels though the P/E ratios in both cases are in the proximity
of 20; these were the only incidents that did not result in a major decline. Note that for the
same period, the P/E ratio lows, falling below a multiple of 10, offered excellent bargains at L2
and L4.
FIGURE 1.3
Monthly P/E ratios of the constituent stocks of the Hang Seng Index for the past 16 years.

Technical analysis, on the other hand, is the study of directional movement of prices using
charts. A technical analyst looks at a stock’s current price movements during the trading period,
regardless of its fundamental value. Whether a stock is expensive or cheap relative to its
fundamental value is immaterial. The only thing that matters is the price directional movement
and where it might move in the future. The arguments are based on two criteria: that all known
fundamental information is reflected in the price, and all changes in emotion and sentiment are
shown in the relative action of price and volume. No matter what the stock is worth, it takes
only buying and selling to move prices, without which no trade will ever be profitable. A
technical analyst does not question why the stock price has moved, but how. His only concern
is whether the present state of the stock price will be short-lived or will continue for his trading
time frame. His challenge is to anticipate the next direction of the stock price and to time his
decisions to either buy or sell based on the correlation of price and volume information, price
patterns, and technical indicators.
Basically, a technical analyst looks at the market price action and its relative price patterns to
determine whether there is a probable trend to trade. The most important point in attempting
to read the market is to have an open-minded approach. It is disastrous to have a prejudicial
frame of mind in reading the market. If a trader is biased, looking to fulfill his ego, he can easily
get a distorted view of the market. He may be telling himself that he already knows what
direction the market will go in, while the truth is he merely wishes it to go in that direction.
In summing up, it will be readily apparent that technical and fundamental analyses serve
different purposes and the best strategy is to apply the technique that is most helpful in making
the trade. Each approach can be used to complement the other. A long-term investor will more
likely be focusing on fundamental information, while a short-term investor will concentrate on
technical analysis. In a broader sense, fundamental and technical techniques are all about
valuation of a company and its stock.
It may be of interest to note that there are software programs that combine fundamental
and technical analysis into a hybrid trading methodology. Investors can use fundamental
analysis to screen a universe of securities and identify stocks with good fundamentals and
growth potential. They can then use technical analysis to determine the timing to purchase
shares, such as near oversold levels, or after a retracement of prices of a certain percentage
from the peak of a rally. In this book, we show another approach where financial astrology is
used instead of using fundamental analysis to screen shares. The shares selected on this basis
have greatly outperformed the shares selected on the more conventional basis, although it
must be said that more comprehensive research is needed to establish that the superior

performance holds true under a greater variety of market conditions.
The book presents readers with a broad range of technical and financial astrology indicators
that have been found to be effective in gauging market trends and approaching change in
trends. The wide range may appear somewhat overwhelming at first. The intention is not for
users to adopt all of these indicators, but, after a thorough review, to choose only those that
suit their style of trading and which they themselves find most useful. In particular, we hope
traders will also find that integrating some select technical indicators with financial astro
indicators can boost their results. Whatever the approach, it is imperative not to overanalyze
the market. As Mark Douglas pointed out in Trading in the Zone (2001), “I know it may sound
strange to many readers, but there is an inverse relationship between analysis and trading
results. More analysis or being able to make distinctions in the market’s behavior will not
produce better trading results.” We have found this to be true as well, and readers would be
well advised to take the time necessary to develop a simple yet powerful trading methodology
of their own that does not involve overly extensive analysis.
Another common habit besides overanalyzing the market is the repeated use of the same
type of information, whether intentionally or unintentionally, particularly in applying multiple
oscillators, so that the result of each oscillator reveals the same type of information. Having
one oscillator to confirm another oscillator will not serve the purpose if the calculation of the
oscillators is derived from the same information. At all cost this must be avoided. As John
Bollinger, author of Bollinger on Bollinger Bands (2002), puts it, “Multicollinearity is a trap in
which several indicators seem to confirm each other, but really do not because they are each
repeating the same message. A typical example of this is the use of several different
momentum indicators.”
Figure 1.4
is an example of multicollinearity in three oscillators that use the same series of closing
price.
FIGURE 1.4
A chart showing an example of multicollinearity in the plots of three oscillators. The second
window is a Stochastic Oscillator, the third window is the Relative Strength Index (RSI)
Oscillator, and the fourth window is the Rate of Change (ROC) Oscillator. Note the similarity of
the ups and downs of the three oscillators.

Indicators could be categorized into three main streams as follows:
1. Momentum Category includes Rate of Change, Stochastic (%K, %D), Relative Strength Index,
Commodity Channel Index, Relative Momentum Index, Ultimate Oscillator, and Williams %R.

2. Trend Category includes Moving Averages, Parabolic SAR, Bollinger Band, Average True
Range, Wilders Direction Movement Index (ADX), Trend Intensity index, Moving Average
Convergence Divergence and Price Oscillator.
3. Volume Category includes Money Flow Index, Chaikin Money Flow, Volume Rate of Change,
On Balance Volume and Price Volume Oscillator, Demand Index and Volume Zone Oscillator.
Figure 1.5
charts the same stock as
Figure 1.4
with three indicators, which highlight the directional movement of the stock in a more
meaningful way.
FIGURE 1.5
The top window plots the 50-day and 200-day moving averages showing the price trend, the
middle window shows the price momentum, and the bottom window shows the volume
transactions of the stock.

An indicator that is collinear with another will basically rise and fall in about the same area
and the same approximate time frame. Indicators that are collinear with each other will not
help traders in gaining a proper view of the market and could result in a misleading perspective.
Ideally, traders and investors should develop three noncorrelated market analysis approaches.
The first analysis approach is to interpret price movements by studying the inter-reaction of the
various indicators selected from each of the three categories—a momentum indicator, a trend
indicator, and a volume indicator. The second analysis approach could be of Elliott Wave Theory
and Fibonacci studies, and the third approach could include astro-harmonic analysis.
Besides maintaining the discipline of applying a systematic structure and technique in
trading, a trader should take note of the following important advice from past masters.
Do not attempt to have a preset idea of price level or attempt to pick tops and bottoms
of a price action. Accept that some points may be sacrificed at the beginning or end of a
trend while waiting for a setup confirmation that the trend beginning or end are in
place.
Understand that trend trading can lead to large gains but also to large losses.
Trading time frame is a key element in determining trend, because trend can take place
on multiple time-frame levels.
Trends remain in force until they have exhausted themselves and their reversals are
confirmed. Let the market decide when the trend has ended.

Volume confirms the trend.
Keep the number of stocks within a range you can manage well.
Always have an exit plan for every trade.
In trading, the objective is to win swiftly whenever possible. It is all about knowing how to
handle the trade in accordance with the trading strategy and time frame. Sun Zi’s military
philosophy emphasizes the uncertainty, the deceptions, and the surprises of warfare. “As water
shapes its flow according to the ground, an army wins by relating to the enemy it faces. And
just as water retains no constant shape, in war there will be no constant condition.” So it is with
the market; there is no such thing as a constant market. The market changes all the time. It is
always trying to throw us off balance. Traders have to hear what the market is trying to say and
follow its flow; they need to be responsive and flexible in the development of the trading
strategies. A trader must learn to take profits when the trend is over. Do not drag. The market
has no rules. Remember, the ability to prevent defeat depends on us, or in the words of the
legendary trader, W. D. Gann: “If we wish to avert failure in speculation, we must deal with
causes.”

CONCLUSION
This chapter highlights two very important issues for every trader who wishes to trade
successfully in the market. Success in trading lies with the trader himself, not the trading
system or the trading software. A successful trader should have a plan for each trade and
should know how he will approach each investment. A successful trader needs to be patient, to
do his homework, and to have trading discipline.
If a trader can take charge of his mind and quell the inner dialogue that creates all sorts of
contradictions, and if he can keep his eyes on the time frame of his trading and focus on
principles and techniques, he will stand a better chance of becoming a successful, happy, and
confident trader.

CHAPTER 2

Let’s Get Started

Technical analysis is a rule-based trading approach. There are many ways to analyze market
information, and the potential variables are endless. A trend is the general direction in which
prices are headed. In using technical analysis, the objective is to identify the probable trend as
early as possible. Unfortunately, early detection of an impending change in trend is not that
easy. There is no single method or system that does so accurately and consistently. Thus, it
would be better to use a scorecard approach based on the collective methodology described in
this book. In a bull market, most stocks go up and in a bear market most stocks go down. From
trial and error in our trading experience and in our research, we have noted that when a trend
is underway, four trend-related dimensions give us clues. These clues may not happen at the
same time, but usually occur within a span of a few bars. The four dimensions are:
1. Patterns
2. Volume
3. Price Momentum
4. Price and Moving Averages
This chapter will briefly introduce each of the four dimensions that need to be studied. The
purpose of the study is to learn the strengths and weaknesses of each dimension. The trader
will then be able to see from the reactions in each dimension where a change in trend takes
place and how to use that information effectively in his trading. And when the trader has
learned to string together all aspects of the four dimensions and to apply their coherent signals
in trading, he will be trading more confidently. Gradually, he will realize that he is trading more
prudently and that the number of his trades has been reduced based on this trading method.
He will discover one of the golden tenet of master traders—“More trades do not equate to
more profits.”

PATTERNS
Patterns are a very important aspect of technical analysis. They are the shapes or structures of
formations that appear on a chart, including double tops, double bottoms, morning star, head
and shoulders, triangles, rectangles, saucers, and so on. Patterns are the body language of price
expressions and offer traders a means of forecasting probable price direction. There are two
major types of patterns—reversal patterns and continuation patterns. Reversal is a formation
pattern that indicates a likely reversal in trend is taking place, that is, from a bullish trend to a
bearish trend, or vice versa. The continuation pattern indicates a temporary price retracement
and on the breakout of the pattern, the prevailing trend will continue. Patterns are not
infallible. There is no chart pattern that will tell you with 100 percent certainty where the price
is heading. But learning the characteristics of each pattern formation and using them with other
supporting indicators will give traders an edge in reading the market and timing trades. The
various patterns are described in Chapter 3, Essential Patterns, which includes candlesticks and
classical patterns, and Chapter 4, Elliott Waves, which includes various triangle patterns.
Candlestick charts place more emphasis on the relationship between opening and closing
prices, known as the body of the candle. If the high of the candlestick is greater than the body,
it is shown by a vertical line called the upper shadow. And if the low of the candlestick is lower
than the body, it is shown also by a vertical line, the lower shadow. Long upper shadows
indicate selling pressure and long lower shadows, buying support. The longer the upper
shadows, the greater the selling pressure, and the longer the lower shadows, the greater the
buying support. And if the closing price is higher than the opening price, the body is charted as
a hollow candle. If the closing price is lower than the opening price, the body is filled. If the
closing price is the same as the opening price, it will be shown as a short dash. The strongest
candle will be a hollow candle (price closes at the high of the day) with no upper or lower
shadows. The weakest candle will be a filled candle (price closes at the low of the day) with no
upper or lower shadows. Various important candlestick patterns are described in Chapter 3.
They are useful in gauging market sentiment and can provide valuable information when used
in conjunction with volume. We would want to be in the trade with a pair of bullish
candlesticks. The bullishness or bearishness of candlestick patterns should not be determined
on the basis of a single candlestick.
Group patterns are formed by clusters of price bars over a given time period. There are two
types of patterns. The linear patterns can be distinguished as bearish reversals (top reversal
patterns) or bullish reversals (bottom reversal patterns), or continuation patterns. (See
Figure 2.1
.) They include head and shoulders (tops and bottoms), double bottoms and double tops,
rectangle or line formations, diagonal patterns, and triangles. The rounding patterns are the
bullish and bearish saucer patterns, or rounding tops and rounding bottoms. Patterns do not
give outright buy/sell signals. They indicate market situations and serve as setup conditions for
a probable change in trend. The patterns described in this book appear very frequently in stock
trends and should be more than adequate to detect such probable changes of trend direction.
A change in trend to the upside should have the support of a bullish reversal pattern, and a
change in trend to the downside should have the pressure of a bearish reversal pattern. During
a period where prices are under accumulation or distribution phases, movements of prices are
contained within a short trading band like a rectangle pattern. Breakouts from these patterns,
supported by volume and candlestick patterns, would signal the start of the relative trend. An
important point to keep in mind is that traders should not try to be too critical when

determining the formation of patterns by trying to exactly connect the highs or lows of each
pivot. Patterns do not need to be an exact fit.
FIGURE 2.1
Chart showing bullish and bearish patterns.

All markets will trend up when the better-informed buyers have completed their
accumulation and will trend down when they have completed their distribution to the
uninformed buyers, who are generally the public participants. One of the key factors that
differentiates between informed investors and uninformed investors is the access to
information. Better-informed investors have earlier access to information whereas uninformed
investors do not have the means to gather such information. The trading activities between the
informed and uninformed investors will cause a series of reactions that tend to have repetitive
patterns and cycles. Elliot Wave Theory is based on the premise of such reactions or
overreactions of the collective behavior and emotion of investors.
Elliott Wave Theory has been around for decades, but there seems to be no consensus
among users as to how wave pattern analysis should be applied for maximum benefit. One
reason is the old habit of zealous practitioners trying too hard to pinpoint evolving price
patterns by crossing every t and dotting every i. The objective is not to label every turn all the
time, which can make analysis of patterns overly complicated. The aim of Elliott Wave Theory is
to identify the stage of the market and the specific setup of patterns to determine the trend
and its probable future direction.
Briefly, the patterns of market prices are always in the process of formation, unfolding in a
set structure of five waves in the direction of one larger trend and in a set structure of three
waves when moving against that trend. The three-wave structure will correct the movement of
the five-wave structure. A five-wave structure is normally labeled as 1-2-3-4-5 and a three-wave
structure is labeled as A-B-C. In short, one full Elliott Wave cycle consists of five waves and
three waves. It is easier to grasp the theory if we think in terms of a set of two root
patterns—impulse waves and corrective waves. Impulse waves are those price movements that
are rising in an uptrend or declining in a downtrend. Corrective waves are those that are
declining counter to a rising trend, or rising counter to a falling trend. In an impulse pattern,
there are two countertrend waves, Wave 2 and Wave 4. In a correction pattern, there is one
countertrend wave, Wave B.
Elliott Wave Theory is a multifractal system in which each cycle can be part of another cycle
or form part of an expanded cycle. In its raw form, Elliott Wave Theory is about forecasting
price trends based on chart pattern recognition, and serves as a complement to other technical

analysis tools. That is, it is best to buy when the market is in an impulse cycle, and to sell when
it is in a correction cycle. Chart patterns delineate the imbalances of supply and demand; they
are important because they inform traders of the status of the market at any given time and
help to determine the likely direction of the trend.

VOLUME
Volume is an important component of analyzing directional price movements. Its importance is
often overlooked by traders because it is such a simple indicator. Volume is often the precursor
of price trend. But volume by itself is not a signal for entry or exit of trades, and a single volume
bar will not be meaningful if it is not compared with its recent historical patterns. During an
uptrend, volume will rise with rising prices and fall during a correction.
Volume can also serve as a tool for guiding wave counts and in projecting extensions of
waves. For example, in a fifth wave, volume generally tends to be less than that of the third
wave. If volume is greater than that of the third wave, an extension of the fifth wave is more
likely. In any bull market, volume tends to expand and contract with the momentum of price
change. Toward the end of a corrective phase, a decline in volume often indicates a decline in
selling pressure and a low point in volume often coincides with a turning point in the market.
The discrepancy between volume and price spread is another indication to watch for price
reversal. (See
Figure 2.2
.) Rising prices with low volume signifies trend weakness and increased volume on falling
prices points to further decline in prices. Heavy volume with narrow price spread at new highs
alerts traders to heavy resistance from sellers, whereas heavy volume at new lows is probably a
sign of buying support. Whether in an uptrend or downtrend, any price movement with a
comparative high volume will be deemed stronger than a similar move with low volume.
Generally, we want to see good volume on a breakout as confirmation of the entry/exit signals
and to distinguish a true breakout from a false breakout above resistance or below support.
Price patterns and volume patterns should be interpreted conjunctively.
FIGURE 2.2
Chart showing application of volume to patterns in the lower window.

PRICE MOMENTUM
Price momentum measures the speed of the rise or fall of price relative to the selected period,
the results of which are plotted as an oscillator. Most momentum oscillators are plotted with
an average line. When the momentum oscillator crosses above or below its average line, it
generates a crossover signal, which is similar to crossover in two different periods of moving
average lines. The resulting momentum plot will fluctuate between its high and low points.
Generally, when the momentum is above 40/50, it is considered to be in an overbought
condition. And when the momentum is below negative (40/50), it is considered to be in an
oversold condition. Overbought and oversold conditions signal that the market is
overstretched. The center line is the zero line, and when momentum is above the zero line, it
indicates strength. When it is below the zero line, it indicates weakness. In a bearish market,
when the momentum moves from above to below the zero line and then reverses in an upward
direction above the zero line, it does not mean the downtrend is over. It just means that the
downtrend is slowing down. Crossover at an overbought level (overbought reversal) indicates
bearishness and crossover at an oversold level (oversold reversal) indicates bullishness. A
reversal indicates an increase or decrease of the price momentum and it may or may not
coincide with a price reversal. When readings are at extreme highs, price momentum is
considered to be overbought, and when readings are at extreme lows, it is oversold. When the
oscillator reaches overbought or oversold conditions, it is an alert to probable change in price
actions. And when there is a divergence between oscillator and price, it indicates an imminent
change in the strength or weakness of the market. (See
Figure 2.3
.)
FIGURE 2.3
Chart showing addition of momentum indicator in the upper window.
