
MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE (MACD)
The MACD is another trend indicator based on momentum and market
sentiment that shows the relationship between two moving averages of
price. It is calculated by subtracting the EMA of the higher number of
periods from the EMA of the shorter periods. Another EMA of an even
shorter period is used as the signal line and serves as a trigger for buying
or selling. The standard values are 26, 12, and 9, respectively.
In the figure below, the value resulting of the subtraction of both
moving averages is represented as a histogram.
The MACD can be used in several ways, and the most common interpretations are crossovers and divergences. Crossovers are twofold: When the

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

174

AUD/USD - 1 Hour Chart

Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)

0

MACD histogram changes to positive when crossing the zero line, this is an
early signal of a possible signal cross upward. When the signal also crosses
above the MACD histogram, this is confirmation of the former cross of the
zero line and a signal to buy. When the MACD falls below the signal line,
this is an indication that it might be time to sell the currency pair.
Divergences, which will be discussed at the end of this chapter, are
used when the direction of the price of the currency pair diverges from the
direction of the MACD and signals a possible end of the current trend.

STOCHASTIC OSCILLATOR
The stochastic oscillator is a technical indicator based on momentum that
compares the closing price of a currency pair with its price range over a
given time period. The formula for this indicator is as follows:
%K ⫽ 100[(C ⫺ Lx)/(Hx ⫺ Lx)]
where x ⫽ number of previous trading sessions
C ⫽ the most recent close price

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

175

Lx ⫽ the low of the x preceding trading sessions
Hx ⫽ the highest price traded during the same x sessions period
%D ⫽ three-period moving average of %K

AUD/USD - 1 Hour Chart

Stochastic Oscillator
80

20

The theory on which this indicator is based is that prices tend to close
near their high when the market is in an uptrend and that they tend to
close near their low when the market is trending down. The signal is given
when the %K line crosses through the three-period moving average called
the %D.

RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX (RSI)
The RSI indicator is based on momentum and compares the size of recent
gains with recent losses so as to determine the overbought and oversold
conditions of a currency pair. It is calculated using the following formula:
RSI ⫽ 100 ⫺ 100/1 ⫹ RS
where RS is the average of x days’ up closes divided by the average of x
days’ down closes.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

176

AUD/USD - 1 Hour Chart

RSI - Relative Strength Index

70

30

The RSI ranges from 0 to 100. A currency pair is said to be overbought
as soon as the RSI approaches the 70 level. This means that it might be getting overvalued, and there are fair chances for a possible pullback of prices.
Conversely, if the RSI approaches the 30 level, this means that the currency
pair is possibly getting oversold and thus undervalued, with a possibility for
a reversal in prices.
The RSI is an excellent tool to be used as a complement to other market indicators. However, it is not a stand-alone indicator because large and
fast rises or falls in prices can create false signals that could induce a trader
into error.

AN UNIQUE INDICATOR: ICHIMOKU KINKO HYO
Ichimoku kinko hyo is a trend-trading charting system in itself. Its
primary strength is that it uses multiple data points to give the trader
a deeper and more comprehensive view of price action. Ichimoku is a very

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

177

Ichimoku Kinko Hyo
Senkou Span A
Senkou Span B

Kumo (Cloud)

Kijun Sen
Tenkan-Sen

Chinkou Span

visual system, and it enables traders to quickly discern and filter the lowprobability trading setups from those with higher probability.
The kumo (or “cloud”) is the very core of this system. It enables you
to immediately distinguish the prevailing trend and the relationship of the
actual price with regard to that trend and provides a deep, multidimensional view of support and resistance as opposed to just a single, unidimensional level that is provided by other charting systems. This more
complete view represents a much better the way to see how the market
truly functions, where support and resistance are not merely single points
on a chart but rather are areas that expand and contract depending on
market dynamics.

DIVERGENCES
Divergences are divided into classic or regular (bullish and bearish) and
reverse or hidden (bullish and bearish).

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

178

CLASSICAL
BULLISH
DIVERGENCE

HIDDEN
BULLISH
DIVERGENCE

HL
LL

HL
LL

Bullish (Buy)
Classic or regular ⫽ price LL ⫹ oscillator HL
Reverse or hidden ⫽ price HL ⫹ oscillator LL
Bearish (Sell)
Classic or regular ⫽ price HH ⫹ oscillator LH
Reverse or hidden ⫽ price LH ⫹ oscillator HH
It can be useful for you to remember this phrase: “Tops down, bottoms
up,” to evaluate divergences. Whenever the tops are involved (lower and
higher highs on the price or on the indicator), the movement that usually
ensues is bearish or downward; whenever the bottoms are involved (lower
and higher lows in any of both), the movement that most probably follows
will be bullish or upward.
Divergences act as an early warning system, alerting you when the
market could reverse. However, they do not have to be used as a trading signal. Relying only on divergences would give too many false signals. But if
you use them along with a particular setup and strategy and confirm the
entries with other indicators, your trades will have a high probability of
being successful with relatively low risk.

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

179

HH

LH

CLASSICAL BEARISH
DIVERGENCE

HIDDEN BEARISH
DIVERGENCE

HH

LH

On the other hand, it is not recommended to trade against the direction
given by this indicator. Classic or regular divergences usually appear when
the trend is about to change. Reverse or hidden divergences can indicate
continuation of the actual direction and thus allow keeping you in the trade
for a longer time and bigger profits.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

11
A

P

T

E

R

TECHNICAL PATTERNS
CANDLESTICKS
Candlesticks were developed as a means to perform technical analysis,
thanks to the Japanese, who first used them to trade rice in the seventeenth
century. A rice trader named Homma from the town of Sakata has been
credited with their development and charting style. Afterwards, Charles
Dow started his own version around 1900, using very similar principles.
Through years of trading and refining, they have been evolving up to the
presentation that you can see today.
The basic principles behind candlesticks are as follows:
●
●
●

●
●

Price action is more important than the reason behind the moves.
All the fundamental data are already reflected in the price.
Markets move because of expectations and emotions of fear and greed
in buyers and sellers.
Markets fluctuate.
The actual price doesn’t always reflect the real value of a currency.

BASIC PARTS OF A CANDLESTICK
The data that are reflected on a candlestick chart are the open, high, low,
and close prices. The chart consists of a body, which is the hollow or filled
portion, which represents the range between the open and the close prices,
and wicks or shadows on both sides, representing the high and low price
ranges from open or close. The high is signaled by the top of the upper

181

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

182

shadow, and the low is marked by the bottom of the lower shadow. If the
close price is higher than the open price, the candlestick is bullish, and its
body will be drawn as hollow; if the open price is higher than the close
price, the candlestick will be bearish and will be drawn with a filled body.

HIGH

HIGH
OPEN

CLOSE

CLOSE

OPEN
LOW
BULLISH

LOW
BEARISH

Candlesticks provide a fast overview of price action and are easy to
interpret. Relationships between open and close and high and low are easy
to compare at a glance. The essence of candlesticks is the information
about the relationship between the open price and the close price. Bullish
or hollow candlesticks indicate buying pressure; filled or bearish candlesticks indicate selling pressure, and the longer the body is, the more
strength the direction has. Short candlesticks, inversely, are a signal of consolidation and little market movement.

GENERAL OVERVIEW
Long versus Short Bodies
Long-bodied candlesticks show a strong buying or selling pressure. The
longer they are, the greater distance there is between the open and close
prices, indicating a significant advance in prices and more aggressive
moves. Usually longer candlesticks will show in the direction of the general trend (hollow are bullish and filled are bearish), but this also depends
on their position in the overall pattern of the chart. This type of candlestick can signal a potential support level or a reversal after an extended
rise or fall.
Marubozu candlesticks are even more powerful because they don’t
have any shadows or wicks, thus signaling that control of the price action

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

183

of the market is in the hands of buyers or sellers for the complete period
they represent.
Short-bodied candlesticks indicate a stalling market where there has
been very little change in prices during the period.
Long versus Short Shadows
Upper and lower shadows or wicks provide information about the trading
action. The longer the body is, the more intense is the buying or selling
pressure. Short shadows indicate little action, mostly circumscribed to the
open and close prices.
When one of the shadows is long and the other is short, this indicates
that one of the sides dominated during that trading period; an longer upper
shadow with a short lower shadow shows that buyers were more active in
the first part of the session, leading prices to a higher level, and that sellers
forced the price to go down, closing at a weaker point. A longer lower
shadow indicates that sellers were dominating and driving the prices down
but were overcome by buyers later on, ending with a stronger close.

market
indecision

There are candlesticks with long shadows and a very small body, called
spinning tops. Such candles represent indecision in the market and that
both buyers and sellers were highly active during the period represented,
driving prices much higher and much lower than the open and close prices
but closing near the opening price in the end. A spinning top signals a possible change in the actual trend, especially if it shows after a long hollow or
filled candlestick.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

184

Doji
This type of candlestick alone is a neutral pattern. The candlestick forms
when the open and close prices are practically at the same level, with various
types of shadows, long or short depending on the price action during that
period. The candlestick looks like a cross, an inverted cross, or a plus sign;
sometimes even one of the shadows is not present, as in the case of a dragonfly doji.

doji
doji

Similar to the case of the spinning tops, a doji is a signal of indecision
in the market and thus a potential turning point because both buyers and
sellers didn’t get control. It shows equilibrium between offers and bids;
buying and selling forces are getting even, which could represent a weakening of the previous trend and a close potential change. However, by itself,
a doji is not enough to be a powerful signal of a trend reversal, and you
would need more confirmation before taking a trade.

BULLISH PATTERNS
See the Appendix.

BEARISH PATTERNS
See the Appendix.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

185

REVERSAL PATTERNS
See the Appendix.

CONTINUATION PATTERNS
See the Appendix.

CHARTISM PATTERNS
Chartism is a system of analysis and prediction for financial instruments
and is a part of technical analysis. It is based exclusively on the study of
patterns that are drawn by the curve of prices on a chart. Its use started at
the beginning of the twentieth century and was consolidated around the
1930s because the amplitude and depth of the crisis of 1929 generated the
need to evolve new analysis techniques in the stock market to get better
information than what was being offered by fundamental analysis.
Chartism is a graphic analysis that focuses solely on the prices and volumes of transactions. Its purpose is to determine the price trend, that is, to
gauge if it is in a bullish or a bearish phase, and help to identify the movements that the price wave realizes at the moment of a trend reversal. It is
based exclusively on the study of the patterns that are drawn by those price
waves. The entire set of patterns is studied and codified in detail, and each
one of them indicates the possible future evolution of prices with a given
risk factor.
Chartism has three basic principles:
1. All the elements that affect a particular asset are reflected and
included in the price.
2. Price rates move in trends.
3. Movements and patterns of price rates always repeat themselves.
With these principles, the chartist analysis affirms that if you know the
price, you do not need to analyze why it is moving because it is enough to
be able to identify clearly the trend of the particular rate and check how it
is moving so as to control and anticipate any changes in trend. Chartists
believe that by studying past actions, the future probable behavior of the
market can be predicted. For this, several chart patterns are used and studied in detail.

186

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

REVERSAL PATTERNS
DOUBLE AND TRIPLE TOPS OR BOTTOMS

Double tops and double bottoms are major reversal patterns that form after
long-term trends. They are made up of two consecutive peaks or down
moves mostly to an equal price with a recession between extreme points.
They usually indicate a change in trend from bullish to bearish, or vice
versa, but a reversal will not be confirmed as long as the key supports or
resistances are not broken.
The recession between the two extreme points must be at least 10 percent
because a shorter distance could represent a normal bump into a resistance or
a support. In addition, there must be a certain indication that there has been
an increase in the selling or buying pressure before the price attempts a second time to break the resistance or support level.
The need for confirmation of a definite break of the support or resistance helps to prevent making a decision too early. The trend remains in
place as long as those levels hold.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

187

Triple tops or bottoms are a similar pattern that also indicates a possible reversal, but having three consecutive highs or lows followed by a break
of the support or resistance. Triple tops usually are formed on shorter time
frames, unlike triple bottoms.
Before forming completely, the pattern will look like a double top or a
double bottom. You also can find a pattern made up of three equal highs or
lows in a rectangle or in an ascending or descending triangle. The triple top
or bottom, like the double top or bottom, should be observed, and you
should wait for a breakout to occur. If there is a failure to break above or
below the peaks, the reversal is near, but only after support or resistance has
been broken will you really have confirmation of the move.

HEAD AND SHOULDERS (H&S) AND INVERTED H&S

188

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Head-and-shoulder patterns usually form after an uptrend, indicating reversal of the actual trend after it has been completed. It is a bearish indicator.
It consists of three consecutive highs, with the middle high being the highest of all three, similar to a head with two shoulders; the two lateral highs
are mostly equal in height and width and lower than the head. The lows
formed at support of the shoulders and the head constitute the neckline.
When this neckline is finally broken after completion of the pattern, the
projected price fall is calculated with respect to the distance from the top of
the middle high, or head, to the neckline. This distance in points is to be
subtracted from the price level at the neckline, and the result is the probable price target. Of course, other indicators should be taken into account,
such as, for example, Fibonacci levels and pivot lines, to have a more accurate perspective on setting the target profit.

An inverted head-and-shoulders pattern is the reverse and indicates a
possible bullish reversal under the same conditions as its bearish counterpart. In this case, though, the volume patterns would be more important to

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

189

define a confirmation of the reversal. The middle low, or head, is deeper
than the lateral lows that form the shoulders, which should be equal in
height and width. The neckline in this case will constitute a resistance, and
when it is broken, the projected price target will measure roughly the distance from the bottom of the head, or lowest low of the pattern, to the neckline; the point range will be added to the price level at the neckline to
define the target price. As a general rule, volume increases are absolutely
required to confirm the bottom version of this pattern.

FALLING AND RISING WEDGES
Wedges are patterns that begin wide in which prices contract as they move
higher or lower. The resulting shape is a cone with a lower line that slopes up
as highs converge for a rising wedge and an upper line that slopes down as
lows converge on a falling wedge. Conversely to symmetric triangles, where
there is no definite slope or trend, rising wedges are bearish and falling
wedges are bullish. This is confirmed by a support or resistance breakout,
which is represented by the horizontal line formed by the price convergence.

A wedge is usually a reversal pattern, but it also could be considered
a continuation pattern if the slope of the wedge goes against the actual
trend. As a reversal pattern, the slope will be in the same direction as the
prevailing trend.

190

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Rising wedges will form after a continued uptrend, where you can see
that prices stall at the horizontal level, indicating that the power of the bullish sentiment is fading away. This horizontal level will act as a resistance
that holds, and the slope acting as support has to be broken to confirm a
change in trend. Falling wedges, on the contrary, will form after a continued downtrend, and prices will tend to agglomerate at the same level, forming the horizontal boundary of the wedge, which will be the holding
support. The falling slope resistance has to be broken to confirm the
change in trend. In both cases, one should wait for the break to be retested
through a correction move to confirm that either the support has become a
new resistance or the resistance has become a new support. Volume is more
important in confirming the breakout of a falling wedge.
Both falling and rising wedges are consolidation patterns where either
side of the market, depending on the case, is losing strength and momentum. They are particularly difficult to recognize because the trend apparently is continuing and there are still higher lows on rising wedges and
lower highs on falling wedges. However, the failure to cross the boundary
formed by the horizontal line is a signal that upside or downside momentum is losing its potential, and finally, when the resistance or support is
broken, you can see that the contrarian side of the market has won, and
prices will cross up or move down against the prevailing trend.

ROUNDING BOTTOM OR TOP
The rounding bottom is a longer-term pattern that can be witnessed on
daily or weekly charts. Rounding tops are less usual. The round bottom is
also called a saucer and is a long period of consolidation turning from a
bearish trend into a bullish trend.
Usually the low of this pattern will be marking a new low in a bearish
trend. However, there can be a series of lower lows while it is forming.
The first part is a long price fall; then comes a slightly decreasing consolidation period where lower lows are slowly creating a horizontal support zone. When seen as a whole, the shape of the round bottom is like a
V pattern.
The second part of the pattern will develop after about the same number of periods as the first declining part, creating a shape that is mostly
symmetric. The confirmation of a change in trend from a bearish decline to
a bullish rise will be the breakout of the starting reaction high from where
the decline started in the first part. An increase in volume is usually
expected in this second part.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

191

BUMP-AND-RUN REVERSAL
The bump-and-run reversal (BARR) was developed by Thomas Bulkowski.
It was originally named bump and run formation (BARF), but such an
acronym wouldn’t have gotten much approval on Wall Street, so he changed
it to BARR, although the original name would have been quite representative of what happens in the markets when this kind of formation occurs.
The pattern develops in three phases: lead-in, bump, and the final run.
The first phase can be quite long and is the base off which the trendline is
formed. There is a steady and slow advance in prices and no particular surprises or excessive surges. The angle that Bulkowski determined to be optimal is 30 to 45 degrees of steepness.
The second phase is a sharp and sudden advance, where prices move further away from the trendline, creating a steeper angle, usually nearly doubling
the previous one (around 45 to 60 degrees). The bump represents the unsustainability of such an advance for a long time, and prices hit a high and decline
a little bit. Prices make a small peak or a series of descending peaks toward the
initial trendline. Volume in this phase is usually low, whereas it increases in
the previous advance and in the subsequent second attempt to rise higher.

192

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

The final phase is the run, and prices start declining heavily with an
increase in volume and reach the trendline, which then is broken. A retest
of the broken trend line will confirm the run, and support will transform in
resistance. This is usually followed by a period of consolidation, as you can
see in the figure above. The decrease in prices most commonly will be
equivalent to the previous long advance.
