
most of the important patterns that will be seen between moving

waves very often retrace nearly all of the early first waves.

correction within a developing uptrend. Points 1 through 9 detail

retracements early in their transition to a trend change. Second

than those that formed at point 2, the decline is confirmed to be a

trader should know that currency markets commonly form deep

screen lows opposite point 2, but with prices staying much higher

and second waves is developing. Whether you knew this or not, a

rolls under the averages. As the oscillator then breaks sharply to the

the Elliott Wave Principle, a trader would suspect a series of first

At points 8 and 9 a gradual trend shift develops as the indicator

knowledge about the normal character of currency markets. Using

for both averages has been in force for some time without change.

below. This break requires the use of more than one method and a

which is where it would have been in real time as the angle of ascent

where the oscillator stalls briefly near the averages and then breaks

At point 7 Stochastics remains above both the moving averages,

into highs that form an M-pattern top and breaks sharply. Note

prices that developed at the oscillator lows in 1996 up to the price

is overwhelming that the dollar wants to attempt a rally. However,

market has only attained half the distance it will achieve from the

ket, testing the 45 level in this situation. The information at point 5

this pullback and will be discussed later. But in a quick summary the

Stochastics pullback at point 5 is at the support zone for a bull mar-

than the longer period. This is a price projection that accompanies

is a trader's last warning that the trend reversal is now in force. The

differential; that is to say that the shorter period average is higher

lator stays above the longer moving average for the first time, and it

the signal is present because the two moving averages have a positive

levels, which denotes growing market strength. At point 4 the oscil-

chastics pulled back to the 75 level in an uptrend. Confirmation of

higher. Therefore, the indicator is becoming oversold at higher price

that one would have permission to buy the market when the Sto-

position, but the prices on close for these corresponding lows are

W forms near the 75 level, which conforms to an earlier statement

The oscillator low at point 4 is higher than the current Stochastics

that form in Stochastics after the oscillator low in 1996. The third

oscillator lows that develop just prior to point 5 compared to point 4.

averages on a Stochastics study. Note the series of three W bottoms

There is an extremely important juxtaposition in the Stochastics

122

•

D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

n<USDMMUl-Weekly
1900D
17500
18000
14500

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 1 2 3

In Figure 5.4 the true formula I use has been given to you, but
Figure 5.6 shows that you may elect to use two exponential averages or two simple averages. It becomes a matter of how you want
the real-time displacement to be handled relative to this indicator, which can be determined only if you evaluate the differences
on your own.
In Figure 5.6 a horizontal line near the 60 level has been added
to help your eye see when the RSI is failing at the upper zone for
a bear market or using the zone as support in a bull market environment. The same market and chart was used with just the RSI
when we discussed detecting trend reversals in Chapter 1. This
chart interpretation adds another dimension of detail. Points 1,2,
and 3 are all RSI pivots that occur below the moving average. Points

Figure 5.6

4, 5, and 6 are also straight forward, showing the RSI pivots develop-

highs that followed prior to the current buy signal in Stochastics. We
will go into more detail on price projections at another time. Let's

ing above the averages.
The RSI at point 7 is more difficult to interpret in this chart. Is
point 7 a failure to exceed the averages that will lead to a market

take a look at a chart applying the RSI indicator.
The weekly DMK/$* chart is again displayed in Figure 5.6,
but this time with a 14-period RSI that includes two moving averages. The two averages in this chart use the exact same period,
but one is a simple moving average while the other is an exponential moving average. In my own charts I will use one fast
simple moving average and one slower exponential moving average. In Figure 5.6 the signals are discussed for the RSI as the
indicator relates to a single average. You need to decide if you
prefer to use the simple or exponential moving average formula.

decline? This is the same point that was so distinctive and clearly a
buy signal for Figure 5.5 when the Stochastics were discussed. So
is something wrong with the RSI, or is this a contradiction between
oscillator formulas? What is wrong is that the slower exponential
RSI is not displayed in this chart but, if it were present, it would
show that the RSI was forming a buy signal at the same time as the
Stochastics. But the difficulty is not in the omission of an average;
it is in making a blatant observation about an oscillator relative to a
moving average without giving it further consideration once the first
interpretation has been made. How often are we satisfied because
we have formed "an answer" to the puzzle at hand, after which we

*The D M K / $ charts were not removed in the second edition discussions because
I believe the Euro will cease to exist and the D M K / $ will return.

confidently move on to something else?

124 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

There is a wealth of information developing at and around
point 7 that has been overlooked:

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts * 125

from long-time horizon charts right down into shorter time horizons that increases the probability of the signal in the shortest
time horizon used to decide when the position should be entered.

1. The two RSI oscillator lows that straddle the high at point 7
form bullish divergences with prices.
2. This divergence occurs above the 40 to 45 support zone
defined as the lower range for a bull market.

A similar formation seen in a 60-minute chart may in fact be
the last hidden warning of a ballistic rally that has been building within a market for months. The progression of signals that
develops from month, week, day, intraday charts, and through the

anticipated before they develop.

lator lows, or they can develop in the midpoint of travel and

as time-consuming triangles versus sharp quick pullbacks can be

has become support. These signals can occur at extreme oscil-

tions can be detected before they develop and how patterns such

level of great significance and the former area of resistance

rect sequential order. This is how more complex market correc-

oscillator low is a market that has found a former resistance

travel in order to realign all these domino signals into their cor-

that once formed a peak at a price level that later develops an

warning we need to find an alternative path that a market may

divergence oscillator lows surrounding point 7. An oscillator

a domino effect. A few dominos being out of sequence is the

tor peak at point 3 is the same price area that forms the bullish

different time horizons we use for trading a market is in essence

3. In addition, the price level on close associated with the oscilla-

An example of how this method is applied is offered in Appendix A,

formed in the monthly chart much earlier.

exactly what I do in my analytic work between international markets.

this signal in a weekly chart may be confirming a signal that

of fitting different time horizons together into a sequential order is

horizon that is longer than the present chart. In other words,

the domino puzzle will fit together that brings results. This aspect

developed earlier in the same chart or within the chart time

simple one?" It is this struggle to understand how all the pieces of

extremes because they are frequently confirming signals that

complex correction would have developed instead of a fairly quick

more powerful than the patterns that form at the oscillator

Often I have been asked, "How could you have possibly known a

become hidden signals. The hidden signals are in fact far

where the Yen/$ has been identified as the key to understanding the

Our markets are interlinked and complex. Companies that strongly

longer horizon chart. It is this transfer and confirmation of signals

and ultimately dictate the short-horizon direction for the S&P 500.

hidden signals are confirmations for an earlier signal located in a

of falling domino signals throughout the global financial complex

rounding point 7 further. It was stated above that frequently these

would be the first trigger signal that would cause the chain reaction

We need to consider this signal that develops in the lows sur-

in fact were ignored for the S&P in favor of believing that the Yen/$

signal is bullish. The pivot high at point 7 is just a stall for time.

next major move for the American S&P 500 Index. The indicators

With or without the slower moving average on the RSI, the

Mark strengthened.

in foreign languages. Without the techniques offered by technical

could lead to a long-term bear market for the dollar as the Deutsche

language to assimilate the masses of fundamental reports printed

fails to push the RSI through the 60 level. Such an oscillator pattern

us all more closely together. Technical analysis offers us a universal

RSI. The danger area for the dollar will come if the next advance

with the expanding global communication highways that are tying

the support zone defined for a bull market, the 40 to 45 area for the

believe each market is an independent entity have not kept pace

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 127

126 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Now we are beginning to apply all the techniques discussed at great

nical analysis is growing.

a daily chart for London's Gilt Bond futures market in Figure 5.7.

direction. It is for this reason that the number of people using tech-

the chart examples. Let's correct this imbalance now and focus on

factors in time to make a correct decision about probable market

Up until this juncture, global rates have been largely ignored in

analysis, we could not possibly process all the global fundamental

additional information to the details we obtain from Figure 5.7.)

that forms between points 8 and 9. The oscillator low is below point

trend lines to this same market to see how they might contribute

ing a dollar rally. However, take a look at the oscillator pivot low

oscillators; cycles have been identified. (In Figure 5.8, we will add

a moving average which are easily interpreted as buy signals preced-

length in the first five chapters. Averages are added to prices and

Returning to Figure 5.6, points 8 and 9 show oscillator lows over

8, though at a corresponding higher price. This is confirmation of
an uptrend as the oscillator became oversold at a higher price showing market strength. Points 10, I I , and 12 all form oscillator peaks

LGL-Daily

London G I L T B O N D Futures

below the average. The averages again clearly make the indicator
easier to interpret. The reentry signal to buy the market does not
actually develop until point 13. An exit signal forms at point 14.
When an M pattern forms under an average in the oscillator, it is
generally viewed a major sell signal; similarly, a W just above an
average would be viewed as a buy signal. In this situation the M
pattern declines to the 60 level and uses the old resistance zone for
oscillators in a bear market as a support zone, adding confidence
that the market will remain in an uptrend. At point 15 confirmation
develops, and the rally resumes with renewed enthusiasm. Points
15, 16, and 17 all become important considerations for a major
trend reversal that was discussed in Chapter 1. The saving grace
for the U.S. Dollar is that the oscillator after pivot high 17 leads to

Figure 5.7

128

• DISPELLING SOME C O M M O N BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

LG L-Daily

London G I L T B O N D Futures

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 1 2 9

RSI remains below the short-period averages, but it declines only
to the 45 level in the RSI, indicating a correction in a bull market.
The Composite Index has unlimited range between its upper and
lower displacement, so range rules will not apply to this indicator
normally. At point 3 the RSI is testing the averages, and the Composite Index is maintaining its distance above the shorter moving
average. Both signals are correctly bullish for London Bonds. Moving along to point 4 is bearish divergence between the Composite
Index and the RSI. The RSI travels under the double line, staying
above the moving averages, and it offers no warning. The cycles on
price remain up. There are only two warnings present in this chart
that a decline will soon follow: the first is the bearish divergence
between the RSI and the Composite Index; the second is the price
advance from the bar marked with the first cycle low into the high
that corresponds to point 4 in the Composite Index, which is a very

Figure 5.8

clear five-wave rally, applying the Elliott Wave Principle. The fact

between indicators that forms at point 5.

and one longer period. Starting at point 1 on the Composite Index,

the first bounce i n the market is foretold by a bullish divergence

with two simple moving averages added to the oscillator: one short

allows both oscillators to alleviate their overbought condition, and

a 14-period interval. The middle indicator is the Composite Index

which the bond market will decline or of its timing. The correction

ferences between simple and exponential weightings. The RSI uses

an extreme, but it offers no further information about the degree to

image. So the two averages in the chart allow you to explore the dif-

multiple noncorrelating methods. In this case, the RSI is clearly at

longer average makes it hard to see the RSI in a black-and-white

we are certain to be blindsided by the market if we do not develop

exponential moving average on the RSI, but in this market the

and experience one can develop with a single indicator or method,

mentioned earlier, I would normally use a longer period for the

nearby. Point 4 is marked to show that no matter how much detail

same period, but one is simple and the other is exponential. As I

that the Composite Index has topped warns that a correction is

Figure 5.7 includes the RSI with two averages that use the exact

that forms in the RSI. Move to the oscillator peak that develops at

leads toward bullish divergence between indicators at point 2. The

moving average, which is a little easier to read than the formation

in the RSI. Bearish divergence at an extreme is a sell signal that

At point 6 the Composite Index fails to exceed the long-period

there is a sharp divergence between the angle of the peaks that form

and 5.8 in one black-and-white chart, the lines are easily differenti-

a cycle low in price that is important coincidental evidence.

it would be difficult to see all the notations drawn in Figures 5.7

gence a second time at point 7 with the RSI. Point 7 coincides with

1,2, and 3 have also become valuable as drawn on the RSI. While

to new lows, but the Composite Index does not form a bullish diver-

posite Index have become extremely valuable additions. Trend lines

as it is unable to exceed the moving averages. The RSI then declines

previously overlooked pivots. Trend lines 2, 3, and 5 on the Com-

the buy signal at point 5 is premature. The RSI has a similar warning

not discussed in Figure 5.7 have major support or resistance now at

under the crossover point of two moving averages, which warns that

Figure 5.8 shows that many of the pivots in the oscillators that were

point S in the Composite Index. The Composite Index is directly

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 131

130 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Following point 7 in Figure 5.7, both oscillators break above their

ated with systems that use color.

alone is insufficient.

8. Point 8 in the Composite Index holds above the longer moving

methods, which is necessary because knowing the market direction

the Composite Index and the RSI leads to a pullback toward point

market direction, we are ready to discuss various price projection

This is a lead that should not be missed. Minor divergence between

Now that we have a strong arsenal of tools from which to define

moving averages before prices are able to exceed their own averages.

average. At point 9 the trend in the RSI is not broken, but it leads to
a push that forms a divergence with the Composite Index. Point 10
is an oscillator low that has broken the averages in the Composite
Index. However, note that point 10 is lower than point 8, but the
oscillator is at a higher price at point 10. The market has become
oversold at a higher price level, denoting strength. The RSI forms a
similar pattern between the new low and point 9. The RSI is the first
to cross back down through the averages, offering the first warning.
At point 11 a bullish divergence develops, and a rally soon follows
into point 12. Point 12 is an M pattern in both the RSI and the Composite Index that warns that the cycle low approaching at point 14
will soon be seen. The oscillators then form a W bottom at point 13
which coincides with the cycle low at point 14. The cycle at point 14
is clearly a cycle that could be viewed in a weekly chart, and it is significant that the oscillators form a signal near this same cycle bottom.
Now take the same market and add trend lines from the oscillator lows and highs that have formed bullish or bearish divergences.

PART 2

CALCULATING
MARKET PRICE
OBJECTIVES

chapter
ADJUSTING TRADITIONAL
FIBONACCI PROJECTIONS
FOR HIGHER
PROBABILITY TARGETS

W

hen this chapter was written 10 years ago it was a specialization
of m i n e at that t i m e . A d d another 10 years o f experience

and the subject became a book released early i n 2006. T h e book is
called Fibonacci

Analysis

and it was published by Bloomberg Press.

T h i s chapter should be viewed as a light introduction on the subject
that I view as the most critical first step o f any analysis work I do.
M y first step i n analyzing any market always begins by identifying the Fibonacci price grid that identifies support and resistance
levels. O n l y t h e n do I apply and consider other methods to answer
how the market w i l l react to the targets: whether nearby targets
w i l l end the trend, i f there w i l l be an i n t e r i m swing, or i f I need to
invest t i m e i n evaluating the probability o f m u l t i p l e Fibonacci targets by adding G a n n targets as a confluence test. Oscillators reveal

135

constant t h r o u g h o u t a t r e n d i n g move. T h e early swings m i g h t be

and position leverage w i l l be.

or contract w i t h i n the move. Price s w i n g proportions are rarely

are at c a l l i n g a market reversal, the better your risk management

w h e n the price internals o f a trend begin to proportionally expand

and tell us w h e n to enter the market, h o l d , or exit. T h e better you

a range has to be changed. T h e overly simplistic approach fails

how a market w i l l react to a target. T h e y give us permission to act

Adjusting Traditional Fibonacci Projections for Higher Probability Targets • 1 3 7

136

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

longest bars within

chart is the single m e t h o d I believe has controlled m y equity curve

precisely

Fibonacci confluence zones develop a grid t h r o u g h o u t a market

character to the price swings that f o r m . We are able to

i f they want to do this for a l o n g t i m e . But u n d e r s t a n d i n g how

as m o m e n t u m dies. Markets have an expansion and contraction

and soon enough everyone learns to pick their battles more wisely

the t e r m i n a t i o n swings may show weakness by b e c o m i n g short

newer traders to recognize. T h e old dog fights leave scars over t i m e

other h a n d , the early swings i n a t r e n d m i g h t be elongated, while

out or trade w i t h smaller size. I t is a valuable f o u r t h o p t i o n for

short and the t e r m i n a t i o n swings m i g h t be exaggerated. O n the

W h e n indicators c o n f l i c t it is a technical signal that means keep

all these years t h r o u g h changing volatility.

how the market is expanding

or contracting

measure

by using

the

the move. A detailed discussion about market

expansion and c o n t r a c t i o n w i l l be f o u n d i n Fibonacci

Analysis,

volatility, or v o l u m e .

low to the market h i g h — t h e n calculate the corresponding price

is t r u e regardless o f t i m e h o r i z o n , type o f market, price range,

f r o m obvious price extremes—for example, f r o m an extreme price

ical g r i d a market is using to b u i l d f u t u r e price movement. T h i s

easy. Just take a measurement of the distance traveled by a market

milestones i n the internals o f a swing w h i c h define the mathemat-

example, many experienced traders believe Fibonacci analysis is

but it is i m p o r t a n t for y o u to k n o w n o w t h a t every market has

It is clear that many people share a few c o m m o n beliefs. As an

significant pivot points.

protective stops tucked safely below or above these Fibonacci price

the longest and strongest rather t h a n the extremes that mark the

orders at these retracement levels are frequently missed. Worse,

most valuable details lie h i d d e n w i t h i n the internal bars that are
