I

' ii

10

Startnew

I t ,

|

. l l rI , l
,l
't ,l

' l r1 l r l

Low2

I
Low

t l
I

10 recordlows
High

Low

lr
'
| tltlr'

lr I
7

EXHIBIT 3.76.
Record Sessions

\r

4

?ill
2 l

I

count
\
5
\

'r
9

(A)

(B)

ThePatterns

was not created. Only when a new high was touched was it counted as
record session2.
To count record sessionsin a downturn, first confirm that a new high
has been set. The sessionthat makes a lower low then becomesrecord
session1. The next lower low then becomesrecord session2.
The theory of record high sessions is that during a rally, a trader
should stop buying after eight to ten record sessionhighs (or liquidate
longs, or sell short with the appearance of a bearish candle signal after
theserecord sessionhighs). The samephilosophy, but in reverse,should
be considered after a decline with eight to ten record sessionlows. To
wit, a trader should stop selling after about eight record sessionlows (or
cover shorts, or buy looking for a bounce with a bullish candle signal
after eight or more record sessionlows).
The record sessioncount need not be consecutive.A few sessionsof
consolidation can be ignored when counting the new highs or lows.
Generally, there should not be more than two or three sessionsof sideways action between the record sessions,nor should there be a sharp
move counter to the record sessiontrend.
The reason that record sessionsshould be almost consecutivehas to
do with the underlying concept of record sessions.In the caseof eightten record sessionhighs (lows), the market becomesoverbought (oversold). In an overbought (oversold) situation, the market becomes vulnerable to a price dip (rally) as those who are currently long (short) may
decide to take their profits.
The market can relieve an overbought or oversold situation in one of
two ways-by trading laterally or by experiencing a sharp price correction. If the market corrects the overbought or oversold situation by either
of these methods, the record sessioncount is no longer valid since the
market is no longer overextended, and thus is less vulnerable to a correction. For example, in Exhibit 3.76(8), observe how the market got to
record sessionhigh 5, then quickly sold off for three sessions.Because
of the extent of the selloff during thesethree sessions,the market relieved
its overbought condition. As shown, a new count is then started after
low 2.
Do not be too concernedwith the specificnumber of record sessions.
The eight to ten record sessionrule is a guidepost. Each market has its
own personality. |ust as those who follow cyclesmay find that different
markets have different cycles, so some markets may correct after six or
trvelve record sessioninstead of the more normal eight-ten sessions.
In Exhibit 3.77, ftom the low at X, we start the record sessionhigh
count at the next candle since it made a higher high. After record session
8, the market formed two doji. These doji reflected a market that is tiring.
For those who were looking for a reason to exit longs, these doji and the

123

124

Candles

MEXICOTELEPHONE- WEEKLY

60
59
5B
57
56
55
51
53

60
59
5B
57
56
55
54
53
52

tr

3t

5l
50
19
48
17
16
15
11
13
12
1l

3t

50
49
48
47
16
15
11
43
12
1l

|t+'
T
92

AUG SEP OCT

NOU DtC

'93

FEB I1AR APR

I,IAY JUN

Metastock
by EQUISInt'l
EXHIBIT 3.77. Record Session Highs, Mexico Telephone-Weekly

high number of record sessionswere valid reasons.A final push occurred
in late 1992as the extended upper shadow candle-the shooting star-in
record session11 denoted a last gasp for the bulls.
Exhibit 3.78'illustrateshow a steep price decline that started with a
bearish engulfing pattern dragged the market down over 50o/ofrom its
highs within a few months. After nine record sessionlows, the market
started to stabilize. Exhibit 3.78 is an example of how the candles not
only show the trend of the market, but also can give more insight into
the market's health by the color of the candles. The ]apanese have a
saying, "as different as snow from coal." The short term rally from October (from the bullish engulfing pattern) showed that the bulls were in
chargebased on the seriesof white real bodies (the "snow"). The post
November selloff pictorially displays the market's weaknesswith an almost consecutiveseriesof black real bodies (the "coaI"\.
In Exhibit 3.79, a gravestonedoji appearedin early September.Inter-

The Patterns

125

AMGEN_WEEKLY

80

80

Bearish
z-\
( ,- )Engulfing

7q

70
65

niIli'""'"
+lIilil''*l*fn
+noht*+

75

'!#nF

55

II
l r
' ll T tlY

OU

fil'

flT
Y

55
hn

'td'"!;,

15

60

15
. ,Il

,Atu'f

]|h

10

It++o!,r0t-.+t

35
, 92

65

50

I

10

70

,93 FEB I1ARAPR I1AYJUN JUL
JUN JUL ..AU6SEP OCT NOUDEC
bYEQUISInt'l
MetaStock

EXHIBIT 3.78. Record Session Lows, Amgen-Weekly

estingly, this gravestone also confirmed that there was a potential top
based on the record sessionconcept. After making a new low at L, the
market on the next day made a higher high. This was record session1.
After record session3, the market took a breather for a few days before
going on to a fresh new high, and then formed record session4. As we
can see,between record sessions3 and 4, the market can trade laterally
for a few sessionswithout intermpting the count for record sessions.
(However, if these sessionsafter record session 5 were sharp selloffs,
then the record sessioncount would have to start again). By the time the
Nikkei gets to record sessions7 and 8 (which are shooting stars), the
market is already in trouble, With the gravestonedoji at record session9
becoming a top.
In Exhibit 3.80, a piercing pattern emerged after a nine-count record
session.As a result, a rebound could be expected. From the 1993high
near $21 to the low of the piercing pattern, we get a 50o/oretracement

35

EXHIBIT 3.79. Record session High and BearishConfirmation, Nikkei-Daily

EXHIBIT 3.80. Record SessionLows and RetracementLevels, Crud.eOil-Weekly

The Patterns

level near $19. This is where the market stalled after the rebound from
the piercing pattern.

CHAPTER4

CANDLES AND THE
OVERALL TECHNICAL
PICTURE
# a + o E x E t mb d
"He Who Sitsin a Well to Lookat the Sky Can SeeBut Little"

"Action that ignores
A ;uputt"se book that I had translated states that,
the condition of the market is only asking for a loss and an ambush
encounter."l This picturesque saying (using the typical military analogy
so common in ]apanese technical analysis) means that you must consider
the overall market condition before trading with the candles. Otherwise,
"loss and ambush encounter."
you may be in for a
A member of the Nippon Technical Analysts Association wrote to me
that he views the overall technical picture as more important than an
individual candle pattern. I certainly agree with that sentiment. Effective
candle charting techniques require not only an understanding of the candle patterns, but a policy of using sound, coherent trading strategiesand
tactics. It is unfortunate that some traders who know about the candle
patterns often ignore such tactics. The candles are a tool that must be
in.otpotuted with other trading guidelines. In this sense, I have always
viewed the candles as being another color, albeit an important one, on
my technical palette.
A disciple of Confucius once asked him who would he take to war
with him. Confucius answered that he would not want someone who
did not care whether he lived or died. He would take someone who
approached difficulties with appropriate caution and who preferred to

129

130

Candles

succeedby strategy.And strategyis the focus of this chapter; here I show
the importance of such strategic principles as using stops, determining
the risk and reward aspectsof a trade, observing where a candle pattern
is in relation to the overall trend, and monitoring the market's action
after a trade is placed. By understanding and using these trading principles, you will be in a position to most fully enhancethe power of the
candles. By the end of this chapter, you should understand that what
emergesbefore and after a candle pattern is a critical element of trading.

STOPS
"Euen Monkeys
FalI from Trees"
There should always be a price at which you say your outlook is wrong.
The protective stop out level is that price. No matter how reliable the
\echnrca\ too\, there wil\be trmes w\ren t\re s\gna\ obta\ned,hom t\rat too\
is wrong. By using stops, you are defining the risk of a trade. ln effect,
the use of stops provides one of the most powerful aspects of technical
analysis;it offers a risk managementapproach to the market.
Many of the candlestickpatterns can become a support or resistance
area. For example, a dark cloud cover often acts as resistance.As such,
for those who are short, a protective buy stop can be placed on a close
above the high of the dark cloud cover. In Exhibit 4.1.,we see that an
uptrend that started in early January stopped via a dark cloud cover as
the market went from an uptrend preceding this pattern into a lateral
band after the dark cloud. The dark cloud cover acted as resistancefor
the next 7 sessions.But the rising window and then the close above the
high of the dark cloud cover were signs that the market was ready to
once again advance.
It is human nature that when price action turns against you, wishful
thinking enters the picture. For instance, after the market pushed above
the stop out level in Exhibit 4.1 (the high of the dark cloud cover), some
traders who were short may have hoped that the market would then turn
around and decline. But in the market, there is no room for hope. Staying
in a market that moves through a stop out level in the hope that prices
"To lean a
will then turn is, as a picturesque Japaneseproverb states:
ladder against the clouds."
In Exhibit 4.2, we see that a rising window emerged in April 1993.
Basedon candle theory, this window should be support, as it was during
the September 1993pullback. Whether a trader bought on a pullback into
the window, or whether he or she was previously long, a protective sell

I

Candlesand the OperallTechnicalPicture

EXHIBIT 4.1. Exceeding a Dark Cloud Cover, Bonds-March 1993

EXHIBIT 4.2. Stops and Risk Tolerance,Gold-Weekly

131

132

Candles

stop should be on a weekly close (i.e., a Friday close)under the bottom
of the rising window. Note how, in this market, the window was pierced
on an intra-weekly basis, but the bears did not have enough itaying
power to maintain prices under the bottom of the window by the close
of the week. In this case,the window held as support, but noi all traders
would have been able to stand the emotional ride in this market as prices
-or
pulled under the window and then sprang back above the bottom
tnu
window before the Friday close. This example illustrates how trading
depends to a large extent on a trader's temperament.
As shown in Exhibit 4.3, Amgen held the rising window as support
when it pulled back to there in November. The iuccessful test oJ the
rising window confirmed the health of the market. The rebound from the
successfultest of the window pushed prices above $75. At that point,
the market gave some clues of trouble based on a harami pattern. over
the next few weeks, the market started to top out via a claisic head and
shoulders pattern denoted by s-H-s (the |apanese call the head and
shoulders a Three-Buddha
Pattenc).\A/henprices penetrated the neckline

AMGEN-

DAILY

'(HaraniS.t0il
H

75
7n
(F

50

75

o,otot?

"l*o'*t*,iil*u,,.,,""n",
70

Window
Holdsas
Support

'1,il1*l'"'"-'s
suPPort65

'

EE

50
55

too'il*l
n

50

50

+5

+5

f+' +0

+0
?6

'92

2 6 N 0 9 1 5 2 3 D D Z l + 2 12 8 ' $ l l
MetaStockby EQUISInt'l

EXHIBIT 4.3. Stops, Amgen-Daily

18 25 F 0 8 t 5 2 2

Candlesand the OaerallTechnicalPicture

of this head and shoulders top, it should have been a sign for longs to
exit. A final warning about the weak state of the market was given when,
in early 1993,the bears finally managed to drag prices under the rising
window, which heretofore had been support. This break of the window
could have been another protective sell stop signal for existing longs.

RISK/REWARD
"The Sidethat Knows When to Fight and When Not to Will Takethe

Victory"
I often find that, after my seminars, people in the audience are so excited
about the new "light" offered by the candles that they cannot wait to
get back to their offices or homes to place a trade based on a candle
pattern. However, as one of the books that I had translated stated (a
trader must) "wait for time to ripen, waiting for just the right moment
is virtuous, a patient mind or spirit is essential."2 ltt other words, just
"time is ripe"
becausethere is a candle pattern, it does not mean that the
for a trade. I try to warn my audiencesthat one of the most important
aspectsin determining the "right moment" for a trade is to inspect the
risk/reward aspectof the market at the time the candle pattern is formed.
In this context, a trader who was in an institutional trading group for
"You were certainly
whom I gave a special seminar wrote to me that,
correct*a little knowledge can be dangerous. We're all running around
the office shouting'Doji, Doji."'
A stop, by defining the risk of a trade, is one of the components of
the risk and reward picture. The other component is the price target of
"reward." There are many ways to determine
the trade, or the potential
price targets, from Elliott Wave to previous support or resistanceareas.
Becausecandle charting techniquesusually do not provide a price target,
I often recommend the joining of Western technicalswith candles. The
candlesare excellentfor sending a reversalor a continuation signal, while
the Western tools, such as retracementsor trend lines, can help provide
a price target. You probably already have your own methodology to
obtain price targets.
A key point to remember is that unless there is an attractive risk/
reward ratio at the time the candle pattern is completed, stay away from
"His potential is that of the fully
the trade. As a ]apaneseproverb says,
drawn bow-his timing the release of the trigger." The timing of the
"release of the trigge{'depends on the risk/reward aspectof the trade.
There will be times when you should not release the trigger. For
example,without an attractiverisk/reward ratio at the time that a bullish
or bearish candle signal emerges,the trade should be ignored (unless a

133

1U

Candles

trader is using the candle signal to offset a position). Another time to
step away from the market is when there is an exchangeof big black
candles and big white candles: "Just like it was an earthquak" of *ug_
nitude 8,"3 as one of the ]apanesetechnicalanalysisbooks states.As this
sameJapanesebook graphically statesabout trying to enter such a market, "Dying in vain is not fun.,,4
As shown in Exhibit 4.4, there was a bearish engulfing pattern in
early september. Based on the concept that the high of the blarish engulfing pattern should be resistance,a trader wanting to sell short could
place a protective_buystop above the high of this beirish engulfing pattern at 465. This defines the risk. To obtain a target, the tradei .o,rld, fo.
instance, look for the mid-August rising window as a support area on
any price retreats. with this window as a target, the appearanceof the
bearish engulfing pattern made for an attractiv'eshort sale becauseof the
relatively low risk stop as compared to the target.
In Exhibit 4.5, we seethat a rally that started with a bullish engulfing
pattern in Januaryformed a rising #ir,do* raterthat month. Two sessions
after this window, the market formed a bearish engulfing pattern. A
question that a trader who is looking to sell short on that signai must ask

EXHIBIT 4.4. Candlesand the Aspects of Risk/Reward,s & p-December \993

Picture
Candlesand the OaerallTechnical

Wal-Mart-

DAILY

/

I
A +|

Bearish
Engulfing
Pattern

",+T
32.0

31.D

I

'ililY
t

fl

t

I

Dark
, \ Cloud

*' ' fl T, *

' H

,"*ii*il
r

-

hl',"**

??6

33.0

135

33.0

l" ll + ,

T

ITrl

Rising +

{t I n

33,5

3t5
2Dn

JI.U

anE

30.0

30.0

)oR

29.5
'92

'93

ll

IB

25

DB

1D

MetaStockby EQUISInt'l

EXHIBIT 4.5. Candlesand the Importance of Risk/Reward,wal-Mart-Daily

is: "Does a short sale based on this bearish engulfing pattern offer an
attractiverisk/reward?." (Selling short is relatively rare in the stock market. Nonetheless,this chart can be used as a guidepost for other markets,
such as futures, where short selling is more common.) Looking at the
overall technical picture and considering the risk/reward aspect, such a
trade would not be warranted. This is becauseof the rising window that
preceded the bearish engulfing pattern. A short sale from this bearish
engulfing pattern should mean a stop above the high of the bearish engulfing pattern. With the support at the rising window, this is not an
attractive risk/reward trade since, in this case, the risk and reward are
about equal. A few weeks later, a dark cloud cover arose.Now, with the
high of the dark cloud cover as a stop and the window as a target, this
becomesa more attractive trading opportunity from the short side.
Exhibit 4.5 underscoresthe difficulty of trying to determine which of
the candlestick patterns is more important. In this chart, there was a

136

Candles

bearish engulfing pattern. Normally, that pattern is considered more
bearish than a dark cloud cover becausethe black candle of the engulfing
pattern envelops the entire prior white candle, rather than just part of
the white candle, as is the case with the dark cloud cover. But in this
example, selling short with the dark cloud cover offered a better trading
opportunity than selling short with the bearish engulfing pattern.
As shown in Exhibit 4.6, the appearanceof a bullish candle signal
does not always warrant a new long position. In this chart, we see that
that a bullish morning star was formed by the price action on fanuary g,
9, and 10. The close on ]anuary 10 (the day the morning star was completed) was at $1205.Let us look at whether a buy at $1205is an appealing
trade based on the risk/reward ratio. First, to determine the reward, we
seethat there was a support area from late November near $1220.Based
on the change of polarity principle (where old support becomes new
resistance), a trader who was looking at the market in early january
(when the bullish morning star was formed) might then expect a bounce
to resistance near $1220. So the target is near fi1220.To determine the
risk in this trade, we would use the candle theory that the low of the
morning star pattern should be support. In this case,the stop would be
on a close under the morning star pattern at $1169.

EXHIBIT 4.5.

Risk/Reward, Cocoa-M

arch 1992

Candlesand the OaerallTechnicalPicture

Consequently, the parameters of this trade are: buying at $L205(at
the completion of the morning star pattern), a stop at$1169,and a target
near $L220.This means a $36 risk and a $15 target. Not an attractiveriski
reward trade by any stretch of the imagination! The morale of the story:
do not place a trade just becausea candle pattern emerges. Note how
the bottom of the morning star became support a week later. The rally
from there stalled at the expected 91220resistance area via a high-wave
candle at L and the long black real body at 2. These two candlesformed
a bearish engulfing pattern. Normally, a bearish engulfing pattern after
such a small preceding uptrend is not too important. But in this specific
case, it took an extra significance since it confirmed the $L220resistance
area.

TREND
"It is Easierto Run Down a Hill Than Up One"
"as clouds to the wind and winds
There is a beautiful japanesephrase,
to the blossom." In the context of trading, I would comParethe trend to
the wind and the price to the clouds or blossoms,whose movements are
controlled by the wind. Thus, determining where the most curtent price
is in relation to the trend is of vital importance. This means that a candle
pattern should be viewed in the context of the prevailing trend before
deciding if a new position should be initiated.
The method I usually recommend for incorporating the candle pattefns into the trend is to place a new trade in the direction of the prevailing trend and to offset a position when there is a reversal signal
against the prevailing trend. For instance, bearish candle signals in bull
trends should be used to offset longs (or to take other protectivemeasures
such as selling calls or moving up sell stop levels). But a bullish candle
signal in a bull trend could be used to place a new long position. The
opposite would be true in markets with major downtrends. To wit, initiating a short sale on a bearish candle signal should be the main goal in
a bear market. A bullish signal in a bear market could be used to cover
shorts.
There are many ways to determine trend. (In Part 2 of this book, I
will reveal some popular methods of trend determination used by Japanese traders and investors.) The goal of this section is not to help you
find the best way to determine trend, but to get you to think about some
ways to incorporate trend into your candle analysis. In this section, I will
discuss some of the more common Western methods of trend determination such as trendlines and moving averages.

137

138

For those who would like to learn more about the practical applications of some of the most popular western technical tools, inciuaing
those techniques to help determine trend, I highly recommend the book,
TechnicalTraders Guide to ComputerAnalysis of the Futures Market, by
CharlesLeBeauand David Lucas (Island view FinancialGroup, Torrance,
cA). Do not let the title of the book dissuade you if you do not use
computers to trade. This book is a must for any trader who useswestern
technical techniques.
One of the most basic methods of determining trend is to use a trendline. In Exhibit 4.7, we see how a resistanceline from late June to early
August kept the trend bearish. The candlesgave some early warnings of
a market that was bottoming. Specifically, the hammer in |uly, the m-orning star in early August, and a small rising window in late August (which
also completed an island bottom). yet, all these bullish signals were in
the context of a bear market (as defined by the downward iloping resistance line). It was not until the break above the trendline that a new
bullish trend was confirmed. Note how the rally from this breakout stalled
at september's dark cloud cover. That dark cloud cover then becamea
resistancelevel.
Exhibit 4.8 shows how in early |uly, there was a bearish engulfing
