
154

c05.indd 154

1/13/09 10:04:57 AM

B r e a k o u t Tr a d i n g ( a n d F a d i n g ) — S h o o t i n g f o r t h e S t a r s

EXHIBIT 5.7

Trendline Break

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

methods available that can be used in breakout trading. These
other methods, however, will usually yield different price levels than
the horizontal line technique. They include: dynamic trendlines
(as illustrated in Exhibit 5.7), chart patterns (described later in this
chapter), pivot points and Fibonacci retracements (also described
later in this chapter), and moving averages.
However support and resistance are measured, the concept of
trading breakouts is straightforward. A trader customarily enters
the breakout trade beyond the actual breakout point, balancing the
goal of avoiding a false breakout with the goal of getting in as early
as possible for a larger profit potential. A hard stop loss is generally

155

c05.indd 155

1/13/09 10:04:58 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

placed right before the breakout point where, if it is hit, the price
move will have proven itself to be a false or premature breakout. This
straightforward stop loss placement is one of the primary strengths of
breakout trading, as it ensures tightly controlled downside risk, while
boosting the potential reward-to-risk profile of the trade.
One very important and common variation on the traditional
breakout is called the pullback/throwback. These phenomena occur
when momentum on a breakout wanes shortly after the break, resulting in an extra move. See Exhibit 5.8 for an illustration of typical
pullback and throwback moves. A throwback is simply a return to the
point of breakout after an upward break. A pullback is a return to
the point of breakdown after a downward break. In either direction,
if the break is true (which means it carries real directional momentum) price should hit and bounce off the point of breakout, and then
surpass the point at which breakout momentum waned and price
turned. On a true break, price should then continue in the breakout

EXHIBIT 5.8

Pullback and Throwback
Throwback

Breakout level

Pullback
Breakout level

156

c05.indd 156

1/13/09 10:04:58 AM

B r e a k o u t Tr a d i n g ( a n d F a d i n g ) — S h o o t i n g f o r t h e S t a r s

direction as if the pullback or throwback never occurred. Some
prudent breakout traders will wait for a pullback/throwback before
getting in on a breakout trade. Traders who do so may miss some
potential trading opportunities (as many breakouts do not have pullbacks or throwbacks), but that extra patience often pays off in betterpositioned breakout trades with somewhat reduced risk.
Like range trading, breakout trading is a very popular strategy
for approaching forex. Breakouts occur frequently on currency
charts. Whether these breakouts are real or false, however, is the difficulty in implementing this methodology. But since the nature of
breakout trading inherently possesses an extremely straightforward
and beneficial method for setting optimal risk management controls
(stop losses), trading in this manner can be a very high probability
method for approaching the foreign exchange markets.

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT

Ed Ponsi
Ed Ponsi, president of FXEducator.com and author of Forex
Patterns and Probabilities, is well-known in the industry as a
top trader, money manager, and forex trading educator. He has
advised hedge funds, institutional traders, and individual traders
of all levels of skill and experience, and has become one of the
most sought-after lecturers in the financial world.
Ponsi states:
“Regarding technique, I’m primarily a trend trader. I look
for situations where the technicals mesh with the fundamentals—if there is a clear trend in place, and if the

157

c05.indd 157

1/13/09 10:04:59 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT (CONTINUED)
fundamentals confirm what I see on the chart, I’m going
to try to grab a chunk of that trend.
One thing I’m very cautious about is trading the
breakout—if the trend is moving upwards, I want to go
long but I don’t want to buy a currency as it’s hitting
new highs. Because there are so many false breakouts
in forex trading, my strategy is to try to catch the pullbacks. That way, even if the currency pair fails to break
through, there is still some potential for profit when the
pair reaches resistance.
One of my favorite situations is a false breakout that
moves against the trend. These types of breakouts have
a high failure rate, and they also set the stage for a ‘slingshot’ trade in the opposite direction. It’s a great setup,
and I’m constantly looking for it.
If the trend is strong enough, I might not use a target at all; instead, I’ll trail a stop. I like to trail stops
manually, moving them strategically instead of automatically. That way, I can keep my stop beneath a trend line
or moving average, instead of moving it to an arbitrary
location—which is often exactly what happens when we
use automatic trailing stops.”

P attern Trading — Playing with Shapes
As mentioned in the previous section, pattern trading may be considered one form of breakout trading, depending upon which type
of chart pattern one might be referring to. There are essentially two
general types of chart patterns. First are the several multibar shapes
that together constitute one of the pillars of Western-style technical
analysis. These formations generally represent price consolidation, and

158

c05.indd 158

1/13/09 10:05:00 AM

P a t t e r n Tr a d i n g — P l a y i n g w i t h S h a p e s

include triangles, flags, pennants, wedges, rectangles, and head-andshoulders, among others. Many of the most important of these patterns are illustrated and described in detail in Chapter 3. For the most
part, all of these patterns are generally traded when a breakout of one
type or another occurs. Conversely, the second type of chart pattern—
candlestick patterns (also described in Chapter 3)—are not tied as
closely with breakout trading.
When speaking of pattern breakouts, it is helpful to delineate
which patterns are more often considered continuation patterns
and which ones are more often considered reversal patterns. These
delineations are far from rules, as any pattern could act as a continuation pattern or a reversal pattern, or neither (e.g., prolonged
consolidation after breakout). Traditionally, though, most patterns
have fulfilled certain roles that historically have been somewhat reliable to a certain extent. A continuation pattern is simply a consolidation formation where price exits, or breaks out of, the pattern
in the direction of the trend that prevailed prior to the formation.
Conversely, a reversal pattern is a consolidation formation where
price exits, or breaks out of, the pattern in the opposite direction of
the trend that prevailed prior to the formation.
As indicated in Chapter 3, of the most common patterns found
on currency charts, those that are generally considered reversal formations include double tops/bottoms, triple tops/bottoms, and headand-shoulders tops/bottoms. Those that are most often considered
continuation patterns include flags, pennants, triangles, wedges, and
rectangles, among others.
When a continuation pattern approaches breakout on the side
of the pattern that would denote a continuation, technical traders

159

c05.indd 159

1/13/09 10:05:00 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

wait patiently for a break. At this point, it is treated as a breakout
trade with a similar type of entry and stop-loss placement as with
standard support/resistance breakout trades. The same holds true for
reversal patterns when price approaches breakout on the side of the
pattern that would denote a reversal. But in actuality, any type of
breakout of these patterns, whether in the direction of continuation
or reversal, is an eagerly watched and traded event.
One added benefit of trading pattern breakouts lies in the precise structuring of profit targets. Most patterns have a built-in profit
target after breakout. A good example is the well-known headand-shoulders pattern. As shown in Exhibit 5.9, after price breaks
the neckline, the traditional signal for a trade, the target is derived
by measuring the height of the pattern from the top of the head
to the neckline, and then projecting that height from the neckline
break down for the profit target. Similarly, for a rectangle consolidation pattern, the height of the rectangle is projected up or down to
derive a profit target after breakout. Triangles, flags, pennants, and
other chart patterns also have convenient, built-in targets.
EXHIBIT 5.9

Head-and-Shoulders Profit Target
Head and Shoulders Profit Target

Neckline

Profit Target

160

c05.indd 160

1/13/09 10:05:00 AM

F i b o n a c c i a n d P i v o t P o i n t Tr a d i n g

In contrast with Western-style chart patterns, Japanese-style
candlestick patterns (the most important of which are described in
Chapter 3) are generally smaller chart formations that are not usually considered self-sufficient trading signals. Rather, candlestick
patterns are more often utilized as important trade confirmation
tools that are used in conjunction with other analytical methods.
For example, a hammer candle that occurs after a steep, well-defined
downtrend should not be taken by itself as a reversal signal to buy at
the low. But if this candle occurs right at a well-established support
level, the hammer can certainly represent a strong confirmation that
a potential long trade may be in order.
Pattern trading is very similar to general support/resistance breakout trading in terms of entries and exits, but with the added benefit
of clear-cut profit targets. Patterns appear very frequently on foreign currency charts, and can be found on all charting timeframes.
Through diligent chart-watching practice, any foreign exchange
trader can learn to spot even the most comprehensive pattern trading opportunities at a glance.

F ibonacci and Pivot Point Trading — Magic
Numbers and Self - Fulfilling Prophecies
Also sharing some similar characteristics with general support/
resistance trading, the use of Fibonacci levels and pivot points are
often considered by their adherents as complete, self-contained trading strategies. The origins of these two methodologies are far from
intertwined with each other, but they are grouped together here
because they are commonly traded and analyzed in a similar fashion.

161

c05.indd 161

1/13/09 10:05:00 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

The horizontal price levels that are generated through Fibonacci
and pivot points are calculated using different methods, but they
both produce mathematically derived support and resistance levels that traders may use either as indicators of possible retracement
turns or as zones to watch for breakouts.
A substantial component of what makes these tools work surprisingly well under diverse market conditions is the simple fact
that many traders, both large and small, utilize both Fibonacci and
pivot points in their trading. Therefore, the levels derived from these
popular tools become a sort of self-fulfilling prophecy. This is where
significant price action often occurs around these levels due to
the simple fact that many traders are watching and reacting to these
price levels. This phenomenon contributes to their frequent effectiveness and accuracy in describing market movement.
As discussed in Chapter 3 on technical analysis tools, the mathematical theory now generally known as Fibonacci Theory is widely considered to have originated from a 13th century Italian mathematician
appropriately named, Leonardo Fibonacci. He calculated a sequence of
numbers that led to the discovery of the Golden Ratio, 1.618, which is
a proportion that advocates say can be found in nature, science, music,
and even financial markets. Derived from this ratio and its inverse of
0.618 are the Fibonacci percentages commonly used in technical analysis today. There are several modern charting tools based on these percentages that have been created expressly for analyzing price charts, of
which the most popular is the standard Fibonacci retracement tool.
The most common Fibonacci retracement percentages, as shown
in Exhibit 5.10, include 23.6%, 38.2%, 50%, and 61.8%. Of these,
the latter three are perhaps the most closely followed by traders and

162

c05.indd 162

1/13/09 10:05:00 AM

F i b o n a c c i a n d P i v o t P o i n t Tr a d i n g

EXHIBIT 5.10

Fibonacci Retracements

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

analysts. Very often, one will read commentary from an analyst in
the financial news proclaiming that price is approaching the 38.2%
retracement level, and that something important, like a turn, could
occur at this key level. Such is the widespread popularity of Fibonacci
retracements.
As mentioned earlier, Fibonacci retracements are customarily traded
in one of two ways—either as a breakout opportunity or as a retracement turn (a bounce). Both are viable methods of trading forex that
have built-in and clear-cut locations for stop-loss placement, much like
all support/resistance trading techniques. In addition, Fibonacci levels
can also be used as profit targets for existing open trades.

163

c05.indd 163

1/13/09 10:05:01 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

Similar to Fibonacci retracements in both look and functionality
are pivot points. As described in Chapter 3, pivot points originated
long ago in other financial markets. They are derived mathematically from the previous day’s key data points, including the high, low,
and close. The main pivot point price level, labeled “PP,” is calculated by taking the mean (average) of the high, low, and close from
the prior day’s price action. From the PP, four other primary pivot
points are calculated, two above and two below the main PP. The
levels above are R1 and R2, where “R” stands for resistance.
The levels below are S1 and S2, where “S” stands for support. Often,
this pivot point structure is extended even further to R3 and S3.
Following are the calculations for the most common daily pivot
points. Although a pivot point calculator may readily be found online,
and is also a standard component of many charting software packages, it is still useful to know how these important levels are derived.
Beginning with the middle Pivot Point that is calculated from the
previous day’s key price points, as per the following calculations,
the resulting support and resistance levels are subsequently derived.
R3 (Resistance 3)  Yesterday’s High  2(PP  Yesterday’s Low)
R2 (Resistance 2)  PP  (RI  SI)
R1 (Resistance 1)  2  PP  Yesterday’s Low
PP (Pivot Point)  (Yesterday’s High  Yesterday’s Low
 Yesterday’s Close)  3
S1 (Support 1)  2  PP - Yesterday’s High
S2 (Support 2)  PP  (R1  S1)
S3 (Support 3)  Yesterday’s Low  2(Yesterday’s High  PP)

164

c05.indd 164

1/13/09 10:05:01 AM

F i b o n a c c i a n d P i v o t P o i n t Tr a d i n g

EXHIBIT 5.11

Pivot Points

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

Traders can calculate the current day’s relevant pivot points
using these calculations, based upon the previous day’s price data,
and then plot the levels using horizontal lines on a currency price
chart. Exhibit 5.11 illustrates the calculated levels plotted on a chart.
Once these levels are calculated and plotted, they are used in much
the same way as Fibonacci retracements. Breakouts or bounces
may be traded, and they are often also used as profit targets. Traders
also use pivot points as reference levels to provide guidance as to
whether the current price is relatively low or relatively high within
its expected range for the day. If price is near the day’s S2, for example, traders may look for long trading opportunities with the view

165

c05.indd 165

1/13/09 10:05:01 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

that price should reasonably move towards equilibrium around the
main PP level.
Both Fibonacci retracements and pivot points are excellent technical tools that often encompass entire trading disciplines in themselves. Mostly based on breakouts or bounces (whether the bounce is
up off support or down off resistance), these strategic trading methodologies can also lend very valuable confirmation to other currency
trading strategies. Both known for their large following of adherents,
Fibonacci retracements and pivot points are frequently effective for
just that reason—traders actually trade off of these levels. This fact
alone makes these tools a valuable component of any trader’s technical trading arsenal.

E lliott Wave Trading — Two Steps Forward,
One Step Back
Related to Fibonacci Theory, Elliott Wave Theory also claims an
enormous following of practitioners. As briefly discussed in Chapter 3,
Elliott Wave is named after Ralph Nelson Elliott, who asserted that
price movement is predictable and can be classified into a series of
identifiable waves. The basic structure is five waves comprising the
trend movement and three waves comprising the corrective (or
countertrend) movement. Furthermore, within each of these waves
is a smaller sub-wave structure that also adheres to the 5/3 pattern,
depending upon whether the wave is with the larger trend or against
it. So the basic 5/3 wave pattern remains intact on every magnitude, from the longest-term to the shortest-term, and each wave

166

c05.indd 166

1/13/09 10:05:03 AM

E l l i o t t W a v e Tr a d i n g

EXHIBIT 5.12

Comprehensive Elliott Wave Structure
Elliott Wave Structure
(5)
(B)
(3)
(A)
(1)
5
B

(4)

(C)

3
1

A
4

C
(2)

2

pattern exists within the context of a larger wave pattern while also
encompassing many smaller wave patterns. Perhaps the best way to
understand this principle is through a visual representation. Exhibit
5.12 provides an illustration of a comprehensive Elliott Wave structure.
There are three primary guidelines of a trend pattern in Elliott
Wave, according to its founder. Within the context of the 5-wave
trend cycle, as shown in Exhibit 5.12, Wave 2 never moves beyond
the beginning of Wave 1, Wave 3 is never the shortest of the five
waves, and Wave 4 never enters the price span of Wave 1. Beyond
these strictly observed principles, there are numerous nuances surrounding Elliott Wave theory that are well beyond the scope of
this book. An explanation of how practitioners view the real-world
implications of each wave, though, should help illustrate how Elliott
Wave traders approach the foreign exchange markets.

167

c05.indd 167

1/13/09 10:05:03 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

IN THE REAL WORLD

Elliott Wave Trading
In practice, trading according to Elliott Wave principles is primarily about identifying market turns, whether those turns are merely
minor retracements within a dominant trend or if they are major market reversals. Within a typical 5-wave dominant trend pattern, each
wave represents a certain market psychology. The same is true of
each wave within the 3-wave corrective pattern. Following is a description of each wave’s significance within the more readily identifiable 5wave trend. This particular description will depict a dominant UPtrend.
The same principles apply, but in reverse, for dominant DOWNtrends.
Wave 1: Within the context of a brand new uptrend, the currency
pair in question is still considered by the majority of market participants and analysts to be entrenched in the previously prevailing downtrend. Therefore, at the time that the trend reversal
occurs, it can often be extremely difficult to identify the fact that
a new trend is indeed beginning. At this point, buying activity
is only a trickle, as contrarian traders begin accumulating inexpensively at or near the lows. This initial move within the new
uptrend later turns out to be a significant push that becomes
progressively more obvious as the first wave ends.
Wave 2: After the initial push in the new direction, this second
wave constitutes, among other actions, profit-taking by those
who participated in the first wave. This correction should not,
however, reach past the beginning of the first wave. Not only
does this second wave represent profit-taking, but this corrective move is also partly caused by the many traders who are
acting on their belief that the market is still embedded within
the previous downtrend.
Wave 3: This wave usually constitutes the strongest and largest
move within the 5-wave pattern. At the very least, it should
never be the shortest. Throughout this wave, traders, analysts,

168

c05.indd 168

1/13/09 10:05:03 AM

E l l i o t t W a v e Tr a d i n g

IN THE REAL WORLD (CONTINUED)
and the media become progressively more bullish and committed to the new trend in the currency pair. By the end of this
third wave, a buying frenzy among the masses may have developed, generally pushing the pair to new heights in a swift and
steep manner. This wave should extend well past the end of
the first wave.
Wave 4: Representing a corrective pullback move before the final
push, this wave is generally not as strong as the other waves,
and often tends to move in a sideways, consolidative fashion.
Many Elliott Wave practitioners consider the end of this wave as
an ideal place to enter a position on a pullback (or “dip”). This
trade setup would be a long trade, in the direction of both the
final wave and the dominant trend. One primary rule is that this
wave should never enter the price region of the first wave.
Wave 5: This is the final push in the direction of the main
trend. At this point, bullish sentiment on the currency pair
is approaching a peak. Analysts, traders, and the media are
generally extremely positive, fueling even more buying activity.
During the middle of this wave, novice traders get carried away
with all of this bullishness and begin joining the buying crowd
at this late stage, if they have not done so already. During
this last wave, only contrarians quietly begin to take profits
on their long positions and start to short-sell. This process
gains momentum to culminate in a peak high, and ultimately
the beginnings of a corrective 3-wave pattern.
