
– xx –

Study I

TECHNICAL APPROACH
TO STOCK TRADING
■ Definition of a Stock Chart

■ Number of Charts Necessary

■ An “Advanced Course”

■ Selecting the Stocks

■ Pure Technical Action

■ Chart Paper

■ Fundamentals Reflected in Technical

■ Co-ordinate Scales

Action
■ Stocks Eligible for Charting
■ The Pictorial Aspect of Charts
■ Charts as the “Complete Memory”
■ Technical Chart Action – the New
Science
■ Technical vs. Fundamental Factors
■ Reasons for Contrary Technical
Action
■ Summary of the Technical Approach
■ The Introductory Warning
■ Beware of Early Presumption
■ No Easy Road to Profits
■ Newspapers which Publish Charts
■ Magazines which Publish Charts
■ Services Selling Daily Charts
■ Ready-made Charts
■ Advantages of Making Your Own
Charts
■ Closer Personal Contact

■ Constructing the Scale
■ Plotting the Price Data
■ Volume of Sales
■ Shifting the Volume Chart
■ The Time Scale
■ Holidays on the Time Scale
■ Helpful Notes on “Fundamentals”

May Be Added
■ Starting a New Sheet
■ Time Range Necessary

STOCK PRICE MOVEMENTS
■ Major Movements
■ Intermediate Movements
■ Minor Movements
■ Major Trends Shown on Monthly
Charts
■ Intermediate Trends Shown by
Weekly Chart
■ Importance of Minor Movement
Study

–1–

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

Definition of a Stock Chart
There is perhaps no better way to begin a discussion of stock charts than to agree on
a definition for them. A stock chart is a pictorial record of the trading history of any
stock or group of stocks. This is a perfectly simple definition of our subject yet it is
general enough to cover all of the many charts, pictures and formations which we
shall discuss in subsequent pages.
A stock chart may conceivably be so simple a thing as the picture of the closing
price of one stock issue on the last trading day of each year for only five or ten years.
The picture would not mean a great deal, yet technically it would fit into our definition. It would be a pictorial record of the trading history of this stock. It would be a
stock chart. It would differ only in degree from the most complete, most detailed
and painstaking stock chart that we might construct.

An ‘‘Advanced Course’’
For the purposes of this study it will be necessary to assume that the reader is quite
familiar with stocks, with securities in general, with the theory and practice of openmarket trading and with all of the myriad technical details covered by our term
‘‘trading history.” To this extent our present study is somewhat of an ‘‘advanced
course’’ in stock market operation, and it is only fair to suggest that fundamentals of
the market be studied and mastered before undertaking to benefit from this course.1
Beyond this introductory generalization, however, it shall be our constant and
continued aim to be as certain as possible that our thought is made clear by simplicity of language, by constant stressing of important points, by myriad examples
and even by possibly tiresome repetition. And it will perhaps be necessary to
request the forbearance and indulgence of our ‘‘brighter pupils’’ or more experienced readers if they find us apparently verging on ‘‘complete recall’’ in order to be
certain of full understanding.
As an example of this possible fault we are constrained to return for a few
moments to a more detailed examination of our introductory definition of stock
charts. The stock chart is a pictorial representation of any stock’s trading history. In
the study of stock charts we are not primarily interested in anything but actual tradRefer to Stock Market Theory and Practice by R. W. Schabacker, Forbes Publishing Company, New York,
NY. (Referring to this particular work is not possible, as it has long been out of print. With the passage of
time many market fundamentals have totally changed. Any reader needing information on the operations and fundamentals of current markets will certainly find this available in the many books that cover
these subjects today.)

1

–3–

STUDY I

ing – that is, the record or result of the orderly buying and selling of any issue in the
course of actual trading on any open market.

Pure Technical Action
We are not interested, for example, in the company behind the stock which we are
studying. We do not care, for our immediate purpose, whether the corporation manufactures mousetraps, tin cans, locomotives or aluminum toothpicks. We are not
particular as to whether it is an industrial, a railroad, a utility or a what-not. Technically the company behind the stock might even be in receivership, with its plant shut
down entirely and making nothing at all. For our primary purpose of charting that
stock it would make no difference, so long as the stock itself continued to enjoy fairly
active trading in some orderly and well regulated open market security exchange.
The reader must not get the impression that such fundamental factors are unimportant in trading, in analysis, in forecasting. They most decidedly are and they
most decidedly should be taken into serious consideration when studying any stock
or any stock chart for practical purposes. We merely assert that the stock chart itself
has nothing to do with such fundamental factors. It concerns itself solely with the
stock’s actual record in open-market trading.

Fundamentals Reflected in Technical Action
In the record of such trading all of these many and varied fundamental factors are
brought to bear, are evaluated and automatically weighted and recorded in net balance on the stock chart.
The trading in any stock is largely the result of the influence these fundamental
factors have had on each buyer and seller of each share of stock. The stock chart is a
pictorial record of such trading, so that it, in itself, is a reflection of all those other
factors and, from a purely technical standpoint, need therefore concern itself no further with such fundamental considerations.

Stocks Eligible for Charting
And, incidentally, since a stock chart is merely a record of trading, it follows that any
stock is eligible for charting which enjoys a trading market. Any stock, and for that
matter any article or service, which is bought and sold for a publicly listed price, can
be charted. For practical purposes, we shall see later that in order to be a valuable
subject for study a stock should have a free and open market, and an active market,
but the fact remains that any traded stock can be pictorialized in a stock chart.
And in like manner, according to our definition, a stock chart may be constructed
–4–

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

for more-than one stock at a time. Any number of stocks may be included in a single stock chart though the clearest results are obtained by averaging all of the component stocks or figures into one series and thus making the chart into a composite
picture which looks like the record of trading in merely one stock, but, in reality, is
the composite result of trading in a great many stocks combined. Such composite
charts on groups of stocks are called ‘‘averages.”
Proceeding further with our definition of a stock chart we note that it is primarily
a pictorial record. A stock chart then is a picture. One of the most simple and easily
understandable advantages of a stock chart is that it presents a picture at any desired
instant of stock history which has covered many months or years and which, in the
absence of the chart, it would take many hours, or even weeks, of diligent research
to produce.

The Pictorial Aspect of Charts
Since the stock chart is a history of trading it finds its primary basis of construction
in actual trading, and in the units of such trading. The most common and accepted
trading place in stocks is the New York Stock Exchange. The results of trading on
that exchange are primarily recorded in brokerage offices throughout the country
through the medium of the stock ticker. But for many apparent and practical reasons
the majority of people interested in such trading are not able to be in personal attendance to watch the trading record unfold itself in a brokerage office from 10 to 3
o’clock each day.2 The newspapers and other periodicals and services bridge this
gap by reporting daily the results of such trading. Any person interested in the stock
market, therefore, may save approximately five hours a day by examining merely
the total results of the day’s trading.
Just as the newspapers save time and energy by summarizing stock trading each
day, so the stock chart goes further in its service by saving days, weeks, months and
years for the interested student. If he wishes to review the past year of trading history for any stock without reference to a chart, he must go back over the newspapers
for more than 300 days or, at best, his own records summarizing those 300 days of
trading. But if he takes advantage of the services offered by the stock chart he may
save all this time and effort. At a glance he may have before him the complete record
of the past year’s daily trading in any particular stock.

Charts as the ‘‘Complete Memory’’
Even if there were no saving of time and effort, stock charts still retain their greatest

2

Today the New York Stock Exchange is open from 9.30am to 4.00pm, New York time.

–5–

STUDY I

advantage, however, which is one of complete memory. If the individual were satisfied to spend his precious hours poring over the written or printed record of the past
year’s trading in any stock, as presumed above, he would still be under a terrific
handicap of trying to remember the characteristics of February trading while looking at the record for October. Unless he had an almost supernatural memory he
would have to be constantly referring from one period of time to another in order to
make any complete order or analysis out of his research.
But if he uses a chart of this stock, how much simpler is his task. Here is the picture, before his eyes in black and white, permanent, accurate, compact – the very picture which, without the chart, he would be trying hazily to recollect or construct in
mental imagery.
The stock chart’s chief value, therefore, grows out of its being a pictorial record of
trading history. Because it is a picture the stock chart makes the past history of any
issue an open book, simple, easy to read, easy to study. Its use brings advantages
similar in practical result to the telescope, the X-ray, the electric eye and other modern devices which save so much time and energy in fundamentals and details that
they make possible the transference of such energy into the more productive channels of study and research.

Technical Chart Action – the New Science
And this thought brings us naturally to by far the greatest practical advantage of the
stock chart. Because it makes the groundwork of fundamental co-ordination of facts
so easy, so simple, so readily grasped, it leads naturally into a more detailed study
of the phenomena which it pictorializes; the actual results of the trading history presented, the patterns, the rules, the characteristics of behavior. In short, it leads to a
new science, the science of technical chart action.
Technical market action is that aspect of analysis which is based upon phenomena
arising out of the market itself, to the exclusion of fundamental and all other factors.
In fact, technical action may also be explained as merely the antithesis of the fundamental considerations. The fundamental aspect of market analysis lays special stress
upon such factors as the corporation behind the stock, its business, its prospects, its
past, present and future earnings, its balance sheet, its financial strength, the quality
of its management and so on. Fundamental factors include the dividend rate of the
stock in question, its capitalization, its yield, its distribution and countless other factors which may have direct or indirect bearing upon the intrinsic worth of the stock,
upon its theoretical price, upon what the individual may think it should sell for, or
upon the true value of the issue in question.
Such fundamental factors are highly important and must be taken into careful
consideration by the investor or trader. But they are not the technical factors which
–6–

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

we are about to study. The technical factors are what might be termed the residuum
of the total sum of all aspects bearing upon the probable market value of the stock,
after the more apparent and fundamental factors are eliminated.

Technical vs. Fundamental Factors
When we have finished our fundamental analysis of earnings, financial strength and
all the rest, there is still something left to be considered with regard to the future
price at which any particular stock may sell. That final consideration has to do with
technical market action.
Realizing the presence and the importance of this ‘‘other factor’’ makes it more
simple to analyze it. We have defined technical action as the phenomena arising out
of the market itself. That market is nothing more than a group of buyers pitted
against a group of sellers. And it stands clearly to reason that in any open market if
there were more sellers than buyers, or more shares of stock for sale than for purchase, then the quotations or prices for that stock would decline.
Ours not to reason why there was more stock offered than the demand could sustain. Ours merely to detect the technical fact that there were more sellers than buyers. That was the important point, for it meant the stock was going down, all
fundamental factors to the contrary notwithstanding.
Such considerations form the basis for our statement at the beginning of this chapter that stock charts, and thus also technical action, take no consideration of fundamental factors like earnings, management, balance sheets and so forth, in their
primary analysis. We shall see later that fundamentals are highly important adjuncts
to the study of technical action and are, in many cases, more important for the long
pull than are the temporary technical aspects. But in our introduction to the subject
and for our basic understanding of stock charts we must realize that in themselves
they completely ignore fundamentals. In fact they completely ignore everything
except technical market action, the balance between buyers and sellers, the balance
between supply and demand for any stock or group of stocks; in short the phenomena arising out of actual trading, per se, in a free and open market.

Reasons for Contrary Technical Action
Perhaps it is too mysterious and suggestive of legerdemain to intimate that we need
not question why a stock suddenly declines on weak technical action just when its
fundamental aspects appear the strongest. There are many possible reasons, but
they arise, like the technical action itself, primarily out of the market.
Speculators may have bought the stock months ago in anticipation of the development of these favorable fundamentals, and as they appear the speculators sell out
–7–

STUDY I

and take their profits. Perhaps a group of powerful insiders, or officials of the company, have loaded up too heavily with the stock. Perhaps they realize that the fundamental situation is not as strong as the news makes it appear. There are any
number of reasons why the technical position may be the opposite of the fundamental position.
The important point is that when they are at variance, the technical position wins
out, since it is closer to the market, and the open
market is what makes stock prices move. At least
The technical position is
the technical position wins out immediately, even if
the factor which is going
only temporarily, and the technical position is thereto influence prices up or
fore more important than the fundamental position
down in the future
for the short-swing trader or speculator who is looking for his profit from the current price movement
of the stock and is not, like the investor, buying to put away for the ‘‘long pull.”
Although through the medium of stock charts we can get a better judgment on the
technical position of the market at the moment, that technical position is constantly
changing and is subject to very rapid and substantial swings from very strong to
very weak in a few days or even, at rare intervals, in a few hours. It takes practically
no time at all for a huge lot of buying or selling to come into the market and such
events are reflected in technical action and lend themselves to chart analysis.
The fact is, however, that technical action does not generally change so rapidly
and, having determined whether the technical position is strong or weak, we are a
little ahead of the game already, because the technical position is the factor which is
going to influence prices either up or down not yesterday, or even now, but in the
future, even though it be only the immediate future.
Technical positions do not generally change rapidly unless fundamentals receive
a terrific impulse which is so strong as to overcome the ‘‘status quo’’ between supply and demand. In the general run of affairs a strong technical position will take
days, weeks or months to build itself up, will have its strong effect for months, and
then will take additional days, weeks or months finally to exhaust itself and switch
to the opposite state of weak technical position. During all this gradual change, market profits are available through proper analysis of the technical situation.

Summary of the Technical Approach
To summarize our introductory discussion, it is not enough to know the fundamental position of stocks. We must also know their technical position. For the short
range, technical considerations are even more important than fundamental statistics, but ‘‘the compleat angler’’ will know both. Fundamental considerations are
easy for the average student. Technical aspects are not so easy or so certain but they
–8–

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

are reduced to somewhat of a science by the study of stock charts.
Through the medium of stock charts we may arrive at a better understanding of
the phenomena which attend the gradual but constantly shifting balance of power
between supply and demand in the stock market.

The Introductory Warning
The following lessons are devoted to such a study but in a spirit of broadmindedness and conservatism which it is highly important that the reader should share. If
there is one generalization about the whole subject of stock charts which we may
suggest at the very introduction of our study, it is the definite caution that the reader
be skeptical of any apparently sure thing. This may sound like a poor anticlimax
with which to open such a study but we do so with well-weighed forethought.
We are most definitely a firm believer in the usefulness of stock charts and their
high value in delineating the technical position of individual stocks and the general
market. Stock charts are, in our opinion, the most important single aid in forecasting
future price movements and we constantly stand on the reiterated premise that they
are an absolute necessity for successful stock trading.

Beware of Early Presumption
But it is this very faith in the efficiency of stock charts that leads to an introductory
warning against over confidence and mistrust. There is nothing like the thrill that
comes to the beginner when he once commences to
master the rudimentary principles of chart reading
Stock charts are most
and sees his first few forecast analyses turn out corimportant in forecasting
rectly.
future price movements
The greatest danger for the beginner lies in just
and are an absolute
this primary awakening to the value of his study.
necessity for successful
With his first few successes he is likely to mistake a
stock trading.
probable forecast for a certain one, to become overconfident, to overtrade, and suddenly find himself
involved in a disastrous quagmire of heavy losses
and, what is perhaps more important, in a hopeless state of indecision, mistrust,
skepticism, and bitter disappointment.

No Easy Road to Profits
There are literally thousands of unfortunate examples in our files and in our
acquaintance with students who became know-it-alls in the first blush of their
–9–

STUDY I

maiden success – whose cupidity was so sharpened by the early realization of the
basic value in technical analysis that they rushed headlong into the pitfalls of chart
reading and chart trading without displaying enough patience and forbearance to
complete their study and perfect their knowledge of basic principles.
The reader may be certain that all of the principles educed in the following study
of stock charts and technical action are considered valuable or important, or they
would not have been included. But the reader may also be just as certain that none
of those principles are guaranteed to be 100 per cent infallible. We have been able to
find, though sometimes with difficulty, exceptions to practically every formation, to
practically every rule. Furthermore, we know of no practical rule of stock charts or
stock trading which may not, under certain conditions and at certain times, have
such exceptions.
By no means the least important aspect of successful chart reading and chart trading, therefore, is the early detection of such exceptional cases, the almost intuitive,
subconscious suspicion of certain formations and, above all, the ability to avoid or
limit loss on such exceptional situations.
We have endeavored to suggest methods for attaining this happy state but, in the
last analysis, it comes generally from long study, from long experience and from
long foresight; and the greatest of these is the attitude which we are attempting to
foster in these paragraphs, that of a healthy skepticism toward all rules, a scholarly
spirit of conservatism and humility in the face of a great and valuable science and a
conservative habit of action in all practical market trading.

Newspapers which Publish Charts
Public and professional interest in stock charts has increased so rapidly in recent
years that the demand has led to a growing supply of sources from which stock
charts may be purchased ready made. Even some of the newspapers have begun to
publish individual stock charts, either in continuous series or merely from time to
time. Regular publication of stock charts in the newspapers is still confined generally, however, to the printing of ‘‘average charts,’’ or charts showing the pictorial history of leading stock groups, rather than individual issues.
Among the New York daily newspapers which publish average charts regularly
are the New York Daily Investment News and the Wall Street Journal.3 The Wall Street
Journal publishes daily an up-to-date record of its own averages of 30 railroad issues,
The information given here and in the following paragraphs regarding several newspapers, magazines
and chart services is mostly obsolete. Today’s readily available computer services with their rapid transmission of market data and chart representations make the type of information referred to in the text easy
to gather. Special note should be made that a number of organizations provide excellent weekly chart
books for stocks and commodities that many technical analysts find as essential today as in the 1930s.
3
