the office. I had never seen the place before. There was a river at one
end and a graveyard at the other. In between was vintage Manhattan: a
deep, narrow canyon in which yellow cabs smacked into raised sewer lids,
potholes, and garbage. Armies of worried men in suits stormed off the

Lexington Avenue subway line and marched down the crooked pavements.
For rich people, they didn't look very happy. They seemed serious, at
least compared with how I felt. I had only a few jitters that accompany
any new beginning. Oddly enough, I didn't really imagine I was going to
work, more as if I were going to collect lottery winnings.
Salomon Brothers had written me in London to announce that it would pay
me anM.B.A.'s wage—though I had noM.B.A.—of forty-two thousand
dollars plus a bonus after the first six months of six thousand more. At
that time I hadn't had the education required to feel poor on fortyeight thousand dollars (then equivalent to forty-five thousand British pounds) a year. Receiving the news in England, the land of
limp paychecks, accentuated the generosity of Salomon's purse. A
chaired professor of the London School of Economics, who took a keen
interest in material affairs, stared at me bug-eyed and gurgled when he
heard what I was to be paid. It was twice what he earned. He was in his
mid-forties and at the top of his profession. I was twenty-four years old
and at the bottom of mine. There was no justice in the world, and thank
goodness for that.
Perhaps it is worth explaining where this money was coming from, not
that I gave it much thought at the time. Man for man Salomon Brothers
was, in 1985, the world's most profitable corporation. At least that is
what I was repeatedly told. I never bothered to check it because it
seemed so obviously true. Wall Street was hot. And we were Wall
Street's most profitable firm.
Wall Street traffics in stocks and bonds. At the end of the 1970s, and
the beginning of both superindulgent American politics and modern
financial history, Salomon Brothers knew more about bonds than any firm
on Wall Street: how to value them, how to trade them, and how to sell
them. The sole chink in its complete dominance of the bond markets in
1979 was in junk bonds, which we shall return to later and which were
the specialty of another firm, similar to us in many ways: Drexel Bumham.
But in the late 1970s and early 1980s, junk bonds were such a tiny
fraction of the market that Salomon effectively dominated the entire
bond market. The rest of Wall Street had been content to let Salomon
Brothers be the best bond traders because the occupation was neither
terribly profitable nor prestigious. What was profitable was raising
capital (equity) for corporations. What was prestigious was knowing lots

of corporate CEOs. Salomon was a social and financial outlier.
That, anyway, is what I was told. It was hard to prove any of it because
the only evidence was oral. But consider the kickoff chuckle to a speech
given to the Wharton School in March 1977 by Sidney Homer of Salomon
Brothers, the leading bond analyst on Wall Street from the mid-1940s
right through to the late 1970s. "I felt frustrated," said Homer about
his job. "At cocktail parties lovely ladies would corner me and ask my
opinion of the market, but alas, when they learned I was abend man, they
would quietly drift away."
Or consider the very lack of evidence itself. There are 287 books about
bonds in the New York Public Library, and most of them are about
chemistry. The ones that aren't contain lots of ugly numbers and
bear titles such as All Quiet on the Bond Front, and Low-Risk Strategies
for the Investor. In other words, they aren't the sort of page turners
that moisten your palms and glue you to your seat. People who believe
themselves of social consequence tend to leave more of a paper trail, in
the form of memoirs and anecdotiana. But while there are dozens of
anecdotes and several memoirs from the stock markets, the bond
markets are officially silent. Bond people pose the same problem to a
cultural anthropologist as a nonliterate tribe deep in the Amazon.
In part this is due to the absence from the bond market of the educated
classes, which in turn reinforces the point about how unfashionable
bonds once were. In 1968, the last time a degree count was taken at
Salomon Brothers, thirteen of the twenty-eight partners hadn't been to
college, and one hadn't graduated from the eighth grade. John
Gutfreund was, in this crowd, an intellectual; though he was rejected by
Harvard, he did finally graduate (without distinction) from Oberlin.
The biggest myth about bond traders, and therefore the greatest
misunderstanding about the unprecedented prosperity on Wall Street in
the 1980s, are that they make their money by taking large risks. A few
do. And all traders take small risks. But most traders act simply as toll
takers. The source of their fortune has been nicely summarized by Kurt
Vonnegut (who, oddly, was describing lawyers): "There is a magic moment,
during which a man has surrendered a treasure, and daring which the man
who is about to receive it has not yet done so. An alert lawyer [read bond
trader] will make that moment his own, possessing the treasure for a
magic microsecond, taking a little of it, passing it on."

In other words, Salomon carved a tiny fraction out of each financial
transaction. This adds up. The Salomon salesman sells $50 million worth
of new IBM bonds to pension fund X. The Salomon trader, who provides
the salesman with the bonds, takes for himself an eighth (of a
percentage point), or $62,500. He may, if he wishes, take more. In the
bond market, unlike in the stock market, commissions are not openly
stated.
Now the fun begins. Once the trader knows the location of the IBM
bonds and the temperament of their owner, he doesn't have to be
outstandingly clever to make the bonds (the treasure) move again. He can
generate his own magic microseconds. He can, for example, pressure one
of his salesmen to persuade insurance company Y that the IBM bonds are
worth more than pension fund X paid for them initially. Whether it is
true is irrelevant. The trader buys the bonds from X and
sells them to Y and takes out another eighth, and the pension fund is
happy to make a small profit in such a short time.
In this process, it helps if neither of the parties on either side of the
middleman knows the value of the treasure. The men on the trading floor
may not have been to school, but they have Ph.D.'s in man's ignorance. In
any market, as in any poker game, there is a fool. The astute investor
Warren Buffett is fond of saying that any player unaware of the fool in
the market probably is the fool in the market. In 1980, when the bond
market emerged from a long dormancy, many investors and even Wall
Street banks did not have a clue who was the fool in the new game.
Salomon bond traders knew about fools because that was their job.
Knowing about markets is knowing about other people's weaknesses. And
a fool, they would say, was a person who was willing to sell a bond for less
or buy a bond for more than it was worth. A bond was worth only as much
as the person who valued it properly was wil ling to pay. And Salomon, to
complete the circle, was the firm that valued the bonds properly.
But none of this explains why Salomon Brothers was particularly
profitable in the 1980s. Making profits on Wall Street is a bit like eating
the stuffing from a turkey. Some higher authority must first put the
stuffing into the turkey. The turkey was stuffed more generously in the
1980s than ever before. And Salomon Brothers, because of its expertise,
had second and third helpings before other firms even knew that supper

was on.
One of the benevolent hands doing the stuffing belonged to the Federal
Reserve. That is ironic, since no one disapproved of the excesses of Wall
Street in the 1980s so much as the chairman of the Fed, Paul Volcker. At
a rare Saturday press conference, on October 6, 1 ?79, Volcker
announced that the money supply would cease to fluctuate with the
business cycle; money supply would be fixed, and interest rates would
float. The event, I think, marks the beginning of the golden age of the
bond man. Had Volcker never pushed through his radical charge in policy,
the world would be many bond traders and one memoir the poorer. For in
practice, the shift in the focus of monetary policy meant that interest
rates would swing wildly. Bond prices move inversely, lockstep, to rates
of interest. Allowing interest rates to swing wildly meant allowing bond
prices to swing wildly. Before Volcker's speech, bonds had been
conservative investments, into which investors put their savings when
they didn't fancy a gamble in the stock market. After
Volcker's speech, bonds became objects of speculation, a means of
creating wealth rather than merely storing it. Overnight the bond
market was transformed from a backwater into a casino. Turnover
boomer at Salomon. Many more people were hired to handle the new
business, on starting salaries of forty-eight grand.
Once Volcker had set interest rates free, the other hand stuffing the
turkey went to work: America's borrowers. American governments,
consumers, and corporations borrowed money at a faster clip during the
1980s than ever before; this meant the volume of bonds exploded
(another way to look at this is that investors were lending money more
freely than ever before). The combined indebtedness of the three
groups in 1977 was $323 billion, much of which wasn't bonds but loans
made by commercial banks. By 1985 the three groups had borrowed $7
trillion. What is more, thanks to financial entrepreneurs at places like
Salomon and the shakiness of commercial banks, a much greater
percentage of the debt was cast in the form of bonds than before.
So not only were bond prices more volatile, but the number of bonds to
trade increased. Nothing changed within Salomon Brothers that made
the traders more able. Now, however, trades exploded in both size and
frequency. A Salomon salesman who had in the past moved five million
dollars' worth of merchandise through the traders' books each week was

now moving three hundred million dollars through each day. He, the
trader, and the firm began to get rich. And they decided for reasons
best known to themselves to invest some of their winnings in buying
people like me.
Classes at Salomon Brothers were held on the twenty-third floor of its
building on the southeastern tip of Manhattan. I made my way there to
begin, at last, my career. At first blush my prospects looked bleak. The
other trainees appeared to have been in the office for hours. In fact, to
get an edge on their colleagues, most had been there for weeks. As I
walked into the training area, they were gathered in packs in the
hallways or in the foyer behind the classroom, chattering. It was a family
reunion. Everyone knew everyone else. Cliques had gelled. All the best
lockers had been taken. Newcomers were regarded with suspicion.
Already opinions had formed of who was "good," meaning who was cut out
for the Salomon trading floor, and who was a loser.
One group of men stood in a circle in a corner of the foyer playing a game
I didn't recognize but now know to be Liar's Poker. They were laughing,
cursing, eyeing each other sideways, and generally behaving
in a brotherly, traderly manner. They wore belts. I think I gave up the
idea of feeling immediately at home at Salomon Brothers when I saw the
belts. I had taken the opportunity to break out a pair of bright red
suspenders with large gold dollar signs running down them. Time to play
investment banker, I had thought. Wrong. Later a well-meaning fellow
trainee gave me a piece of advice. "Don't let them see you on the trading
floor in those things," he said. "Managing directors are the only guys who
can get away with wearing suspenders. They'll take one look at you and
say, 'Who the fuck does he think he is anyway?' "
I remember also that as I walked into the foyer that first morning, a
female trainee was shouting into what must have been a fuzzy phone
connection. In the midst of a scorching July, the pudgy woman on the
phone was stuffed into a three-piece beige tweed suit with an oversize
white bow tie, which I probably would not have given a second thought
had she not herself called attention to it. She placed one hand over the
receiver and declared to a tiny group of women: "Look, I can do six full
suits for seven hundred and fifty bucks. These are quality. And that is a
good price. You can't get them any cheaper."
That explained it. She wearing tweed only because she was selling tweed.

She guessed rightly that her training class represented a market in
itself: people with money to burn, eyes for a bargain, and space in their
closets for the executive look. She had persuaded an Oriental sweatshop
to supply her with winter wear in bulk. When she saw me watching her,
she said that given a bit of time, she could "do men too." She did not
mean this as a bawdy joke. Thus the first words spoken to me by a fellow
trainee were by someone trying to sell me something. It was a fitting
welcome to Salomon Brothers.
From the foyer's darkest corner came a tiny ray of hope, the first sign
that there was more than one perspective on life at Salomon Brothers .
A fat young man lay spread-eagled on the floor. He was, as far a.s I could
determine, asleep. His shirt was untucked and badly wrinkled; his white
belly pushed through like a whale's hump where the buttons had come
undone. His mouth was opened wide as if awaiting a bunch of grapes. He
was an Englishman. He was predestined for the London office, I later
learned, and not terribly worried about his career. Compared with most
trainees, he was a man of the world. He complained incessantly of being
treated like a child by the firm. He had been in the markets in the City
of London for two full years and found the whole idea of a training
program absurd. So he turned Manhattan into his
sporting ground at night. He convalesced during the day. He drank pots
of coffee and slept on the training class floor, from which he made his
first, indelible impression on many of his new colleagues.
The 127 unholy members of the Class of 1985 were one of a series of
human waves to wash over what was then the world's most profitable
trading floor. At the time we were by far the largest training class in
Salomon's history, and the class after us was nearly twice as large again.
The ratio of support staff to professional (we were, believe it or not, the
"professionals") was 5:1; so 127 of us meant 635 more support staff. The
increase in numbers was dramatic in a firm of slightly more than 3,000
people. The hypergrowth would eventually cripple the firm and, even to
us, seemed unnatural, like dumping too much fertilizer on a plant. For
some strange reason management did not share our insight.
In retrospect it is clear to me that my arrival at Salomon marked the
beginning of the end of that hallowed institution. Wherever I went, I
couldn't help noticing, the place fell apart. Not that I was ever a big
enough wheel in the machine to precipitate its destruction on my own.

But that they let me—and other drifters like me—in the door at all was
an early warning signal. Alarm bells should have rung. They were losing
touch with their identity. They had once been shrewd traders of
horseflesh. Now they were taking in the all the wrong kinds of people.
Even my more commercially minded peers—no, especially my more
commercially minded peers, such as the woman selling the suits— did not
plan to devote their lives to Salomon Brothers. And neither did I.
Nothing bound us to the firm but what had enticed many of us to apply:
money and a strange belief that no other jobs in the world were worth
doing. Not exactly the stuff of deep and abiding loyalties. Inside of
three years 75 percent of us would be gone (compared with previous
years when after three years, on average, 85 percent of the class was
still with the firm). After this large infusion of strangers intent on
keeping their distance the firm went into convulsions, just as when any
body ingests large quantities of an alien substance.
We were a paradox. We had been hired to deal in a market, to be more
shrewd than the next guy, to be, in short, traders. Ask any astute trader
and he'll tell you that his best work cuts against the conventional
wisdom. Good traders tend to do the unexpected. We, as a group, were
painfully predictable. By coming to Salomon Brothers, we were doing only
what every sane money-hungry person would do. If we were unable to buck convention in our lives, would we be likely to buck convention
in the market? After all, the job market is a market.
We were as civil to the big man addressing the class as we had been to
anyone, which wasn't saying much. He was the speaker for the entire
afternoon. That meant he was trapped for three hours to the ten-yard
trench in the floor at the front of the room with a long table, a podium,
and a blackboard. The man paced back and forth in the channel like a
coach on the sidelines, sometimes staring at the floor, other times
menacingly at us. We sat in rows of interconnected school chairs—
twenty-two rows of white male trainees in white shirts punctuated by
the occasional female in a blue blazer, two blacks, and a cluster of
Japanese. The dull New England clam chowder color of the training room
walls and floor set the mood of the room. One wall had long, narrow slits
for windows with a sweeping view of New York Harbor and the Statue of
Liberty, but you had to be sitting right beside them to see anything, and

even then you were not supposed to soak in the view.
It was, all in all, more like a prison than an office. The room was hot and
stuffy. The seat cushions were an unpleasant Astroturf green; the seat
of your trousers stuck both to it and to you as you rose at the end of
each day. Having swallowed a large and greasy cheeseburger at lunch, and
having only a mild sociological interest in the speaker, I was overcome
with drowsiness. We were only one week into our five-month training
program, and I was already exhausted. I sank in my chair.
The speaker was a leading bond salesman at Salomon. On the table in the
front of the room was a telephone, which rang whenever the bond market
went berserk. As the big man walked, he held his arms tight to his body
to hide the half-moons of sweat that were growing under his armpits.
Effort or nerves? Probably nerves. You couldn't blame him. He was airing
his heartfelt beliefs and in so doing making himself more vulnerable than
any speaker yet. I was in the minority in finding him a bit tedious. He was
doing well with the crowd. People in the back row listened. All around the
room, trainees put down their New York Times crossword puzzles. The
man was telling us how to survive. "You've got to think of Salomon
Brothers as like a jungle," he said. Except it didn't come out that way. It
came out: "Ya gotta tink a Salomon Bruddahs as like ajungle."
"The trading floor is ajungle," he went on, "and the guy you end up
working for is your jungle leader. Whether you succeed here or rot
depends on knowing how to survive in the jungle. You've got to learn from
your boss. He's key. Imagine if I take two people and I put them in the
middle of the jungle and I give one person a jungle guide and the other
person nothing. Inside the jungle there's a lot of bad shit going down.
Outside the jungle there's a TV that's got the NCAA finals on and a
huge fridge full of Bud. . . ."
The speaker had found the secret to managing the Salomon Brothers
Class of 1985: Win the hearts and minds of the back row. The back row,
from about the third day of classes on, teetered on the brink of chaos.
Even when they felt merely ambivalent about a speaker, back-row people
slept or chucked paper wads at the wimps in the front row. But if the
back-row people for some reason didn't care for a speaker, all hell broke
loose. Not now. Primitive revelation swept through the back of the
classroom at the sound of the jungle drums; it was as if a hunting party
of Cro-Magnon men had stumbled upon a new tool. The guys in the back

row were leaning forward in their seats for the first time all day.
Oooooooo. Aaaahhhhh.
With the back row neutralized, the speaker effectively controlled the
entire audience, for the people sitting in the front row were on
automatic pilot. They were the same as front-row people all over the
world, only more so. Most graduates of Harvard Business School sat in
the front row. One of them greeted each new speaker by drawing an
organization chart. The chart resembled a Christmas tree, with John
Gutfreund on the top and us at the bottom. In between were lots of
little boxes, like ornaments. His way of controlling the situation was to
identify the rank of the speaker, visualize his position in the hierarchy,
and confine him to his proper box.
They were odd, these charts, and more like black magic than business.
Rank wasn't terribly important on the trading floor. Organizational
structure at Salomon Brothers was something of a joke. Making money
was mostly what mattered. But the front row was less confident than the
back that the firm was a meritocracy of money-makers. They were
hedging their bets—just in case Salomon Brothers after all bore some
relation to the businesses they had learned about in school.
". . .a huge fridge of Bud," said the speaker, a second time. "And chances
are good that the guy with the jungle guide is gonna be the first one
through the jungle to the TV and the beer. Not to say the other guy
won't eventually get there too. But"—here he stopped pacing and even
gave the audience a little sly look—"he'll be reeeaaal thirsty and there's
not going to be any beer left when he arrives."
This was the punch line. Beer. The guys in the back row liked it. They fell
all over each other slapping palms, and looked as silly as white men in
suits do when they pretend to be black soul brothers. They were relieved
as much as excited. When not listening to this sort of speech, we faced a
much smaller man with a row of Bic fine points in a plastic case in his
breast pocket—otherwise known as a nerd pack—explaining to us how to
convert a semiannual bond yield to an annual bond yield. The guys in the
back row didn't like that. Fuck the fuckin' bond math, man, they said.
Tell us about the jungle.
That the back row was more like a postgame shower than a repository
for the future leadership of Wall Street's most profitable investment
bank troubled and puzzled the more thoughtful executives who appeared

before the training class. As much time and effort had gone into
recruiting the back row as the front, and the class, in theory, should
have been uniformly attentive and well behaved, like an army. The curious
feature of the breakdown in discipline was that it was random,
uncorrelated with anything outside itself and, therefore, uncontrollable.
Although most of the graduates from Harvard Business School sat in the
front, a few sat in the back. And right beside them were graduates from
Yale, Stanford, and Penn. The back had its share of expensively educated
people. It had at least its fair share of brains. So why were these people
behaving like this?
And why Salomon let it happen, I still don't understand. The firm's
management created the training program, filled it to the brim, then
walked away. In the ensuing anarchy the bad drove out the good, the big
drove out the small, and the brawn drove out the brains. There was a
single trait common to denizens of the back row, though I doubt it ever
occurred to anyone: They sensed that they needed to shed whatever
refinements of personality and intellect they had brought with them to
Salomon Brothers. This wasn't a conscious act, more a reflex. They were
the victims of the myth, especially popular at Salomon Brothers, that a
trader is a savage, and a great trader a great savage. This wasn't exactly
correct. The trading floor held evidence to that effect. But it also held
evidence to the contrary. People believed whatever they wanted to.
There was another cause for hooliganism. Life as a Salomon trainee was
like being beaten up every day by the neighborhood bully. Eventually you grew mean and surly. The odds of making it into the Salomon
training program, in spite of my own fluky good luck, had been 60:1
against. You beat those odds and you felt you deserved some relief.
There wasn't any. The firm never took you aside and rubbed you on the
back to let you know that everything was going to be fine. Just the
opposite, the firm built a system around the belief that trainees should
wriggle and squirm. The winners of the Salomon interviewing process
were pitted against one another in the classroom. In short, the baddest
of the bad were competing for jobs.
Jobs were doled out at the end of the program on a blackboard beside
the trading floor. Contrary to what we expected when we arrived, we
were not assured of employment. "Look to your left and look to your
right," more than one speaker said. "In a year one of those people will be
