
The Theory of Reflexivity

35

be attributed to the false analogy with Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle. I am no expert in quantum physics but, as I understand
it, the principle holds that the mass and velocity of quantum
particles cannot be measured at the same time because the act of
measurement interfergs with the object that is being measured. In
this case, the element*of uncertainty is introduced by the outside
observer. (Whether tlje behavior of quantum particles is inherently random is a separate question.) The parallel with the social
sciences is misleading because in the latter case the indeterminacy (uncertainty) is caused by the partikipants. Only if quantum
particles behaved as' thinking participants would the analogy
hold.
I shall try to reverse the discussion to its proper order: the
uncertainty in the subject matter first, the role of the scientist
second.
The idea that there' is a fundamental difference in the subject
matter of the natural sand social sciences has not been generally
recognized. On the ccjntrary, Karl Popper, whom I otherwise admire, enunciated what he called the "doctrine of the unity of
~ c i e n c e " that
; ~ is, the same methods and criteria apply in both the
natural and social sciences. Although it has not been universally
accepted, it has not been conclusively refuted either. 1 shall try to
do so here.
In order to appreciate the problem posed by thinking participants, let us take a closer look at the way scientifi95 method operates. For this purpose I am invoking Karl Popper's scheme of
scientific method, described in technical terms as the "deductivenomological," or "D-N," model. Like every model, it presents a
simplified and idealized version of a more comi;lex reiility, but
exactly because it is simple and elegant it suits my purpose very
well.
The model is built on three kinds of statements: specific initial
conditions, specific final conditions, and generalizations of universal validity. Combining a set of generalizations with known
initial conditions yields predictions; combining them with
known final conditions provides explanations; and matching
known initial with known final conditions serves as testing for
the generalizations involved. It can be seen that there is a symmetry between predictions and explanations; they are logically
reversible. Testing is different, because no amount of testing can
prove that a generalization is universally valid. Scientific theories

36

Theory

can only be falsified, never verified. The asymmetry between
verification and falsification and the symmetry between prediction and explanation are the two crucial features of Popper's
scheme.
The model works only if certain conditions are fulfilled. An
essential condition is that the content of the statements should
exist in total isolation from the statements that are made about
them; only then does the content provide an independent criterion for judging the truth or validity of the statements that relate
to it.* Other essential requirements are that the initial and final
conditions should consist of facts which are amenable to scientific observation and the generalizations should, have universal
validity. That is, if a given set of conditions recurred, it would
have to be followed or preceded by the same set of conditions as
before. It can be seen that the requirement of universal validity
defines not only the nature of scientific laws but also the character
of initial and final conditions: they must consist of observable
facts governed by universal laws. It is this requirement that is so
difficult to meet when a situation has thinking participants.
What constitutes scientific observation is a matter of debate that
we need not enter into here. Clearly, a single observation by a
single scientist is not admissible. Exactly because the correspondence between facts and statements is so difficult to establish,
science is a collective enterprise where the work of each scientist
has to be open to control and criticism by others.
The interaction between scientists is governed by certain conventions. These conventions are neither clearly defined nor permanently fixed. They derive their authority from the fact that fiey
produce desired results. Individual scientists often find the conventions quite onerous and try various shortcuts in order to attain
a desired result. Only because the shortcuts do not work do the
conventions of scientific method continue to prevail.
Perhaps the most outstanding example of the observer trying to
impose his will on his subject matter is the attempt to convert
base metal into gold. Alchemists struggled long and hard until
they were finally persuaded to abandon their enterprise by their
* Interestingly, this condition holds not only for the facts that constitute the
initial and final conditions but also for the generalizations that connect them.
The laws of nature must prevail whether they are recognized or not. This is the
basis of Popper's abortive idea of a "third world" of objective thoughts (in
Objective Knowledge, New York: Oxford University Press, 1972).

The Theory of Reflexivity

37

lack of success. The lailure was inevitable because the behavior
of base metals is governed by laws of universal validity which
cannot be modified by any statements, incantations, or rituals.
Let us now consider the behavior of human beings. Do they
obey universally valid laws that can be formulated in accordance
with the D-N model? Undoubtedly, there are many aspects of
human behavior, from birth to death and in between, which are
amenable to the same treatment as other natural phenomena. But
there is one aspect of human behavior which seems to exhibit
characteristics different from those of the phenomena which form
the subject matter of natural science: the decision-making process. Decisions are based on an imperfect understanding of the
situation. How does such a situation provide the initial and final
conditions which are supposed to be connected according to laws
of universal validity? Do those conditions include or exclude the
participants' thinking? If thinking is included, the conditions are
not amenable to scientific observation, because only the effects of
the participants' thinking can be observed, not the process itself.
If the thinking process is excluded and only its effects are admitted as evidence, the universal validity of scientific generalizations
is destroyed because a given set of conditions is not necessarily
preceded or succeeded by the same set every time: the sequence
of events is influenced by the participants' thinking, yet there is a
lack of correspondence between the participants' thinking and
the course of events. In either case, the D-N modabreaks down.
This may not be the end of the world, but it is a serious blow to
scientific method. The method has been so successful that we find
it hard to believe that there should be a large and vital area beyond its scope. Natural science has aiso encountered limitations
in the form of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle but the limits
were reached only after a number of impressive accomplishments
-the uncertainty principle itself counts as one of the great discoveries of natural science. In social science we encounter difficulties even before we get started: the imperfect understanding of
the participants is incompatible with the D-N model.
This conclusion is so devastating that every effort has been
made to escape it. To review the various attempts would take a
whole book-and an interesting one at that. I shall confine my
attention to economic theory, which constitutes one of the most
ingenious attempts, and in some ways the most effective one, to
escape the problems connected with imperfect understanding. It

38

Theory

simply assumes away the problems by erecting a hypothetical
system in which the participants' decisions are fully determined
by the available information. This approach yields conclusions
which meet some of the requirements of the D-N model. For instance, the theory of perfect competition qualifies as universally
valid and-at least in principle-it can be used to explain and
predict conditions with equal force. The theory fails, however,
when it comes to testing, leaving in doubt the relevance of the
hypothetical to actual conditions.
Social scientists have gone to great lengths trying to maintain
the unity of method but with remarkably little success. Their
endeavors have yielded little more than a parody of natural science. In a sense, the attempt to impose the methods of natural
science on social phenomena is comparable to the efforts of alchemists who sought to apply the methods of magic to the field of
natural science. But while the failure of the alchemists was wellnigh total, social scientists have maqaged to make a considerable
impact on their subject matter. situations which have thinking
participants may be impervious to the methods of natural'science,
but they are susceptible to the methods of alchemy. The thinking
of participants, exactly because it is not governed by reality, is
easily influenced by theories. In the field of natural phenomena,
scientific method is effective only when its theories are valid; but
in social, political, and economic matters, theories can be effective without being valid. Whereas alchemy has failed as natural
science, social science can succeed as alchemy.
This brings us to an examination of the relationship between
the scientist and his subject matter. As we have seen, the ID-N
model requires that scie2iists keep their statements and observations rigorously segregated from the subject matter to which they
relate; only then can the subject matter fulfill its function and
serve as an objective criterion for judging the truth or validity of
scientific statements. The conventions of scientific method are
designed to maintain the required segregation.
In natural science the conventions are effective because the
scientist's thinking is, in fact, distinct from its subject matter. The
scientist can influence the subject matter only by actions, not by
thoughts, and the scientist's actions are guided by the same laws
as all other natural phenomena. Specifically, nothing the scientist
can do will turn base metals into gold. The scientist may gain
some personal advantage by flouting the conventions of science,

The Theory of Reflexivity

39

but the advantage is achieved only by a deception which is liable
to be revealed by those who abide by the conventions.
Social phenomena are different. The imperfect understanding
of the participant interferes with the proper functioning of the
D-N model. This has far-reaching implications for the conventions of scientific method. It limits the results that can be produced by observing thk conventions and, what is worse, it opens
the way to attaining worthwhile results by transgressing them.
There is much to be gained by pretending to abide by the conventions of scientific method without actually doing so. Natural science is held in great esteem: a theory that claims to be scientific
can influence the gullible public much better than one whicn
frankly admits its political or ideological bias. I only need to
mention Marxism and psychoanalysis as typical examples; but
laissez-faire capitalism, with its reliance on the theory of perfect
competition, is also a: case in point. It is noteworthy that both
Marx and Freud were vocal in protesting their scientific status
and based many of their conclusions on the authority they derived from being "scientific." Once this point sinks in, the very
expression "social science" becomes suspect. It is a magic word
employed by social alchemists in their effort to impose their will
on their subject matter by incantation.
How can the "true" practitioners of scientific method protect
themselves against such malpractice? It seems to me that there is
only one way out: to deprive social science of theeatus it enjoys
on account of natural science. Social science ought to be recognized as a false metaphor.
That does not mean that we must give up the pursuit of truth
in exploring social phenomena. It means only that the pursuit of
truth requires us to recognize that the D-N model does not apply
to situations with thinking participants. We must abandon the
doctrine of the unity of method and cease the slavish imitation of
natural science.
The D-N model has been so successful in natural science that it
has come to be equated with scientific method. Ironically, the
model has been largely superseded in modern natural science; the
social sciences, however, are still trying to compete with the accomplishments of nineteenth-century natural science. The attempt is in vain because, as we have seen, the subject matter does
not fit the D-N mold. But, as quantum physics has shown, scientific method is not necessarily confined to the D-N model: statis-

40

Theory

tical, probabilistic generalizations may prove more fruitful. Nor
should we ignore the possibility of developing novel approaches
which have no counterpart in natural science. Given the differences in subject matter, there ought to be differences in the
method of study.
I shall explore a novel approach in this book, but before I start,
I want to make sure that it will not be judged by the standards of
the D-N model. A world of imperfect understanding does not lend
itself to generalizations which can be used to explain and to predict specific events. The symmetry between explanation and prediction prevails only in the absence of thinking participants.
Otherwise, predictions must always be conditioned on the participants' perceptions; thus they cannot have the finality which they
enjoy in the D-N model. On the other hand, past events are just as
final as in the D-N model; thus, ex*nation turns out to be an
easier task than prediction. Once we abandon the constraint that
predictions and explanations are logically reversible, we can
build a theoretical framework which is appropriate to the subject
matter. Unfortunately, the theory cannot be tested in the same
way ;as those which fit into Popper's logical structure. That is not
to say that testing must be abandoned; on the contrary, as long as
we remain concerned with understanding things as they are, we
ought to insist on testing our views. We need to develop novel
ways of testing. I shall do so in the real-time experiment that
frankly admits, and exploits, the alchemical potential in the study
of social phenomena (Part 111).

The Participants' Bias
My approach is to tackle the problem of imperfect understanding
head on. What makes the participants' understanding imperfect
is that their thinking affects the situation to which it relates. The
causal role played by the participants' thinking has no counterpart in the phenomena studied by natural scientists. It is obviously not the only force shaping the course of events, but it is a
force which is unique to events that have thinking participants.
Hence it deserves to take center stage.
As we have seen, imperfect understanding is a very difficult
concept to work with. We have established that there is a lack of
correspondence between the participant's thinking and the situa-

The Theory of Reflexivity

41

tion to which it relates; but the lack of correspondence is difficult
to define, let alone measure. The participant's thinking is part of
the situation to which it relates and the very idea of correspondence is inappropriate to describing a relationship between a part
and a whole. The idea :was imported from natural science, where
facts and statements belong to separate universes and from philosophy, where correspondence serves as the criterion of truth.
The analogy does not apply to the participant who is, by definition, part of the situation that he is trying to understand. We can
speak of a lack of correspondence, but we cannot define that to
which the participant's understanding fails to correspond because it sillrply does dot exist. To simplify rn~tttzrs,I sha!! speak
of an inherent bias in the participants' thinking. Since the bias is
inherent, the unbiased is unattainable.
There is, however, a norm in the outside world against which
the participants' bias can be measured. Although there is no reality independent of the participants*perception, there is a reality
that is dependent on ;it. In other words, there is a sequence of
events that actually occurs and that sequence reflects the participants' behavior. The actual course of events is likely to differ from
the participants' expectations and the divergence can be taken as
an indication of the participants' bias. Unfortunately, it can be
taken only as an indication-not as the full measure of the biasbecause the actual course of events already incorporates the effects of the participants' thinking. Thus the participants' bias
finds expression both in the divergence between outcome and
expectations and in the actual course of events. A phenomenon
that is partially observable and partially submerged in the course
of events does not lend itself readily to scientific investigatiorr.
We can now appreciate why economists were so anxious to eliminate it from their theories. We shall make it the focal point of our
investigation.

The Concept of Reflexivity
The connection between the participants' thinking and the situation in which they participate can be broken up into two functional relationships. I call the participants' efforts to understand
the situation the cognitive or passive function and the impact of
their thinking on the real world the participating or active func-

Theory

42
I

4

tion. In the cognitive function, the participants' perceptions depend on the situation; in the participating function, the situation
is influenced by the participants' perceptions. It can be seen that
the two functions work in opposite directions: in the cognitive
function the independent variable is the situation; in the participating function it is the participants' thinking.
There are many cases where one or the other function can be
observed in isolation but there are also instances where they are
both operating at the same time. An obvious example of the cognitive function is when someone learns from experience. Examples of the participating function are to be found in textbooks of
economics where the participants apply a given set of preferences
to a given set of opportunities and in the process determine
prices.
When both functions operate at the same time, they interfere
with each other. Functions need an independent variable in order
to produce a determinate result, but in this case the independent
variable of one function is the dependent variable of the other.
Instead of a determinate result, we have an interplay in which
both the situation and the participants' views are dependent variables so that an initial change precipitates further changes both in
the situation and in the participants' views. I call this interaction
"reflexivity," using the word as the French do when they describe
a verb whose subject and object are the same. Using simple mathematics, reflexivity can be depicted as a pair of recursive functions:
y = f (x) cognitive function
x = (yj partlcipati~~g
function

+

Therefore,

This is the theoretical foundation of my approach. The two
recursive functions do not produce an equilibrium but a neverending process of change. The process is fundamentally different
from the processes that are studied by natural science. There, one
set of facts follows another without any interference from
thoughts or perceptions (although in quantum physics, observa-

The Theory of Reflexivity

43

tion introduces uncertqinty). When a situation has thinking participants, the sequence of events does not lead directly from one
set of facts to the next; rather, it connects facts to perceptions and
perceptions to facts in a shoelace pattern. Thus, the concept of
reflexivity yields a "shoelace" theory of history.
It must be recognized that the shoelace theory is a kind of dialectic. It can be intergreted as a synthesis of Hegel's dialectic of
ideas and Marx's dialectical materialism. Instead of either
thoughts or material conditions evolving in a dialectic fashion on
their own, it is the interplay between the two that produces a
dialectic process. The' only reason I do not use the word more
prominently is that I do not want .icu be burdened by the excess
luggage that comes with it. I find Hegel obscure, and Marx propounded a deterministic theory of history that is diametrically
opposed to my own view.
The historical process, as I see it, is open ended. Its main driving force is the participants' bias. To be sure, it is not the only
force at work, but it js a force that is unique to the historical
process and sets it apart from the processes studied by natural
science. Biological evblution is attributed to genetic mutation; I
contend that historical processes are shaped by the misconceptions of the participants. I would even go as far as to say that the
ideas that make histor) consist of fertile fallacies. A fertile fallacy
is originally conceived as an insight; only when it is translated
into reality do its shortcomings become apparenMt then begets
another fertile fallacy that is antithetical to it, and so it goes. Each
fallacy provides a new experience and, to the extent that people
learn from experience, the process can be described as progress.
Fallacy is, of course, too strong a word, but it is helpful in directing attention in the right direction: to the participants' bias.
I shall not pursue the subject further here, but it is obvious that
the concept of reflexivity, as described here, has implications far
beyond the range of topics tackled in this book.

Reflexivity Versus Equilibrium
Returning to economic theory, it can be argued that it is the participants' bias that renders the equilibrium position unattainable.
The target toward which the adjustment process leads incorporates a bias, and the bias may shift in the process. When that

,

44

Theory

happens, the process aims not at an equilibrium but at a moving
target.
To put matters into perspective, we may classify events into
two categories: humdrum, everyday events that are correctly anticipated by the participants and do not provoke a change in their
perceptions, and unique, historical events that affect the participants' bias and lead to further changes. The first kind of event is
susceptible to equilibrium analysis, the second is not: it can be
understood only as part of a historical process.
In everyday events, only the participating function is operative;
the cognitive function is given. In the case of unique, historic
developments, both functions operate simuitaneously so that neither the participants' views nor the situation to which they relate
remain the same as they were before. That is what justifies describing such developments as historic.
It should be emphasized that my definition of historical change
involves a tautology. First, I classify events according to their
effect on the participants' bias: those that alter the participant's
bias are historic and those that do not are humdrum. I then claim
that it is changes in the participants' bias that qualify a course of
events as historical.
Tautologies can be useful, provided they are recognized as
such. In this case it helps to put equilibrium analysis into the
proper perspective. I have defined historical change as an interplay between the cognitive and participating functions. What
makes the change historical is that it affects both the course of
events and the participants' perceptions so that the next event
cannot be a mere repetition of the one that preceded 'it.
Equilibrium analysis eliminates historical change by assumming away the cognitive function. The supply and demand curves
utilized by economic theory are expressions of the participating
function only. The cognitive function is replaced by the assumption of perfect knowledge. If the cognitive function were operating, events in the marketplace could alter the shape of the demand
and supply curves, and the equilibrium studied by economists
need never be reached.
How significant is the omission of the cognitive function? In
other words, how significant is the distortion introduced by neglecting the participants' bias?
In microeconomic analysis, the distortion is negligible and the
participants' bias can be accounted for easily. As a first step, the
