
$300,000.18
Although he took Howie’s rent checks, he didn’t set foot on the farm. As with Susie’s art gallery, he had no
interest in the experience, only the money. He compared the farm, as a commodity business, to men’s suit
linings. “No one goes to the supermarket to buy Howie Buffett’s corn,” he said.19
That Buffett tried to control his children with money yet never spent any time teaching them about money
might seem odd, but it was the same story as with his employees: He felt any smart person could figure it out.
He handed the kids their Berkshire stock without stressing how important it might be to them someday,
explaining compounding, or mentioning that they could borrow against the stock without selling it. By now,
his shareholder letters, polished to a fine sheen by Carol Loomis, had tackled most financial subjects, and he
undoubtedly thought that these, along with the example of his life, served as adequate lessons. It probably
didn’t occur to him that his kids might need more personal tutoring than his partners.
Buffett did care very much about what they did with their stock, however, because he and Berkshire were as
one. To sell the stock was to sell him too. Even so, he did not want his childen to live on Easy Street because
of Berkshire Hathaway. Rather, he thought the future of his children and the future of Berkshire Hathaway
would ultimately be joined not through ownership of the company, but by an act of philanthropy—their
stewardship of the stock in the Buffett Foundation.
Buffett expressed his feelings on the subject of inheritance and philanthropy through a tribute he wrote in the
Omaha World-Herald upon the death of Peter Kiewit, a near-mythical figure in Omaha. Kiewit’s company,
Peter Kiewit Sons’, Inc., was reportedly the most profitable construction company in the world, once called
the “Colossus of Roads.”20 Buffett and Kiewit never had business dealings, but Kiewit owned the Omaha
World-Herald and Buffett sat on its board.
The childless, workaholic Kiewit had lived in a penthouse apartment in Kiewit Plaza, where Berkshire was
headquartered, and he commuted to work by elevator. Buffett envied him this arrangement.21 Kiewit was
another Buffett prototype, a hard taskmaster and penny-pincher in the office who instilled his values through
pithy little sayings. The company was his labor of love, and he was often “pleased, but never satisfied.” “A
reputation is like fine china,” he said, “expensive to acquire, and easily broken.” In making ethical decisions,
therefore, “If you’re not sure if something is right or wrong, consider whether you’d want it reported in the
morning paper.”22 Also like Buffett, Kiewit was obsessed with managing other people’s weight.
The main differences between them were three: Kiewit was a hands-on manager. He shunned publicity. And
he only seemed to be a cheapskate. While in Omaha, he drove a four-year-old Ford and lived like a Spartan
as an example to his employees, but at his Palm Springs vacation home he drove a Cadillac and lived a
more-than-comfortable lifestyle.23 Nevertheless, in many ways, Peter Kiewit exemplified Warren Buffett’s
ideas about how a life should be lived. When Kiewit died, Buffett’s tribute not only honored the man, it
expressed—as much as anything that Buffett ever wrote—how he would like to be remembered himself. 24
“Starting from scratch,” he wrote, Kiewit “built one of the great construction companies of the world….
Although not the largest, it may well be the most profitable business of its type in the country, an
achievement possible only because Kiewit was able to transmit, throughout an organization of thousands of
employees, an unremitting insistence on excellence and efficiency.
“Kiewit was overwhelmingly a producer, not a consumer,” he went on. “Profits went to build the capacity of
the organization, not to provide opulence to the owner.
“In essence, one who spends less than he earns is accumulating ‘claim checks’ for future use. At some later
date he may reverse the procedure and consume more than he earns by cashing some of the accumulated
claim checks. Or he may pass them on to others—either during his lifetime by gifts, or upon his death by
bequest.”

William Randolph Hearst, Buffett wrote, used up many of his claim checks by building and maintaining his
castle in San Simeon. He arranged to have ice hauled daily to the bears in his private zoo, much the way
pharaohs used their claim checks to build the pyramids. Buffett had meditated on the economics of the
pyramids. If he hired a thousand people to build a pyramid dedicated to himself, he says: “It would all go
into the economy. Every dime. And a lot of forms of giving and spending are just a form of that. It’s crazy,
and it’s probably somewhat morally wrong too. But there are people who would think it’s great that you’re
giving employment to the people who are tugging the slabs for the pyramid. And they’re making a mistake.
It isn’t productive. They’re thinking in terms of input, not output.
“If you want to build pyramids to yourself, and take a lot of resources out of society, you ought to pay like
hell for it. You ought to pay a perfectly appropriate tax. I would force you to give back a huge chunk to
society, so that hospitals get built and kids get educated too.”
Instead, he noted in this article, some who earned the claim checks passed them along to their heirs, enabling
hundreds of descendants to “consume far more than they personally have produced; in effect, their whole
lifetimes have been spent at the withdrawal window of the bank of societal resources.” Buffett found the
results ironic.
“I love it,” he says, “when I’m around the country club, and I hear people talk about the debilitating
aspects of a welfare cycle, where some woman had a child at seventeen, and she gets food stamps, and
we’re perpetuating a cycle of dependency. And these same people are leaving their kids a lifetime supply of
food stamps and beyond. But instead of having a welfare officer, they have a trust fund officer. And instead
of having food stamps, they have stocks and bonds that pay dividends.”
Peter Kiewit, he wrote, “made major deposits in society’s bank…but his withdrawals have been few.” He left
about five percent of his wealth to his family. The rest went to a charitable foundation for the benefit of the
people of the region in which he lived, the same causes that Kiewit had supported when alive. Most of the
company continued to be owned by his employees, and Kiewit had ensured that they could sell only to one
another. “Peter Kiewit could not have better served his community and his compatriots,” Buffett concluded.
Among philanthropists, Buffett also admired Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller as original thinkers.
Carnegie had built public libraries in poor neighborhoods all across the United States. The Carnegie
Foundation had sent Abraham Flexner as an emissary to study medical education in the United States.25
When his 1910 paper caused a national scandal by revealing the shocking condition of medical schools,
Flexner convinced the Rockefeller Foundation to donate enough money to revolutionize medical education.
Rockefeller also wanted to tackle problems that lacked a natural funding constituency. He found that poor
black colleges, lacking rich alumni, had no way to improve themselves. “In effect, John D. Rockefeller
became their alumnus,” Buffett says. “He tackled problems without concern of which among them was most
popular, and he backed them up big-time.”
At this point, the Buffett Foundation had a token $725,000 and gave away less than $40,000 a year, nearly
all to education.26 Susie ran the Buffett Foundation, which reflected their joint philosophy that money should
go back to society. If she’d had access to them, Susie would have given away large amounts quickly. But
Buffett was in no rush. He felt that by allowing the money to compound over time, there would be more to
give away in the end—after he was gone. Certainly by 1983 he had a good argument in favor of this idea.
Between 1978 and the end of 1983, the Buffetts’ net worth had increased by a stunning amount, from $89
million to $680 million.
As he became richer, requests for money from friends, strangers, and charities poured in to Kiewit Plaza.
Some were heartfelt pleas from the genuinely needy. Other people seemed to feel entitled to his money. The
United Way, universities, cancer, churches, heart disease, the homeless, the environment, the local zoo, the
symphony, the Boy Scouts, the Red Cross—all deserving causes, but the answer was the same: If I did it for
you, I would have to do it for everybody. Some of his friends agreed with him, while others were perplexed
that a man so generous with his time, advice, and wisdom was such a tightwad with his cash. It’s not like it
would kill him to peel off a few bucks, they said. Why didn’t he find the joy in giving?

But as long as Buffett was still amassing the snowball, promising to give it all away after he died was like the
“jam tomorrow” of Alice in Wonderland’s White Queen. “After he died” was the same as never; another
hedge against mortality, one of Buffett’s great preoccupations. The “White Queen” form of denial was
self-reinforcing in a peculiar way. By now, the Buffetts had at least nine friends or relatives who had, or
whose family members had, attempted or committed suicide. Most recently, one of his friends’ sons had
driven his car off a cliff on Christmas Eve. Then, Rick Guerin’s wife, Ann, had shot and killed herself a few
days before their son’s eighth birthday. By now, Buffett had a queasy preoccupation with suicide that was
perfectly reasonable under the circumstances. Yet he himself was determined to live as long as possible—and
to make money until the very end.
As his wealth grew, Buffett’s often articulated and unwavering determination to keep making money at a
furious rate while withholding it from his family and his foundation finally sparked a rebellion among his
friends. Rick Guerin had written to Joe Rosenfield about the possibility of Buffett becoming the world’s
richest man: “What will Warren do when he becomes No. 1 sled dog and sees that there’s more to the world
than hair and a small target? (He thinks it’s a bull’s-eye, but we know better.)”27
When the Buffett Group met in Lyford Cay, Bahamas, between the snorkeling and deep-sea fishing George
Gillespie sparked a hot debate by organizing a talk on “The Children (and Charity) Will Have to Wait.”
Years earlier Buffett had said he gave his kids a few thousand dollars for Christmas each year and told them
to expect half a million dollars when he died.28 That, he thought, was “enough money so that they would feel
they could do anything, but not so much that they could do nothing.”29 This phrase would become one of his
mantras, repeated over the years. “Warren, that’s wrong,” said Larry Tisch, one of his former partners. “If
they aren’t spoiled by age twelve, they won’t be spoiled.”30 Kay Graham, tears streaming down her face,
asked, Don’t you love your children, Warren?
Prompted by Carol Loomis, Fortune took up the issue in a cover story: “Should You Leave It All to the
Children?” Family comes first, many people said.
“My kids are going to carve out their own place in the world and they know that I’m for them, whatever they
want to do,” Buffett said. But “just because they came out of the right womb,” setting them up with a trust
fund—which he considered “a lifetime supply of food stamps”—could be “harmful” and an “antisocial
act.”31 This was the rational Buffett. This Buffett had once written to a friend when his children were
toddlers that he wanted to see “what the tree has produced” before deciding what to do about giving them
money.32
Nevertheless, Buffett had made a decision that demonstrated newfound—if slight—flexibility. In 1981, he set
up an innovative program in which Berkshire Hathaway would contribute $2 per share to a charity of the
shareholder’s choice. Berkshire did not pay a dividend, but this program allowed the shareholders to direct
how the company spent its charitable dollars rather than letting top management donate to its pet causes and
receive the credit. The program did not allocate much money, but for Buffett to do it at all was a loosening of
the fist. And the shareholders loved it. The participation rate in the program was always close to one hundred
percent.
To Buffett, the collector of information, the contributions program also turned out to be a tiny gold mine. It
gave him an insight into the philanthropic interests of each shareholder, which he could never have gotten
any other way. Collecting this information had no purpose whatsoever—even less than collecting nuns’
fingerprints. Buffett, however, was insatiably curious and had a deep interest in knowing about his
shareholders as individuals, as if they were part of an extended family, which was how he thought of them.
At fifty-three, Buffett—who had already “retired” twice—was thinking through issues of philanthropy and
inheritance. The subject that visibly unnerved him was retirement. He joked about working after he was dead
and made a point of highlighting elderly managers like Gene Abegg and Ben Rosner. But now they had
retired, and Lou Vincenti had Alzheimer’s. Perhaps it was not surprising, therefore, that Warren’s next move
would be to strike a deal with an eighty-nine-year-old woman, one who would outlast anyone he had ever
met.

44
Rose
Omaha • 1983

Rose Gorelick Blumkin came to Omaha from the tiny village of Shchedrin, in the region of Minsk. Born in
1893, she and her seven brothers slept on straw on the bare floor of a two-room log house because her rabbi
father couldn’t afford to buy them a mattress.
“I dreamed all my life, since I was six years old,” she said. “The first dream of mine was to go to America.
“In Russia, they used to have pogroms against the Jews. They’d cut up the pregnant women and take out the
kids. They’d tear up their fathers and then have a dance in the main market. I was six years old when I found
out about that. I said, I’m going to America when I grow up.”1
At thirteen, Rose walked barefoot for eighteen miles to the nearest train station to save the leather soles of
her brand-new shoes. She had the equivalent of four cents in her pocket and hid under a train seat for three
hundred miles to save her money, until she reached the closest town, Gomel. There she knocked on
twenty-six doors until the owner of a dry-goods store responded to her proposition. “I’m not a beggar,” the
four-foot-ten-inch girl said. “I’ve got four cents in my pocket. Let me sleep in your house and I’ll show you
how good I am.” The next morning, “When I came to work I waited on customer. I rolled out the material
and I added it up before anybody picked up a pencil. And at twelve o’clock he asked me if I was going to
stay.”2
By age sixteen, she was a manager, supervising six married men. “Don’t worry about the men, Mamma!” she
wrote her mother. “They all mind me!”3 Four years later she married Isadore Blumkin, a shoe salesman in
Gomel.4 That same year, World War I broke out, vigilantes ran amok in Russia, and Rose made up her mind.
They had money for only one passage to America, so she sent her husband and started saving to go herself.
Two years later, the czarist monk Rasputin was killed by revolutionaries in December 1916. Fearing the
chaos that would ensue even more than the cruelties of the czarist regime, Rose began her journey to
America two weeks later, boarding the Trans-Siberian Railway on a train headed for China.
For seven days she rode the train until, at the border town of Zabaykai’sk, a Russian guard stopped her
before she could enter China. She told the man she was buying leather for the army and promised him a
bottle of slivovitz on her return. Either naive or lenient, he let her through the border. She rode through
Harbin, Manchuria, to Tientsin, China, on another train. By then Rose had journeyed over nine thousand
miles across almost the entire continent of Asia.5 From Tientsin she used her small stock of money to take a
boat to Japan, with stops at Hiroshima and Kobe along the way, until she finally arrived in Yokohama. There
she waited for another two weeks until finding the Ava Maru, a cargo boat carrying peanuts that gave her
steerage passage to the United States. As the Ava Maru crossed the Pacific for six leisurely weeks on its way
to Seattle, “I never saw so many peanuts,” she said later. “I thought I’d never get here.”6 She had carried dry
black bread on board but was too sick for most of the journey to eat.7
Landing in Seattle on the Jewish holiday Purim after almost three months of travel with a face swollen from
illness, Rose was met at the dock by the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, fed a kosher dinner, and given a
hotel room. “When I came to this country,” she said, “I thought I am the luckiest one in the whole world.”8
The HIAS put a tag around her neck with her name and “Ft. Dodge, Iowa,” where her husband had settled

and was working as a junk peddler. They sent her on a train through Minneapolis to Fort Dodge, where the
American Red Cross met her and reunited her with Isadore. Rose got pregnant right away and gave birth to a
daughter, Frances. She didn’t know a word of English.
Two years later, she still spoke hardly any English. Feeling isolated, the Blumkins decided they had to live in
a place where Rose could converse in Russian and Yiddish, so they moved to Omaha, a town filled with
32,000 immigrants drawn by the railroads and packinghouses.9
Isadore rented a pawnshop. “You never hear of a pawnshop going broke,” he said.10 Rose stayed home and
had three more children, Louis, Cynthia, and Sylvia. Sending fifty dollars at a time back to Russia, she
brought ten of her relatives to America. Unlike her husband, she still didn’t speak much English. “I was too
dumb,” she said. “They couldn’t drill it in me with a nail. The kids teached me. When my Frances started
kindergarten, she says, ‘I’ll show you what an apple is, what a tablecloth, what a knife.’”11 But the store
struggled and the family almost did go broke during the Depression. Then Rose took charge. I know what to
do, undersell the big shots, she told her husband. “You buy an item for three dollars and sell it for $3.30. Ten
percent over cost!” When the old-fashioned suits they carried weren’t selling, Rose handed out ten thousand
circulars all over Omaha, saying their store would outfit a man for five dollars from head to toe—underwear,
suit, tie, shoes, and straw hat. They took in $800 in a single day, more than they had made the entire year
before.12 The store branched into jewelry, used fur coats, and furniture. Then Rose drove the department
stores crazy when she started underselling them on new fur coats on consignment.13 But she had a
philosophy: “It’s better to have them hate you than to feel sorry for you.”
Soon customers started asking her for more furniture. At first she accompanied them to wholesalers and
bought for them at ten percent over her cost. She noticed that, unlike pawnbroking, selling furniture was a
“happy business,” so in 1937 she borrowed $500 from a brother to open a store called Blumkin’s in a
basement near her husband’s pawnshop. But the furniture wholesalers didn’t want her as a customer, because
their dealers complained that she was underselling them. So Rose went to Chicago, found one sympathetic
man, and ordered $2,000 worth of merchandise from him on thirty days’ credit. The time came due and she
was short, so she sold her own house furnishings cheap to pay off the debt. “When my kids came home, they
cried like somebody will die,” she recalled. “Why I took away the beds and the refrigerator? The whole
house, an empty house? I told them, they were so nice to me I can’t stand it not to keep my promise.”14 That
night she took a couple of mattresses from the store for the family to sleep on. “The next day I brought in a
refrigerator and stove,” she said, “and the kids quit crying.” 15
In school the other children picked on her son, Louie, for having a pawn-broker as a father. He found it
painful but ignored their taunts, worked in the store after school, remained a good student, and became an
all-American diver at Tech High while delivering sofas until midnight. His mother by now had established the
Nebraska Furniture Mart and moved to larger quarters. In a side business, she sold and rented out Browning
automatic shotguns during hunting season. Louie’s favorite job was testing the guns by firing them into cinder
blocks in the family’s basement.16
By the time the United States entered World War II in 1941, Louie had enrolled at the University of
Nebraska, but he dropped out to enlist in the service after only a few semesters, still just a teenager. During
the war, he and his mother wrote each other every day. His mother was discouraged, and he urged her not to
quit.17 Because the big wholesalers refused to sell to the Nebraska Furniture Mart, Rose had become a
furniture “bootlegger,” traveling on trains all over the Midwest to buy overstock merchandise at five percent
over wholesale from stores like Macy’s and Marshall Field’s. “They could see she knew what she was
doing,” says Louie. “They were fond of her and would say, here’s this dining-room set that just came in. It
wasn’t easy or cheap, but she got it.” Rose said, “The more [the wholesalers] boycotted me, the harder I
worked.”18 You don’t own the country, the country belongs to everyone, was her attitude.19 She developed a
lasting hatred of big shots. “When you’re down they spit on you,” she said. “When you start making some
dollars they start paying attention. Phooey. Who needs them? Give me the middle class and I’ll be happy.”
Her slogan was “Sell cheap and tell the truth, don’t cheat nobody, and don’t take no kickbacks.”20 When she

made a sale, she also told the employees, “Deliver it before they change their minds!”21
Louie won a Purple Heart at the Battle of the Bulge. After the war, he came straight home to Omaha in 1946
and went back to work. He learned everything about merchandising: buying, pricing, inventories, accounting,
delivery, display. To Rose, nobody was as good as Louie. Ruthless with her employees, she screamed at them
at the top of her lungs: “You worthless golem! You dummy!” But after his mother fired them, Louie would
hire them back.
Four years later, the store was prospering, but then the Korean War began, and sales started to sink. Rose
decided to give the business a boost by adding carpet to her line. She went to Marshall Field’s in Chicago and
told them she was buying carpet for an apartment building; they sold her three thousand yards of Mohawk
carpet for $3.00 a yard. She retailed it for $3.95, half the standard price, although the fact that she had lied to
Marshall Field’s seemed to bother her for years afterward.22
Rose had managed to launch a successful carpet business by giving her customers a better price than the
other carpet dealers. But carpet maker Mohawk filed a lawsuit to enforce their minimum-pricing policies
—under which manufacturers required all their retailers to charge a minimum price—and sent three lawyers
to court. Rose showed up alone. “I say to the judge, ‘I don’t have any money for a lawyer because nobody
would sell to me. Judge, I sell everything ten percent above cost, what’s wrong? I don’t rob my customers.”23
The trial lasted only an hour before the judge threw the case out. The next day, he went out to the Furniture
Mart and bought $1,400 worth of carpet.
But even though the Furniture Mart was selling carpet, furniture sales were depressed due to the war; Rose
still couldn’t pay her suppliers. Finally a friendly Omaha banker, Wade Martin, asked her what was wrong. “I
don’t know what I’m going to do,” she said, “I can’t eat the merchandise.”24 He loaned her $50,000 for
ninety days, but Rose couldn’t sleep worrying about how she was going to pay it back. She hit upon the idea
of renting the Omaha City Auditorium and cramming it with sofas and dinettes and coffee tables and TV sets.
Master merchandisers, she and Louie took out an ad in the paper that was strictly truthful, yet played on
wartime scarcity.
This is It! The Sale of Sales! Shortages? Malarky! We can’t eat ’em! We must sell ’em! We’ve been shipped
so much merchandise this past 60 days, we have no warehouse room. Yes, we’re overloaded, and how! We
can’t eat ’em and usually couldn’t sell as much in six months. So we’ve staged the largest sale ever of its type
ever held in this area…45,000 square feet filled with the most unheard of savings of famous brand
merchandise.
It drew as many people as if the circus had come to town.25 The Furniture Mart sold a quarter of a million
dollars’ worth of furniture in three days. Omaha now knew that Rose Blumkin and the Furniture Mart meant
discount furniture, and “From that day, I never owed anybody a penny,” she said.26
That same year, Isadore died of a heart attack. Rose and Louie kept on going. Gradually, “Mrs. B” was
becoming a name that everybody knew in Omaha. People came into the store at every stage of their lives:
when they got married, when they bought their first house, when they had a baby, when they got a big
promotion. The Blumkins bought in huge quantities, cut expenses to the bone, and sold at ten percent above
their cost. When a tornado tore the roof off their huge new West Side suburban store in 1975, she and Louie
moved everything to their remaining downtown store without hesitation. “If you have the lowest price, they
will find you at the bottom of a river,” she said. They did. When a fire burned down the store, she gave the
firefighters free TV sets.27
“Everything Mrs. B knew how to do, she would do fast. She didn’t hesitate and there was no secondguessing. She’d buy five thousand tables or sign a thirty-year lease or buy real estate or hire people. There
was no looking back. She just swung. You got about two inches outside the perimeter of her circle of
competence, she didn’t even want to talk to you about it. She knew exactly what she was good at, and she
had no desire to kid herself about those things.”
