
Fed watch: Understanding how
interest rates affect markets
Watching the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve
(which includes the seven members of the Board of Governors, the president
of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, and presidents of 4 of the other 11
Federal Reserve Banks) and tracking what it may or may not do to interest
rates is almost a daily spectator sport in the business press. Although
members of the FOMC meet only eight times per year, discussions about
whether the Federal Reserve will raise or lower interest rates serves as
fodder for stories published on at least a weekly, if not daily, basis. Every
time Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks, people look for indications of what
the Fed may be thinking. Speeches by other members of the Fed likewise
are carefully dissected between FOMC meetings. Most press coverage will
shortcut all this by saying the Fed may raise or lower interest rates.
The key reason for you to be concerned: A change in interest rates can have a
major impact on the economy and thus on how you make trades. An increase
in rates is likely to slow down spending, which can lead to an overall economic
slowdown. For the most part, when the Fed raises interest rates, it’s because
the board believes the economy is overheated, which can fuel the risk of
inflation. An increase in interest rates can reduce spending and thus ease
overheating. If, on the other hand, the Fed fears an economic downturn or is
trying to fuel growth during a recession, the board frequently decides to cut
interest rates to spur spending and growth.
In addition to following press reports covering speeches and Congressional
testimony by members of the Fed, you can also get a good hint about what
the Fed is thinking by reading the Beige Book, which is a report compiled by
the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. Summaries about current economic conditions
in each of the 12 districts are circulated to Federal Reserve Board members
two weeks prior to the FOMC meeting, at which monetary policy, including
interest rates, is set. The summaries are developed through interviews with
key business leaders, economists, market experts, and others familiar with
each individual district. You can read the Beige Book online at www.federal
reserve.gov/FOMC/BeigeBook/2008/. You can find out about past FOMC

75

76

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
statements at www.federalreserve.gov/fomc. These links give you
access not only to current issues of the Beige Book and FOMC statements but
also to information from those two sources dating back as far as 1996. They
can provide an excellent overview of economic trends and possible shifts in
Federal Reserve monetary policy.

Money supply
The money supply is a key number to watch, because growth in money
supply can be a leading indicator of inflation in situations when the money
supply is greater than the supply of goods. When more money than goods is
around, prices are likely to rise. Commodities and money traders will want to
keep close watch over these three aggregates — money supply, inflation, and
goods and services.
The Fed tracks two monetary aggregates: M1 and M2. M1 includes money
used for payments, such as currency in circulation plus checking accounts
in banks and thrifts. Currency sitting in bank vaults and bank deposits at
the Fed are not part of M1, but instead are part of the monetary base. M2
includes M1 money plus retail nontransaction deposits, which is money
sitting in retail savings accounts and money market accounts. You can follow
the money stock measures for M1 and M2 at www.federalreserve.gov/
releases/h6/Current. When you total the money base, M1 and M2,
you can track the total amount of money sitting in someone’s account or
circulating in the economy.
The Fed decided in July 2000 that it no longer would set target ranges for
growth rates of the monetary aggregates. In the late 1970s, money supply
drove the Fed’s decision-making process. As money supply grew to what was
considered out of hand, the Fed kept raising interest rates until they were so
high that many believe the Fed moves actually caused the recession in the
early 1980s. After that time, managing interest rates became a higher priority
than managing money aggregates. The Fed didn’t kill the idea of target ranges
for the money supply until it was certain that managing interest rates alone
would help stem inflation. Now that the Fed has proved interest-rate
management works, it decided it no longer needed to set a target for monetary
aggregates.

Inflation rate
Several key economic indicators point you toward ways of identifying the
risk of inflation. The primary overall indicator is Gross Domestic Product; it’s
released quarterly by the United States Department of Commerce’s Bureau

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
of Economic Analysis (BEA). You can also follow monthly trends by keeping
your eye out for the Consumer Price Index, the Producer Price Index, and
Retail Sales Data, as described in the list that follows.
✓ Gross Domestic Product (GDP) represents the monetary value of goods
produced during a specific period in the economy. GDP is released
quarterly in three different versions. The first version, which includes
advance data, is released at 8:30 a.m. on the last business day of the
months January, April, July, and October for the previous quarter.
Preliminary data is released a month later, and the final numbers are
released a month after that. GDP is important to traders because it
indicates the pace at which the economy is growing. In the GDP, you’ll
find numbers for consumer spending, private domestic investment,
government or public spending, and the net exports. Essentially, it
includes all information about labor and property involving business
activities inside the confines of the United States. If GDP fails to meet
expectations set by the analysts or exceeds market expectations, stock
prices will be affected at least temporarily. For a glimpse of what may
be in store for the future, pay attention to the rate that inventories are
increasing. It can be a leading indicator that growth is slowing or
consumer demand is changing. Even though the final official numbers
are released quarterly, the advance reports and preliminary reports give
you a good indication of what to expect in the final numbers. You
can get full details about the GDP reports at http://bea.doc.gov/
national/index.htm#gdp. You can track the release schedule for the
GDP reports, as well as other government statistical reports, at http://
bea.doc.gov/national/index.htm. Often the report is posted at
the Bureau of Economic Analysis early in the morning before the actual
release and embargoed until the official release time, so as a trader you
may be able to get a heads up before the news is actually reported by
the press.
✓ Consumer Price Index (CPI) measures the cost of a representative
basket of goods and services, including food, energy, housing, clothing,
transportation, medical care, entertainment, and education. Each type of
cost is weighted. For example, medical costs are weighted more highly
in recent years, because they are rising at a faster pace, especially as
the current population ages. In addition to the broad CPI, a core rate is
issued that excludes food and energy, which are considered more volatile.
The core rate is an indicator you can watch for general price shifts. The
financial markets, in general, look for a rate of increase in the range of 1
percent to 2 percent; anything higher may be a sign of inflation and can
cause at least a temporary shock to stock prices. Any shock to stock
prices obviously can be an opportunity for traders. The CPI is released
by the Labor Department about 8:30 a.m. around the 15th of each month
and reflects data from the previous month. You can track the CPI at the
Web site of the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics at
www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm.

77

78

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
✓ Producer Price Index (PPI) is thought of more as a basket full of other
indexes that affect domestic producers, including goods manufacturing,
finishing, and agricultural and other commodities. The Labor
Department collects more than 100,000 prices each month from 30,000
production and manufacturing firms to calculate this basket. The
markets pay close attention to the index, because even though it isn’t as
powerful an inflation index as the CPI, it gives traders clues about what
to expect in the next CPI release. The PPI is released a couple of days
before the CPI, at 8:30 a.m. usually around the 13th of each month, and
it reflects data from the previous month. You can track PPI data at
www.bls.gov/ppi.
✓ Retail Sales Data tracks information about (you guessed it) retail sales
by large corporations and by small mom-and-pop retail outlets. The U.S.
Census Bureau, which is a part of the Department of Commerce, surveys
hundreds of firms each month using a random sampling of retail outlets
that make federal insurance contributions to collect this data, which
is particularly important whenever you’re trading stocks in the retail
sector. The survey looks at changes in retail numbers from month to
month. When the number is a negative number, it means sales levels
decreased from the previous month. This type of negative news can be
a shock to stock prices, especially for companies in the retail sector.
The data is released about two weeks after it’s collected, or at 8:30 a.m.
about the 12th of each month. You can track it online at www.census.
gov/marts/www/marts.html.

Deflation
In addition to watching the economic indicators discussed in the previous
section for inflation, traders also need to watch the numbers for signs of
deflation. Serious concern about the possibility of deflation takes center
stage when prices start falling. Deflation occurs when a sustained period of
falling prices takes place. The Great Depression of the 1930s was a classic
period of deflation. Many economists believe that printing more money cures
deflation, because (as mentioned earlier in the “Money supply” section)
increases in the money supply normally lead to increases in prices when
more money is around than goods to be purchased.
During periods of deflation, increasing the money supply isn’t necessarily
the answer. Some economists believe injecting more money into the economy
is risky, especially when production capacity is in excess, and producers
continue to produce goods even though prices are falling. Whereas, in other
economic situations, producers commonly stop producing when prices fall.
In early 2004, Japan faced a continuing period of deflation even though its
central bank had lowered rates to an effective negative interest rate and
continued printing money in attempts to prop up its sagging pricing structure,
and yet prices were continuing to drop. Some economists believe the

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
Japanese experienced a liquidity trap. No matter how much money Japan
printed, prices continued downward in a deflationary spiral.
With housing prices, commodity prices, and stock prices falling, some are
concerned that the United States could be headed in a similar direction. In
fact, while we were writing this chapter in early 2009, one of the arguments in
favor of the stimulus bill was to ward off a deflationary spiral.

Jobless claims
The Employment Situation Summary, another report from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS), is one of the most important leading indicators to
watch. This report is the first critical economic indicator released every
month and frequently sets the expectations for the rest of the reports
that month. For example, signs of a weak labor market reported in the
Employment Situation Summary usually are a strong indication of poor retail
sales and other possible negative reports later in the month. The summary
also breaks down data by industry, such as construction and manufacturing.
For example, a significant drop in employment numbers for the construction
sector is a strong sign that the housing starts report will also be negative.
This report can send shockwaves through the financial markets, especially
if the numbers that are released vary greatly from expectations. Stock prices
definitely fall whenever the report doesn’t meet expectations or employment
statistics show signs of weakness. On the other hand, stock prices can rise
dramatically whenever the report indicates better than expected numbers.
As is true with any shock to the market, changes in prices are temporary
unless other indicators also exhibit the same trend or tendency.
The reason why the employment report can drive markets so strongly is that
the information it contains is a timely assessment of the overall market,
because it includes data that is only a few days old. This report is widely
recognized as the best indicator of unemployment and wage pressure. Rising
unemployment can be an early sign of recession, while increased pressure
on wages can be an early sign of inflation. The report also is a broad-based
snapshot of the entire labor market, covering 250 regions of the United States
and every major industry.
The Labor Department (www.bls.gov) releases the report at 8:30 a.m. on
the first Friday of each month with data for the previous month. The two key
parts of the report that traders need to watch are
✓ Unemployment and new jobs created
✓ Average weekly hours worked and average earnings
Another employment indicator traders like to watch is the Employment
Cost Index (ECI). It’s especially relevant during actual times of inflation or

79

80

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
when fear exists that an inflationary period may be imminent. The ECI is a
quarterly survey of employer payrolls that tracks movement in the cost of
labor, including wages, benefits, and bonuses. Wages and benefits make up
75 percent of the index. The BLS surveys more than 3,000 private-sector firms
and 500 local governments to develop the index. The ECI, which reports data
from the previous quarter, is released on the last business day in January,
April, July, and October.

Consumer confidence
Keeping an eye on consumer confidence is another way of casting a glance
into the future of the market. When confidence is high, consumers are more
likely to spend. The best overall index for monitoring consumer confidence
is the Consumer Confidence Index (CCI), which is put out by The Conference
Board. This index is compiled through a sampling of 5,000 households and is
widely respected as the most accurate indicator of consumer confidence.
Although minor changes in the CCI are not strongly indicative of a problem,
major shifts can be a sign of rocky waters ahead. Most people who watch the
CCI look for three- to six-month trends. The Fed, as an example, looks closely
at consumer confidence when determining interest rate policy, which as you
know can greatly affect stock prices. When confidence is trending lower, the
Fed is more likely to lower interest rates. Stock markets love to hear about
the Fed lowering interest rates. Confidence levels that are trending higher
can be a warning of a pending inflationary period. A rapidly rising trend in
consumer confidence can lead the Fed to raise interest rates to cut off inflation;
moreover, a rise in interest rates can send stock prices lower.
The Conference Board releases the CCI at 10 a.m. the last Tuesday of each
month. The biggest weakness of this index is that it isn’t based on actual
spending data. Instead, it’s a survey of planned spending. You can track the
CCI online at www.conference-board.org/economics/consumer
confidence.cfm.

Business activity
A number of key economic indicators can give you a good idea of what
business is doing and how that information may impact the stock markets.
Key business indicators to watch include
✓ The National Association of Purchasing Managers report (NAPM):
One of the first economic indicators released each month is the NAPM
report, which surveys purchasing managers and provides reviews
of new orders, production, deliveries, and inventories. This report is

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
released at 10 a.m. the first business day of each month and reflects data
compiled from the previous month. You can track this report online at
www.ism.ws/ISMReport/index.cfm.
✓ Durable Goods Orders: The Commerce Department releases another
critical economic indicator of business activity in the area of Durable
Goods Orders. This indicator measures the dollar volume of orders,
shipments, and unfilled orders of durable goods, or types of merchandise
that have a life span of three years or more. This report serves as a
leading indicator of manufacturing activity and can move the stock
market, especially when its numbers vary from expectations. You can
track the Durable Goods Orders online at www.census.gov/indicator/
www/m3/index.html.
✓ Housing Starts and Building Permits: This report is another that’s
released by the Commerce Department. It can be a leading indicator of
the direction the economy will take. When the number of permits rises, a
positive economic indicator results. About 25 percent of investment dollars
are plowed into housing starts, and that makes up about 5 percent of the
overall economy. The report is broken down by regions — Northeast,
Midwest, South, and West — so you can also get a strong indication of
the strength of the economy on a regional basis. You can track this
indicator online at www.census.gov/const/www/C40/table2.html.
You can also track other reports on myriad industries at www.census.
gov/cir/www/alpha.html.
✓ Regional Manufacturing Surveys: Each Federal Reserve Bank district
compiles data from regional manufacturing surveys that can help you
find a score of indicators including new orders, production, employment,
inventories, delivery times, prices, and export and import orders.
Positive reports indicate an expanding economy. Negative reports
indicate a contracting economy. The two most closely watched are the
Philadelphia survey at www.phil.frb.org/econ/bos/bosschedule.
html and the Chicago survey at www.chicagofed.org/economic_
research_and_data/cfmmi.cfm. If you’re trading in regional stocks,
following the manufacturing surveys from the Federal Reserve Banks in
key regions that you follow can help you determine the direction of the
economy for the areas most relevant to the stocks you’re trading.

Using the Data
You can see that plenty of data is available, but not all of it is relevant to
the types of stocks you want to trade. Organizing your data collection and
tracking the trends can make choosing economic signs and analyzing which
part of the business cycle is driving the markets easier for you. Here are a
few steps that can make this task much easier:

81

82

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
1. Maintain a calendar of the release dates for the key economic
indicators you decide to follow.
The markets may move in anticipation of this data, so if you know that a
key economic indicator is about to be released, be sure to watch stock
price trends for the possible impact the anticipated release may be
having on the market.
2. Know the parts of the economy that are most impacted by the
economic indicators you’re following.
For example, the GDP strongly suggests the path of economic growth,
but PPI and CPI are strong measures of inflation.
3. Know which economic indicators are most important to the market.
For example, in times of inflation, economic indicators that reveal key
data regarding inflation are the biggest market movers. If the markets
are worried about growth, the growth components of GDP and other
indicators will have the greatest potential for moving the markets.
4. Know what the market is expecting to see in the numbers.
The actual number is not as critical as whether that number was
expected by the markets. Surprises are what move the markets.
5. Know what parts of the economic indicator are important.
Newspapers may write headlines for shock value, but the parts of the
index they cover may not be what are critical to your decision making.
For example, traders know that food and energy components of the CPI
are volatile, so the more important number to watch is the core CPI,
which doesn’t include food and energy. The news media may focus only
on the more volatile number.
6. Don’t overreact to a newly announced economic indicator that didn’t
meet market expectations.
Indicators frequently are revised after they’re initially issued. The
difference may merely be related to a revision and not an indication of a
shift in the business cycle. However, be sure to check information about
revisions to the previous month and how those revisions have impacted
the current month’s trend.
7. Monitor the trends.
On your calendar, keep track of key components of each economic
indicator that you watch. Follow the trends of the most important data
components to get a good idea of where the business cycle is headed.
Keeping a tight watch on economic indicators is the best way for you to
determine at what point the economy is in a new business cycle. Waiting for
official pronouncements is much too late. By the time they’re released, that
phase of the cycle may be over and a new cycle may be driving the markets.

Chapter 6

Digging Into the Critical Parts of
Fundamental Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Adding up the income
▶ Following the cash
▶ Checking on the balances
▶ Running the ratios

M

ost traders don’t worry about the fundamentals. These numbers
include the general economic and market conditions that impact a
stock, as well as the financial information known about a company’s activities
and its financial successes and failures. Instead, traders tend to focus entirely
on technical analysis and trends that can be seen using that type of analysis.
Taking the time to analyze the fundamentals of a stock puts you one step
ahead of the trading crowd. Using fundamental analysis, you can determine
how a stock’s price compares with those of similar companies based on
earnings growth and other key factors, including business conditions. This
chapter helps you understand critical parts of fundamental analysis and how
you can use the information gathered from it to make better trading decisions.
When starting a fundamental analysis, select an industry or business sector
that interests you for possible stock purchases. Sometimes, a particular
company piques your fancy, and you start your research by looking at
the major players in that company’s sector or by turning to the sector’s
fundamentals. Regardless of how you start, you need to narrow down your
list of the companies you want to compare to the ones that are in similar
businesses within the sector, so you can find the best opportunity. You also
want to be sure the stock trades well by looking at its daily volume of trades.
Stocks with low trading volume can be hard to get into and out of, making
them riskier stocks.
