
Trading System Design

163

maximum peak-to-valley dollar drawdown of $400 000 when the equity was reduced
from $1 000 000 to $600 000 even though the percentage reduction is only 40 %,
less than the 50 % maximum peak-to-valley percentage drawdown caused when the
equity was reduced from $10 000 to $5000.
Maximum position adverse excursion (MAE): This is defined as the most equity
lost intraday by any single position.
Ideally we would like to have no drawdown in equity but in reality it cannot be avoided.
There will be periods where traders experience a string of losses that outweigh any
recent gains. The main implication of drawdown is the psychological effect it will
have, as a large string of losses may cause the trader to abandon his trading system.
Finally, you should keep in mind that drawdown can sometimes be an unreliable
figure. It should never be used on its own to compare two trading systems but always
used in conjunction with profitability criteria.
MetaStock reports only the maximum initial drawdown which is usually lower than
the maximum open drawdown but it is a helpful statistic as it will help determine the
size of the account needed to begin trading the system.
In addition to drawdown, the following metrics use drawdown, time in the market
or standard deviation to measure risk:
Risk/reward index: This index compares risk to reward and is defined as the ratio
of the maximum open drawdown to the total net profits. MetaStock reports the
reward/risk index by calculating the ratio of total net profits to maximum initial
drawdown and normalizes it to a range of −100 to +100.
Risk adjusted return: A statistical method of comparing systems is to calculate the
risk adjusted return. This is calculated by dividing the annualized rate of return on
equity by the standard deviation of equity changes. The compounded rate of return
is calculated according to the following formula:
Annual compounded rate of return = (ending equity − initial equity)(1/n) − 1
where n = test duration in years.
The standard deviation of equity changes is usually calculated monthly but can
also be calculated annually depending on the time frame of the system to be analyzed.
This method involves time-consuming calculations. A quick method of obtaining
the return/risk of different systems for comparison purposes is to divide the total
profit by the standard deviation of profits. The test with the greatest return/risk ratio
would be the best as long as the time period is the same.
R
R
index: Developed by RINA
Systems, this is a risk adjusted profitability
RINA
metric. It is the ratio of the net profit divided by the product of the maximum open
drawdown and percent of time in the market.

164

Intermarket Trading Strategies

The number of consecutive losers: This is a test of how strong your stomach must
be to trade the system. Before making any hasty conclusions, however, the dollar
value of these strings of losses should be examined as well. A trading system may
experience a long string of losses but actually lose very little money, compared to a
short string of heavy losses.
Sharpe ratio: This is a measure of the mean excess return per unit of risk and
describes how much excess return you are receiving for the extra volatility of trade
results. It is calculated according to the following simple formula:
SR = (r − R) /σ
where r is the asset return; R is the return on a benchmark asset, such as the risk free
rate of return of the US T-bill; and σ is the standard deviation of the excess return.
When calculating the Sharpe ratio it is important for all the variables to be calculated
for the same time frame, e.g. if you are comparing annual returns the standard
deviation should be annualized by multiplying by the square root of 365 divided by
the time period (in days) used for the standard deviation calculation. Also all numbers
(including the standard deviation) should be expressed in percentage terms.
The Sharpe ratio is used widely when evaluating mutual fund performance.
These numbers are available for most mutual funds on the Morningstar web site
at http://www.morningstar.com/ (subscription required). A Sharpe ratio of over 1.0
is good. Outstanding funds achieve something over 2.0.
A serious problem in using this metric is the assumption that asset returns are
normally distributed which in reality is not always the case.
Sterling ratio method: Similar to the Sharpe method above, the Sterling ratio
method measures risk adjusted return and is given by:
R(%)/ (D(%) + 10%)
where R = three-year average annual return; D = three-year average maximum
annual drawdown.
Both the Sharpe and Sterling ratio methods compare variability of returns, as
opposed to drawdown which measures losses.
The coefficient of variation of average profit: The coefficient of variation can be
used instead of the average profit per trade in order to account for volatility of results.
It is a useful statistic for comparing the degree of variation from one data series to
another, even if the means are significantly different from each other.
This is calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the mean profit. It is often
reported as a percentage (%) by multiplying by 100. The result is a unit-less, relative
measure and risk adjusted comparisons can be made between different systems.

Trading System Design

165

You should avoid using this metric when the mean profit value is near zero because the coefficient of variation becomes very sensitive to changes in the standard
deviation, limiting its usefulness. A low positive value is the most desirable as this
indicates a high profit with low variability.
The Calmar ratio: This is the average percentage yearly gain divided by the largest
percentage drawdown.
The Ulcer Index: This risk metric is designed to measure only the negative return (drawdown) fluctuations and it is defined as the root mean square of equity
drawdowns.

10.4

STOP-LOSS

A stop-loss order is used to liquidate a losing position upon the breach of a predefined
maximum loss limit. When confronted with an equity drawdown on an active trade,
a trader must choose between two conflicting actions: liquidating the trade in an
attempt to conserve capital, or continuing with the hope of recouping losses on the
drawdown.
The ideal stop is unique. Though no such ideal stop exists, a good idea is to place
stops just outside the range of random price swings, not so close that it gets you out
of a trade too soon but not so far away as to be meaningless. Your time horizon should
also determine stop placement. Short-term traders looking for relatively small profits
should use tight stops, while intermediate to long-term trend traders looking for big
market moves should use loose stops placed far away from the current price in order
to allow for random moves.
There are many types of stop loss conditions:
• Initial stop-loss. This is applied to the initial price when entering the trade. On
entering a trade, the maximum loss, in points or percentage, that will be risked on
the trade is determined. If the market moves against the position by this amount
from the entry price, the stop is activated and the position is closed. One problem
with this rule is that it doesn’t account for volatility. With volatile stocks or futures,
this range may be within the normal price action over a dull week.
• Trailing stop-loss. A trailing stop is designed to both limit loss and protect profit.
The difference from the initial stop is that it applies to the highest price during
the trade. If the market initially moves against the trader’s position the stop is
activated and in this case it is identical to the initial stop. If, on the other hand, the
market initially moves in favor of the position, the stop is re-positioned x points or
percentage from the current price.
• Price level based stop. This stop-loss is usually set at a price level of technical
significance, i.e. a support or resistance. Stops are often placed near a significant

166

Intermarket Trading Strategies

swing high or low in trending markets, while in trading markets, stops may be
placed just above or below the current trading range.
• Volatility stops. Instead of defining the stop-loss in terms of a fixed percentage or
dollar amount, a standard deviation or average true range threshold can be used to
achieve a similar objective. This is my favorite as it seems a good compromise to
the too tight or too loose dilemma.
• Indicator based stop. This is triggered by an indicator, the most popular being
Wilder’s parabolic stop and reverse (SAR) indicator. The term “parabolic” comes
from the shape of the curve (resembling a parabola) created on the technical chart.
The parabolic SAR is a trend-following indicator that is designed to create a trailing
stop. It is primarily used in trending markets so the SAR is really inappropriate for
range bound markets as it will whipsaw in and out of the market.
• Time stop. This is triggered after a predetermined period of time has elapsed.
There are a number of variants of the stops described above, and stops may also be
set on combinations of the above.
Despite the many advantages of using them in your strategy, stop-losses are not a
panacea. Here are some advantages and disadvantages of using stop-loss conditions:
• Risk management. The nature of the stop-loss order allows a certain degree of risk
management, according to each trader’s risk aversion, even though it might not
improve overall profitability.
• Catastrophic losses. Stop-loss orders are essential to avoid catastrophic losses and
reduce the risk of ruin.
• Curve-fitting. Stop-loss conditions can reduce the drawdown caused when trading
in real time a bad or a curve-fitted system.
• Psychological implications. Stop-loss conditions contribute positively to a trader’s
emotional and psychological condition. By placing a simple stop-loss it is not
necessary to agonize over unconscionably large equity drawdowns during the life
of a trade.
And some disadvantages:
• A stop-loss could liquidate profitable trades prematurely.
• The nature of the stop-loss order does not allow the user to absolutely define the
amount of risk. As stated in the risk disclosure statement issued by the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC): Placing contingent orders, such as a “stoploss” or “stop-limit” order will not necessarily limit your losses to the intended
amounts, since market conditions may make it impossible to execute such orders.
• A stop-loss might reduce the profitability of your system. Although stop-loss
reduces the risk of a single large loss, it can generate a series of small losses, which
in total can exceed the single loss. According to a study by William Chan published
in the Journal of the Market Technicians Association (see Bibliography), after

Trading System Design

167

back-testing fixed % and trailing % stop-loss conditions on both trend-following
and mean-reversion trading strategies the author concluded that “The results from
our tests indicate a significant negative correlation between the value added by
applying these stop-loss rules and the profitability of the trading strategies tested.
In other words, there was a tendency for these stop-loss mechanisms to undermine
the performance of the profitable trading strategies tested and improve that of the
unprofitable ones in the test”(my italics). Based on my experience in developing
trading systems, I have also noticed that stop-loss conditions improve systems with
poor exit conditions but tend almost always to degrade the profitability of a system
with good and timely exit conditions. This is because an unrealized loss caused by
an excessive price spike might be recouped by continuing with the trade instead
of being converted into a realized loss on liquidation.
• The frustration involved in being stopped out of a position, only to have the market
turn around, will prevent the trader from re-entering a good trade.
In conclusion I would have to agree that even though stops do not necessarily improve
the final profitability of the results of a trading system they certainly contribute to
a trader’s peace of mind and prevent catastrophic losses in the case of unforeseen
events. In a sense, stop-losses can be compared to premiums on an insurance policy
and should be considered as an unavoidable cost of doing business.

10.5

PROFIT TARGETS

The use of profit targets is not uncommon, but in general they run contra to the
popular principle “cut your losses short and let your profits run”.
Profit targets effectively exit a trade once a predefined amount of profit has been
achieved. Below are some variants of profit exits:
• Percentage based. This is the simplest method. The profit taking target is measured
as a percentage of the initial price when entering the trade.
• Double objectives. This is similar to the first method with the difference that two
profit targets are used, spaced further apart as profits get larger. Half of the initial
position is liquidated upon reaching each target. This method has the advantage
of increasing the chance of reaching at least one of the objectives while removing
half the risk.
• Price level based. The target is usually set at a price level of technical significance,
i.e. a support or resistance. In the case of technical systems based on pattern
recognition the profit target is applied according to the specific formation. In the
case of flag, pennant and rectangle formations I have derived statistically a formula
to calculate the appropriate price target in my articles in the April 2005, May
2006 and June 2007 issues of Technical Analysis of STOCKS & COMMODITIES

168

Intermarket Trading Strategies

(see Bibliography). You can also find the formula for calculating the price objective
of rectangle formations in Appendix C.
• Indicator based stop. This is triggered by an indicator such as a stochastic reaching
an overbought level in range bound markets.

10.6

MONEY MANAGEMENT

Money management concerns the actual size of the trade to be initiated, with consideration of account equity and potential for trade risk. It is extremely important for a
trader to scale trading positions relative to available capital.
Effective money management is related to the risk of ruin, which can help determine
the amount of capital needed to trade a given system. Effectively, the risk of ruin
increases as the amount per position increases, and decreases as the probability of
winning increases, or as the payoff ratio increases.
As every trade carries a potential for loss, there is a need to determine the maximum
amount of capital to expose at each trade, given a finite capital base. There are a
number of approaches in common usage. For example, the traditional Kelly system
(see Money Management Strategies for Futures Traders by Balsara) evaluates the
fraction of capital to expose, f , as the difference between the probable expected
win and the amount expected to lose. Other methods include Vince’s optimal f
(see Bibliography). Monte-Carlo analysis can also be used to determine the optimal
money management strategy by optimizing f according to the probability of success
or failure.

10.7

NEURAL NETWORKS

