
E-mini S&P—June 2004 Contract, May 24, 2004
1. On M ay 24, 2004, the markets gap higher and register a +1,000 tick reading early in the session (see Figure 9.9). This is before 10:00 a.m. eastern, so I treat it just
like a phone call that pops up as “out of area” on caller ID—I ignore it. Closer to 10:30 a.m., we get another +1,000 reading, and I short this action with a market
order. I am filled at 1098.50, and I set my parameters.

197

Figure 9.9

198

2. About 20 minutes later, my target is hit, and I’m out at 1096.50 for +2.00 ES points.
3. M ost of the rest of the day is quiet, but as we approach the last few hours, we get an extreme tick reading, and I take a short at 1096.50.
4. About 25 minutes later, my target is hit, and I’m out for +2.00 ES points.
5. The ticks get wild and crazy again, hitting +1,000, so I short, and I’m filled at 1096.00.
6. The markets remain choppy, and my time buzzer goes off. I cover at the market, and I’m out at 1095.50 for a gain of 0.50 ES point.
7. The markets pop higher again and register an extreme tick reading. However, it’s past 3:30 p.m. eastern, so I don’t take any action on this signal.

E-mini S&P—June 2004 Contract, June 7, 2004
1. The markets gap up, and the ticks spend the vast majority of their time over the zero level (see Figure 9.10). If at 12:00 noon eastern the ticks have spent more than
85 percent of their time above zero, then I pass on any further tick fades on the day. Remember, it is on these days that there is serious buying taking place. Only
consistent and steady fund buying can keep the ticks above zero all day long. That hasn’t happened yet, but it’s in the back of my mind.

199

Figure 9.10

2. At around 11:00 a.m. eastern, the ticks register an extreme reading, and I short at the market. I’m filled at 1134.25, and I set my parameters. I take this short because
200

at this point we haven’t passed the 12:00 noon eastern deadline. Also, in the rules, I mentioned that if the ticks have spent all of their time above zero by 10:00
a.m. eastern, I’d like to see at least one move below zero before taking a trade. In this case, we did get some moves just below zero. These aren’t ideal conditions,
but they do pass the test.
3. Time passes by quickly, and my time stop expires. I exit at the market, and I’m out at 1133.00 for +1.25 ES.
4. A little after 1:00 p.m. eastern, the ticks register another +1,000 reading. I ignore this reading because the ticks have spent more than 85 percent of their time above
zero, indicating massive fund buying.
5. This happens again near 3:30 p.m. eastern, and I ignore this signal for the same reason. The markets are “on fire” today, as is evidenced by the consistent high tick
readings, with hardly anything dipping below the zero level. I therefore pass on fading these extreme tick readings. Although these days are rare, it is important to
know what they look like so that they can be avoided in terms of a “tick fade” day.

Summing Up the Tick Fades
As I state in the introduction, the financial markets are naturally set up to take advantage of and prey upon human nature. When traders see a market running away
without them, their natural instinct is to jump onboard and participate in the run. Although this makes sense on paper, this feeling of “missing the move” causes more
trading errors than almost anything else. This blinding urge forces amateur traders to jump into markets based solely on the fear that they are missing out on a lot of
profits—as opposed to entering the market as a result of a specific setup that they have mapped out and are patiently waiting to set up. This extreme panic buying
and selling is measured accurately by the ticks, and extreme tick readings provide traders with the opportunity to jump into the markets and teach the amateurs a
valuable lesson.

How Do You Know When Fading Ticks Won’t Work?
In the first edition of this book, I focused exclusively on the “fade” setup. During most of 2004 and 2005 (when I wrote the first edition), the stock indexes were
extremely quiet, and most of the big momentum moves were found in the currency markets. And that’s one great thing about becoming a trader of setups—the market
you end up trading is irrelevant. In truth, I don’t trade markets; I trade setups and patterns. I couldn’t care less whether a setup takes place in the stock market, oil, or
gold. Just give me something that is ready to make a move.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, however, big stock market moves have become the new normal—big moves to the upside and big moves to the downside. Either is
fine with me, and the ticks play a crucial role in these types of markets as well. The bottom line is this: if the markets are crashing today, then we aren’t going to try to
buy a –1,000 tick reading. We are, in fact, going to use modest tick strength (instead of extreme tick strength) as an opportunity to go short.
The question comes down to this: how do we know whether we should be fading the move or going with the move? And, if we are going to go with the move, how
do we play that move?
Let’s jump in and take a look.

How Do We Trade “Going with” the Ticks Instead of Fading Them?
This chapter ties in a lot with the chapter on internals. The first half hour of trading is typically very telling concerning what kind of day it’s going to be. It’s like when
I wake up in the morning and try to gauge my wife’s mood. I’ve learned that if she’s had dreams of happy things and happy places, then the day will start off positive
and trend that way well into the evening. If, on the other hand, she had a dream about me and our Swedish au pair, then I know the first half hour of the day is going to
be dicey at best, and the rest of the day will depend on how I navigate that early session. During those shaky times, I try to reassure her that I’m a trader at heart, and
that swapping out half my net worth for a quickie with the au pair is, at best, a bad trade. Sometimes that logic seems to help. Sometimes.
Quite simply, the ticks are a road map to what the elephants are doing and where they are going. In July 2010, I traveled to South Africa for two weeks to see the
World Cup. It was an amazing trip. The first week I stayed at Ulusaba, which is Richard Branson’s game reserve, located in Kruger National Park. Although the terrain
looked a lot like Texas, it was amazing to see the “Big 5” in their natural habitat, up close and personal. Of the Big 5 animals, the easiest to find were the elephants.
Not only could you see their tracks, but you couldn’t help seeing the knocked-over trees and their huge piles of dung. For them, hiding was impossible. (As opposed
to the jaguar, which was extremely difficult to find. In trading, just be the jaguar quietly following the elephant.)
Large-scale coordinated institutional buying and selling is the same. It is impossible for them to hide if you know where to look. The $TICK marks their trail through
the bush, along with their steaming piles of dung. As traders, all we have to do is follow along for the ride.
In Figure 9.11, we have a snapshot of the $TICK and SPY from Friday, September 30, 2011. On this particular day, the first few hours of trading are on the quiet
side. The market gaps down big, about 15 ES points (150 Dow points), which is $1.50 on the SPY. It takes time for traders to digest this move, and the first few hours
see choppy action. The first extreme $TICK reading occurs at 11:20 a.m. eastern, when the ticks hit the +1,000 level. The first extreme $TICK reading of the day is a
good one to fade. It’s the first probe, and probes generally fail. In this case, the markets chop around for about 20 minutes and then promptly sell off.

201

Figure 9.11
The $TICK goes back into quiet mode, and then about an hour later we get the first extreme $TICK reading to the downside. At this point, even though the market
has gapped down more than 15 ES points, it is still choppy. There isn’t any real trend in place. This might seem like a scary $TICK reading to buy because the market
is down so much, but in reality it’s the first real probe to the downside during the cash session (the rest of the selling occurred during the overnight session). It’s worth
a shot. After the extreme $TICK reading, the market did indeed set up a nice rally, so fading the first extreme $TICK reading of the day is working nicely.
At point 3, the dynamics change. First and foremost, the market is no longer choppy. It’s making new lows on the day. That’s not chop; that’s trend. It is after this
point, however, that things get interesting. Try as they might, the ticks cannot push much above the +200 level, and when they do, they are rejected handily. Not only
are they now spending most of their time below zero, but they continue to probe the –1,000 level and beyond. And that’s the real key here. If a market tests –1,000
and bounces back, that’s a probe. If, on the other hand, a market tests –1,000 and then keeps hanging around at that level, even testing lower $TICK levels, then there
is some real selling coming into the markets. The final stake in the coffin here is when any move back toward the 0.00 line is quickly rejected. Then we know that the
elephants are selling, and they are selling hard.
In situations of this type, there are two strategies. First, any move to the 0.00 line is a shorting opportunity. The stop loss is a market that stays above +600 for
more than a minute or 4 to 6 ES points, whichever comes first. The target is another move to –1,000. Into this ferocious selling, it’s okay to cover your short, and then
reload at the next retracement $TICK move to the 0.00 line.
Let’s look at an extreme example. Sometimes, as in all areas of life, it helps to look at an extreme situation in order to get a better reading on how to handle something
that’s “normal.” In Figure 9.12, we see the $TICK and how it behaved on the day of the infamous “flash crash,” M ay 6, 2010. This is a one-minute chart, on which
I’ve placed an eight-period exponential moving average (EM A). The moving average is helpful for watching the “trend of the $TICK” intraday. As I’ve mentioned
already, moving averages are a lagging indicator, and they aren’t useful for spotting “immediate” changes in trend. However, they are useful for clarifying that a trend
“has now changed.” M any traders blow out their accounts trying to prove they are right. M oving averages are glaring road signs that indicate when it’s time to throw in
the towel and change tactics. Still shorting when the moving averages have crossed and turned higher? Good luck with that.

202

Figure 9.12
This day starts out normally enough. We can see that at point 1, we get the first extreme $TICK reading of the day at –1,000. This is a normal reading. At point 2,
we start to get consistently extreme readings, which is the first heads-up that this is going to be a “go with” day. At this point, however, there is nothing telling us
what is about to unfold. At point 3, we get the first –1,500 $TICK reading of the day. This is unusual and shows that there is extreme downside pressure in this
market. At this point, we are looking at all rallies in the $TICK as an opportunity to get short.
For a few hours, the market then goes into chop mode. Rallies to the 0.00 line (point 4) can be shorted and then covered when the $TICK heads down to –1,000.
Easy enough?
And then something very unusual happens. At point 5, we start to get consistent readings at the –1,500 level, which shows an incredible amount of selling pressure.
This is a rare reading, and it shows that there is some “ugliness” going on out there and that this day might, in fact, be a “crash day.” Crashes can occur only when there
are consistent $TICK readings in the –1,200 to –1,500 range. If the $TICK hangs out at these levels, the selling eventually cracks the markets. And then things get even
more intense at point 6, when the $TICK hits –1,875 and in fact tests the –1,700 to –1,800 level multiple times. The markets start selling off steadily for about 15
minutes, to the point where the Dow is down just over 300 points. And then all hell breaks loose, and the Dow drops another 600 points over the course of five
minutes … only to then recover that move in the next five minutes. “The world is coming to an end,” I hear a few people say. “Never mind, it’s not.”
Was there any way to tell that the “flash crash” was going to happen this day? Of course not. Were there telltale signs that intense selling pressure was hitting this
market, and that there wasn’t any reason to be long? Yes, absolutely. Finally, was there a way to recognize that the selling pressure had come to an end? Yes.
At point 7, we can see that the downward trendline of the eight-period moving average has been broken. M oments like this represent key areas of “mentality shift”
in the herd of elephants that we are trying to follow. For a while, they were heading south, and we followed them south. Now they’ve changed direction and are headed
north, and there is nothing to do but follow them north. This doesn’t mean that we are able to catch the dead bottom of a move; it just means that once we are able to
see that the herd has shifted, we can then also shift our focus. Once the $TICK shifted, it became time to focus on long setups, although every ounce of rational
thought fought against that idea.
In Figure 9.13, I’ve zoomed in on the flash crash portion of the day. Points 1 and 2 show the extreme –1,500 $TICK readings and the even more extreme –1,800
$TICK readings. These are very hard for the market to “shake off.” They indicate persistent selling, with more to come. Anytime I see something like this, I expect
any rallies to continue to be sold and for new lows to continue to be made on the day. The underlying intensity of this type of selling cannot be underestimated.
Shortly after point 2, the eight-period EM A turns higher and a small bounce ensues. However, remember from the previous chart that what we are looking for here is
a change in trend. That doesn’t happen until point 3, when we break the trendline shown in Figure 9.12 at point 7. It’s all about going with the flow and not fighting
the action unfolding on the computer screen.

203

Figure 9.13
With Figure 9.14, we have slightly more “normal” conditions. This is from M onday, October 3, 2011. The market shows some choppy strength early in the session,
then rolls over into steady selling. One thing I’ve found helpful in “watching the flow of the $TICK” is to place an 8- and 21-period EM A on the one-minute chart. On
this chart, the 8-period EM A is the thick line, and the 21-period EM A is the thin line. Although I spend more time watching the actual $TICK, these moving averages
are helpful in gauging the “trend of the $TICK,” which drives the price action throughout the day. If I see these moving averages above the zero line, then I’m inclined
to focus on the long side, and if they are below the zero line, then I’m going to focus more on the short side. The crosses on these moving averages are also helpful. If
the ticks are below zero, a cross of the 8-period EM A below the 21-period EM A indicates massive selling pressure. A cross of the 8-period EM A above the 21-period
EM A (while below zero) indicates a pause in the selling pressure, and the reverse is also true when the ticks are above zero.

204

Figure 9.14
Figure 9.15 shows the remainder of October 3, 2011, with the vertical line at point 1 representing the cutoff point on Figure 9.14.

205

Figure 9.15

On this chart, the $TICK rallies and the SPY rallies into point 2, only to be rejected, forming an intraday swing high, a key level that will need to get broken for there
to be a significant short-covering rally into the close. At point 3, the $TICK goes positive and the markets rally hard, only to get rejected again. Finally, at point 4, a
time of day when a reversal is most likely to happen, the $TICK rallies above zero and the SPY rallies hard, only to get handily rejected at this level once again. This
time the markets plummet into the close. What do all of these key rallies have in common? Although the $TICK went positive and a market rally looked promising, the
8- and 21-period EM As could not both cross above zero. As long as they are staying below zero, the pressure is to the downside.
In quiet markets, fading $TICK moves and the occasional wayward high $TICK reading is a solid way to make a living. Watch it, though, when the elephants are
moving. During those times, it’s best to follow the herd.
I can’t imagine day trading stocks or stock indexes without using the information provided by the $TICK indicator. The best way to learn about how to use this
indicator is simply to start using it. I’ve logged over 20,000 hours watching how the $TICK interacts with the market. I’ve created a page at
www.tradethemarkets.com/ticks with additional updates to this setup as well as live trading examples. Watching this with live examples is really the only way to learn
how to maximize this trading asset.

206

10
Reverting Back to the
Mean, or, “When Is the Best
Time to Take a Profit?”
Where Do Markets Stop Their Current Trend and Run Out of Gas?
The pivots are great for establishing ranges in markets on an intraday basis. But what about for larger time frames, such as daily and weekly charts? Is there a way to
establish extension levels to buy and sell against on a swing basis—positions that can be held for days or weeks instead of minutes or hours? Although this chapter has
nothing to do with pivots, the general idea is the same. A daily pivot level represents an “average price” from the prior day’s trading, which is one of the reasons price
is attracted to that level on the next trading day. It just needs to test it out and see if it will hold.
The concept of average price is an important one. Any particular market at any given time is either expanding away from its average price or reverting back to its
average price—also known as “reverting to the mean.”
In Figure 10.1, we see a daily chart of gold with a set of exponential moving averages, the 13-period EM A and the 21-period EM A. These levels, which represent
the average prices over the past 13 days and 21 days, respectively, are also a continually adapting representation of a market’s key average price levels. These are the
specific levels that the market is either expanding away from or reverting back to. The key question is, then, “How far away from its average price zone does a market
need to get before it needs to start reverting back to that level?” That’s a great question.
This is where the concept of average true range comes into play. The average true range, referred to as ATR throughout the rest of this chapter, literally represents
the average price range of the prior 14 periods of trading.

Figure 10.1
In Figure 10.2, we see the same gold chart with its ATR inserted at the bottom of the chart. At point 1, the ATR is around 20, which in this case means $20.00 an
ounce on the price of gold. Why is this important? It means that most of the time, if the price action moves about $20.00 away from the mean (the zone represented
by the 13- and 21-period EM As), then it’s going to have to start reverting back to the mean. At point 1, prices extended above these moving averages by $20.00 an
207

ounce, and then started making their way back. At point 2, prices extended about $20.00 an ounce below these levels, and then promptly made their way back to the
mean. Later in the year, we can see that the ATR increases to $60.00 an ounce, at point 3, which means that the price action could move this far away before it needed
to start working its way back.

Figure 10.2
In Figure 10.3, we have a daily chart of the Swiss franc (SF). On this chart, I’ve placed a modified version of the Keltner Channels, which plot the average true range
as outer-range bands. I have the “mean” price (the middle dotted band) set to 13, and I set the bands to be 1.5 times that average true range. This means that at any
given time, both the upper and lower bands will be 1.5 times the current ATR reading away from the middle band. For example, at point 1, we have an ATR reading of
0.0100, which translates into 100 ticks. M ultiply this by 1.5, and you get 150 ticks. At point 2, we see that the lower band is 150 ticks away from the middle band,
and at point 3, the upper band is also 150 ticks away from the middle band. Why multiply it by 1.5? The ATR is a lagging indicator, and by multiplying it by 1.5, we
give a little more room to accommodate the most current price action.

208

Figure 10.3

There are now a couple of key concepts we need to understand in order to trade this setup on this chart.
1. The bands are sloping upward, indicating, surprise, an uptrend. Because of this, I’m interested in initiating only long trades. I could initiate short trades at the upper
bands, but since the upper bands are continually rising, this is an inherently lower-probability strategy than going long. For example, if we initiated a short at point
A, the market would just keep moving higher and stop us out. The market is still trading within its ATR, just on a steep uprising slope.
2. At point 4, we get a pullback to the mean. I initiate a long. When SF moves back to the outer band at point 5, I close out the position. Then when SF pulls back to
the mean again at point 6, I go long, and I sell at point 7. I then buy the pullback at point 8 and close it out at point 9. Wash, rinse, repeat.
3. Tip: there is no need to try to capture every tick of these moves. Remember that I said that the bands were set to 1.5 times the ATR? Well, I’m really interested in
capturing only 1 ATR worth of movement, or even slightly less than that. So I’m getting out of the trade at point 7, even though it hasn’t hit the band. This is
because I’m trying to get only 1 ATR (about 100 ticks) instead of 1.5 ATR (about 150 ticks). In other words, I’m constantly selling too soon. There’s no need to
be a pig at the trough.
4. What about stops? For best results, have stop losses, in this case, just outside the lower bands. This keeps a trader completely out of the wiggle room, and a stop
