
Choosing Timeframes—the Factor of Five
Another major dilemma is that the trend of any trading vehicle can be both up and
down at the same time, depending on what charts you use. A daily chart may show an
uptrend, while a weekly chart shows a downtrend, and vice versa. We need a system
to handle conflicting signals in different timeframes.
Charles Dow, the author of the venerable Dow Theory, stated at the turn of the
twentieth century that the stock market had three trends.The long-term trend lasted
several years, the intermediate several months, and anything shorter than that was
a minor trend. Robert Rhea, the great market technician of the 1930s, compared
these three trends to a tide, a wave, and a ripple. He recommended trading in the
direction of the tide, taking advantage of the waves, and ignoring the ripples.

156

TRADING SYSTEMS

Times have changed, and the markets have become more volatile. Computers are
cheap, or even free; live data have created better opportunities to capitalize on faster
moves. We need a more flexible definition of timeframes. The Triple Screen trading
system is based on the observation that every timeframe relates to the larger and
shorter ones by approximately a factor of five (see Chapter 32).
Begin by asking yourself, what’s your favorite timeframe. Do you prefer working
with the daily, 10-minute, or any other charts? Whatever timeframe is your favorite,
the Triple Screen calls that the intermediate timeframe.The long-term timeframe
is one order of magnitude longer. The short-term timeframe is one order of magnitude shorter. Once you select your intermediate timeframe, you may not look at it
until you examine the longer-term timeframe and make your strategic decision there.
For example, if you want to carry a trade for several days or weeks, then your
intermediate timeframe is likely to be defined by the daily charts. Weekly charts are
one order of magnitude longer, and they’ll determine the long-term timeframe for
you. Hourly charts are one order of magnitude shorter, and they’ll determine the
short-term timeframe.
Day traders who hold their positions for less than an hour can use the same principle. For them, a 5-minute chart may define the intermediate timeframe, a 25-minute
chart the long-term timeframe, and a 2-minute chart the short-term timeframe.
Triple Screen demands that you examine the long-term chart first. It allows you
to trade only in the direction of the tide—the trend on the long-term chart. It uses
the waves that go against the tide for entering positions. For example, when the
weekly trend is up, daily declines create buying opportunities. When the weekly
trend is down, daily rallies provide shorting opportunities.

First Screen—Market Tide
Triple Screen begins by analyzing the long-term chart, one order of magnitude greater
than the one you plan to trade. Most traders pay attention only to the daily charts, with
everybody watching the same few months of data. If you begin by analyzing weekly
charts, your perspective will be five times greater than that of your competitors.
Begin by selecting your favorite timeframe and call it Intermediate. Do not even
glance at your intermediate chart because it’ll prejudice you. Go immediately to
the timeframe one order of magnitude longer—your long-term chart. That’s where
you’ll make your strategic decision to be a bull or a bear. After that, return to the
intermediate timeframe and start making tactical decisions, such as where to enter
and where to place a stop.
If you make the mistake of looking at the daily chart first, you’ll be prejudiced by
its patterns. First, make an unbiased decision on a long-term weekly chart before
even glancing at the daily.
The original version of Triple Screen used the slope of weekly MACD-Histogram
as its weekly trend-following indicator (Figure 39.1). It was very sensitive and gave
many buy and sell signals. Later I switched to using the slope of a weekly exponential
moving average as my main trend-following tool on long-term charts. After I invented the Impulse system (described in the following chapter), I began to use it for
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

157

39. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

B

D
C

A

E

FIGURE 39.1â•… Gold weekly, with 26- and 13-EMAs and MACD-Histogram (12-26-9).
(Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Using Weekly MACD-Histogram as the First Screen of Triple Screen
Triple Screen requires us to examine weekly charts before even looking at the dailies. The
slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between its two latest bars.
This indicator flashes a buy signal when its slope turns up and a sell signal when its
slope turns down. The best buy signals occur when MACD-Histogram turns up from below its centerline. The best sell signals are given when its slope turns down from above its
centerline (see Indicator Seasons in Chapter 32).
When the slope of MACD-Histogram turns up (arrows A, C, and E), it allows us to trade
only from the long side or stand aside. When that slope turns down (arrows B and D), it
allows us to trade only from the short side or stand aside.
Note that the buy signals at A and E are of better quality than at C—because the signal
C occurred above the centerline. It is better to buy in spring than in summer. At the right
edge of the chart, the uptrend is very strong because the signal E came from a bullish
divergence: a double bottom of prices (A and E) was accompanied by a much shallower
second bottom of the indicator.

the first screen of Triple Screen. The Impulse system combines the best features of
the previous two methods. It is not quite as jumpy as MACD-Histogram but is faster
to react than the slope of an EMA.
As you’ll read in the next chapter, the Impulse system colors every bar green when
it’s bullish, red when bearish, and blue when neutral. The Impulse system doesn’t tell
you what to do. It’s a censorship system that signals what you’re prohibited from doing.
When the Impulse system is red, it prohibits you from buying.When it is green, it prohibits you from shorting. Glancing at a weekly chart when you want to buy, you have
to wait until it stops being red. Glancing at a weekly chart when you want to sell short,
you have to make sure it isn’t green. The blue Impulse permits you to trade either way.
Some traders use other indicators to identify major trends. Steve Notis wrote an
article in Futures magazine showing how he used the Directional System as the first
screen of Triple Screen. The principle is the same.You can use most trend-following

158

TRADING SYSTEMS

indicators, as long as you analyze the trend on the weekly charts first and then look
for trades on the daily charts only in that direction.
Screen One Summary: Identify the weekly trend using a trend-following indicator
and trade only in its direction.
A trader has three choices: buy, sell, or stand aside. The first screen of the Triple
Screen trading system takes away one of those options. It acts as a censor who permits you only to buy or stand aside during major uptrends. It allows you only to
sell short or stand aside during major downtrends. You have to swim with the tide
or stay out of the water.

Second Screen—Market Wave
The second screen of Triple Screen identifies the wave that goes against the tide.
When the weekly trend is up, daily declines point to buying opportunities.When the
weekly trend is down, daily rallies point to shorting opportunities.
The second screen applies oscillators, described in a previous section, to the daily
charts in order to identify deviations from the weekly trend. Oscillators give buy
signals when markets decline and sell signals when they rise. The second screen of
the Triple Screen allows you to take only those signals on the daily charts that put you
in gear with the weekly trend.
Screen Two: Apply an oscillator to a daily chart. Use daily declines during weekly
uptrends to find buying opportunities and daily rallies during weekly downtrends
to find shorting opportunities. I like using Force Index, described in chapter 30, for
the second screen, but other oscillators, such as RSI, Elder-ray, or Stochastic also
perform well.
When the weekly trend is up, Triple Screen takes only buy signals from daily oscillators but doesn’t short their sell signals. The 2-day EMA of Force Index gives buy
signals when it falls below its zero line, as long as it doesn’t fall to a new multi-week
low.When the weekly trend is down, Force Index gives shorting signals when it rallies
above its centerline, as long as it doesn’t rise to a new multi-week high (Figure 39.2).
Other oscillators, such as Stochastic and RSI (see Chapters 26 and 27), give
trading signals when they enter their buy or sell zones. For example, when weekly
MACD-Histogram rises but daily Stochastic falls below 30, it identifies an oversold
area, a buying opportunity. When the weekly MACD-Histogram declines but daily
Stochastic rises above 70, it identifies an overbought area, a shorting opportunity.

Third Screen—Entry Technique
The Third Screen is your entry technique, and here you have quite a bit of latitude.
You can go to an even shorter time-frame, especially if you have live data, or you can
use the same intermediate timeframe.
In the original Trading for a Living I recommended looking for a ripple in the direction of the market tide: buying a breakout above the previous day’s high for entering
longs or shorting a breakdown below the previous day’s low for entering shorts.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

39. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

159

FIGURE 39.2â•… Gold daily, with 26- and 13-EMAs and 2-day Force Index. . (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Daily Force Index—the Second Screen of Triple Screen
The 2-day EMA of Force index is one of several oscillators that can work for the second
screen of the Triple Screen trading system. Force Index marks buying opportunities when
it falls below its centerline. It marks selling opportunities when it rises above its centerline.
When the weekly trend is up (marked here with a green horizontal bar), take only buy signals from the daily oscillator for entering long positions. When the weekly trend is down
(marked by a red horizontal bar), take only sell signals for entering short positions.
Notice a bullish divergence, accompanied by a false downside breakout before the
start of the uptrend (marked with a diagonal green arrow). At the right edge of the screen,
Gold is flying, along with most gold stocks. I’m actively buying them—but not Gold ETFs.
A Traders’ Camp graduate from Australia wrote the other day: “I bought XAU ETF but it
is being left far behind by NCM, our biggest Gold Miner. Is that the normal scenario for
ETFs?” Yes, Sir!

The downside of that approach was that the stops were quite wide. Buying a
breakout above the previous day’s high and placing a stop below that day’s low could
mean a wide stop after a wide-range day, either putting a lot of money at risk or
reducing position size. At other times, when the pre-breakout day was very narrow,
placing the stop right below its low would expose that trade to the risk of being
stopped out by market noise.
The breakout technique is still valid, but I seldom use it. With the wide availability of intraday data, I like to switch to 25-minute and 5-minute charts and use daytrading techniques for entering my swing trades. If you don’t have access to live data
and need to place an order in the morning, before leaving for the day, I recommend
an alternative approach which I call “an average EMA penetration.”
Almost every rally is penetrated by occasional pullbacks, and you want to measure how deeply those pullbacks drop below your fast EMA. Look at the daily chart
for the past four to six weeks, and if it is in an uptrend, measure how deeply prices
penetrate below their EMA during normal pullbacks (Figure 39.3).

160

TRADING SYSTEMS

C
A

B

D

Downside
penetrations
below fast EMA
A = $9.40
B = $5.90
C = $11.30
D = $11.70

FIGURE 39.3â•… Gold daily, with 26- and 13-EMAs. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

An Average Downside Penetration—the Third Screen of Triple Screen
Here we zoom in on the chart from Figure 39.2. We can sharpen Triple Screen buy signals by
not waiting for the 2-day Force rally back above zero. We can use its declines below zero as
alerts and then place our buy orders below value, using an average downside penetration.

Calculate an average penetration
■■ Subtract yesterday’s EMA level from today’s and add this number to today’s EMA:
this will tell you where your EMA is likely to be tomorrow.
■■ Subtract your average penetration from your estimated EMA level for tomorrow
and place your buy order there.You’ll be fishing to buy at a bargain level, during a
pullback—instead of paying a premium for buying a breakout.
■■

In the example in Figure 39.3, prices dipped below their fast EMA (colored red)
on four occasions. An average downside penetration was $9.60. At the right edge of
the screen, the 13-day EMA stands at $1,266. Deducting the recent average downside penetration from that number suggests that if today sees a spell of panic selling,
we should place our buy order approximately $9 below the latest level of EMA. We
can perform this calculation on a daily basis, until we finally get an opportunity to
buy low. This is a much more peaceful approach than chasing runaway prices.
These rules are for buying during an uptrend. Reverse them for selling short
in downtrends. Keep in mind though that downtrends tend to move twice as fast
as uptrends.

Triple Screen Summary
Weekly Trend
Up
Up
Down
Down

Daily Trend
Up
Down
Down
Up

Action
Stand aside
Go long
Stand aside
Go short

Order
None
EMA penetration or an upside breakout
None
EMA penetration or a downside breakout

When the weekly trend is up and a daily oscillator declines, place a buy order
below the fast EMA on the daily chart, at a level of an average downside penetraGet More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

161

39. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

tion. Alternatively, place a buy order one tick above the high of the previous day. If
prices rally, you will be stopped in long automatically when the rally takes out the
previous day’s high. If prices continue to decline, your buy-stop will not be touched.
Lower your buy order the next day to the level one tick above the latest price bar.
Keep lowering your buy-stop each day until stopped in or until the weekly indicator
reverses and cancels its buy signal.
When the weekly trend is down, wait for a rally in a daily oscillator and place
an order to sell short above the fast EMA on the daily chart, at a level of an average
upside penetration. Alternatively, place an order to sell short one tick below the latest bar’s low. As soon as the market turns down, you will be stopped in on the short
side. If the rally continues, keep raising your sell order daily. The aim of a trailing
sell-stop technique is to catch an intraday downside breakout from a daily uptrend in
the direction of a weekly downtrend.

Triple Screen in Day-Trading
If you day-trade, you may select a 5-minute chart as your intermediate timeframe.
Again, do not look at it, but go to a 25- or a 30-minute chart first, which will be
your long-term chart. Make a strategic decision to be a bull or a bear on that longerterm chart, and then return to your intermediate chart to look for an entry and stop
(Figure 39.4).

AMZN
30-min

Wed

AMZN
5-min

Thu

Thu

FIGURE 39.4â•… On the left: AMZN 30-min chart with a 13-bar EMA and 12-26-9 MACD-Histogram.
On the right: AMZN 5-min chart with a 13-bar EMA, 0.6% channel, and 2-bar Force Index.
(Charts by Stockcharts.com)

Triple Screen in Day-Trading
The shares of Amazon.com, Inc. (AMZN) are a popular trading vehicle, thanks to their volatility and liquidity. The principles of Triple Screen are the same here as on the longer-term
charts. Here, a longer-term chart whose every bar represents 30 minutes of trading defines
the long-term trend. With it rising, we turn to a short-term chart, whose every bar represents 5 minutes of trading. When its 2-bar Force Index dips below zero, it marks a wave
that goes against the tide—an opportunity to buy at a lower price. A channel that contains
approximately 95% of all prices helps set profit targets.

162

TRADING SYSTEMS

A neat combination of timeframes for day-trading stocks is a set of 39- and 8-minute
charts. The U.S. stock market is open from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m.—six and a half hours
or 390 minutes. Using a 39-minute chart as your long-term screen neatly divides each
day into 10 bars. Make your strategic decision there, and then drop down to a chart
that’s 5 times faster—an 8-minute chart—for tactical decisions on entries and exits.
Don’t mash together too many timeframes. If you’re swing-trading, you can briefly
use an intraday chart to time your entry, but then return to the daily charts. If you
keep watching intraday charts, chances are they’ll shake you out of the trade prematurely. If you day-trade, then the weekly chart is not really relevant, but you may take
a quick look at the daily chart. The rule is this: select your favorite (intermediate)
chart, pair it with a long-term chart that is 5 times longer, and go to work.

Stops and Profit Targets
Proper money management is essential for successful trading. A disciplined trader
takes his profits at targets, cuts losses short, and outperforms those who keep hoping
and hanging on to bad trades. Before you enter a trade, write down three numbers:
the entry, the target, and the stop. Placing a trade without defining these three numbers is gambling.
Triple Screen calls for setting profit targets using long-term charts and stops on
the charts of your intermediate timeframe. If you use weekly and daily charts, set
profit targets on the weeklies but stops on the dailies. When buying a dip on a daily
chart, the value zone on a weekly chart presents a good target. When day-trading
and using a 25-minute and a 5-minute pair, set the profit target on a 25-minute chart
and the stop on a 5-minute chart. This helps you aim at the greater results, while
holding down the risk.
The Triple Screen trading system calls for placing fairly tight stops. Since it has you
trading in the direction of the market tide, it doesn’t give much room to losing trades.
Get on with the tide—or get out. We’ll return to this topic in Chapter 54, “How to
Set Stops.”

■■40. The Impulse System
The idea for the Impulse system came to me in the mid-1990s. I woke up in the
middle of the night in a faraway hotel and sat up bolt upright in bed with the thought
that I could describe any market move in any timeframe, using only two criteria:
inertia and power. By combining them, I could find stocks and futures with both
bullish inertia and bullish power and trade them long. I could also find stocks and
futures with both bearish inertia and power and sell them short.
A good measure of the inertia of any trading vehicle is the slope of its fast EMA.
A rising EMA reflects bullish inertia, while a falling EMA reflects bearish inertia. The
power of any trend is reflected in the slope of MACD-Histogram. If its latest bar is
higher than the previous bar (like the height of the letters m–M) or less deep than the
previous bar (like the depth of the letters y–v), then the slope of MACD-Histogram
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

40. THE IMPULSE SYSTEM

163

is rising, and the power is pushing up. If the latest bar of MACD-Histogram is lower
than the previous one (like the depth of the letters v–y or the height of the letters
M–m), then the slope is declining, and the power is pushing down. When we use
MACD-Histogram to define power, it doesn’t matter whether it’s above or below
zero: what matters is the relationship of the last two bars of MACD-Histogram.
It is relatively simple to program most software packages to color price bars or
candles using the Impulse system. If both indicators are rising, the bar is green—
bullish. If both are falling, the bar is red—bearish. When the two indicators move
against one another, that bar is blue—neutral (Figure 40.1).
At first, I anticipated making this system automatic—buy green, short red, and
cash checks on all colors. Backtesting the Impulse system threw cold water on that
idea. The automatic system caught every single trend, but it got whipsawed during
trading ranges, where it kept flipping between green and red.
I set the Impulse system aside, but kept thinking about it. A few years later it
dawned on me: this wasn’t an automatic trading system—it was a censorship system! It didn’t tell me what to do—it told me what not to do. If either weekly or
daily bar was red—no buying allowed. If either weekly or daily bar was green—no
shorting permitted.
Ever since that discovery, I’ve been using the Impulse system for all my trades.
I presented it to the public in my 2002 book Come into My Trading Room, which
Barron’s named a book of the year. The Impulse system is becoming increasingly popular worldwide, and its terminology has entered the language of trading.

FIGURE 40.1â•… The colors of the Impulse system.
■■

■■

EMA rising & MACD-Histogram rising (especially below zero) = Impulse is green, bullish.
Shorting prohibited, buying or standing aside permitted.
EMA falling & MACD-Histogram falling (especially above zero) = Impulse is red, bearish.
Buying prohibited, shorting or standing aside permitted.

■■

EMA rising & MACD-Histogram falling = Impulse is blue, neutral. Nothing is prohibited.

■■

EMA falling & MACD-Histogram rising = Impulse is blue, neutral. Nothing is prohibited.

164

TRADING SYSTEMS

And that’s how I’ve been using the Impulse system ever since (Figure 40.2).
It keeps me out of trouble. I may develop my trading plans based on any number
of ideas, signals, or indicators—and then the Impulse system forces me to wait
until it no longer prohibits an entry in the planned direction. In addition, the
Impulse system helps me recognize when a trend starts weakening and suggests
an exit.

Entries
Green and red bars of the Impulse system show when both inertia and power are
pointing in the same direction. At a green bar, bulls are in charge and the uptrend
is accelerating. At a red bar, bears are dominant and the downtrend is in full swing.
A fast EMA and MACD-Histogram may stay in gear with each other for only a few
bars, but that’s when the market travels fast—the impulse is on!
Before you start applying the Impulse system to your favorite market, remember
the Triple Screen’s insistence on analyzing markets in more than one timeframe.
Select your favorite timeframe and call it intermediate. Multiply it by five to define
your long-term timeframe. If your favorite chart is daily, analyze the weekly chart
first and make a strategic decision to be a bull or a bear. Use the Impulse system to
decide when you’re permitted to enter long or short positions.
■■
