
At most 40 percent certain.

unreasonable
usually

A setup with an unfavorable trader’s equation.

At least 60 percent certain.

vacuum A buy vacuum occurs when the strong bears believe that the price will
soon be higher so they wait to short until it reaches some magnet above the market. The result is that there is a vacuum that sucks the market quickly up to the
magnet in the form of one or more bull trend bars. Once there, the strong bears
sell aggressively and turn the market down. A sell vacuum occurs when the strong
bulls believe that the market will soon be lower so they wait to buy until it falls
to some magnet below the market. The result is that there is a vacuum that sucks
the market down quickly to the magnet in the form of one or more bear trend bars.
Once there, strong bulls buy aggressively and turn the market back up.
wedge Traditionally, a three-push move with each push extending further and the
trend line and trend channel line at least minimally convergent, creating a rising or
descending triangle with a wedge shape. For a trader, the wedge shape increases
the chances of a successful trade, but any three-push pattern trades like a wedge
and can be considered one. A wedge can be a reversal pattern or a pullback in a
trend (a bull or bear flag).
wedge flag A wedge-shaped or three-push pullback in a trend, such as a high 3 in
a bull trend (a type of bull flag) or a low 3 in a bear trend (a type of bear flag). Since
it is a with-trend setup, enter on the first signal.
wedge reversal A wedge that is reversing a bull trend into a bear trend or a bear
trend into a bull trend. Since it is countertrend, unless it is very strong, it is better

P1: OTA/XYZ

P2: ABC

JWBT576-LOT

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

2:13

Printer: Donnelly

LIST OF TERMS USED IN THIS BOOK

xxvii

to take a second signal. For example, if there is a bear trend and then a descending
wedge, wait for a breakout above this potential wedge bottom and then try to buy
a pullback to a higher low.
with trend Refers to a trade or a setup that is in the direction of the prevailing
trend. In general, the direction of the most recent 5 minute chart signal should be
assumed to be the trend’s direction. Also, if most of the past 10 or 20 bars are above
the moving average, trend setups and trades are likely on the buy side.

P1: OTA/XYZ

P2: ABC

JWBT576-LOT

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

2:13

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA/XYZ

P2: ABC

JWBT576-LOT

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

2:13

Printer: Donnelly

Trading
Price
Action

TRENDS

P1: OTA/XYZ

P2: ABC

JWBT576-LOT

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

2:13

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

Introduction

here is a reason why there is no other comprehensive book about price
action written by a trader. It takes thousands of hours, and the financial
reward is meager compared to that from trading. However, with my three
girls now away in grad school, I have a void to fill and this has been a very satisfying project. I originally planned on updating the first edition of Reading Price
Charts Bar by Bar (John Wiley & Sons, 2009), but as I got into it, I decided instead
to go into great detail about how I view and trade the markets. I am metaphorically
teaching you how to play the violin. Everything you need to know to make a living at it is in these books, but it is up to you to spend the countless hours learning
your trade. After a year of answering thousands of questions from traders on my
website at www.brookspriceaction.com, I think that I have found ways to express
my ideas much more clearly, and these books should be easier to read than that
one. The earlier book focused on reading price action, and this series of books is
instead centered on how to use price action to trade the markets. Since the book
grew to more than four times as many words as the first book, John Wiley & Sons
decided to divide it into three separate books. This first book covers price action
basics and trends. The second book is on trading ranges, order management, and
the mathematics of trading, and the final book is about trend reversals, day trading,
daily charts, options, and the best setups for all time frames. Many of the charts
are also in Reading Price Charts Bar by Bar, but most have been updated and the
discussion about the charts has also been largely rewritten. Only about 5 percent
of the 120,000 words from that book are present in the 570,000 words in this new
series, so readers will find little duplication.
My goals in writing this series of three books are to describe my understanding
of why the carefully selected trades offer great risk/reward ratios, and to present
ways to profit from the setups. I am presenting material that I hope will be interesting to professional traders and students in business school, but I also hope that
even traders starting out will find some useful ideas. Everyone looks at price charts
but usually just briefly and with a specific or limited goal. However, every chart has
an incredible amount of information that can be used to make profitable trades, but

T

1

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

2

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

much of it can be used effectively only if traders spend time to carefully understand
what each bar on the chart is telling them about what institutional money is doing.
Ninety percent or more of all trading in large markets is done by institutions,
which means that the market is simply a collection of institutions. Almost all are
profitable over time, and the few that are not soon go out of business. Since institutions are profitable and they are the market, every trade that you take has a
profitable trader (a part of the collection of institutions) taking the other side of
your trade. No trade can take place without one institution willing to take one side
and another willing to take the other. The small-volume trades made by individuals
can only take place if an institution is willing to take the same trade. If you want
to buy at a certain price, the market will not get to that price unless one or more
institutions also want to buy at that price. You cannot sell at any price unless one or
more institutions are willing to sell there, because the market can only go to a price
where there are institutions willing to buy and others willing to sell. If the Emini is
at 1,264 and you are long with a protective sell stop at 1,262, your stop cannot get
hit unless there is an institution who is also willing to sell at 1,262. This is true for
virtually all trades.
If you trade 200 Emini contracts, then you are trading institutional volume and
are effectively an institution, and you will sometimes be able to move the market a
tick or two. Most individual traders, however, have no ability to move the market,
no matter how stupidly they are willing to trade. The market will not run your stops.
The market might test the price where your protective stop is, but it has nothing to
do with your stop. It will only test that price if one or more institutions believe that it
is financially sound to sell there and other institutions believe that it is profitable to
buy there. At every tick, there are institutions buying and other institutions selling,
and all have proven systems that will make money by placing those trades. You
should always be trading in the direction of the majority of institutional dollars
because they control where the market is heading.
At the end of the day when you look at a printout of the day’s chart, how can
you tell what the institutions did during the day? The answer is simple: whenever
the market went up, the bulk of institutional money was buying, and whenever the
market went down, more money went into selling. Just look at any segment of the
chart where the market went up or down and study every bar, and you will soon
notice many repeatable patterns. With time, you will begin to see those patterns
unfold in real time, and that will give you confidence to place your trades. Some of
the price action is subtle, so be open to every possibility. For example, sometimes
when the market is working higher, a bar will trade below the low of the prior bar,
yet the trend continues higher. You have to assume that the big money was buying
at and below the low of that prior bar, and that is also what many experienced
traders were doing. They bought exactly where weak traders let themselves get
stopped out with a loss or where other weak traders shorted, believing that the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

3

market was beginning to sell off. Once you get comfortable with the idea that strong
trends often have pullbacks and big money is buying them rather than selling them,
you will be in a position to make some great trades that you previously thought
were exactly the wrong thing to do. Don’t think too hard about it. If the market is
going up, institutions are buying constantly, even at times when you think that you
should stop yourself out of your long with a loss. Your job is to follow their behavior
and not use too much logic to deny what is happening right in front of you. It does
not matter if it seems counterintuitive. All that matters is that the market is going
up and therefore institutions are predominantly buying and so should you.
Institutions are generally considered to be smart money, meaning that they
are smart enough to make a living by trading and they trade a large volume every day. Television still uses the term institution to refer to traditional institutions
like mutual funds, banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, pension funds,
and hedge funds; these companies used to account for most of the volume, and
they mostly trade on fundamentals. Their trading controls the direction of the market on daily and weekly charts and a lot of the big intraday swings. Until a decade
or so ago, most of the trade decisions were made and most trading was done by
very smart traders, but it is now increasingly being done by computers. They have
programs that can instantly analyze economic data and immediately place trades
based on that analysis, without a person ever being involved in the trade. In addition, other firms trade huge volumes by using computer programs that place trades
based on the statistical analysis of price action. Computer-generated trading now
accounts for as much as 70 percent of the day’s volume.
Computers are very good at making decisions, and playing chess and winning at
Jeopardy! are more difficult than trading stocks. Gary Kasparov for years made the
best chess decisions in the world, yet a computer made better decisions in 1997 and
beat him. Ken Jennings was heralded as the greatest Jeopardy! player of all time,
yet a computer destroyed him in 2011. It is only a matter of time before computers
are widely accepted as the best decision makers for institutional trading.
Since programs use objective mathematical analysis, there should be a tendency for support and resistance areas to become more clearly defined. For example, measured move projections should become more precise as more of the
volume is traded based on precise mathematical logic. Also, there might be a tendency toward more protracted tight channels as programs buy small pullbacks on
the daily chart. However, if enough programs exit longs or go short at the same
key levels, sell-offs might become larger and faster. Will the changes be dramatic?
Probably not, since the same general forces were operating when everything was
done manually, but nonetheless there should be some move toward mathematical
perfection as more of the emotion is removed from trading. As these other firms
contribute more and more to the movement of the market and as traditional institutions increasingly use computers to analyze and place their trades, the term

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

4

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

institution is becoming vague. It is better for an individual trader to think of an
institution as any of the different entities that trade enough volume to be a significant contributor to the price action.
Since these buy and sell programs generate most of the volume, they are the
most important contributor to the appearance of every chart and they create most
of the trading opportunities for individual investors. Yes, it’s nice to know that
Cisco Systems (CSCO) had a strong earnings report and is moving up, and if you
are an investor who wants to hold stock for many months, then do what the traditional institutions are doing and buy CSCO. However, if you are a day trader,
ignore the news and look at the chart, because the programs will create patterns
that are purely statistically based and have nothing to do with fundamentals, yet offer great trading opportunities. The traditional institutions placing trades based on
fundamentals determine the direction and the approximate target of a stock over
the next several months, but, increasingly, firms using statistical analysis to make
day trades and other short-term trades determine the path to that target and the
ultimate high or low of the move. Even on a macro level, fundamentals are only
approximate at best. Look at the crashes in 1987 and 2009. Both had violent selloffs and rallies, yet the fundamentals did not change violently in the same short
period of time. In both cases, the market got sucked slightly below the monthly
trend line and reversed sharply up from it. The market fell because of perceived
fundamentals, but the extent of the fall was determined by the charts.
There are some large patterns that repeat over and over on all time frames and
in all markets, like trends, trading ranges, climaxes, and channels. There are also
lots of smaller tradable patterns that are based on just the most recent few bars.
These books are a comprehensive guide to help traders understand everything they
see on a chart, giving them more opportunities to make profitable trades and to
avoid losers.
The most important message that I can deliver is to focus on the absolute best
trades, avoid the absolute worst setups, use a profit objective (reward) that is at
least as large as your protective stop (risk), and work on increasing the number of
shares that you are trading. I freely recognize that every one of my reasons behind
each setup is just my opinion, and my reasoning about why a trade works might
be completely wrong. However, that is irrelevant. What is important is that reading
price action is a very effective way to trade, and I have thought a lot about why
certain things happen the way they do. I am comfortable with my explanations and
they give me confidence when I place a trade; however, they are irrelevant to my
placing trades, so it is not important to me that they are right. Just as I can reverse
my opinion about the direction of the market in an instant, I can also reverse my
opinion about why a particular pattern works if I come across a reason that is more
logical or if I discover a flaw in my logic. I am providing the opinions because they
appear to make sense, they might help readers become more comfortable trading

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

5

certain setups, and they might be intellectually stimulating, but they are not needed
for any price action trades.
The books are very detailed and difficult to read and are directed toward serious traders who want to learn as much as they can about reading price charts.
However, the concepts are useful to traders at all levels. The books cover many of
the standard techniques described by Robert D. Edwards and John Magee (Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, AMACOM, 9th ed., 2007) and others, but focus
more on individual bars to demonstrate how the information they provide can significantly enhance the risk/reward ratio of trading. Most books point out three or
four trades on a chart, which implies that everything else on the chart is incomprehensible, meaningless, or risky. I believe that there is something to be learned
from every tick that takes place during the day and that there are far more great
trades on every chart than just the few obvious ones; but to see them, you have to
understand price action and you cannot dismiss any bars as unimportant. I learned
from performing thousands of operations through a microscope that some of the
most important things can be very small.
I read charts bar by bar and look for any information that each bar is telling me.
They are all important. At the end of every bar, most traders ask themselves, “What
just took place?” With most bars, they conclude that there is nothing worth trading
at the moment so it is just not worth the effort to try to understand. Instead, they
choose to wait for some clearer and usually larger pattern. It is as if they believe
that the bar did not exist, or they dismiss it as just institutional program activity that is not tradable by an individual trader. They do not feel like they are part
of the market at these times, but these times constitute the vast majority of the day.
Yet, if they look at the volume, all of those bars that they are ignoring have as much
volume as the bars they are using for the bases for their trades. Clearly, a lot of
trading is taking place, but they don’t understand how that can be and essentially
pretend that it does not exist. But that is denying reality. There is always trading
taking place, and as a trader, you owe it to yourself to understand why it’s taking
place and to figure out a way to make money off of it. Learning what the market is
telling you is very time-consuming and difficult, but it gives you the foundation that
you need to be a successful trader.
Unlike most books on candle charts where the majority of readers feel compelled to memorize patterns, these three books of mine provide a rationale for why
particular patterns are reliable setups for traders. Some of the terms used have
specific meaning to market technicians but different meanings to traders, and I am
writing this entirely from a trader’s perspective. I am certain that many traders
already understand everything in these books, but likely wouldn’t describe price
action in the same way that I do. There are no secrets among successful traders;
they all know common setups, and many have their own names for each one. All
of them are buying and selling pretty much at the same time, catching the same

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

6

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

swings, and they all have their own reasons for getting into a trade. Many trade
price action intuitively without ever feeling a need to articulate why a certain setup
works. I hope that they enjoy reading my understanding of and perspective on
price action and that this gives them some insights that will improve their already
successful trading.
The goal for most traders is to maximize trading profits through a style that is
compatible with their personalities. Without that compatibility, I believe that it is
virtually impossible to trade profitably for the long term. Many traders wonder how
long it will take them to be successful and are willing to lose money for some period of time, even a few years. However, it took me over 10 years to be able to trade
successfully. Each of us has many considerations and distractions, so the time will
vary, but a trader has to work though most obstacles before becoming consistently
profitable. I had several major problems that had to be corrected, including raising
three wonderful daughters who always filled my mind with thoughts of them and
what I needed to be doing as their father. That was solved as they got older and
more independent. Then it took me a long time to accept many personality traits as
real and unchangeable (or at least I concluded that I was unwilling to change them).
And finally there was the issue of confidence. I have always been confident to the
point of arrogance in so many things that those who know me would be surprised
that this was difficult for me. However, deep inside I believed that I really would
never come up with a consistently profitable approach that I would enjoy employing for many years. Instead, I bought many systems, wrote and tested countless
indicators and systems, read many books and magazines, went to seminars, hired
tutors, and joined chat rooms. I talked with people who presented themselves as
successful traders, but I never saw their account statements and suspect that most
could teach but few, if any, could trade. Usually in trading, those who know don’t
talk and those who talk don’t know.
This was all extremely helpful because it showed all of the things that I needed
to avoid before becoming successful. Any nontrader who looks at a chart will invariably conclude that trading has to be extremely easy, and that is part of the
appeal. At the end of the day, anyone can look at any chart and see very clear entry
and exit points. However, it is much more difficult to do it in real time. There is a
natural tendency to want to buy the exact low and never have the trade come back.
If it does, a novice will take the loss to avoid a bigger loss, resulting in a series of
losing trades that will ultimately bust the trader’s account. Using wide stops solves
that to some extent, but invariably traders will soon hit a few big losses that will
put them into the red and make them too scared to continue using that approach.
Should you be concerned that making the information in these books available
will create lots of great price action traders, all doing the same thing at the same
time, thereby removing the late entrants needed to drive the market to your price
target? No, because the institutions control the market and they already have the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

7

smartest traders in the world and those traders already know everything in these
books, at least intuitively. At every moment, there is an extremely smart institutional bull taking the opposite side of the trade being placed by an extremely smart
institutional bear. Since the most important players already know price action, having more players know it will not tip the balance one way or the other. I therefore
have no concern that what I am writing will stop price action from working. Because of that balance, any edge that anyone has is always going to be extremely
small, and any small mistake will result in a loss, no matter how well a person
reads a chart. Although it is very difficult to make money as a trader without understanding price action, that knowledge alone is not enough. It takes a long time to
learn how to trade after a trader learns to read charts, and trading is just as difficult
as chart reading. I wrote these books to help people learn to read charts better and
to trade better, and if you can do both well, you deserve to be able to take money
from the accounts of others and put it into yours.
The reason why the patterns that we all see do unfold as they do is because
that is the appearance that occurs in an efficient market with countless traders
placing orders for thousands of different reasons, but with the controlling volume
being traded based on sound logic. That is just what it looks like, and it has been
that way forever. The same patterns unfold in all time frames in all markets around
the world, and it would simply be impossible for all of it to be manipulated instantaneously on so many different levels. Price action is a manifestation of human
behavior and therefore actually has a genetic basis. Until we evolve, it will likely
remain largely unchanged, just as it has been unchanged for the 80 years of charts
that I have reviewed. Program trading might have changed the appearance slightly,
although I can find no evidence to support that theory. If anything, it would make
the charts smoother because it is unemotional and it has greatly increased the volume. Now that most of the volume is being traded automatically by computers and
the volume is so huge, irrational and emotional behavior is an insignificant component of the markets and the charts are a purer expression of human tendencies.
Since price action comes from our DNA, it will not change until we evolve.
When you look at the two charts in Figure I.1, your first reaction is that they are
just a couple of ordinary charts, but look at the dates at the bottom. These weekly
Dow Jones Industrial Average charts from the Depression era and from World War
II have the same patterns that we see today on all charts, despite most of today’s
volume being traded by computers.
If everyone suddenly became a price action scalper, the smaller patterns might
change a little for a while, but over time, the efficient market will win out and the
votes by all traders will get distilled into standard price action patterns because
that is the inescapable result of countless people behaving logically. Also, the reality is that it is very difficult to trade well, and although basing trades on price
action is a sound approach, it is still very difficult to do successfully in real time.
