
122

I

Historical Perspective

at an exponential rate. Knapp figured that in this way he would
have a high-yielding portfolio when interest rates finally declined
and if he grew large enough he could not be allowed to go broke
even if interest rates did not decline: heads he would win, tails
he could not lose. The calculation was correct. The company grew
from $4.9 billion in deposits in 1982 to $20.3 billion in 1984.As
the financial position of the company deteriorated, Knapp was
forced out (after receiving severance pay in seven figures) but the
company was r e s c ~ e d . ~
The crisis in Continental Illinois Corp. and Financial Corporation of America came to a head more or less concurrently in the
=mmer of 1984.That was the true turning point fw
Liul'king
and thrift industries, although this fact is still not properly appreciated. Bank examiners remembered their statutory duty and
began to take a stand on bad loans. Regulators tightened capital
requirements, and insisted on strengthening bad debt reserves.
Banks responded by shrinking their balance sheets, selling off
assets, and packaging loans for resale rather than putting them on
the books. The period of unsound growth came to an end and the
adjustment process finally began.
At first blush, the adjustment has been remarkably smooth.
Banks became adept at packaging loans for resale, developing a
variety of financial instruments ranging from floating rate notes to
mortgage pass-through certificates. Whenever necessary, other institutions have taken over the banks' role. Junk bonds have replaced bank loans in financing mergermania, and Treasury bonds
have taken the place of Eurodollar deposits in sucking in capital
from abroad. It is no coincidence that the withholding tax on
foreign-owned bonds was removed just as the turning point in
bank expansion was reached.
With every passing quarter, the financial position of the banks
ought to improve. Individual banks may be hurt when they have
to recognize losses but the industry as a whole ought to become
sounder. The stock market responded positively to the changed
outlook: bank shares rose to levels where they were selling at
premiums over book value.
But the period of danger is not yet over. It is after a trend has
been reversed that the full effect of the preceding excesses is felt.
While banks were given leeway, they could cover up their bad
loans by extending additional credit. But when banks are required
to set up reserves against bad or doubtful loans it does not pay

Evolution of the Banking System

123

them to throw good money after bad. On the contrary, they have
every reason to liquidate bad loans, because by doing so they can
convert non-earning assets into earning assets and they may also
be able to recapture some of the reserves they have been obliged
to set up. The danger is that the liquidation of bad loans uncovers
other bad loans. For instance, there were many farmers who could
not service their debt but the value of their land was still high
enough to provide adequate collateral: these farmers were given
additional credit rather than forced into bankruptcy. But the liquidation of bankrupt farmers is depressing land prices, so that
additional farmers are forced into bankruptcy. The same is happening in the oil industry, and at the time of this writing (September 1985) ominous signs are emerging in real estate. shipping is
probably next in line.
The bankruptcy of Community Savings Bank of Maryland and
its subsidiary, Equity Programs, Inc. (EPIC), in 1985 serves as a
paradigm of what happens when the trend is reversed. The institution in question had been acquired by real estate developers
who carried on their syndicating activities as a subsidiary of the
thrift institution. They specialized in financing model homes and
enjoyed a good reputation. The mortgages on these homes were
insured by private mortgage insurance companies and sold to
investors in the form of mortgage-backed securities. Following a
run on state-insured savings banks in Ohio, savings banks in
Maryland were required to seek federal insurance. The Federal
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, in its chdened mood,
insisted that the real estate syndicating subsidiary should be
sold before the parent was granted FSLIC cover. That caused the
whole situation to unravel. The subsidiary coiild not syndicate
any new loans, and without new syndicaiions it could not service its outstanding mortgages. It turned out that the income
from the already syndicated homes had been insufficient to cover
the mortgages and the deficiency had been habitually made up
from new syndications. In theory, the model homes would eventually be sold and would start to produce income, but, in practice,
the subsidiary had become heavily indebted to the parent and
it appears that some of the model homes did not even exist. The
subsidiary had issued about $1.4 billion of mortgage-backed securities and the ,moFgage insurance companies were on the hook.
The potential liability exceeded the assets of some of the insurance companies in question, and if they cannot meet their obli-

124

,

4

Historical Perspective

gations the security of mortgage-backed securities may be
endangered.*
My brief account of recent events is sufficient to show that
regulators are not exempt from bias. They are participants in a
reflexive process and operate on the basis of imperfect understanding, just like those whom they regulate. On balance the regulators understand the business they supervise less well than
those who engage in it. The more complex and innovative that
business is, the less likely that the supervisory authority can do a
competent job.
Regulation always lags behind events. By the time regulators
have caught up with excesses, the corrective action they insist on.
tends to exacerbate the situation in the opposite direction. That is
what has happened in the period under study. By the time the
authorities discovered that international lending was unsound it
was too late to correct the situation because the correction would
have precipitated a collapse. When they finally insisted that
banks recognize their losses, their insistence reinforced the collapse of collateral values in areas such as agriculture, the oil industry, and shipping.
Commercial bankers have also committed many mistakes, but
at least they have an excuse: they operate within guidelines laid
down by the regulators. Their job is to compete, not to worry
about the soundness of the system. Their excuse is valid in the
sense that, as long as there is no fraud involved, the authorities
will, in fact, bail them out if they get into difficulties. This compounds the responsibility that regulators have to shoulder.
The authorities have given a good account of themselves whenever the situation has deteriorated to the crisis point. To s a n e
extent, this is due to the merit of the individuals involved. Events
might have taken a different course if it had not been Volcker who
was in charge of the Federal Reserve. He displayed a positive
eagerness in confronting difficult situations and coming up with
innovative solutions that is rare in a bureaucrat. But there is also
an institutional reason. Central banks are given a mandate to act
as lenders of last resort. They have incomparably more authority
in an emergency than in the ordinary course of events. They are
* Subsequently, one of the mortgage insurance companies, Ticor Mortgage Insurance Company, went out of business, but the mortgage-backed securities
market was not endangered.

Evolution of the Banking System

125

geared to crisis management and quite incompetent when it
comes to problem solvihg. To achieve any lasting solutions, the
whole machinery of the administration and Congress needs to be
involved. That means that needed reforms are rarely enacted in
time.
The banking crisis of '1984 has left us with an unresolved dilemma. There is a basic imbalance in deregulating deposit-taking
institutions and guaranteeing depositors against loss. The guarantee enables financial institutions to attract additional deposits
at will, and deregulation gives them wide latitude in putting those
deposits to use. The combination of the two is an invitation to
unrestrained credit expansi-on The problem has been inherent in
the system of Federal deposit insurance since its inception but at
the time the FDIC was founded banks were strictly regulated. The
imbalance between risk and reward became more pronounced as
the trend toward deregulation gained momentum, and it reached
a critical point in the crisis of 1984.
The Federal Reserve was forced to expand its role as lender of
last resort and guaranteb all depositors against loss whatever the
size of their deposits. This removed the last vestige of the discipline that depositors are supposed to impose on banks. In the
absence of that discipline there is nothing left but the regulatory
authorities to stop financial institutions from engaging in unsound lending practices.
It may be argued that shareholders would act as asonstraining
influence because they remain at risk, but the constraint is not
very effective since a bank can cover up its losses by lending even
more. By the time the losses can no longer be hidden, much more
will have been lost than the equity capital. Thus, hil~ringequity
and loan capital at risk is not sufficient to ensure sound lending
practices.
The regulatory authorities have, in fact, become much stricter
since 1984. Yet the popular and political bias in favor of deregulation is as strong as ever. The geographic and functional restrictions imposed in the Great Depression are in the process of being
dismantled. Theoretically, there need be no conflict between deregulation and stricter supervision; but in practice there is. As we
have seen, regulators make mistakes; the more varied and changeable the business, the less likely that it will be adequately supervised. There is a strong prima facie case for keeping the deposittaking business as simple as possible. On the other hand, simple,

126

4

Historical Perspective

regulated businesses tend to breed stodgy, conservative managements. It boils down to a choice between stability and innovation.
When one of these ingredients is missing its absence is sorely felt.
As a consequence, preferences tend to swing from one extreme to
another. At present we are still elated by the opportunities that
have been opened up by the removal of outdated regulations; but
the need for stability is increasingly pressing.
There is another simmering problem that is approaching boiling point. It concerns the treatment of insolvent financial institutions. Traditionally, the authorities prefer to arrange the
acquisition of failing institutions by larger, sounder ones. Such
forced mergers used to offer an easy way out when the industry
was tightly regulated, failures were few and far between, and the
acquiring institutions were financially strong. The failing bank
had a valuable franchise that could be auctioned off to the highest
bidder without endangering the structure of the industry. But as
the process of credit expansion and deregulation progressed, the
procedure of "merging out" insolvent units became both more
frequent and less satisfactory. The franchises became less valuable and the acquiring institutions less able to withstand a dilution of their financial strength. A concentrated industry is
seemingly stronger. For instance, the clearing banks of the United
Kingdom have never had any difficulty in attracting deposits, although Midland Bank, for one, was in worse shape than any of
the surviving banks in the United States. But increasing concentration increases the danger of catastrophic losses. What would
happen to the United Kingdom if the clearing banks were unable
to collect the interest on their loans to less developed countries?
Closer to home, Bank cf America was encouraged to acquire First
of Seattle; but who is going to acquire Bank of America if the need
arises? * We have already had the first instance, that of Continental Illinois Bank, where no buyer could be found. We may yet
arrive at a point where several of our largest banks end up as
public property. It has happened in other countries.
In no instance was the idea of merging out sick units so ill
conceived as in the savings and loan industry. As we have seen,
* To my great surprise, as of December 1986, First Interstate is avidly pursuing
BankAmerica, Chemical Bank is buying Texas Commerce Bank, and
RepublicBank is willing to take over one of the weakest banks in Texas, Interfirst, in order to prevent out-of-state competitors from gaining a foothold in the
state.

Evolution of the Banking System

127

much of the industry became insolvent during the 1980-82 period of record high interest rates. The authorities devised the brilliant scheme of selling off ailing units to adventurous
entrepreneurs who appreciated the privilege of being able to attract federally issued aeposits. We have seen how entrepreneurs
like Charles W. Knapp of the Financial Corporation of America
exploited the privilege. Now that the regulators have put a stop to
uncontrolled expansibn, many of the excesses are beginning to
surface. Only the decline in interest rates has saved us from an
avalanche of insolvencies.

THE: " O L I G O P O ~ A T I O N "OF
AMERICA *

Within the context of Reagan's Imperial Circle there is another
important reflexive development under way: the corporate structure of the United States is being reshaped by means of mergers,
acquisitions, divestitures, and leveraged buyouts. The move has
the dramatic quality usually associated with reflexive processes
and it has reached proportions that endow it with historical significance. Its roots go back to well before the inception of the
Imperial Circle but it has .gained tremendous momentum since
1982. The process of corporate restructuring is clearly interrelated
with the Imperial Circle but so far the relationship is rather lopsided: prevailing economic and political conditions provide the
context in which the restructuring occurs but the evolution of the
Imperial Circle has not been significantly affected by corporate
restructuring. The process that can be loosely described as mergermania is therefore best regarded as a sideshow rather than an
essential ingredient of the Imperial Circle.
In its impact on the corporate structure of the United States,
mergermania has already exceeded the conglomerate boom. Conglomerates started out as relatively small companies that became
large through acquisitions; mergermania has involved the largest
entities in corporate America. There are many similarities between the two developments but the differences are more pro* This chapter has been kept as it was originally written in June 1985, with a
brief postscript added in December 1986.

The "Oligopolarization"of America

129

nounced. If the conglomerate boom represents the simplest case
of an initially self-reinforcing and eventually self-defeating process, mergermania is perhaps the most complex. The conglomerates provided a paradigm of boom and bust; mergermania
exemplifies a reflexive process in which the self-reinforcing and
self-defeating interactiohs are not sequential but simultaneous.
I shall not attempt a descriptive history of mergermania. I shall
simply assume that the, reader is more or less familiar with the
discrete corporate events that have occurred in the last few years.
My own familiarity with mergermania is not much greater than
that of a well-informed,member of the public because I did not
participate in it in a professional capacity.
Corporate events have been occurring continuously ever since
there have been organized stock markets. Whenever the market
value of the shares is higher than the value of a company as a
privately owned entity1the corporate event consists of a sale of
shares; whenever the market value is lower, a purchase of shares
is involved. The purchaser may be the company itself, the management, an outside group, or another company that may have a
special reason for putting a high value on the shares.
The conglomerate boom combined the buying and selling of
shares. Conglomerates were selling their own shares at inflated
prices and buying the shares of other companies. They could put
a higher value on the shares of other companies than the market
because the acquisitions helped to support the ov~rvaluationof
their own shares. Thus the conglomerate boom was essentially a
phenomenon of overvaluation with inflated securities serving as
the means of exchange.
By contrast, in the current process of corporate restructuring
the primary means of exchange is cash. The cash may be borrowed in a number of ways, but the final result is the same: shares
are bought for cash. There are occasional mergers that are accomplished by an exchange of shares but they are not characteristic of
the trend. There are also many developments, notably the disposition of assets and operating divisions, that do not involve the
purchase or sale of shares at all; yet the event that characterizes
the current process and qualifies it as a reflexive one is the purchase of shares for cash. Thus mergermania is predicated on the
undervaluation of shares: the company as a whole must be worth
substantially more than the market capitalization of its shares.
The undervaluation started to develop after the second oil

130
t

I

Historical Perspective

shock when a concerted effort was made to bring inflation under
control through stringent monetary policy. It was greatly reinforced after Reagan became president and the Imperial Circle
evolved.
We can discern three factors in the relative undervaluation of
shares: economic, political, and tax related. The first two are definitely interconnected with Reagan's Imperial Circle; the third is
due to the peculiarity of our tax system. I shall emphasize it because it provides that element of distortion that seems to be an
essential ingredient in reflexive processes.
As long as interest expense is tax deductible, it pays to acquire
companies with borrowed cash, became there is a savicg on taxss.
That is one of the major motivations in leveraged buyouts. There
are many other, more arcane, tax benefits involved, but this is not
the place to explore them.*
Shares traditionally have been valued as a multiple of earnings.
When the rate of interest is high, the multiple tends to be low.
But earnings are only a part of pretax cash flow, often a minor
part. Yet, it is cash flow that is the primary criterion in determining the value of a business as a candidate for acquisition. Thus
the traditional method of valuing shares has helped to create opportunities for acquisition, especially in periods, such as the Imperial Circle, when earnings are depressed and interest rates
relatively high.
Let us take a profitable but mature company with little scope
for expansion-a so-called cash cow. If it is acquired with borrowed funds, the interest can be paid out of pretax earnings. To
the extent that the market discounts pretax earnings at a rate
higher khan the prevailing interest rate, t h e is a margin of e a i ings, in addition to the free-cash flow, that can be used to pay
down the loan. Eventually, the acquirer is left with a debt-free
company. As that point approaches he could, in theory, sell the
shares to the public, realizing a capital gain. He could then turn
around and buy back the shares from the public and start the
process all over again. In practice, several of the early leveraged
buyouts have resurfaced as new issues. I do not know of any
* Several of them, notably the so-called General Utilities doctrine, which allows
the acquiring company to write up assets and depreciate them from a higher
base, have been eliminated in the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The tax deductibility
of interest has not been changed, but the corporate tax rate has been lowered
from 48%to 34%, thereby reducing the tax benefit of using borrowed money.

The "Oligopolarization" of America

131

instances where a refloated company has gone private again, but I
know of cases where previous leveraged buyouts have been releveraged in private transactions.
It can be seen that the tax system has made cash cows particularly susceptible to leveraged buyouts, while the Imperial Circle
has had the unintended consequence of turning companies into
cash cows. The mechhism by which the effect is achieved is high
real interest rates and an overvalued currency. High real interest
rates render financial assets more attractive, and physical investments less attractive; thus they provide an incentive not to put
cash to work in expanding the business but rather to use it as a
financial asset: buying in shares or acquiring other companies. An
overvalued currency tends to render industrial activity less profitable: export markets shrink and domestic markets come under
price pressure from irqports.
The combination of high real interest rates and an overvalued
currency proved to be a potent brew. The producers of tradable
goods have been put under great strain; often their survival is at
stake. They have reacted by consolidating: shedding unprofitable
divisions, abandoning activities where their market position is
weak, and concentrating on those areas where their position is
worth defending. Traditional attitudes have been shaken up;
often there has been a change in management. Gone are the days
when corporations pursued growth for its own sake; free cash
flow and profits have assumed an importance VmPiich they had
previously enjoyed only in textbooks. Managements have started
to look at their businesses more like an investment fund manager
looks at his portfolio. This has created a suitable atmosphere for
corporate restructuring.
Every time an acquisition occurs, it tends to narrow the gap
between market prices and the value to the acquirer. This brings
us to the most curious feature of the process. One would expect
that the acquisitions of shares for cash would reduce the extent of
undervaluation to a point where acquisitions are no longer profitable and the movement comes to a stop. Why has the gap not
been closed? To answer this question, we must invoke a political
factor. The Reagan administration believes in the magic of the
marketplace. This finds expression, first of all, in the deregulation
of regulated industries, but it also permeates the government's
attitude toward corporate activity in general.
There has been no formal reform of antitrust laws but there has

132
I

+
