
FIGURE 7.4

Daily chart of the same stock shown in
Figure 7.3
. The upper panel is the hybrid oscillator of a long and short momentum. The short momentum
is the MACD histogram. The middle panel is the chart of the stock price with a BIC trend
indicator, a pair of medium–time frame moving averages, and three longer-term moving
averages. The bottom panel is the volume percentage plot between a 2-day moving average
and a 10-day moving average of volume. For purpose of explanation of the system, end-ofweek references are marked by perpendicular lines, which will not be plotted during trading.

Let’s look at the weekly chart in
Figure 7.3
. The stock had been rising quietly since December 2009 (see
Figure 7.2
), and entered into a rectangle consolidation. The consolidation ended at the breakout of the
pattern at end-of-week (EOW) October 23, 2009, which started the uptrend, pushing the price
to a new high of $3.30. Thereafter, the stock went into a triangle consolidation (see the blue
circles marked 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5), which failed to uphold prices. Price broke away from the
triangle pattern at end-of-week April 9, 2010, and started its downtrend move until end-ofweek September 3, 2010.
The upper panel in
Figure 7.3
is the weekly momentum oscillator. The plot in histogram is the shorter time frame
momentum of MACD. The line plot is the longer time frame momentum. The shorter time
frame momentum has greater volatility and catches the minor fluctuation. It has an advantage
by giving early divergence signals. The longer time frame momentum is less volatile and
complements the shorter time frame and moving average system in confirmation of a probable
trend reversal.
The weekly chart in
Figure 7.3
turned bullish at end-of-week October 23, 2009. For that week, daily prices moved above
both the BMA and RMA, and the BMA also crossed above the RMA. The longer-term moving
averages (50-day, 90-day, and 200-day) were also moving in order of alignment, indicating a
probable bullish rally (see Chapter 6, Key Indicators). Both short- and long-term momentum
showed bullish reversals confirmed by increased volume. This indicates a good opportunity to

buy in response to a probable change in trend. A buy should be taken on the next immediate
trading day, Tuesday morning, October 27, 2009 (Monday being a holiday). The price at the
open of the day was $1.45. A tactical trading technique is to purchase two lots of the stock. The
purpose of this technique will unfold as the process of trading is described further.
Prices trended up strongly for five weeks and began to slow down to form a diagonal pattern
(see markings 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in chart in
Figure 7.3
). Although the pattern was bearish, prices failed to fall below the trough at Point 4 of the
pattern, and the BIC trend indicator did not show any weaknesses. Weekly price movements
indicate a continuing upward trend; weekly moving averages, RMA, and BMA were diverging,
and long-term momentum was still trending upward.
In
Figure 7.4
, on Wednesday, January 20, 2010, although the BIC trend indicator remained positive, price
did not make a new high. Instead, it closed the day with a bearish candlestick pattern, dark
cloud cover. Long- and short-term momentum trends also remained listless, and together with
the bearish price pattern, signaled a likely pause of the uptrend. This was confirmed on January
21 with the daily price falling below both the RMA and BMA, and the change of the color of the
BIC trend indicator to neutral. A hangman candlestick was formed on January 22, as price
continued downward. The week closed with a wide range bearish spinning top, and daily price
fell below both the RMA and BMA with increased volume. Long and short momentum
continued to be weak. It warned of a corrective phase in progress, which was confirmed by
both weekly and daily BIC trend indicators to neutral color. One lot of the position was sold on
Monday morning of January 25, 2010, at $3.01, keeping one lot on hand just in case the market
should turn bullish again.
On January 26, 2010, the daily price fell below the previous bar closing price, RMA also
crossed below BMA, and the BIC trend indicator showed its first red bearish signal after a 14week bull run. It might be deemed a coincidence, but a red bar after a long period is often a
portent of further weakness. It is like seeing the first fall of snow as a sign of the coming winter.
Prices trended downward to break below the 50-day average line, and started to settle at this
level, vacillating around the average line. Weekly prices did not show any sign of extreme
weakness, its RMA still trading above its BMA. The BIC trend indicator maintained its neutrality.
On February 23, prices made a bullish reversal. Prices crossed above both the RMA and BMA,
and the RMA also crossed above the BMA. Long and short momentum also made a bullish
reversal with increased volume. A rally was likely to follow. However, no new position was
added as the reward to risk ratio was about 1:3; that is to say for every 10 cents to be gained
there is a probable risk of 30 cents loss. Also the weekly momentum trend remained weak and
the two weekly moving averages, RMA and BMA, were converging, which did not seem to
support the daily price rally. And on March 26, the last position of one lot was sold at the
opening price of $2.80, when both daily and weekly momentum confirmed the weakness of the
rally. The average disposal price for the two lots was about $2.90 per share, which captured
approximately 75 percent of the uptrend move, from the low of the date of entry to the highest
price reached by the stock.
After the disposal, price tried to rally as at end-of-week April 9, 2010, but failed to maintain
its momentum. It finally crashed below its 50-day moving average line and its 90-day average
line for another 9-week period of bearish mood.
At end-of-week June 18, price made an attempt to rally, but was stopped at the resistance
level of its 50-day moving average (see point 2 circled in red). There were no buying setups

offering a 3:1 reward to risk ratio. The downward trend continued till March 9 when prices
made a significant thrust above the RMA and BMA lines, supported by the positive movement
of the momentum oscillator. Prices went into a trading range for one week. On September 17,
the uptrend movement was confirmed when both daily and weekly charts turned positive. A
buy order for two lots was entered on the next trading day, September 20, 2010, at $2.45,
which saw a breakaway gap. A protective stop would have been set at $2.35, being the low of
the preceding bar. On October 14, price spiked up to close at the day’s high of $2.57.
The preceding describes a detailed scenario of a trading system that applies the concept of
using crossovers between price and its averages and the crossovers of different time spans of
moving averages in weekly and daily charts. The use of weekly charts is mainly to filter out
noise created by daily prices, and also to avoid overtrading. The strategy is to trade in the
direction of the larger time frame (the weekly trend) and to execute the trade based on the
smaller time frame (the daily trend).
Moving average is perhaps the simplest and most widely used method applied to identify the
trend of price movement. Generally, moving averages are used (1) as a forecast value for the
next projected time period, (2) as a means of measurement, and (3) as a supportive indicator to
other trading systems.
The formulas for plotting various indicators described in this chapter are in MetaStock
format. The following are the formulas for plotting the long momentum oscillator as shown in
Figure 7.4
.
{“Long Momentum”}
Prd1:=Input("Smooth",1,144,5);
Prd2:=Input("Average 1",1,144,1);
Prd3:=Input("Average 1",1,144,7);
x:=Input("Oscillator Multiplier",1,1000,1);
mmt1:=x*(Mov(ROC(CLOSE,21,$),prd1,S)+ROC(CLOSE,13,$))/2;
Mov(mmt1,prd2,S);
Mov(mmt2,prd3,S);
The basic formula for calculating the various moving average lines is as follows:
Period:=Input("MA Period",1,300,n);
SF:=Input("Slope Factor",-20,20,n1);
sma:=Mov(close,period,s) + LinRegSlope(close,period) * SF;
sma;
The formula for the volume indicator is as follows:
prd1:=Input("Fast Period",1,300,2);
prd2:=Input("Slow Period",1,300,10);
evp:=Input("Extreme Volume Percentage",1,500,200);

vavg1:=Mov(volume,prd1,s);
vavg2:=Mov(volume,prd2,s);
z:=If(vavg2=0,0.0001,vavg2);
VolRatio:=100*(VAvg1/z);
VolRatio;
100;
evp;
Here is another example on the trading concept of “Look at the weekly, trade on the daily.”
Figure 7.5
shows the weekly chart of a stock that had declined since November 9, 2007, from a high of
$25.40. It fell by approximately 86.4 percent to a low of $3.46 on October 31, 2008. It made a
three-wave rally to a high of $11.50 at lower volume on June 5, 2009, and continued downward
to a low of $5.57 at the week ending February 25, 2011.
FIGURE 7.5
Weekly chart showing probable trading range of the stock and the interesting progression of a
30-day cycle period.

From the weekly chart, it is interesting to note that price momentum has reached its
oversold zone level on three occasions: October 31, 2008, December 24, 2009, and February
25, 2011. There is a period of approximately 60 weeks between each low. And the week ending
February 25, 2011, is approximately 90 weeks from the high of June 5, 2009. From the low of
December 24, 2009, to October 22, 2010, prices managed to hold at approximately 50 percent
to 61.8 percent of the Fibonacci Retracement support zone, as momentum moved upward to
overbought zone. This reflects the improvement of the strength in price. After making a double
top, momentum fell as prices failed to hold above the support levels and reached an oversold
position with a low of $5.57 at week ending February 25, 2011. The oversold position provides
a setup for traders to look at probable trade opportunity on the daily.
Now let’s look at the daily chart as shown in

Figure 7.6
.
FIGURE 7.6
Daily chart showing the interplay of moving averages and probable trade entry and exit signals
(upper panel). The middle panel is the momentum indicator, with its overbought/oversold
indicator. The bottom panel is the volume histogram. Note the divergence of both momentum
from price and volume from price.

As early as February 1, 2011, the daily price momentum had been in an oversold position. For
the next 30 days, momentum did not make any new low, which reflected the stabilization of
price and depicted a divergence between price movements.
On February 24, 2011, price made a downward thrust by a wide range bar with increased
volume, which became the range for the next five trading bars. This was followed by five inside
narrow bars. An entry signal was alerted on March 4, 2011, when price crossed above both
medium time frame moving averages and momentum also crossed above the zero line. The
bullish signal was supported by the built-in-color trend indicator and increased volume. On
March 7, 2011, price traded in a narrow range similar to that of the previous day, again allowing
opportunity to enter a trade for two units of the stock.
On March 8, 2011, price made a strong rally, crossing above the 10 percent band of the 90day moving average line. Price continued its uptrend for the next seven trading days. Although
prices had crossed above the three longer time frame moving averages, the 50-day, 90-day, and
200-day, showing an underlying strength of the trend, the three moving averages were not in
alignment. This suggested that the positive trend would be short-lived if prices failed to
consolidate at this level. Average volume traded had dwindled, and the first sign of weakness in
trend was shown on March 17, 2011, when the built-in-color trend indicator changed its bullish
blue color to black and momentum crossed below its average line. Following that, on March 22,
2011, price made a bearish hammer pattern, and an exit signal was made for one unit of the
trade on the next day.
Prices continued to fluctuate in narrow ranges. Although the 50-day moving average line
crossed above the 200-day moving average line on April 15, 2011, the 90-day moving average
line remained relatively flat and diverged from the 50-day and 200-day moving averages. And
on April 27, 2011, the first red bearish bar appeared and signaled the exit of the remaining one
unit of the stock.

TRADING WITH ICHIMOKU
The concept of the trading method and Queuing Theory can also be applied to Ichimoku
charting technique. The complete Ichimoku indicator comprises five lines, Tenkan-sen, Kijunsen, Senkou span A, Senkou span B, and Chikou span. In
Figure 7.7
, Chikou span is not plotted. Chikou span is the closing price of the current candlestick, plotted
backward by the period of the Kijun-sen.
FIGURE 7.7
Using Ichimoku lines to track trade opportunities. Support of RSI and volume indicators
appears in the bottom panel.

Figure 7.7
is an illustration of how the principles of the trading method described in this book can also
be applied to various indicators. As an example, the chart uses the popular indicators such as
Ichimoku indicator, volume, and RSI (relative strength index).
The popular Ichimoku Cloud, shown in
Figure 7.7
, is the filled space between the faster line, Senkou span A, and the slower line, Senkou span
B. The Ichimoku Cloud often acts as the equilibrium zone of price movements, and it marks an
area of support and resistance. When price moves above the cloud, it is said it has broken out
of the resistance area, and when price moves below the cloud, it has fallen from the supporting
area. When prices are trading or fluctuating in the area of the cloud, it normally indicates a tugof-war between sellers and buyers in a trading range, where price movements can sometimes
become unpredictable. Ichimoku Cloud can vary in depth and thickness. A thicker cloud
indicates higher past price volatility, and a thinner and shallower cloud indicates lower
volatility.
The Tenkan-sen is the faster line and the Kijun-sen is the slower line. An uptrend is triggered
when price crosses above both lines and also crosses above the cloud, as marked in Point A in
Figure 7.7
. Crossing of the Tenkan-sen from below to above the Kijun-sen signifies positive signal, and
crossing of the Tenkan-sen from above to below the Kijun signifies negative signal, as marked

by Point B.
The Queuing Theory, as it is described in Chapter 6, will work in Ichimoku charting technique.
When a trend is positive, the various Ichimoku lines, the Tenkan-sen, Kijun-sen, and the cloud
(formed by Senkou span A and Senkou span B) should also be in sequential order to price.
When any of these lines is not in sequence with the price, the trend in progress may be shortlived. When prices have moved to an extreme level, a change in trend is anticipated, as marked
by Points T2 and T3 in
Figure 7.7
.
When price is making a change in trend, its movements are often hidden in pattern
formations such as divergence between the price and momentum oscillator, price and volume,
price spread and volume, and convergence and divergence of various moving averages.
Divergence that hints of an impending change does not necessarily take place at the exact
turning point, but may have been in the making weeks ago.
Extreme levels of prices or proximity of extreme levels are often reflected in the divergence
between price and momentum oscillator, as shown in Points T1 and T2 of
Figure 7.7
. Generally, momentum oscillators in an uptrend tend to rally quickly to overbought levels
before price makes its peak. And as momentum starts to slow down while price catches up, it
will create a divergence between the slope of price and oscillator. At T1, the momentum
oscillator rallies to its overbought level, and retraces gradually to T2, where price makes its
peak.
The importance of volume, covered in Chapter 5, cannot be ignored. Volume helps to
confirm the validity and the strength of the trend. At Point A of
Figure 7.7
, the rally of price above the cloud was supported by increased volume. At point T2, the rally
of price to its peak was not supported by volume in comparison to the volume at breakout or at
point T1. The rally to point T3 also was not supported by volume comparative to T2, indicating a
weakness in the rally. Although price reached a new high to $17.18, the rally was not supported
by increased volume comparative to volume at the price level of $12.68. In addition, the
Ichimoku lines and the cloud were not in sequential order, indicating a weakening or slowdown
of the uptrend.
Figure 7.8
is another chart using only the Ichimoku cloud, two sets of moving averages, volume, and
RSI indicators. No description of interpretation is being made, but readers are urged to see for
themselves how they would have traded in this stock.
FIGURE 7.8
Chart displaying plots of Ichimoku Cloud, moving averages, RSI, and volume indicators.

CONCLUSION
The aim of reading stock charts is to track trading opportunities by identifying price behavior,
which is based on recognition of past price patterns and price analysis, to anticipate the
probable outcome.
The concept of the trading method described in this book is for end-of-day (EOD) traders,
and the method is centered on a trend-following concept. To reduce risks, the method
embodies as its main tenet the usage of two time frames to better gauge trade entries and
exits. The combination of the four dimensions related to trend, as discussed in earlier chapters,
will help traders to identify different market environments and to switch a trading strategy
from trending mode to mean reversal mode using the momentum oscillator and Queuing
Theory. The method will assist traders to differentiate between a market that is in a corrective
phase and one that is in an impulse phase and to anticipate areas of support and resistance
levels, so they may plan their trading strategy accordingly.
These are the basic assumptions of the methodology:
Watch the weekly and trade the daily; trade entry or exit should be looked at from the
weekly chart first before making any entry or exit trade. Weekly charts should be used
to support the daily charts in determining whether the current phase of the market is a
trending or non-trending phase in the longer time frame, and whether the current
phase of the market offers a trade entry with a lower risk or a trade exit that will
safeguard investment value.
When a market is making a change in trend for the better, each of the four dimensional
aspects of trend (price patterns, volume, price momentum, and interaction of price and
moving averages) will also be adjusting itself in the positive direction. When the trend
has developed, the four dimensions of trend will act in tandem with each other to
sustain the trend.
Queuing Theory on moving averages is not confined to any particular set or group of
moving averages. There are no preset numbers of moving averages to be used, nor is
there any preset period to be applied to any specific moving averages. The key principle
is that when a stock is in a strong trend, its various relative moving averages will move
to align in sequential order until price reaches its extremes and starts to reverse the
order of alignment. A price rally in which its relative moving averages fail to follow in
sequential order will tend to be short-lived. Generally, it indicates the market is going
into a corrective phase.
No mandatory requirements are set in regard to the use of indicators. Traders may
continue to use their preferred indicator or indicators, which they are familiar with and
which they have used confidently in their trading.
A good trading system is one that gives a trader an edge in executing his trades, whether in a
volatile trading market or in a narrow-range market. Designing a system of trade requires
patience. A good start is to write down your thoughts on what you want to achieve through the
system. Just take note that there is not one single trading system that will detect precisely the
price movements of every stock. Every stock has its own characteristics, business activities and
prospects, earnings and dividend ratios, price movement patterns, groups of investors, and so
forth. However, there is one similarity in every trading system. That is, when a stock has a
strong trend, almost every trading system is good. Similarly, there is no one single oscillator
with identical parameters that will fit across the board for all stocks, and though most

oscillators are momentum based, their results will differ and the visual output will also differ.
Every opportunity comes with a time element; time regulates opportunity. Many traders
habitually fail at time management. Many traders may sit on nonperforming stocks for months
and tie up their investment capital while good opportunities pass by, while other traders may
miss major support and resistance that appears on the next higher time frame. In short, traders
must acknowledge the importance of time and manage time as efficiently as price, combining
price and time triggers for protective stop-loss management. It may be justified to consider
using time to activate trade exits on nonperforming stocks even when price stops have not
been breached. And it may even be more justified to sell at the time of a bear crunch and to
enter the market when time aspects improve the odds for profit.
In investments and trading, success requires three elements: money management, trading
methodology, and understanding of time. Time is the least understood. Time has great
influence on the market because when the time is up, trend changes. One common issue with
time is often seen in the accumulation or distribution of a stock. When such activity is over,
prices will break out of the accumulation pattern upward or break out of the distribution
pattern downward. Other issues with time include understanding time in trend continuation
and trend correction. Time remains the hardest of the three elements to master. Chapter 9 may
help traders learn more of how to use financial astrology to choose the best timing for their
trades and to find the best time in their personal cycles to trade.

CHAPTER 8

Formulating Your Trading Plan

In 1992, Jack Schwager published The New Market Wizards. The chapter titled “The Silence of
the Turtles” covers an interview with Harold Seidler, one of the many market wizards
mentioned in the book. In this interview, Jack asked Harold, “What advice would you give
someone in regards to being successful in the markets?” Harold replied: “I think the single most
important element is having a plan. First, a plan forces discipline, which is an essential
ingredient to successful trading. Second, a plan gives you a benchmark against which you can
measure your performance.”
Trading is an exercise in well-planned strategy. It is said that to have good trading results, a
trader needs to spend 70 percent of his time in planning and only about 30 percent in trading.
He formulates a plan and follows it in a firm and disciplined way.
The ability to make decisions confidently in trading is to get rid of the fear factor. Fear arises
when there is uncertainty. Fear is a hindrance to making good decisions and having a trading
plan will help alleviate fear. A trading plan does not have to be complicated, but it has to be
clear. It has to blend with the trader’s character and thinking.
The trading plan should include the basic elements of deciding the type of trades that suit
the trader, the method of selecting stocks, the conditions for trade entries and exits, and the
contingent steps to protect capital.
In this book, examples of trading are not based on real-time data, but on end-of-day data.
