
“By May or June the spring recovery forecast in our letters of last December
and November should clearly be apparent.”
—Harvard Economic Society, May 17, 1930
“Gentleman, you have come sixty days too late. The depression is over.”
—Herbert Hoover, responding to a delegation requesting a public works
program to help speed the recovery, June 1930
“Irregular and conflicting movements of business should soon give way to a
sustained recovery.”
—Harvard Economic Society, June 28, 1930
“The present depression has about spent its force.”
—Harvard Economic Society, August 30, 1930
“We are now near the end of the declining phase of the depression.”
—Harvard Economic Society, November 15, 1930
“Stabilization at [present] levels is clearly possible.”
—Harvard Economic Society, October 31, 1931
“All safe deposit boxes in banks or financial institutions have been
sealed . . . . and may only be opened in the presence of an agent of the I.R.S.”
—President F. D. Roosevelt, 1933

45
WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

Do not feel bad about what happened in the past in the stock market or if you were
deluded by geniuses or legends! Think for yourself with the carefully laid‐out plan we
will develop in Chapter 6.
Do not look out the back window; look out the front window. Even the father of
trend following, Richard Donchian, virtually lost all of his money in the Great Depression. Richard Donchian’s trading account basically went to zero. Donchian was
above intelligent. During World War II he was one of the Pentagon whiz kids. He was
a cryptanalyst who worked with Robert McNamara, secretary of defense under Kennedy and Johnson.
Richard Donchian started the first publicly managed futures fund, Futures, Inc., in
1949. He developed the trend timing method of futures investing and introduced the
mutual fund concept to the field of money management.
Richard Donchian is considered to be the creator or father of the managed futures industry and is credited with developing a systematic approach to futures money management. His professional trading career was dedicated to advancing a more conservative
approach to futures trading. Donchian traded until his death in his 90s. One of Richard
Donchian’s famous quotes is, “Nobody has ever been able to demonstrate that a complex
mathematical equation can answer the question: Is the market moving in an uptrend,
downtrend, or simply just sideways?” He took the complicated and simplified it.

Confirming this is Marty Schwartz, author of Market Wizards. He is somewhat of a
trend follower and uses very simple techniques. Schwartz looks at moving averages
prior to taking a position. Is the price above or below the moving average? Simple
question with a simple answer! Schwartz believes this works better than any other
tool or indicator. He does not to go against the moving averages; he knows that it is
self‐destructive. Going with the moving averages is simple trend following in the basic
and simplistic approach. Trend following does not need to be complicated.

■ Ed Seykota and Market Wizards
Systems don’t need to be changed. The trick is for a trader to develop a system
with which he is compatible.
—Ed Seykota

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

46

Richard Donchian has been an inspiration to all trend followers, including Ed
Seykota, a leader in trend following and pioneer of computerized trading. Ed Seykota
turned $5,000 into $15,000,000 over a 12‐year time period in his model account,
which was an actual client account.
Seykota’s trading system used exponential moving averages. He improved this system over time, adapting the system to fit his trading style and preferences. With the
initial version of the system being rigid, he later introduced more rules into the system
in addition to pattern triggers and money management algorithms.
Another aspect of his success was his genuine love for trading and his optimistic
attitude. This factor sustained his efforts to continuously improve on his system, although he never changed the response indicators of the system and instead fine‐tuned
market stimuli.
One of the key aspects of trading systems is the testing for the maximum drawdown and duration of drawdowns. The maximum drawdown is the difference from
the highest level of the equity curve to the lowest. Bear in mind that there is no actual
floor for a drawdown.Your greatest drawdown is always ahead of you. Previous drawdowns will be exceeded. Hypothetical results also can lead to distortion.When testing
systems, since the future is unknown, all we are basing our work on is the past, and
the past has extreme limitations. We have read repeatedly that past performance is not
necessarily indicative of future performance. It is so true. All we are trying to do is
give us a possible impression on what to expect.
Worse than the drawdown is the duration or time period in which you have not
made any new money. This is probably what causes traders to either stop trading or
start their quest for a new approach. One needs the mental fortitude to continue
trading when one has not made money for more than two years. This is reality. Many
successful trend followers have durations of drawdowns even exceeding 24 months.

47
WHY TREND FOLLOWING?

I have seen some in the 30‐month range. What sets these traders apart from others
is their tenacity to keep on going. These traders know they are in a marathon. They
believe in their methodologies and systems; however, even with that said, the demons
pop up and questions are asked.
The trading system should have multiple markets and be diversified. As well, the
trading system can contain various models that could offset each other. There are traders that encompass multiple time periods even for the same type of system.
The obvious issues to be aware of when testing a mechanical system are curve fitting and optimizing. Through the wonders of computers today one could find the best
performing markets in the past, plug in various indicators, and present a holy grail
mechanical trading system. The issue is that in the real world at best this system will
underperform and in the most likely case not work and lose money. This same optimization can attempt to reduce the hypothetical drawdowns.
In today’s world it is very easy to test different type of strategies and mechanical
systems. The problem is that traders can so easily jump to another time or mechanical
system with a couple of clicks of a mouse. Every system, every trader will encounter
rough periods of drawdowns and losses. Traders can get nervous after experiencing a
group of trades that do not work. The problem with some of these traders is that this
sets them off on their quest for a better mechanical system. They think that all of a
sudden they can add an idea that could have prevented the prior losses. What is worse
is when a trader is in the midst of a trade and he has tested another mechanical system
and it is showing a contrary signal. Confusion and pressure set in. Once you are in a
trade, you need to follow your original plan and implement any changes after you exit.
You must adhere to your plan. Additions or filters are fine to add to your mechanical
system, but not in the midst of a trade. The market does not know your position nor
does it care. You need to stay focused and let the odds work out over time. You can
never avoid a loss. Do not even try to frustrate yourself. You cannot control the markets. All you can do is control your emotions. After the trade is over, analyze it. Set
time aside to invest in your future. The best way to do is this is via a trade journal. Do
not let fear, greed, or ego become your personal enemy.
Over the years after trades I have analyzed what I perceived as mistakes and added
filters to my model. I believed in the model as it worked for decades for others; however, my goal was to try to mitigate some very evident mistakes. I was an observer of
my actions. I was not a participant in my emotions. I added several risk filters after
losses such as sector maximum risk and total open trade risk only after analyzing my
errors. This is a world apart from tinkering as in a hobby and trying to build the holy
grail. Improvement of my model was a well‐timed pursuit. Searching and thinking
there was something better than what I had would have been a waste of time. I have
spoken to traders that have spent years building a system and never trading it. They always think they can make it better. They think they can improve the performance. My
reality is that they have not accepted the risks of trading and that they can lose money.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

48

I am a proponent of robust simple trading ideas. In order to test these I have used a
rolling testing time frame. I test the system over different data periods. I test two‐year
periods, five‐year periods, staggering them from the 1980s to the present. In order to
have confidence, the system should present similar results in returns, in drawdowns,
and in the number of trades. Even with this, it is only an estimate or guess of what we
will encounter in the real world of trading.
Determining the amount of capital actually demanded by a trading portfolio is not
exact. There are proponents who speak about optimal f, but I really believe not just
that this is an overlooked issue but that it is a very difficult issue. Failing to plan and allocate enough capital is a disaster waiting to happen. To some degree diversifying your
portfolio can reduce the possibility of ruin. As much as markets are correlated, some
markets are not correlated or only correlated to a lesser extent.Trading noncorrelated
markets will enable us to benefit due to the differences in time when and if markets
trend. There are times markets and sectors get quiet. When markets are quiet, trends
are absent. Without movement either up or down, generating profits is very difficult.
I was lucky that one of my mentors learned under Ed Seykota.Years ago I invested
with David Druz from Tactical who also learned under Ed Seykota. I learned a lot of
ways to think from both my mentor and David Druz. There is no magical system or
indicator; it is all in how you think. Ed has been a mentor to many via his Trading Tribe.
The Trading Tribe is a group of trend followers who are committed to personal growth
and receive support from other traders all over the world.
These trend followers know there is no holy grail.

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 4

How Successful
Trend Followers
Trade
I

t is imperative to remember that the returns of professional trend followers are not
representative of those of all trend followers. More so, do not expect your results to
be on par with theirs as you begin your journey.
I am not recommending these managers, rather using their history to show what
trend following can generate when one trades with a well‐thought‐out plan and risk
management in place. I am giving a short historical background of each of the managers as well. I present here a hypothetical compounding if you had invested with these
various managers.

■ The Trend Followers
Before we start, remember: Past performance is not indicative of future performance.
The risk of loss in trading commodity futures, options, and foreign exchange (forex) is
substantial.

49

Salem Abraham
Abraham Trading Company
Began January 1988
CAROR 19.18 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

50

Salem Abraham does not trade from Wall Street, rather from Canadian, Texas.
The population of Canadian is is approximately 2,000. However, Abraham Trading has been called “The Best Little Hedge Fund in Texas” by Absolute Return and Alpha
magazine. In 2003 the New York Times wrote about Salem. The article was called “A
Homespun Hedge Fund, Tucked Away in Texas.” I was surprised that Salem made it
mainstream and was featured in the business section of the New York Times. Salem had
been in the trading arena since 1988 and had built an impressive real‐time audited
hedge fund. He started with money his grandfather gave him. I believe the sum was
$800,000, which in 1988 was a large sum of money. The deal was that if he lost the
money, he would throw his data provider out the window and work in the family
business of cattle and real estate. Salem did not lose his initial stake and has been compounding money over the decades ever since. Salem has a strong awareness of risk as
per his statement, “You want your seatbelt to work in a wreck, not when you’re not in
a wreck.” He was quoted in a Pensions and Investments article.
His office is not what you would expect for a successful hedge fund. His initial office
was 1,000 square feet above a steakhouse. Salem is proof that one does not need to be
in Chicago or on Wall Street to succeed in the financial world. He attended the University of Notre Dame starting in August 1984. As I have stated many times, one does not
need to go to Harvard or Yale to be successful over time trend following. No one at the
company has an Ivy League degree. The members of Salem’s Abraham Trading team do
not have the financial background you would expect. Salem’s coworkers were originally
employed at the area’s feedlots or natural gas drilling and pipeline companies. ‘‘This
beats shoveling manure at 6 in the morning,’’ said Geoff Dockray, who was hired as a
clerk for Mr. Abraham after working at a feedlot near Canadian. ‘‘The financial markets
are complicated, but they’re not as relentless as dealing with livestock all the time.’’
None of this has impeded the success of Abraham Trading. Salem has a burning passion to succeed. He did extensive research in the technical and methodological aspects of
futures trading, as have most successful trend followers. It is imperative to truly believe in
your methodology. He combined information he gathered with ideas that he developed
during his research, and he back‐tested the profitability and drawdowns of numerous
robust trading theories. Salem graduated cum laude with a B.B.A. in finance in December
1987 and moved back to Canadian, where in January 1988, he began to manage customer
accounts using his systematic approach. He became registered as a Commodity Trading
Advisor in October 1988 and organized Abraham Trading in 1990 to act as a CTA for all
customer accounts. The website of Abraham Trading states that 21 years of trading and
research make Abraham Trading one of the most experienced traders in the business.

51
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.1 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in January 1988, today it would be

worth $6,743,434.54.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

Elizabeth Chavel
EMC Capital Management
Began January 1985
CAROR 21.81 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

52

Elizabeth Cheval is the chairman and founder of EMC Capital Management, Inc. It
is well known in the trading community that women make better traders. This is not
because women are smarter, but because of how women control their emotions in trading. Elizabeth has a B.S. in mathematics from Lawrence University. Not to put down
Lawrence University, but it is not an Ivy League school, yet the notion of needing a proper
university education such as Wharton is not a prerequisite for trading success. Elizabeth
started her trading career at the Chicago Board of Trade. Luckily she landed a job with
Richard Dennis. Before working with Mr. Dennis, Ms. Cheval worked with A. G. Becker,
a Chicago‐based brokerage firm, on the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade. Ms. Cheval
has invested in futures since 1983, when she began investing in financial futures for her
own account. In 1984, she was lucky enough to be chosen for the investment management training program offered by C&D Commodities. This was the famed Turtle Trader
experiment. Richard Dennis and his partner, William Eckhardt, made a bet that traders could be taught how to trade. Some traders did much better than others. Elizabeth
did fantastic, however, with volatility. For three years in a row, 1986, 1987, and 1988,
Elizabeth returned 134 percent, 178 percent, and 124 percent. In 1990, probably due to
the volatilities in the markets, she returned an astonishing 187 percent. However, there
is never any free lunch, and there was a period when she experienced a drawdown of
45 percent. She has had periods of one year and longer in which she has had drawdowns
exceeding 25 percent up to that dreaded 45 percent. The results of the Turtle Traders
varied tremendously even though they all went through the same two‐week course. After
the Turtle program was disbanded in 1988, Elizabeth formed EMC. EMC, which stands
for her initials, was incorporated in May 1988. The EMC trading models invest in over
80 futures markets including stock indexes, currencies, financial instruments, metals,
agricultural, meats, energies, and soft commodities. The concept of being diversified is
evident in EMC. Elizabeth is available to trade any of the opportunities that become present in these markets. Her proprietary systems include ideas of using multi time frames
and multi systems. She uses strong risk management. Her proprietary risk algorithms are
based on account equity (core equity), open trade equity, trailing return, and drawdown.
Additionally, EMC utilizes proprietary trade‐specific risk controls that are independent of
the overall portfolio leverage. Market weight factors, system weight factors, and market
volatility factors are applied individually to each signal taken at the time of buy or sell.The
goal of most managers is to try to mitigate some of the volatilities of returns. After her big
drawdown of 45 percent she added filters and enhancement to their Classic Program in
July 1996. The goal of these enhancements was to maintain returns consistent with long‐
term average returns while at the same time trying to reduce the expected drawdown levels and volatility by approximately one half.This is what smart traders do. After a negative
run successful CTAs evaluate what happen and try to add filters to mitigate some of these
drawdown issues. Her worst drawdown after 1996 was approximately 25 percent. This
was a substantial improvement. As per the website of IASG.com, EMC has $110 million
under assets. EMC’s minimum managed account size is $5,000,000.

53
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.2 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in January 1995, today it would be

worth $20,579,720.22.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

Tom Shanks
Hawksbill Capital Management
Began November 1988
CAROR 22.70 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

54

Tom was a professional blackjack player in the 1970s. Through playing blackjack
he met Blair Hull. Blair Hull is personally credited with buffering the crash of Black
Monday in 1987 when he bought the bottom of the market and restored liquidity and
confidence to the panicked financial markets. Trader Monthly recognized him for having executed one of “The 40 Greatest Trades of All Time,” and Worth magazine named
him one of “Wall Street’s 25 Smartest Players.” Tom and Blair were a great team. Tom
started as a research programmer for Hull Trading and later became operations manager for research of options. He left Hull Trading in 1985 to work with Richard Dennis and Bill Eckhardt. Tom Shanks was an original Turtle Trader like Elizabeth Chavel.
He started his Hawksbill program once the Turtle mentor program was disbanded
in 1988. Tom, like others, had a better pedigree than a Harvard education. He surrounded himself with legendary traders and honed his skills with them. This is a common occurrence with traders. They all had their mentors. I have invested with what
I call a third‐generation Turtle Trader, Alex Spies. His knowledge of the markets was
not learned out of textbooks or college. He learned over the years by trading and surrounding himself with great traders.
Hawksbill’s methodology involves active, aggressive trading. The trading approach
emphasizes risk control through proprietary money management rules and diversification of systems and markets within each portfolio. What is unique about Hawksbill is
that as much as he is a trend follower he allows for some discretion. Hawksbill is different from most trend followers who are systematic by his use of discretion.
Underpinning the reality of aggressive trading, Hawksbill has returned some outstanding numbers. Hawksbill’s returns have historically shown low to no correlation to bond and stock markets,
thus offering the potential to diversify a traditional investment portfolio, as well as a portfolio of
alternative investments. In 1990 Hawksbill returned 252 percent; in 1993 114 percent; and for those
that think the markets changed and outstanding results are not possible, in 2008 he returned 96
percent. However, as I always say, there is no free lunch with trading, and I would only suggest buying drawdowns of traders like Hawksbill. He has had some extremely deep drawdowns. Hawksbill’s
worst drawdown was after his huge run up in 1990 when he was down 60 percent. In 1994–1996 he
was down 50 percent for almost 24 months. In 2004–2007 he was down 31 percent for 37 months.
No one ever promised you trend following is easy. However, putting the whole picture into context,
he has been able to compound money at a great rate.

Clearly, money managers and investors diversify across the entire universe of ideas
from low volatility to high volatility. It could be considered prudent depending on
one’s risk tolerance to place a small portion of one’s portfolio with an aggressive
trader such as Hawksbill. There are also individuals and institutional investors who
seek high returns and are willing to accept the risk entailed in achieving them.

55
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.3 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in November 1988, today it would

be worth $13,560,306.49.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

William Eckhardt
Eckhardt Trading Company
Began October 1991
CAROR 21.25 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

56

Bill Eckhardt is considered by many in the industry to be the Trend Following
Wizard. He was behind the Turtle Traders experiment with his high school friend,
Richard Dennis. The two were trading partners in C&D. They had a bet to see if trading could be taught. The two disagreed whether the skills of a successful trader could
be systematized into a group of rules. The Turtle program was overwhelmingly successful with novice traders ending up making $100 million. Eckhardt believed trading could not be taught and lost his bet with Dennis. After the closure of the Turtle
program, Bill Eckhardt founded ETC in 1991. ETC manages over $700 million in
managed accounts and both onshore and offshore funds. Eckhardt’s managed account
minimum is $10,000,000. Bill has been featured in various magazine articles as well as
most prominently in New Market Wizards by Jack Schwager. He is the chief architect of
ETC’s system development and ongoing research. There was a recent article in Futures
magazine with the title, “William Eckhardt: The man who launched 1,000 systems.”
He has traded futures professionally for over 31 years. Before he started trading he
spent four years doing doctoral research at the University of Chicago in mathematical
logic. He never lost his passion for mathematics and has even published in academic
journals. Even with all of his experience, Eckhardt still had drawdowns and extended
periods of elusive profits. His worst drawdown, which lasted for five months in late
1991, was 27 percent. He went through a 20‐month drawdown in 2008 till 2010 of
15 percent. The point is that drawdowns and durations happen to every trader and
