
221

JOHN BENDERS

with the markets and saw that they provided a challenging application for
his analytical skills.
Bender began trading his own account after graduation, but he had

only a few thousand dollars of risk capital. After a year, he was able to
raise $80,000 in financial backing. He traded this account from August
1989 through March 1995, averaging a compounded annual return of
187 percent during this period, with only three losing quarters, the worst
being an 11 percent decline.
After taking a sabbatical, Bender launched his fund in August 1996,
with returns over the subsequent three and a half years averaging 33
percent. Although still quite respectable, you might wonder what
caused this steep decline in returns relative to the performance in his
personal account in prior years. The answer is very simple: leverage.
For the fund, Bender reduced his leverage by a factor of approximately
4 to 1 (which because of the effect of monthly compounding reduced
the annual return by a greater amount), placing a strong emphasis on
risk control. To date, the fund's worst decline from an equity peak to a
subsequent low has been only 6 percent. In addition to managing hundreds of millions in his own fund, Bender also manages an undisclosed
allocation from the Quantum fund, for which he trades currency
options.
It is quite common for Market Wizards to use a portion of their substantial trading profits to support favorite charities or causes. I found one
of Bender's uses for his winnings particularly noteworthy for its originality, long-lasting impact, and hands-on directness in mitigating a problem
before the opportunity for action disappears: He is buying up thousands
of acres of the Costa Rican rain forest to protect this area from destruction by developers.
A day before leaving for New York City to conduct interviews for this
book, I learned that Bender was scheduled to be in the city at the same
time. Since he lives in Virginia, which is not near any of the other traders
I planned to interview, it seemed convenient to arrange a meeting on our
mutually coincident visit to New York. The only problem was that my
schedule was already booked solid. We decided to meet for a late dinner.
To simplify the logistics, Bender booked a room at my hotel.

D U E S T I O N I N G THE O B V I O U S

We met in our hotel lobby before leaving for dinner. It was an
extremely warm summer evening. Bender was wearing a suit and tie,
while I had considered substituting Dockers for jeans a sufficient concession to being dressed for dinner. Bender, who had made the reservations, expressed concern whether I would be allowed into the restaurant
dressed as I was and suggested calling to make sure. I assured him that
I usually did not encounter any problems because of my casual dress.
He seemed almost disappointed when this proved to be the case. As
the evening progressed, I became aware that Bender was clearly uncomfortable in his suit and tie, which was obviously atypical dress for him
as well, and somewhat envious of the fact that I had gotten away going
casual. His large frame seemed to strain in his more formal clothes.
The interview was conducted over a wonderful multicourse meal in
a sushi restaurant. We left nearly four hours later, just short of midnight, when we suddenly realized that we were the last remaining diners
and that the staff was milling about impatiently, waiting for us to depart.
We took a brief break upon returning to the hotel, I to visit my
orphaned wife, who had accompanied me to the city, and Bender to
check on trades on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in which his firm is a
heavy participant. When we met again in the hotel lobby fifteen minutes later, Bender was wearing shorts, a sloppy T-shirt, and a look of
relief at having been freed from his suit and tie. The interview finished
at three-thirty in the morning as the second of my three-hour tapes
rolled to an end.

What was your career goal in college?
My plan was to be a research physicist.
What area of physics were you interested in?
I majored in biophysics. One of the projects I spent a lot of time on
was trying to develop a method for displaying three-dimensional
information using a light microscope. When you look at very small
structures inside of a cell, you essentially have two choices: you can
look at them with an electron microscope or you can look at them
with a light microscope. If you use an electron microscope, you have

Q U E S T I O N I N G THE OBVIOUS

the advantage that it magnifies objects very well. The problem is that
you don't have any idea whether the cell you see bears any resemblance to what it looked like when it was alive because in order for
the image to show up, you first have to infuse the cell with heavy metals. I don't know about you, but I'm sure that if someone shot me and
placed me in a vat of molten lead, I wouldn't come out looking anything like what I look like. The method of observation changed the
object being observed. People would write papers saying that they had
found a new structure in a cell, but then it would turn out to be
merely an artifact of metal crystals precipitating inside the cell.
Everyone recognized the problem with using electron microscopes. Therefore the preferable approach was to try to use light
microscopes. The main problem with light microscopes, however, is
that when you use the extremely high magnification needed to look at
very small objects, the depth of field approaches zero. You can see one
flat slice in focus and everything else is out of focus, which makes it
very difficult to view three-dimensional objects. If you try to view
more than one layer, all you get is mud because the out-of-focus
information wins out. To circumvent this obstacle, we had to come up
with programs that would filter out the out-of-focus information. It's a
very interesting mathematical problem.
Why did you gravitate away from physics?
Physics was a lot of fun as a student. Everyone wants you to provide
research help. You get a chance to work on stuff you find interesting,
write research papers, and show everyone how smart you are. When
you are no longer a student, however, you have to support yourself in
the eyes of the institution, which means writing endless grant proposals and churning out papers for the main reason of getting tenure. You
end up spending 90 percent of your time not doing physics. I would
be busy working on physics all day while the other people in the lab
would be tearing their hair out writing grant proposals. I realized that
wasn't for me.
When did you first get interested in the market?
When I was growing up, I spent all my time thinking about math and
physics. I was a bit of a twisted kid. I started looking at the options

market as early as high school because I thought it was a fun way to
apply the mathematics I was learning.
When did you start trading?
In my senior year of college. The thing that I liked about trading was
that the only limitation you had was yourself.
What did you trade?
Stocks and stock options on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.
How did you end up trading on the floor?
I had a friend who was a market maker. I went down to the floor with
him a few times and decided it was a perfect job for me. I had always
been interested in the markets and mathematics, and option trading
combined the two perfectly.
How did you get the money to trade when you first started out on
the floor of the exchange?
I was able to raise $80,000 from a few backers who were professional
gamblers. Because 1 was a serious Go and backgammon player, 1 had
met some of the world's best backgammon and poker players. One of
my investors had just won the World Series of poker and another
investor was one of the most successful backgammon players in
world.
What did they get for backing you?
Initially, 50 percent of my profits. I eventually bought them out.
There are a lot of similarities between gambling and trading, although
gambling is a bad term.
Because?
Because it implies that your results depend on luck. The people that
I'm talking about look at poker or backgammon as a business, not a
game of chance. There are a few things that are essential to success
in both trading as well as playing gambling games as a business. First,
you have to understand edge and maximize your edge. Second, you
have to be able to deal with losing. For example, a world-ranked
backgammon player could lose $100,000 to a total pigeon because of
bad luck. If that happens, he can't lose his head. He has to stay calm
and continue to do what he is supposed to be doing. Third, you have
to understand gambler's ruin—not playing too big for your bankroll.

JOHN BENDER

It might seem that if you have an edge, the way to maximize the

edge is to trade as big as you can. But that's not the case, because of
risk. As a professional gambler or as a trader, you are constantly walking the line between maximizing edge and minimizing your risk of
tapping out.
How do you decide what is the right balance?
There is no single right answer to that question. It depends on the
individual person's risk tolerance. Let's say you saved up enough
money to live out your life in relative comfort but without the ability
to make extravagant expenditures. I come along and offer to give
you ten-to-one odds on the flip of a coin. The only catch is that you
have to bet your entire net worth. That bet has a tremendous edge,
but it is probably a bet that you wouldn't want to make, because the
value of what you can gain, even though it is a much larger sum of
money, is much less than the value of what you could lose. If, however, you are just out of college with $10,000 in savings and your
whole earnings career ahead of you, you would probably want to
take the same bet. As a fund manager, the correct answer as to how
to maximize your edge will depend not only on your own risk characteristics, but also on your perception of the risk profiles of your
investorsHow long did you trade on the floor of the Philadelphia stock
exchange?
Just over five years.

How did you do?
By the time 1 left, I had turned my initial $80,000 stake into over $7
million alter paying back my investors.
If you were doing so well, why did you leave the floor?
As I made more money, it became increasingly difficult to invest it
trading only two or three stocks; it made sense to go off the floor in
order to be able to diversify.
How have you been able to make such consistent gains trading
options?
To make money in options, you don't need to know what the price of
the stock is going to be; all you need to know is the probability distri-

bution [the probabilities of a stock being at different price levels at
the time of the option expiration].*
If the Almighty came to me and said, "I won't tell you where IBM
is going to be one month from now, but you've been a pretty good boy,
so I will give you the probability distribution," I could do the math—
and it's not very complicated math—and tell you exactly what every
option that expires on that date is worth. The problem is that the
Almighty is not giving me or anyone else the probability distribution
for the price of IBM a month from now.
The standard approach, which is based on the Black-Scholes formula, assumes that the probability distribution will conform to a normal curve [the familiar bell-shaped curve frequently used to depict
probabilities, such as the probability distribution of IQ scores among
the population]. The critical statement is that it "assumes a normal
probability distribution." Who ran out and told these guys that was
the correct probability distribution? Where did they get this idea?
[The Black-Scholes formula (or one of its variations) is the widely used
equation for deriving an option's theoretical value. An implicit assump*A probability distribution is simply a curve that shows the probabilities of some event
occurring—in this case, the probabilities of a given stock being at any price on the
option expiration date. The x-axis (horizontal line) shows the price of the stock. The
y-axis (vertical line) shows the relative probability of the stock being at different
prices. The higher the curve at any price interval, the greater the probability that the
stock price will be in that range when the option expires. The area under the curve in
any price interval corresponds to the probability of the stock being in that range on
the option expiration date. For example, if 20 percent of the area under the curve lies
between 50 and 60, it implies that there is a 20 percent chance of the stock being
between 50 and 60 on the option expiration date. As another example, if 80 percent
of the area under the curve corresponds to prices under 60, the 60 call option, which
gives the holder the right to buy the stock at 60, would have an 80 percent chance of
expiring worthless.
The shape of the probability distribution curve, which is a snapshot of the probabilities of prices being at different levels on the option expiration date, will determine
the option's value. The true shape of this curve is unknown, of course, and can only
be estimated. The assumptions made regarding the shape of this curve will be critical
in determining the value of an option. Two traders making different assumptions
about the shape of the probability distribution will come to two different conclusions
regarding an option's true value. A trader who is able to come up with a more accurate estimate of the probability distribution would have a strong edge over other
traders.

JOHN BENDER

tion in the formula is that the probabilities of prices being at different
levels at the time of the option expiration can be described by a normal
curve*—the highest probabilities being for prices that are close to the
current level and the probabilities for any price decreasing the further
above or below the market it is.]
A normal distribution would be appropriate if stock price movements were analogous to what is commonly called "the drunkard's
walk." If you have a drunkard in a narrow corridor, and all he can do is
lurch forward or backward, in order for his movements to be considered a random walk, the following criteria would have to be met:
1. He has to be equally likely to lurch forward as backward.
2. He has to lurch forward by exactly the same distance he lurches
backward.
3. He has to lurch once every constant time interval.
Those are pretty strict requirements. Not many variables meet
these conditions. Stock prices, I would argue, don't even come close
[substituting daily price changes for the drunkard's steps],
I don't mean to suggest that Black and Scholes made stupid
assumptions; they made the only legitimate assumptions possible, not
being traders themselves. In fact, they won the Nobel Prize for it.
Although, to be honest, that always seemed a bit strange to me
because all they used was high school mathematics. All my trading
operates on the premise that the most important part is the part that
Black-Scholes left out—the assumption of the probability distribution.
Why do you say with such assurance that stock prices don't even
come close to a random walk?
As one example, whether you believe in it or not, there is such a thing
as technical analysis, which tries to define support and resistance levels and trends. Regardless of whether technical analysis has any validity, enough people believe in it to impact the market. For example, if
people expect a stock to find support at 65, lo and behold, they're
willing to buy it at 66. That is not a random walk statement.
*See note in final section of this chapter.

Q U E S T I O N I N G THE OBVIOUS

I'll give you another example. Assume people get excited about
tech stocks for whatever reason and start buying them. Which funds
are going to have the best performance next quarter when mom-andpop public decide where to invest their money?—the tech funds.
Which funds are going to have the best inflows during the next quarter?—the tech funds. What stocks are they going to buy?—not airlines, they're tech funds. So the tech funds will go up even more.
Therefore they're going to have better performance and get the next
allocation, and so on. You have all the ingredients for a trend. Again,
this is not price behavior that is consistent with a random walk
assumption.

You've seen this pattern increasingly in the recent run-up in the
U.S. stock market. The rampant uptrend has been fueled by constant
inflows into the same funds that are buying the same stocks, driving
these stocks to values that are ridiculous by any historical valuation.
[See Michael Lauer's interview for another perspective on this same
phenomenon.] You have stocks that have reproduction values of $20
million—someone's Web page system—trading at $ 1 billion or more.
Are they really worth that? I don't want to be the one to say no—after
all, they are trading there—but I think ultimately you're going to see
the same thing you saw with RCA during the TV boom: a run-up to
stratospheric levels and then a crash.
If these companies do their job right and the Internet is what it's
supposed to be, with every company having access to every customer,
they're going to be cutting one another's margins to the point where
very few companies will make much money. If you pick up an issue of
The New Yorker, you can find twenty ads for booksellers on the Internet. It's a classic example of an industry with perfect competition.
There will be some exceptions because there are brand names and
some people will do their job better than others, but can the structure
support the valuations that are currently out there for the industry? I
doubt it.

Why are we seeing valuations for stocks that are so far above
their historical levels? Has something changed fundamentally?
Because of the repetitive cycle of price strength bringing in new buying, which causes more price strength. An important factor that has

JOilPBENDER

amplified the rally in the Internet stocks is the limited supply of
shares in these companies. Most Internet stocks float only about 20
percent or less of their shares.
Another major development during the past five to ten years has
been a substantial upward shift in the amount of money insurance
companies and pension funds allocate to stock investments. As hedge
fund managers, we think we are huge if we are trading one billion dollars. That is nothing compared with insurance companies and pension funds that have assets of trillions of dollars.
If I understand you correctly, your basic premise is that stock
price movements are not random and therefore the assumption
that prices are normally distributed, which everyone uses to
determine option values, cannot be the accurate mathematical
representation of the true market. Does that imply that you've
come up with an alternative mathematical option pricing model?
Not in the sense that you are probably thinking. It's not a matter of
coming up with a one-size-fits-all model that is better than the standard Black-Scholes model. The key point is that the correct probability
distribution is different for every market and every time period. The
probability distribution has to be estimated on a case-by-case basis.

If your response to Bender's last comment, which challenges the core
premises assumed by option market participants, could best be summarized as "Huh?," and assuming that you really care, then you should probably reread the explanation of probability distribution (footnote, page
227). In essence, Bender is saying that not only are conventional option
pricing models wrong because they make the unwarranted assumption
that prices are normally distributed, but the very idea that any single
model could be used to estimate option prices for different markets (or
stocks) is inherently wrong. Instead, it is necessary to use a different
model for every market (or stock).

How do you estimate the probability distribution?
By looking at everything from the fundamentals to technical factors to
who is doing what in the market. Each stock has its own probability

Q U E S T I O N I N G T H E OBfiflUS

distribution that depends on a host of factors: Who has what position? Where did the major buyers accumulate their positions? Where
are their stop-loss points? What price levels are likely to be technically significant?
Can you get that type of information reliably?
I get that information off the floors in the case of stocks and stock
options and from the banks in the case of currencies.
How do you turn information like who is doing what into an
alternative option pricing model?
The best example I can think of involves the gold market rather than
stocks. Back in 1993, after a thirteen-year slide, gold rebounded above
the psychologically critical $400 level. A lot of the commodity trading
advisors [money managers in the futures markets, called CTAs for
short], who are mostly trend followers, jumped in on long side of gold,
assuming that the long-term downtrend had been reversed. Most of
these people use models that will stop out or reverse their long positions if prices go down by a certain amount. Because of the large num• her of CTAs in this trade and their stop-loss style of trading, I felt that
a price decline could trigger a domino-effect selling wave. I knew
from following these traders in the past that their stops were largely a
function of market volatility. My perception was that if the marketwent back down to about the $390 level, their stops would start to get
triggered, beginning a chain reaction.
I didn't want to sell the market at $405, which is where it was at
the time, because there was still support at $400. I did, however, feel
reasonably sure that there was almost no chance the market would
trade down to $385 without setting off a huge calamity. Why?
Because if the market traded to $385, you could be sure that the
stops would have started to be triggered. And once the process was
under way, it wasn't going to stop at $385. Therefore, you could afford
to put on an option position that lost money if gold slowly traded
down to $385-$390 and just sat there because it wasn't going to happen. Based on these expectations, I implemented a strategy that
would lose if gold declined moderately and stayed there, but would
make a lot of money if gold went down huge, and a little bit of money
if gold prices held steady or went higher. As it turned out, Russia

JOHN BENDER

announced they were going to sell gold, and the market traded down
gradually to $390 and then went almost immediately to $350 as each
stop order kicked off the next stop order.
The Black-Scholes model doesn't make these types of distinctions. If gold is trading at $405, it assumes that the probability that it
will be trading at $360 a month from now is tremendously smaller
