
Oil
Crude oil is the largest of the global commodity markets and a finely balanced one at that. That
means even minor supply disruptions can send oil prices jumping higher, whereas excess supply
(seen in weekly inventory data) can send prices dropping quickly. Production disruptions from
turmoil in the Middle East/North Africa in early 2011 led to a sharp rise in oil prices, but gains
were prone to abrupt setbacks as fears periodically subsided. Oil demand is also a good indicator
of the global growth outlook, where upbeat views may inspire higher oil prices and vice versa.
Oil is usually priced in USD so there is a tendency for oil prices to trade inversely to the value of
the USD. This is especially apparent when the USD is in a weakening phase. But the real reason
oil and the USD are inversely correlated is that Middle East oil producers receive oil revenue in
USD, but their import purchases are mostly in EUR. If the USD weakens, their EUR purchasing
power declines, so they raise long-term oil prices to compensate.
Currencies of oil producing countries like Canada and Norway tend to strengthen alongside oil
prices, based on the improved outlook for domestic economic performance, but there’s no
guarantee that will always happen.

The best way to look at oil is as an inflation input and as a limiting factor on overall
economic growth. The higher the price of oil, the higher inflation is likely to be and the
slower an economy is likely to grow. The lower the price of oil, the lower inflationary
pressures are likely (but not necessarily) to be. Because the United States is a heavily energy-

dependent economy and also intensely consumer-driven, the United States typically stands to
lose the most from higher oil prices and to gain the most from lower oil prices. I like to factor
changes in the price of oil into my inflation and growth expectations, and then draw
conclusions about the course of the USD from them. Above all, oil is just one input among
many.

Stocks
Stocks are microeconomic securities, rising and falling in response to individual corporate results
and prospects, whereas currencies are essentially macroeconomic securities, fluctuating in
response to wider-ranging economic and political developments. As such, there is little intuitive
reason that stock markets should be related to currencies.
In recent years, however, risk sentiment (see the “Risk on or risk off?” section, earlier in this
section) has taken on greater significance in global markets, increasingly driving asset classes
from stocks and commodities to currencies and precious metals.
The paths of stocks and currencies typically intersect in two main ways. When risk is on, stocks
and risk currencies tend to rise, whereas safe haven assets like government bonds, USD, and JPY
tend to weaken. A good example of this is carry trades, where higher yielding currencies are
bought and lower yielding currencies are sold, for example buying AUD/JPY. As long as risk
sentiment stays positive, stocks and carry trades tend to appreciate. But if bad news hits and
investor sentiment turns sour, stocks and carry trades usually sell-off and the USD and JPY may
see a rebound as shorts are covered (this typically sees USD/JPY decline).
The other main crossroad between stocks and FX is more closely based on the value of the USD.
When the USD is weakening, U.S. stocks tend to benefit as the outlook for U.S. multinational
corporations’ profits will improve on more valuable foreign revenue. If the USD is weakening on
the prospect of easy Fed monetary policy, stocks may also benefit on the lower interest rate
outlook. At the same time, non-U.S. stocks may be more attractive to U.S.-based investors on
rising currency values.

But if the outlook for more accommodative Fed monetary policy is due to a deteriorating
economic outlook in the U.S., then risk sentiment is likely to be suffering and the USD may
actually benefit as stocks and commodities are sold and USD-shorts are bought back. As you
can see, circumstances do matter for how stocks and FX will interact.

Bonds
Fixed income or bond markets have a more intuitive connection to the forex market because
they’re both heavily influenced by interest rate expectations. However, short-term market

dynamics of supply and demand interrupt most attempts to establish a viable link between the two
markets on a short-term basis. Sometimes the forex market reacts first and fastest, depending on
shifts in interest rate expectations. At other times, the bond market more accurately reflects
changes in interest rate expectations, with the forex market later playing catch-up.

Overall, as currency traders, you definitely need to keep an eye on the yields of the
benchmark government bonds of the major-currency countries to better monitor the
expectations of the interest rate market. Changes in yield spreads, the difference between two
countries’ interest rates, exert a major influence on forex markets. (See Chapter 5 for more on
interest rates and currencies.)

U.S. Treasury yields tend to have a strong positive relationship with the direction of
USD/JPY. Japanese asset managers hold massive amounts of U.S. Treasury debt, and they
actively hedge the currency exposure. When U.S. yields rise, prices fall and the USD value of
U.S. debt holdings declines, meaning Japanese hedgers need to buy back USD they sold
earlier. The opposite happens when U.S. yields fall and bond prices rise. The effect is that
USD/JPY will frequently follow U.S. Treasury yields. (See more about trading USD/JPY in
Chapter 8.)

Getting Started with a Practice Account
For newcomers to currency trading, the best way to get a handle on what currency trading is all
about is to open a practice account at any of the online forex brokers. Most online forex brokers
offer practice accounts to allow you to experience the real-life price action of the forex market.
Practice accounts are funded with “virtual” money, so you’re able to make trades with no real
money at stake and gain experience in how margin trading works.

Interpreting your results realistically
Trading in a practice account is the 21st-century form of paper trading. Paper trading is writing
down trades on paper based on real-time market prices, but not having any real money at risk.
Practice accounts are a souped-up version of paper trading — you only have to click and deal, and
the trading platform does all the recording for you.
Whether you’re trading in an online forex practice account or paper trading on stock quotes from
the morning newspaper, be sure to keep in mind that your results aren’t real because you never had
any real money at stake.
Think of it this way: If you make a handshake bet with a friend on a football game, you’re probably
not going to be too concerned with whether you win or lose. You may not even watch the game. But

if you bet $50 or $100 on the game, you’re probably going to be watching the whole game and
cheering and yelling while you do. The difference: Your emotions come alive when real money is
on the line.
Practice accounts are a great way to experience the forex market up close and personal. They’re
also an excellent way to test-drive all the features and functionality of a broker’s platform.
However, the one thing you can’t simulate is the emotions of trading with real money. To get the
most out of your practice-account experience, you have to treat your practice account as if it were
real money, as much as you can.

Practice accounts give you a great chance to experience the minute-to-minute price movements of
the forex market. You’ll be able to see how prices change at different times of the day, as well as
how various currency pairs may differ from each other. Be sure to check out the action when major
news and economic data is released, so you can get a sense of how the forex market reacts to new
information.
In addition to witnessing how the forex market really moves, you can
Start trading in real market conditions without any fear of losing money.
Experiment with different trading strategies to see how they work.
Gain experience using different orders and managing open positions.
Improve your understanding of how margin trading and leverage work.
Start analyzing charts and following technical indicators.

Using a practice account while you read this book is a great way to experience many of the
ideas and concepts I introduce. If a picture is worth a thousand words, then a real-time
currency trading platform with constantly changing prices, market updates, and charting tools,
has to be worth a book. I like to think I’m pretty good at explaining how currency trading
works, but nothing beats being able to see it for yourself.

I recommend that you open practice accounts with a few different forex brokers, because
each trading platform has varying capabilities and functionalities. In addition, different
brokers have different trading policies, charting packages, and research offerings. Also, try to
get a feel for the level of customer support you’ll receive as a client.

Chapter 3

Who Trades Currencies? Meet the Players
In This Chapter
Understanding where currency rates come from
Stepping onto a trading floor
Hedging and investing through the forex market
Understanding that speculating is the name of the game
Managing foreign currency reserves
The forex market is regularly referred to as the largest financial market in the world based on
trading volumes. But this massive market was unknown and unavailable to most individual traders
and investors until the late 1990s.
That leaves a lot of people in the dark when it comes to exactly what the currency market is: how
it’s organized, who’s trading it, and why. In this chapter, I discuss how the FX market is structured
and who the major players are. Along the way, I clue you in to how they go about their business
and what it means for your trading in the currency market.
If you believe that information is the lifeblood of financial market trading, which I certainly do, I
think you’ll appreciate this guide to the movers and shakers of the currency market. When you have
a better understanding of who’s active in the FX market, you’ll be able to make better sense of
what you see and hear in the market.

The Interbank Market Is “The Market”
When people talk about the forex market, they’re usually referring to the interbank market,
whether they realize it or not. The interbank market is where the really big money changes hands.
Minimum trade sizes are one million of the base currency, such as €1 million of EUR/USD or $1
million of USD/JPY. Much larger trades of between $10 million and $100 million are routine and
can go through the market in a matter of seconds. Even larger trades and orders are a regular
feature of the market.
For the individual trading FX online, the prices you see on your trading platform are based on the
prices being traded in the interbank market.
The sheer size of the interbank market is what helps make it such a great trading market because

investors of every size are able to act in the market, usually without significantly affecting prices.
It’s one market where I would say size really doesn’t matter. I’ve seen spot traders be right with
million-dollar trades, and sophisticated hedge funds be wrong with half-billion-dollar positions.

Daily trading volumes are enormous by any measure, dwarfing global stock trading volumes
many times over. The most recent Bank of International Settlement (BIS) report, released in
2010, estimated daily FX trading volumes of nearly $4 trillion.

Getting inside the interbank market
So what is the interbank market, and where did it come from? The forex market originally evolved
to facilitate trade and commerce between nations. The leading international commercial banks,
which financed international trade through letters of credit and bankers’ acceptances, were the
natural financial institutions to act as the currency exchange intermediary. They also had the
foreign branch network on the ground in each country to facilitate the currency transfers needed to
settle FX transactions.
The result over years was the development of an informal interbank market for currency trading.
As the prefix suggests, the interbank market is “between banks,” with each trade representing an
agreement between the banks to exchange the agreed amounts of currency at the specified rate on a
fixed date. The interbank market is alternatively referred to as the cash market or the spot market
to differentiate it from the currency futures market, which is the only other organized market for
currency trading.
Currency futures markets operate alongside the interbank market, but they are definitely the tail
being wagged by the dog of the spot market. As a market, currency futures are generally limited by
exchange-based trading hours and lower liquidity than is available in the spot market.
The interbank market developed without any significant governmental oversight, and it remains
largely unregulated to this day. In most cases, there is no regulatory authority for spot currency
trading apart from local or national banking regulations. Interbank trading essentially evolved
based on credit lines between international banks and trading conventions that developed over
time.
The big commercial banks used to rule the roost when it came to currency trading, whereas
investment banks remained focused more on stocks and bonds. But the banking industry has
undergone a tremendous consolidation over the last 20 years, as bank merger after bank merger
has seen famous names subsumed into massive financial conglomerates. Today it’s hard to even
think of the major banks as either commercial banks or investment banks, such has been the
expansion of their trading operations.
While banks formed the core of the interbank market for decades, nonbank financial institutions,

like hedge/pension/mutual funds, steadily increased their activity in the forex market. The
proliferation of electronic trading technology in recent years has only increased the market
presence of these firms. And in 2010, for the first time ever, the BIS survey of FX trading volume
showed nonbank financial firms surpassed traditional banks’ FX trading volume. Nonbanks FX
trading volumes surged 42 percent from 2007 levels of $1.3 trillion to $1.9 trillion in 2010. Still,
the interbank market continues to serve as the primary liquidity provider to the broader forex
market. There are just more nonbank players adding to the overall pool of liquidity.

Bank to bank and beyond
The interbank market is a network of international banks operating in financial centers around the
world. The banks maintain trading operations to facilitate trading for their own accounts, called
proprietary trading, or just prop trading for short, and to provide currency trading services for
their customers. Banks’ customers can range from corporations and government agencies to hedge
funds and wealthy private individuals.

Trading in the interbank market
The interbank market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market, which means that each trade is an
agreement between the two counterparties to the trade. There are no exchanges or guarantors for
the trades, just each bank’s balance sheet and the promise to make payment.
The bulk of spot trading in the interbank market is transacted through electronic matching services,
such as EBS and Reuters Dealing. Electronic matching services allow traders to enter their bids
and offers into the market, hit bids (sell at the market), and pay offers (buy at the market). Price
spreads vary by currency pair and change throughout the day depending on market interest and
volatility.
The matching systems have prescreened credit limits, and a bank will only see prices available to
it from approved counterparties. Pricing is anonymous before a deal, meaning you can’t tell which
bank is offering or bidding, but the counterparties’ names are made known immediately after a
deal goes through.
The major international FX trading banks have all deployed electronic trading platforms that
function via the Internet, enabling their customers to bypass banks’ trading desks and deal directly
in the market, potentially accessing more advantageous prices. Electronic trading also facilitates
algorithmic or system trading, which has also contributed to the recent surge in trading volumes.
Concrete numbers are hard to come by, but conservative estimates put the amount of algorithmic
trading at around 25 to 30 percent of total daily volume.

Stepping onto a currency trading floor
Interbank trading rooms are staffed by a variety of different market professionals and each has a

different role to play. The typical currency trading room has
Flow traders: Sometimes called execution traders, these are the market-makers, showing
two-way prices at which to buy and sell, for the bank’s customers. If the customer makes a
trade, the execution trader then has to cover the resulting deal in the interbank market,
hopefully at a profit. These traders are also responsible for watching and executing
customer orders in the market. These are the traders who are generating most of the
electronic prices and price action.
Proprietary traders: These traders are focused on speculative trading for the bank’s own
account. Their strategies can run the gamut from short-term day trading to longer-term
macroeconomic bets.
Forward traders: Forward traders are active in the forward currency market, which
refers to trades made beyond the normal spot value date. The forward market is
essentially an interest rate differential market, where the interest rates of the various
currencies are traded. These traders provide the bank’s customers with pricing for nonspot deals or currency swap agreements. They also manage the bank’s interest rate
exposure in the various currencies.
Options traders: Options traders manage the bank’s portfolio, or book, of outstanding
currency options. They hedge the portfolio in the spot market, speculate for the bank’s
own account with option strategies, and provide pricing to the bank’s customers on
requested option strategies.

Hedgers and Financial Investors
The forex market sits at the crossroads of global trade and international finance and investing.
Whether it’s a U.S. conglomerate managing its foreign affiliates’ balance sheets or a German
mutual fund launching an international stock fund, they all have to go through the forex market at
some point.
Participants in the forex market generally fall into one of two categories: financial transactors and
speculators. Financial transactors are active in the forex market as part of their overall business
but not necessarily for currency reasons. For instance, an electric utility operator in the United
States may need EUR to buy a German-made turbine for a new generator. Speculators are in it
purely for the money.
The lion’s share of forex market turnover comes from speculators. BIS data suggest that nearly 90
percent of daily FX trading volume is based solely on speculation. I look at the types and roles of
speculators in the “Speculators” section of this chapter, but here I want to introduce the players
who are active in the forex markets for nonspeculative reasons.

Financial transactors are important to the forex market for several reasons:
Their transactions can be extremely sizeable, typically hundreds of million or billions.
Their deals are frequently one-time events.
They are generally not price sensitive or profit maximizing.

Add up those reasons and you’re looking at potentially very large, one-off trading flows that
are not really concerned with where the current market is trading or which way it’s headed.
They enter the market to do their deal and then they’re gone, which can introduce an element
of market inefficiency that can allow traders to take advantage of counter-trend movements.

Hedging your bets
Hedgers come in all shapes and sizes, but don’t confuse them with hedge funds. (Despite the
name, a hedge fund is typically 100 percent speculative in its investments.)
Hedging is about eliminating or reducing risk. In financial markets, hedging refers to a transaction
designed to insure against an adverse price move in some underlying asset. In the forex market,
hedgers are looking to insure themselves against an adverse price movement in a specific currency
rate.

Hedging for international trade purposes
One of the more traditional reasons for hedging in the forex market is to facilitate international
trade. Let’s say you’re a widget maker in Germany and you just won a large order from a UKbased manufacturer to supply it with a large quantity of widgets. To make your bid more attractive,
you agreed to be paid in British pounds (GBP).
But because your production cost base is denominated in euros (EUR), you face the exchange rate
risk that GBP will weaken against the EUR. That would make the amount of GBP in the contract
worth fewer EUR back home, reducing or even eliminating your profit margin on the deal. To
insure, or hedge, against that possibility, you would seek to sell GBP against EUR in the forex
market. If the pound weakened against the euro, the value of your market hedge would rise,
compensating you for the lower value of the GBP you’ll receive. If the pound strengthens against
the euro, your loss on the hedge is offset by gains in the currency conversions. (Each pound would
be worth more euros.)
Trade hedgers follow a variety of hedging strategies and can utilize several different currency
hedging instruments. Currency options can be used to eliminate downside currency risk and
sometimes allow the hedger to participate in advantageous price movements. Currency forward

transactions essentially lock in a currency price for a future date, based on the current spot rate
and the interest rate differentials between the two currencies.
Trade-related hedging regularly comes into the spot market in two main forms:
At several of the daily currency fixings: The largest is the London afternoon fixing,
which takes place each day at 4 p.m. local time, which corresponds to 11 a.m. eastern
time (ET). The Tokyo fixing takes place each day at 8:55 a.m. Tokyo time, which
corresponds to 6:55 p.m. eastern time (ET). A fixing is a process sponsored by an
exchange or central bank where commercial hedgers submit orders to buy or sell
currencies in advance. The orders are then filled at the prevailing spot rate (the rate is
fixed) at the time of the fixing.
The difference between the amount of buying and selling orders typically results in
a net amount that needs to be bought or sold in the market prior to the fixing time. On some
days, this can see large amounts (several hundred million dollars to a billion dollars, or
more) being bought or sold in the hour or so leading up to the fixing time. After the fix, that
market interest has been satisfied and disappears. Month-end and quarter-end fixings
typically see the largest amounts.
Short-term traders need to closely follow live market commentaries to see when
there is a substantial buying or selling interest for a fixing.
Mostly in USD/JPY, where Japanese exporters typically have large amounts of
USD/JPY to sell: Japanese exporters typically receive dollars for their exports, which
must then be converted into JPY (sell USD/buy JPY). The Japanese export community
tends to be closely knit and their orders are likely to appear together in large amounts at
similar levels. Again, real-time market commentaries are the most likely source for
individual traders to hear about Japanese exporter selling interest.
