
E)(tremeKy2 -2665,55

always. But it is worth the effort to study all you can because you can

,i^k.,k,J*.J,.n

now understand what it is like to fall in step for even a brief period.
F

M

A

M

J

Figure 10.27
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

Once you experience this flow and harmony, it becomes an
addiction. You will easily become motivated to work hard to find
the next sonata that may grow beyond just the notes within a chart.

3 3 6 • CALCULATING M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle * 3 3 7

triangle. It was not a three-wave structure if you wondered about it

over the last few days.

made more difficult to see by a sprawling fourth-wave contracting

has its own strengths and weaknesses. We have seen both illustrated

rally may have bothered some people as thefive-wavestructure is

the ElHott Wave Principle is clearly a viable technical method that

developed. In Figure 10.18 there is a Zigzag rally. Wave c in this

more potential than you first thought? I cannot convert anyone, but

ket scenario, and I tried to squeeze past the first triangle when it

and your accountant's. Might not the Elhott "Piano" have a bit

We actually had two triangle examples in our real-time mar-

The right notes in perfect harmony can become music to your ears,

some people.

have tremendous problems with this pattern because it is common

fourth wave was indeed a triangle, and that might have confused

contracting triangle in a short-horizon DMK/$ chart. Most people

have had to compress the data to make it very obvious that the

most common way this pattern develops. Figure 10.28 displays a

is actually wave c' of four in this small five-wave advance. I would

Figure 10.24. The pattern that developed in the DJIA is in fact the

three-wave decline that is just prior to the high marked wave c up

tunity to discuss both patterns. We encountered a small triangle in

Zigzag was complete, confirming the pattern. In Figure 10.18 the

However, the daily S&P 500 data will provide us with ample oppor-

at the time. Also the market cleariy fell to new price lows when the

There are two patterns remaining that we have not discussed.

a three-wave structure. Case closed. No exceptions. If any of the

the orthodox high.

single leg you label as one of the swings within a triangle must he

frequently produce a wave b second leg that breaks the origin of

is called wave a-b-c-d-e. That too is easy. Here's the catch. Every

illustrate this pattern. However, markets are permitted to and will

develop within a triangle pattern. That part is easy. Each swing

triangle pattern in Figure 10.28 is the pattern most books use to

industry to illustrate a common error. Suppose that five swings

show a perfect pennant formation. A dotted line in the contracting

triangles. I say this because there are so many examples in our

that most illustrations in books that show line charts nearly always

There is in the industry a lot of misunderstanding about

for wave b to exceed the origin of wave a. The problem might be

waves in your triangle has five waves, it is not a triangle. The most
Contracting Triangle

Expanding Triangle

abused market in recent years was the weekly chart data for the
U.S. T-Bonds. Most people used the outer dimensions of a contracting price structure to suggest that a contracting triangle was
forming. If you go back to look at these wave interpretations, you
will find afive-wavepattern in the first wave position. That should
have been an early warning that this market was not developing
a bullish contracting triangle. When the second wave became
a five-wave pattern, it ruled out the possibility that the market

Figure 10.28

338

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 3 3 9

f o r m i n g on market news. W h i l e it can happen, it does not have to

a triangle.

Expect this because it happens often. A lot is said about wave Es

was f o r m i n g a bearish c o n t r a c t i n g triangle. Bonds d i d n o t f o r m

a t i m e projection for resolution of the pattern. T h e intersection of

pattern for their first wave.

this pattern to end. It is the m a x i m u m a m o u n t of t i m e allowed, not

is h o w people got caught on the w r o n g side: they used a five-wave

these two exterior trend lines converge marks the t i m e allowed for

T h e resolution f r o m wave B up w o u l d be a wave C decline. T h a t

highs and higher lows to mark a projected intersection. W h e r e

decline, and then a bearish triangle w i l l develop to f o r m wave B up.

be complete is to extend the converging trend lines of the lower

is a distinct five-wave pattern, it can be used as wave A , let's say for a

be the cause. O n e way to determine where the triangle pattern must

W h e n the first leg of what is thought to be a contracting triangle

I n a triangle the first leg d o w n is generally sharp. T h a t is why the

these two trend lines is the apex of a pennant chart pattern.

thrust must occur before the market exceeds the apex of the pat-

make a new h i g h .

w i l l explode i n what we call a " t h r u s t " out of the triangle. T h e

that the market wants to preserve. Wave B up is then p e r m i t t e d to

ket for the next move. A t the c o m p l e t i o n of the pattern, the market

triangle i f a Z i g z a g decline f r o m the h i g h is the correct pattern

T h e triangle is a c o i l i n g pattern b u i l d i n g energy w i t h i n a mar-

current decline i n the D J I A may develop into only a long-horizon

of your o r i g i n a l expectations.

is well k n o w n that wave D may not break below wave C . D o not

w i l l produce a thrust out of the pattern i n the opposite direction

T h i s is also displayed i n Figure 10.28. I n a contracting triangle, it

that is just one leg o f f is c o i l i n g i n the opposite d i r e c t i o n , and it

wave a. I f it does, you have to consider an e x p a n d i n g triangle.

leg of your triangle is not part of the o r i g i n a l structure. A triangle

a contracting triangle, wave C may not break the t e r m i n a t i o n of

to be f o r m i n g . There may be a larger triangle, or perhaps the first

it comes back to f o r m another leg i n the complex structure. I n

solidation, the pattern is not developing the triangle you believed

most t i m e to develop, and every t i m e y o u t h i n k it is complete,

tern. I f the market crosses t h r o u g h the apex and it is still i n a con-

Wave C w i t h i n a t r i a n g l e is very sneaky. I t usually takes the

2.618 swing relationships. T h e n project these ratios f r o m the ter-

determine stop placement.

the market i n wave B, and t h e n calculate 0.618, 1.00, 1.618, and

C i n a bearish triangle). Use another price projection m e t h o d to

can make a price projection. Measure the distance traveled by

page exposure for stops below wave C is horrendous (above wave

O n c e the market has developed a thrust out of this pattern, you

put your stops just below wave C for this very reason! T h e slip-

we address the longer horizon analysis.

kets are frequently a last leg d o w n that w i l l throw o f f your t i m i n g .

degree best fits this fourth-wave correction w i l l be deferred u n t i l

T h e y are hard to identify. Be aware that wave Es i n financial mar-

not considered the larger picture for this market. D e c i d i n g w h i c h

f o r m their o w n contracting pattern, w h i c h can be very confusing.

i n Figure 10.29 is simply called a " f o u r t h wave" because we have

relationship relative to wave B. Wave Es, on the other h a n d , may

m i n a t i o n of wave E. T h e resolution of the triangle interpretation

Wave D is not as tricky because it frequently forms a Fibonacci

340

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 341

can be defined. I would also argue about the placement of wave b
up in this chart. But whether or not this structure is a triangle will
have no impact on the larger issue. The debate over this pattern was
ended once and for all when the decline that developed in April and
May 1998 moved the RSI only to the 40 to 45 range for this indicator.
That is a decline within a bull market based on the range rules
defined in Chapter 1. Case closed. If you viewed indicator signals as
more important evidence than wave structure, the only conclusion
that you could derive would be that the market needed to develop
afifth-waveadvance from the June lows.
It should be noted that those in favor of the triangle scenario were
Figure 10.29
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

forced to use the choppy shructure into the high marked wave "5?"
as the end of the advancefiromthe resolution of the triangle. When
a fifth wave cannot exceed the third wave in a developing five-wave

10.29. We will discuss this analytic technique in the next chapter.

at this wave structure now in Figure 10.29.

The RSI has an upper and lower volatility band displayed in Figure

not. In Figure 10.10 the data is compressed. Let's take a closer look

on its own. Elliott wave structure by itself is deadly in my opinion.

ary 1998. The debate concerned whether a triangle had formed or

cators made the more accurate call compared to using wave structure

over the price structure that developed from August 1997 to Janu-

case. Both interpretations correctly called for a decline. But the indi-

there was a great debate within the S&P Elliott wave community

structure, it is called a failure. It failed to make a new high in this

When we discussed Figure 10.10, we briefly mentioned that

triangle pattern: the diagonal triangle, or rising wedge.

called wave b' up. That could end the prior advance. Therefore,

To discuss the first wave, we need to look at a distant cousin of the

on the right, and you will have a five-wave pattern into the high

"Where is the first wave and from what price low does it begin?"

daily S&P 500 futures chart. Move wave a' over to the adjacent low

If afive-waveadvance developed, it raises a significant question:

There are several ways to label this triangle in the middle of the

develop in wave positions 4, B, and x only, the diagonal triangle

not matter how you interpret each wave. A valid three-wave swing

steam, so to speak. While a contracting and expanding triangle will

Each wave within this structure is a three-wave pattern, and it does

at the end of a larger trend when the market is running out of

with much better proportions, but it does not change the outcome.

tern that formed in a financial market. These patterns will occur

first leg. It will not change the debate. I can give you a triangle

In Figure 10.30 we have an actual bullish diagonal triangle pat-

this triangle can have a sprawled-out first wave a down or a sharp

342 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Bullish Diagonal Triangle

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 343

Bearish Diagonal Triangle

h ttp ://ww w. aeroin ves t .com

Aerodynamic Investments Inc ^
F i g u r e 10.30

will develop only in wave 5 or C. The internals are similar in both

'J

Source:

ture. Waves 1, 3, and 5 in a textbook environment will develop

F i g u r e 10.31

patterns since each swing or leg will develop a three-wave struc-

'J

>

's

'o

W

b • • '98 " V • W

'A " W ' V

''j

TradeStatlon. © TradeStation Technologies

Zigzag patterns. Do not get hung up looking for Zigzags in a real

chop your trading account into shreds so that you end up trading the

returns to the origin of the wedge.

pattern will save a trader a lot of money. This pattern in real life can

wedges will end. Once the pattern is complete, the market rapidly

declining slope between each successive impulsive wave within this

that you use a guide to help determine where these rising or falling

for the fifth wave relative to the third. The three lines displaying a

when the exterior trend lines converge. What is more important is

your third wave in the wedge is not complete. The same can be said

choppy, they will do. The wedge shape should be quite apparent

forward. If your third wave has a slope that is steeper than your first,

market environment. As long as the price structure internals are

market declines back to the wave iv in June 1997, which is the start

declining slope of each line gives the impression that they are falling

You can see that the resolution from this pattern is sharp, and the

of these lines. They are progressively becoming less steep, and the

asterisks to mark waves that form a rising diagonal triangle pattern.

connect the start and end of each impulsive wave. Look at the slope

structure to the left in 1997 that defines wave v of 5. There are five

triangle. You will find three lines in the bearish diagonal pattern to

explanation. We will come back to this in a moment. First look at the

been horizontallyflippedso that I could illustrate a bearish diagonal

ter interpretation. This chart shows a five-wave pattern that needs

data displayed in the falling wedge that ended a market decline have

chart as displayed in Figure 10.29. However, Figure 10.31 is the bet-

prematurely thinking it is complete. Here's a useful guide: The same

In Figure 10.31 we are viewing the same daily S&P 500 futures

ronment because an error can easily be made in the third wave by

final resolution poorly. The slope is the key to surviving this pattern.

Tracking these patterns can be very tricky in a real-time envi-

3 4 4 • CALCULATING M A R K E T PRICE OB)ECTIVES

of the wave v diagonal that later ends in August 1997. This is the pat-

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 3 4 5

three-wave structures for each wave in a termination pattern. How-

wave building blocks are cataloged. The 13 patterns are:

interpretation shown in Figure 10.31. A diagonal triangle forms

pattern is quietly mentioned when all the patterns of the Elliott

It is pattern number 5 in this list that is the key to the chart

every single one except number 5 in the list that follows. The fifth

Patterns 12 and 13 are just complex corrections that use connected corrective building blocks together in a group. We will look
at these in a moment.

There are 13 Elliott wave patterns, and we have discussed or used

tern that always marks the end of a trend and leads to a correction.

ever, there is another wedge pattern. It is the diagonal triangle type

strates a diagonal triangle in the first wave position that ends into

Leading diagonal triangle (wedge)

only one of two positions; wave 1 or wave A. Figure 10.31 demon-

4. Ending diagonal triangle (wedge)

except this pattern must be a distinct wedge, and it is permitted in

3. Truncated fifth wave or failure

wave breaks the top of wave 1. Is that not a rule violation? Yes,

2. An extendingfive-wavepattern

2, or the leading wedge. The internals are 5-3-5-3-5, and the fourth

1. A simplefive-wavepattern

5.

bonds because bonds generally are slow to establish a new trend.

9. Expanded Flat

However, you will find that this pattern develops more often in

8. Flat

rencies and equity indices and should be used only in hindsight.

7. Double Zigzag

the market high of December 1997. It is a rare pattern within cur-

6. Zigzag

the prior range are demonstrated once again. However, the indica-

13. Triple threes

new low, so the guidelines we discussed that an oscillator will test

12. Double threes

1 through 3. The low at point 3 is equal to point 1. Point 2 makes a

Expanding triangle

11.

In Figure 10.31 the RSI indicator has three oscillator lows marked

10. Contracting triangle

tor level cleariy warns that the bull market is leading into a fifth
Pattern 3 in this list is the fifth-wave failure when wave 5 is

wave, which negates the triangle.

The minimum is three complete patterns, and the puzzle pieces

a failure for Figure 10.29.

any three complete corrective patterns that follow one another.

situations are often forming fifth-wave failures. We had to consider

these last two patterns to be highlighted. A double three is just

new high as S&P futures fail to form a new high. Futures in these

10.23, but it turned into another Zigzag. So Figure 10.32 allows

in intraday data. The reverse is also common: The Cash makes a

nario. We were close—I thought we had one developing in Figure

when the Cash S&P makes a new low when the futures do not

complex patterns did not develop in our real-time market sce-

used more often than truncated. It is a common trading signal

In the list that cataloged the 13 Elliott wave patterns, the two

unable to exceed the termination of wave 3. The term failure is

346 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Double Threes

Triple Threes

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 347

a standard two-dimensional board. However, the analysis work is not
two dimensional. It is synonymous with playing chess on a threedimensional board. I would use the indicator signals from underlying
components within the S&P 500 Index in conjunction with global
equity indices and the key financial markets of Currencies, Bonds,
and Gold. The balance between indicators and wave structure must
balance in my three-dimensional game of chess. When they align
and you see the pattern as a three-dimensional model, you have

Figure 10.32

something to get excited about. I will not go into great detail about

will be constructed from Flats, Triangles, and Zigzag patterns.
Figure 10.31 shows another real-life example as wave 4 is a complex double three.
A common error made within our industry can be discussed
from the double three chart in Figure 10.32. If wave x up were
higher than wave b, which is at the price high, would it still be wave
X? No. How do you know that the market is not forming a Flat or
Expanded Flat? Waves a-b-c would be labeled wave A, and the x
wave would become wave B in a larger pattern. You would then
have to see afive-wavepattern develop in the market to complete
the Flat or Expanded Flat pattern. Wave x's into new highs or lows
are usually wrong wave counts. I'm not saying they will never occur,
but I have not used an x into a new high or low for any time horizon
or financial market within the last six years. That means it is far
more rare than the elusive leading diagonal triangle.

how to take the information we have just covered up to yet another
level by showing you a three-dimensional model. It could easily be
done, but that's why people pay me for my market opinion, so I'm not
going to be stupid and give everything away But I did promise that I
would show you why I had a bullish outlook for equities by utilizing
the Wave Principle when others had a different view.
First, you know I construct wave counts from indicator signals,
not just from price data structure. That alone will lead to conclusions and market interpretations that are different from those of
conventional Elliott wave practitioners. But I also construct my
larger market opinions from components within an Index rather
than depending totally on indicator signals developing from the
Index itself Let me show you.
The S&P 500 Index is made up of 500 stocks, but most stocks
within the Index have no weighted significance in terms of the
actual movement of the Index itself In fact, there are numerous S6'P
Sectors within the Index that have no weighted significance on the

Long-Term Analysis

future movement of the Index. In Figure 10.33 you will see that 19
cent within the S&P 500 Index. In addition, 12 stocks make up 21.27

of chess, I would refer to that market decline as a game of chess using

S&P Sectors contribute an underlying weighted value of 58.58 per-

If the S&P decline we tracked together in this chapter were a game

348

•

C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

I AEKODYNAMIC INVESTMENTS INC
htti>://www.«erolnve«tc<iin

r

Sector

5 33%

A|>ill 199B US Equity Index Summaiy

SW SOD IndeK
(Sector Subset) % »f S i P (stock) % of S&P I

Financials 16.03%
Mjr. Reg Bank 5.08%
Money Ctr Banks 2.99%
Techr\ology 15.68%
Computer (hrdw 8. Soft) B,B1%

Consumer Staples 14.38%

Beverages (non)

2.92%

Consumer Discr.
Foods 2.57%
Household Prds 2 14%

Health Care 10.39%

Capital Goods 9.74%

Russell
2000

Nasdaq
100

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 3 4 9

The underlying components of the Index change. A market leader
with significant weighting within the Index today may be less influential in a year's time. Therefore, to base all your analytic work on
the Index itself is the same as swimming in an ocean and never

13.40%
IBM 1.44%
INTC 2.17%
IV1SFT 2.27%

1 52%

MO

1 27%

PG

2 02%

KQ

68.94%

looking for a shark or barracuda passing under the surface that
could ruin your day.

2.80%

When you consider that Energy and Computer Technology

16.00%

alone contribute an underlying weighting of 25 percent to the
S&P 500 Index, you can see why Figure 10.26 had the A M E X

in your index, you have a higher probability of being right. So I

Hth Care (Drugs) 4.41%

computer screen. If you know 25 percent of the underlying weight

0 17%
4 05%

BioTechnology
Health Care (Div)

143%

Tobacco

Aerospace/Def 1.21%
Elect. Equip 4.21%

Manuf. Diversified 2,29%
Consumer Cyclicals 9.27%
Autos 1.77%
Producer Durables
n/a
Energy 9.00%
International Integrated B.41%
Communications 5.96%
Industhals
Basic Materials

Utilities 3.06%
Transportation
Other

Telephone

PFE
MRK

9 90%

Composite Indices for Computer Technology and Energy on my
3.08%

1.06%
1.59%

analyze 20 S&P Sectors that have nearly a 60 percent weighting
and align their wave patterns and indicator signals to construct a

216%
1.62%

mN
RD

3.04%

GE

wave interpretation for the Index. I use the same approach then

underlying weightings of these individual indices. Finally, you can
