
THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

40

FIGURE 3-6

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

market is when the market begins to bracket or consolidate creating equal
highs and equal lows for a period of time (see Figure 3-7). What if you were
just starting out and the market began to go sideways, or consolidate, as
shown in Figure 3-7. Just about every time the computer gave a buy signal,
the market went south, and just about every time the computer gave a sell
signal, the market reversed and went north. When most people board an
airplane and look inside the cockpit, they are intimidated by all the gauges
they see. They say to themselves, “I could never do that.” But the reality is,
they could. How do I know? I used to say the same thing when I boarded
those same planes, and I am proud to report that I received my private
pilot’s license back in 1984. Just like when I turned on my computer back
in the 1980s and looked at charts, I, too, was extremely intimidated. But
believe it or not, sideways movement can potentially offer the trader more
trading opportunities than trends. Envision buying all the lows as seen in
Figure 3-7 and exiting at the highs and then reversing your position,
shorting the market by selling all the highs taking a ride across the trading
channel and exiting at the lows. It is clear to see by continually repeating
this process that there is profit to be made.

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

FIGURE 3-7

41

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

USING INDICATORS TO DETERMINE EXIT STRATEGIES
When going long in the market or buying first to enter the market, every
buy entry order needs two sell exit orders, one for profit and one for loss.
Conversely, when going short or selling first to enter the market, every sell
entry order needs two buy exit orders, one for profit and one for loss. After
you enter the market, you need the two exit points, one for profit and one
for financial protection should the trade not work out. The fact of the matter is that no one knows where the next pip will go. The best you can do is
to understand how the market works and learn how to go with it. It’s like
navigating in the ocean—it can be predictable at times and very unpredictable at others. But success comes to those who understand how it
works—just look at the people who have been able to create great companies that haul freight, passengers, or oil over the ocean.
After the market has moved in your direction from entry, as planned,
the question is where do you get out? The last thing in the world you want
to do is guess what the market is going to do next. Let a simple mathematical calculation of price movement against time tell you instead.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

42

You can use your indicators to make your exit decisions as well. Remember
the two indicators—the moving trend lines that are overlapping the candles
and the MTI Trend Tracker at the bottom of the chart? If you take a long
position and want to become a long-term trader, you may want to stay in
until the moving trend lines cross over. However, if you only want to grab a
few pips, and you entered using the indicator below, you may want to get
out after that line has moved from the south to the north and is beginning to
U-turn back south (see Figure 3-8).
Some traders use the movement of their indicators as their protective
stop loss orders—they let the indicators make their decisions regarding
when to reverse their positions. I don’t recommend this, because you are
letting your emotions make your decisions. How? If you do not have a
clearly defined exit point, you will get caught up in the “hope and fear trap.”
Once the market moves against you, and you are relying on the indicator to
tell you what to do to get out with a small loss, well, guess what? Your hope
and or fear will get the best of you. The best place to put your protective

FIGURE 3-8

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

43

stops are a little beyond the latest major level of support or the last low if
going long and a little beyond the latest major level of resistance or the last
high if going short. What is critical is finding and calculating where your protective stop order needs to go as you are making your trading plan. Once you
find that location, after you enter the market, place that order immediately
and do not move it if you are trading an OCO (one cancels the other) order.
Trading is about keeping your losses small and letting your profits run.
The problem with most Forex traders is they hold onto their losses and
quickly dump their profits for fear the market will take them back. They
have the definitions of hope and fear backwards. They will hold a losing
position for days, sweating it out, walking through the valley in the shadow
of death, praying, hoping, promising God and everyone else that will listen
to just help them get back to breakeven and once they do, they dump their
position after only capturing a few pips. Some traders will go 300 pips in
the red to only exit after a brutal ordeal and capture only 2 pips.
Learning where to place your protective stop loss orders and creating a
trading plan before you trade is of critical importance as a novice trader.
Below are some trading tips for novice traders;
●

Keep your exit strategy simple and never risk more than you are
willing to make.

●

Trade using smaller time frames—perhaps 30-minute, 15-minute, or
10-minute time frames. Trade a simple strategy with a clear entry
order accompanied by two exit orders trying to capture a profit of
perhaps 10 to 20 pips. That is $10 to $20 in profit on a mini
($10,000) account and $100 to $200 on a regular ($100,000)
account.

●

As a beginner trader, you want to set a goal of trading 7 out of 10
times successfully, making more money than you lose by trading on
smaller time frames, before moving to larger time frames. Your aim
should be to establish the habit of winning more than you are losing.
After you get in the habit of winning more than losing, and realizing
that losing is just as much a part of this game as winning, you will
then be able to move to a larger time frame to capture more pips,
perhaps capturing 40 to 80 pips at a time, consistently, 7 out of
10 times with some losses.

●

The most important part of this process is forming successful trading
habits. After you get the simple basics down of winning more than
losing, you can start learning more advanced exit strategies.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

44

USING MULTIPLE TIME FRAMES TO TRADE
As you look at multiple time frames, always remember that the movements
on the smaller time frames are controlled by the movements on the larger
time frames. Take two different time frames, for example, a daily time
frame and a four-hour time frame, using the same MTI Trend Scalper trading system on both time frames.
Remember the MTI Trend Tracker at the bottoms of the charts, which
monitors the wave movement? Look what happens to the price movement on
a four-hour chart when the indicator U-turns on a daily chart, as seen in
Figure 3-9. The prices U-turned on the four-hour chart, didn’t they? Remember, prices on a smaller time frame respond to the movement on a larger time
frame. This works the same on all time frames and is a great way to trade.

CONCLUSION
All successful traders create a trading plan and trade their plan. After you
create a trading plan, cross-check it with the MTI “Grade Your Trade
FIGURE 3-9

EUR/USD Charts

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

FIGURE 3-10

45

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

Checklist,” The MTI “Grade Your Trade Checklist” allows you to attach
percentages to the probability of success of your trade. The MTI checklist
cross-checks important points for your entry and exit. These seven points
are graded, indicating the odds of your making money, and include the
use of indicators, candlestick formations, Fibonacci (Fib) numbers, countertrend lines, and more.
Trading needs to be fun and simple. Anyone who tries to impress
you with all their knowledge and indicators (see Figure 3-10) will only
confuse you.
A confused mind is going to take you down a path of financial destruction. Stay clear from using too many indicators or complicated indicators.
Keep it simple!

This page intentionally left blank

C

4

H

A

P

T

E

R

TRADING
JAPANESE
CANDLESTICKS
HARTS MAY BE deaf and mute, yet they still communicate very

C

well. Candlestick formations are the sign language of the market. They frequently tell the trader where U-turns or reversals
are and where the market is going.

Most beginner traders prefer learning how to read charts using what is
called a Japanese candlestick, which monitors price movement against
time. There are three types of charts traders can refer to: a line chart, a bar
chart, or a candlestick chart. Until recently, bar charts dominated the financial industry, but now even the world’s top traders are using Japanese candlestick charts for the additional information they can provide.

THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS
The period 1500 to 1600 in Japan was known as Sengoku Jidai, or The Age
of War. Military confrontation had become a way of life in that country as
feudal lords fought for control of rival territories.
47
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

48

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Over a period of 40 years (1534–1582, 16th century), three charismatic
generals—Nobunaga Oda, Hideyoshi Toyotumi, and Leyasu Tokagawa—
unified Japan. Once somewhat relative peace had been established, several
new opportunities for expansion developed.
It was during 1600 that the concept of the Japanese candlestick was
being explored, tested, and used in monitoring prices in the rice markets.
Because there was no standardized currency, the price of rice became the
predominant medium of exchange, or currency. In the late 1600s, the Rice
Exchange was formed to regulate trading proceedings. By 1710, there were
more than 1,300 rice dealers. Rather than just deal in actual rice, rice
coupons were issued, and these became one of the first forms of futures
contracts ever traded.
Similar events took place in other parts of the world. There was the Tulip
Mania that swept The Netherlands in the early 1600s, which also involved a
form of futures contract. During this period, tulips became the standard
medium of exchange and became even more valuable than gold there.
The popularity of these Tulip coupons were drawing attention around
the world and other countries began to catch on to this effective way of trading. Rice coupons in Japan became significant, with a bale of rice being the
standard amount to be traded. By 1749, there were approximately 110,000
bales of rice traded via “empty rice coupons” although it is believed there
were only about 30,000 bales in all of Japan. An empty rice coupon became
a form of a futures contract—a coupon for rice that may not even
be planted or harvested yet. The rice is traded for a specific future date, as
if it was grown and going to be delivered to that person on that future
date. Today, futures trading is a multibillion dollar industry. In America,
most futures trading for commodities occurs in Chicago, at the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange, or CME.
But where do Japanese candlesticks fit in? Munehisa Homma was born
into a wealthy Japanese farming family in 1724. Homma had an aptitude
for business and would eventually become a dominant trader in the
Japanese rice market. Although candlesticks were not actually developed
by Homma, he studied the psychology of investors and formulated several
key trading principles. These concepts evolved into the candlestick
charting techniques that we know today.
Candlestick charts were originally plotted painstakingly by hand. This
labor-intensive step, as well as the fact that many Japanese traders could
not properly communicate or share their trading methods due to language
barriers, meant that the use of Japanese candlestick formations could not
become widespread until recent times. However, they are now included in
the majority of financial charting packages as a standard option and are a

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

49

key indicator for establishing a method of prices and analyses, alongside
the more traditional bar charts and line charts.

HOW TO READ A JAPANESE CANDLESTICK
Japanese candlestick charts monitor price movement during a certain period of
time. As the candlesticks form, they begin to tell a story of the activity in the
market, as well as reflect the mood of the market during that time. Candlesticks
become the sign language of the market, communicating via certain formations the future potential moves of the market, which is how profits are
made—by projecting correctly where the market will go, not where it has been.
Successful traders take the time to study and understand this visual language. Candlestick formations indicate clear buy and sell signals, communicating to the trader when it is time to enter the market or to get out. How
well you understand candlestick formations can give you a significant
advantage in the market.
Japanese candlesticks formations can provide the trader with the
market’s first sign of changing direction, a coming U-turn, or a reversal.
They will appear in the form of a single candlestick or a combination of
more than one candlestick. There are hundreds of formations, yet only a
handful of formations carry substantial weight when looking for a good
entry point. A good entry point is described as a location where the market
goes your way from the beginning. Let us see what a Japanese candlestick
looks like and how it forms (see Figure 4-1).
Candlesticks, which are composed of full bodies and wicks, measure
price fluctuations within a certain period of time. As prices move up or down
from the opening, the body begins to form. If, from the opening price, prices
move up and then close higher than the opening, it is a bullish candle. These
candlesticks, in this book, will always appear “empty” or “white”—which
indicates their bullish nature. If prices begin to fall from the opening price
and close lower than the opening, it is a bearish candle. These candlesticks
will always appear to be “filled” or “black” in this book—which indicates
their Bearish nature. The lines on the north and south sides of the bodies of
the candles are called “wicks.” They monitor the highest price, or high, and
the lowest price, or low, of that time period. For example, you can set your
charts to provide you with 5-minute candlesticks, 10-, 15-, or 30-minute
candlesticks, even hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly. Candlesticks
monitor price movement against time, providing traders with four key
pieces of information for that specific time period: the opening price, the
closing price, the highest price reached, and the lowest price reached.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

50

FIGURE 4-1

Reading Japanese Candlesticks
High

High

Close

Open

Open

Close
Low

Low

Candlesticks measure price fluctuations
within a certain time frame.

Trading is a financial game involving two opponents: the bulls and
bears. We all know that there are not actual bulls and bears trading in the
market, but investors and traders who have invested either in a bullish
direction or a bearish direction. Both sides have clear objectives and want
the market to move in their direction: bulls want the market to go up, or
rally, to make higher highs, whereas the bears want to take the market
down, or have it dip to make lower lows.

READING A JAPANESE CANDLESTICK CHART
Most novice traders look at Japanese candlestick charts simply because they
are easy to read and understand. The numbers to the far right indicate the
price and the numbers at the bottom of the chart indicate the time period. The
very last candle to the right is the current candle, indicating the current price.
All the previous candles, to the left of the current candle, have recorded the
historic price movement during that time. As you see in Figure 4-2, all the
icons to the left, top, and right of the actual chart are your trading tools.

HOW TO FIND A HIGH
Highs are defined as a level where the market ceases to rally and U-turns in
the opposite direction. You can spot a high between four candles, when the

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

FIGURE 4-2

51

USD/CHF (Four-Hour Chart)

two to the left and the two to the right are lower than the center wick, which
is highest. A high can be considered a new level of resistance, or a higher
price level achieved by the bulls that is interrupted and reversed by the bears.
However, not all highs are major levels of resistance. Only highs that
are higher than the current market can be considered a level of resistance
(see Figure 4-2).
The levels of resistance noted in the above chart as R1, R2, R3, R4, and
R5 become future price targets for the bulls to chase and move higher. Once
they regain control of the market, they will aim to make higher highs and
higher lows. The bears are maintaining control in the above chart, as the
market is making lower lows and lower highs.

HOW TO FIND A LOW
A low is defined as the level where the market ceases to drop. A low in a
candlestick formation is seen where there are two candles to the left and two
candles to the right that are higher than the center wick, which is the lowest

52

FIGURE 4-3

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

USD/CHF (One-Hour Chart)

point. A low can be considered as a new level of support, or a lower price
level that was achieved by the bears and then interrupted and reversed by
the bulls; however, only lows that are lower than the current market level
can be considered a level of support (see Figure 4-3).
The levels of support noted in the above chart as S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5
become future targets for the bears to chase and/or move lower. Once they
gain control of the market again, they will aim to make lower lows and
lower highs. The bulls control the above market example.

UNDERSTANDING THE DIFFERENT JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS
The art of proper communication starts with taking the time to learn and
educate yourself about the various forms of communication, including the
spoken word, body language, and voice fluctuations, among others.
Although candlesticks may look alike, the 20 formations listed in
Figure 4-4 will provide you with a solid understanding of candlestick
formations and their meanings.

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

FIGURE 4-4

Japanese Candlesticks

BULLISH PATTERN

HAMMER. This is a bullish line if it occurs after a significant
downtrend. If the line occurs after a significant uptrend, it is called
a hanging man. A hammer is identified by a small body (a small
range between the open and closing prices) and a long lower shadow
(the low is significantly lower than the open, high, and closes). The
body can be empty or filled in.

BULLISH PATTERN BULLISH PATTERN

BULLISH PATTERN

PIERCING LINE. This is a bullish pattern and the opposite of a
dark cloud cover. The first line, on the left, is a bearish line, and the
second line is a bullish line. The second line opens lower than the
first line's low but closes more than halfway above the first line's
real body.
BULLISH ENGULFING LINES. This pattern is strongly bullish if
it occurs after a significant downtrend (it acts as a reversal pattern).
It occurs when a small bearish line is engulfed by a large bullish
line.
MORNING STAR. This is a bullish pattern signifying a potential
bottom. The star, at the bottom between the two lines, indicates a
possible reversal; the bullish line confirms this. The star can be
empty or filled in.

BULLISH PATTERN

BULLISH DOJI STAR. A star indicates a reversal and a Doji
indicates indecision. Thus, this pattern usually indicates a reversal
after an indecisive period. You should wait for a confirmation,
as in the morning star in the previous pattern, before trading a Doji
star. The first line can be empty or filled in.

BEARISH PATTERN

HANGING MAN. These lines are bearish if they occur after a
significant uptrend, and if the pattern occurs after a significant
downtrend, it is called a hammer. They are identified by small real
bodies (a small range between open and closing prices) and a long
lower shadow, that is, the low was significantly lower than the open,
high, and close. The bodies can be empty or filled in.

53

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

54

BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN

BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN

FIGURE 4-4 Continued
DARK CLOUD COVER. This is a bearish pattern that is more
significant if the second line's body is below the center of the
previous line's body (as illustrated).

BEARISH ENGULFING LINES. This line is strong and bearish if
it occurs after a significant uptrend—it acts as a reversal pattern. It
occurs when a small bullish line is engulfed by a large bearish line.

EVENING STAR. This is a bearish pattern signifying a potential
top. The star indicates a possible reversal, and the bearish line
confirms it. The star can be empty or filled in or it can be a Doji
star.
DOJI STAR. A star indicates a reversal and a Doji indicates
indecision. Thus, this pattern usually indicates a reversal after
an indecisive period. You should wait for a confirmation, such as
an evening star illustration, before trading a Doji star.

SHOOTING STAR. This pattern suggests a minor reversal when it
appears after a rally. The star's body must appear near the low price,
and the line should have a long upper shadow.

LONG-LEGGED DOJI. This line often signifies a turning point. It
occurs when the open and close are the same, and the range between

the high and the low is relatively large.

DRAGONFLY DOJI. This line also signifies a turning point. This
pattern occurs when the open and the close are the same and the low
is significantly lower than the open, high, and closing prices.

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

NEUTRAL PATTERN

NEUTRAL PATTERN NEUTRAL PATTERN NEUTRAL PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN BEARISH PATTERN

FIGURE 4-4 Continued
GRAVESTONE DOJI. This line signifies another turning point. It
occurs when the open, close, and low are the same, and the high is
significantly higher than the open, low, and closing prices.

STAR. Stars indicate reversals. A star is a line with a small real
body that occurs after a line with a much larger real body, where the
real bodies do not overlap, although the shadows may.
