Tom Baldwin-The Fearless Pit Trader
The trading pit of an active futures market is an imposing place. Scores of traders push over each
other, while shouting buy and sell orders at the top of their lungs. To the uninitiated, it seems
miraculous that this institutionalized bedlam actually functions efficiently as a process for executing orders. In the frenzied world of futures pits, the T-bond ring, with over 500 traders, stands
out as the unchallenged giant. The pit is so large that one side of the ring often does not know what
is happening on the other side.
By most accounts, Tom Baldwin is the single largest individual trader in the T-bond pit. His trading
size puts him in the same league as the primary institutional players. Single trades as large as 2,000
contracts ($200 million face value T-bonds) are not unusual for him. On a typical day, he may trade
over 20,000 contracts (the equivalent of $2 billion in face value T-bonds). Baldwin is in his early
thirties, having begun trading T-bonds a scant six years ago.
Baldwin's entry into the world of floor trading sounds more like a recipe for failure than success. In
1982, with no prior trading experience, Baldwin left his job as a product manager for a meatpacking firm to lease a seat on the Chicago Board of Trade. His stake was only $25,000. Out of this
skimpy capital base, he had to pay over $2,000 per month to lease the seat, and at least another
$1,000 per month for living expenses. As if this were not enough, his wife was pregnant at the time.
Obviously, Baldwin is not one to play it safe. His aggressive risk-taking posture is one of the key
elements of his success. He turned a profit from the beginning. He was a millionaire before his first
year was up and has never looked back. Although he declines to discuss the extent of his winnings,
$30 million appears to be a conservative estimate. The true figure could be significantly higher.
I considered an interview with Baldwin essential to this project, because of his prominence as the
most successful floor trader in the world's largest futures market. Baldwin, however, was not eager
to be interviewed. Although he had done some interviews in the past, he had obviously grown
reluctant to do any more. Without Brian Gelber's generous intervention—the two are friends and
admire each other's trading abilities—this interview would never have taken place.
Gelber had warned me that Baldwin could be either abrasive or gracious, but to be prepared for the
former. As an example, Gelber said that Baldwin would probably answer the question of how he
first got involved in trading with the curt response: "I went down to the floor and began trading."
As it turned out, this was very close to the spirit of his answer.
I arrived at Baldwin's office several minutes after the end of the day's trading. Baldwin arrived a
few minutes later. Since he had just moved to new offices and the furniture had not yet been
delivered, the interview was conducted sitting on a window sill.
Baldwin's attitude was neither abrasive nor gracious; aloof might be the best way to describe it. I
had the distinct impression that the minute I hesitated in asking the next question, Baldwin would
be gone. It was St. Patrick's Day, and this impression was intensified each time someone left the
office saying that he or she would meet Baldwin at a local bar. I could sense that Tom was anxious
to join them. I decided to conduct the interview completely impromptu, shooting off a new question
the second he finished answering the prior one. Often his responses were quite short. I felt like a
photographer stalking a rare bird; one false step and the bird would fly off.
I knew that, at some point, I would not be able to think of an immediate follow-up question. This
happened about forty minutes into the interview. I quickly glanced down at my index cards,
searching for a lead. Unfortunately, my eyes focused on a question I had already touched upon, and
though I tried to ask it from a different perspective, it was too late. The game was over. Baldwin
said he had to get going and excused himself.
How did you first get interested in trading?
I had taken some classes in commodities in graduate school. I wanted to trade, but I didn't have the
money to buy a seat. In 1982, 1 found out I could lease a seat, and that's when I began.
Did you always want to trade as a local as opposed to any other type of trading?
Yes.
How did you learn to trade?
One lot at a time. I always had an opinion. All day long I stood there and developed an opinion. As
178

I came to see that my opinion was right, I was reinforced, even if I didn't make the trade. Then
when I traded, I knew from standing there six hours a day, every day, that most of the time I was
right. I would see the same scenarios develop over and over again.
Are you talking about market patterns or traders doing certain things?
Both. Market patterns would occur over and over again, or market players would do the same thing
over and over again, and you just trade it.
What were your first few months like? Were you profitable initialI think the most I was ever down was 19 ticks, so I pretty much started out profitably.
Coming to the pits with no background, what was it that gave you enough of an edge to be
right on the market?
I worked hard. I stood there six hours a day, all day, every day.
But you didn't have any experience to fall back on.
You don't need it. You don't need any education at all to do it. The smarter you are, the dumber you
are. The more you know, the worse it is for you.
For your type of trading—that is, scalping—when you put on a trade, what are you looking
for?
To get as much as I can get out of it. I've taken full points or just 1 tick out of a trade. You just
never know. You have to watch the market, get a feel for it, and if you are in the right position, just
go with it.
On average, though, your trades will net out at a few ticks?
Yes. I probably average 4-tick profits on big positions.
I assume your holding time is probably very, very short.
I try to make it short.
Are we talking about minutes?
Yes, or seconds. Just because that is less risk. The object is always: Minimize your risk.
Have you always been a scalp-type trader?
Well, I evolved from a pure scalper to a combination of scalper and speculator.
Right now, what percentage of your trades are position versus scalp?
A small percentage, well below 10 percent.
Basically then, you are still using the same basic trading style yon started out with.
Right.
Do you use any technical input?
Yes. I use charts.
Do you use intraday charts, since you are trading short term?
No. Bar charts covering the past six months.
If you look at the charts and say, "I'm basically bullish," do you primarily scalp from the
long side?
Not necessarily. I would start with an opinion, but if I saw something to change my mind, I would
adjust.
Is the fact that you started off with a chart-influenced trading bias a key element behind your
winning?
Yes.
Were there periods when you were unsuccessful, or did you remain consistent?
Consistent.
Didn't you have any losing months?
Yes, I had one or two.
179

But not two together?
No, never.
What percentage of those who come to trade on the floor are still around after five years,
versus losing their stake and dropping out?
Less than 20 percent. That is really the rale of thumb, and it's probably less than that.
What percentage are successful to the point of making and keeping at Least a couple of
million?
One percent.
In other words, a very small fraction of traders.
Right. It is like any other industry. How many people get to be president of General Motors?
Do you have an opinion about what separates the 1 percent from the other 99 percent?
Yes. It is a lot of hard work, for one. It's perseverance. You have to love to do it. Also, in our
business, you have to have a total disregard for money. You can't trade for money.
Do you mean as long as you like the position, you stay with it? That you can't think, "I'm
losing $1 million on this trade, and with $1 million I could have bought a great house." You
can't translate it into real terms.
Exactly. Most people do.
I guess another way of saying it is you have to have almost no fear.
Right.
Is that a characteristic of winning traders: They have less fear than the losers?
Yes.
Can you size up a new trader on the floor and tell if he is going to make it or not?
Yes.
What kind of things would tip you off that he is a loser?
Most important, losers don't work hard enough. Most people walk in and think there is a 50/50
chance on any trade. They don't think there is anything more to it than that. They don't concentrate.
They don't watch the factors that affect the market. You can see it in their eyes; it is almost as if
there is a wall in front of their face.
By factors, do you mean fundamentals?
No. Paying attention to what other markets are doing, such as the Dow Jones or gold. Watching the
traders in the pit.
Patterns?
Yes.
In other words, they are not paying enough attention. They are standing there trying to pick
a trade here and there, but they are not absorbing everything that is going on.
Right. Also, their expenses are usually way too high. They can't stand there and hack it long
enough to pick it up. Because it is like any job, if you stand there long enough, you have to pick it
up. It is just a matter of how long you can afford to stand there before you do.
Do you really believe that?
Well, the average guy might not be a million-dollar trader, but if he stands there for five years, he
would have to pick it up. It is just like a job. You don't start any job and feel comfortable in the first
six months.
You did.
Yes, but I did start as a one-lot trader. And I wasn't really comfortable, because I had to make
money. I only had $25,000 to my name.
At what point were you confident that you were going to be successful at it?
That is an interesting question. You are never really confident in this business, because you can
180

always be wiped out pretty quickly. The way I trade is: Live by the sword, die by the sword. There
is always the potential that I could get caught with a big position in a fluke move with the market
going the limit against me. On the other hand, there is no doubt in my mind that I could walk into
any market in the world and make money.
What percentage of your days are losers?
One day out often.
Has that percentage changed over time?
That is over a long period of time.
From your perspective, what does the average trader—that is, public trader—do wrong?
They trade too much. They don't pick their spots selectively enough. When they see the market
moving, they want to be in on the action. So, they end up forcing the trade rather than waiting
patiently. Patience is an important trait many people don't have.
Waiting for the right spot?
Right, I bet most people are probably ahead after their first five trades. They think, "This is great,
like free money." But then they forget that the reason they made money on their early trades was
because they waited a long time. They said, "I bet this is a good spot to buy it because I've seen the
market act this way a lot of times." And they made money. But all of a sudden, they are doing a
trade every day.
The next thing that happens is they lose on a few trades, and invariably don't know how to take a
loss. They made money to start, and before they know it, they are even. Now they hesitate. "Where
do I get out?" The minute they hesitate, the market just keeps going. Now they are losing money
and they say, "If I sell it here, I'm going to lose $1,000." They don't like to lose $1,000, when
they're getting paid $500 a week. Now, all of a sudden, they are thinking about the money.
Once you think about the money, you are dead?
Yes. That is what usually happens to the public.
What is your own way of handling losses? Get out. Quickly?
If I can. My point is that I have a lot of patience and I wait. If I know it is a losing trade, I wait for
what I think is the optimum time to bail out. Then I try and reverse.
So, if you realize you don't like the trade anymore, you'll get out, but you'll pick your time?
Right, but I will get out.
Let's say you are doing that on a day when the market is a one-way street. At what point do
you just have to cough it up?
It depends how far it has gone against you. If it's against you a long way, at some point you just
throw it in. Those days happen maybe three or four times a year. You just start bailing out.
But you usually have a feel for when that is the thing to do?
Yes, because it has happened before.
But normally, if you are just a bit behind in a trade, you are better off if you let the market
move a little in your direction and try to sell on strength, or buy on weakness, instead of just
trying to dump it in a hurry?
Right.
Is that a key element to your trading style?
Yes. Never give up on a trade. Many traders who are in a losing trade will just get out because they
were taught that you have to have discipline. Great. Those traders will always be around. But if
they just had some patience and said, "Yes, it is going to be a losing trade, but instead of getting out
here at 7, maybe if I wait and just sweat it out for another minute, I can sell at 10."
Is it a matter of just wanting to get out to stop the pain? And if they were willing to stand the
pain a little longer, they would be better off. Is that a fair way of putting it?
Yes. They give up too quickly. In most cases, if you don't give up, you might be able to turn a fiveyard loss into a two-yard loss.
181

Your trading size has obviously grown quite dramatically since you first got into the business.
Has that made it harder to trade?
Yes, you have to adapt. You need to change your method of buying and selling, because the market
is continually changing in subtle ways.
What changes have you seen in the bond market since you got in?
Well, you can trade bigger size. Now you can usually trade a couple of hundred at each tick. It
doesn't move the market as much.
How about a thousand lots?
It depends on the liquidity at the time. Lots of times you can get out. It is amazing how much
liquidity there is when you want to get out.
On average, if you had to dump a thousand, how much would that move the market?
Depending on the time of day and the liquidity, maybe 1 or 2 ticks.
Not much at all?
No, not much.
Has size been an impediment at all if the liquidity is that good?
Yes, it is harder. Generally, when you get into a big position, the rest of the floor knows about it
because they stood there and watched you. At least they think they know. They all put their hands
down and wait when they think you are wrong. It is natural for a trader to be skeptical.
I would almost think that because you have a long-term record of success, they would more
often coattail you.
Lots of times that is true, and that also makes it harder to get in and out. When you go to offer
them, they are all offering too.
How do you handle those situations?
You have to pick your spot. You have to wait for the big paper order to come in and then go for it.
Does it become like a chess game, where you sometimes want the pit thinking that you are
selling when you are really buying?
Yes, sometimes. But generally, you can't trade big size when you are doing that.
So, frequently, if you are long and want to liquidate, you just wait for the bid to come in?
Right.
What kinds of things do you look for in a chart?
Key points such as the high and low for the week, the halfway backpoint, and consolidation areas.
Do you use charts for short-term or long-term perspective?
Short term.
Short term in your case meaning?
I guess as short as possible. You get in a trade, make money as fast as possible, and minimize your
risk.
I've noticed that a lot of times, bonds will take out one- and two-week highs or lows by a few
ticks and then pull back. The price action almost seems like a trap for the breakout players.
Is that a pattern in the bond market?
Yes. It always has been.
Do you use fundamentals?
Whenever any important fundamental numbers come out, I use them.
Do you use the fundamentals indirectly, that is, by seeing how the market responds to the new
information?
Yes, but also by being the first one to trade off the new fundamental information. I know what I am
going to do if a number comes out one way or the other, and I usually have the opportunity to be
first.
182

You want to get there before the crowd does. Are you normally right on that type of trade?
Yes.
You've done tens of thousands of trades. Does any single trade stand out as particularly
emotional?
The first 100-lot I did. It was a milestone.
What kind of jump was that for you?
You tend to go from one lot to five lots to ten lots to twenty lots to fifty lots.
So, you probably went from 50 to 100? Do you remember that trade?
Yes, it was a much bigger risk. The market was trading at 64.25 and a broker bid 25 for 100 lots.
But he didn't put a size on it, he just bid 25. So I said, "Sold." He thought I was being funny and
said, "I'll buy the 100," knowing I had never traded that big before. So I said, "Well, I'll sell you
100." The market went to 24 offered instantly.
It almost sounds like you did your first 100-lot as a dare?
Well, almost. But I wasn't a very good trader then. I immediately bought ten, then ten more. I was
trying to bid at 23, and the market went to 22 offered. By the time I got out, I had ten different
people in the trade, because I didn't know how to cover 100 lots.
But the trade worked out for you?
Oh yes. Well, actually, the word got out that this small trader had done a 100-lot. So I had to go up
to the office to talk to the clearing firm after the close.
How long had you been trading at that time?
Six months.
That was pretty early on. I assume your capitalization was really inadequate to handle 100
lots?
Right. I had probably made $100,000 by then. Maybe not even that.
Even at $100,000, that wouldn't cover you for much of a move.
Yes, only 1 point. [In bonds, 1 point equals 32 ticks (the smallest price movement).] I told them,
"Look, I just thought it was a great trade at the time, and I'll probably never do it again."
How long was it before you traded 100 lots again?
Two days.
You just never thought about the risk side of it?
No, if a guy bids 25 for 100, and I think that it is a great trade, I just say "Sold."
Is there any element in your mindset as a trader that says: I had better be careful that I'm
always in the game?
That came later.
Are you always in control, or are there days when you have lost control?
There were days when I've lost control.
Any that stand out?
A couple. You have to say that about any day you lose a couple of million dollars.
Were those days one-way street markets?
Yes, one-way streets. Because I'm a market maker, I take the other side of the trend. So, if the
market goes one way for 50 ticks, I can guarantee you I'm going the wrong way, and at some point,
it is going to be a loss.
What was your position at the October 1987 low in bonds?
I was long.
When did you start getting long?
Five points higher.
183

Five full points! You mean 81?
Yes. The day it broke below 77,1 was long thousands of contracts. Other traders were also heavily
long.
That was the day we gapped sharply lower. Who was selling?
The commercials just kept selling.
Did you have second thoughts?
Yes.
Did you think if the market went down to 76, maybe it could go to 70?
No. At that point, you had to say it was all over and done.
Why?
Technical analysis and experience.
Was that an example of your being patient in picking your spot to get out, even when the
initial trade was wrong?
Right.
Do you ever use any trading systems for anything?
No. They wouldn't be there if they weren't wrong.
Do you think trading systems are a losing game? Sure. Why do they exist?
You tell me. Because people aren't confident in their own ability. If you had a really good trading
system, you could make millions. Why would you sell it for $29.95?
Does luck have anything to do with trading?
Trading is like any other job. You work hard, put in the time and effort, and make your own luck. I
was lucky that the first 100-lot I sold was a winner. But why was I lucky? Because I stood there all
day for over six months, developing and honing market feeling. When the opportunity occurred, I
didn't hesitate.
You have to pay your dues to get the luck.
Right.
Are there people on the floor who are not good traders, but are way ahead because they just
happened to do a couple of big trades on the right side of the market? Can anybody really get
by just on luck?
No, not for long. The rule of thumb is if you have lasted a year, you will make it, but it is hard.
Are there traders that you are influenced by because you respect what they are doing?
Oh, yes. They are indicators.
So, that is actually part of your trading approach. For example, if trader X is a good trader,
and he is on a roll, and you are thinking of selling— And he does, then you know you're right.
But if he is buying?
Then you hesitate. Maybe you don't get into the trade.
Are there traders who can't succeed because their ego is too big to ever be influenced?
Yes.
Is part of the success a willingness to not always do your own thing?
Right. You have to adapt to your success. If you make a lot of money, all of a sudden you start to
think you are infallible. You forget the reason you were right was because of all those little factors
that you followed. As soon as you think, "I'm the guy who is going to lead the way," you get
slammed.
So, it really doesn't make a difference whether it is your idea or somebody else's. Winning or
losing is all that counts. Where the idea came from isn't important?
Right.
Do you have to be somewhat of an egomaniac to be a good trader?
184

Actually, the best traders have no ego. To be a great trader, you have to have a big enough ego only
in the sense that you have confidence in yourself. You cannot let ego get in the way of a trade that
is a loser; you have to swallow your pride and get out.
After you get way ahead, is there a temptation to say, the extra money doesn't mean anything
anymore, maybe I should cash in the chips?
I never thought that way. Obviously, when I started, I needed to make money to support my family,
but I never had a goal to make a million dollars. I said, "Hey, this is great, maybe I can make
$100,000."
You passed that a very long time ago. Do you have any other goals?
No.
You just do what you do because you enjoy it?
Yes. And I hope it lasts.
Baldwin's incredible trading achievements made him an ideal interview candidate for this book.
However, I did not really expect his comments to be pertinent to myself or other off-the-floor
traders. After all, what could a floor trader, whose time horizon is measured in minutes and
seconds, say that was relevant to traders who hold positions for weeks or months?
To my surprise, the interview yielded some relevant insights. Perhaps the most important point
made by Baldwin was his emphasis on not viewing trading in terms of money. To him, money is
only a means of keeping score. By contrast, most traders tend to think of gains and losses in terms
of their monetary implications—a frame of mind that only gets in the way of making trading
decisions.
For example, assume you originally planned to risk up to $5,000 on a trade, and quickly find
yourself down by $2,000. If, at this point, you start to think of the trade in terms of money (for
example, "the extra $3,000 can pay for my vacation"), you might well liquidate the position, even
though you still believed in the trade. It is one thing to get out because you no longer like the
position, but it is quite another matter to liquidate on impulse simply because you have translated
the risk into tangible terms.
Another interesting point made by Baldwin is an unconventional one: Don't get out of a losing
trade too hastily; instead, wait and choose your time. This advice seems to fly in the face of most
trading advice. After all, isn't one of the basic tenets of trading success to cut your losses quickly?
However, I don't think Baldwin's statement contradicts the rule. I believe he is saying that often the
worst time to bail out of a position is during a violent price move against you. Baldwin's point is
that by bearing the pain just a little longer, you may be able to find a more favorable circumstance
for liquidating. Of course, this philosophy should be applied only by disciplined traders: those with
the ability to maintain a risk control strategy.
