
THREE

On Monte Carlo simulation as a metaphor to understanding a
sequence of random historical events. On randomness and
artificial history. Age is beauty, almost always, and the new and
the young are generally toxic. Send your history professor to an
introductory class on sampling theory.

EUROPLAYBOY MATHEMATICS

he stereotype of a pure mathematician presents an anemic man
with a shaggy beard and grimy and uncut fingernails silently
laboring on a Spartan but disorganized desk. With thin shoulders and a
pot belly, he sits in a grubby office, totally absorbed in his work,
oblivious to the grunginess of his surroundings. He grew up in a
communist regime and speaks English with an astringent and throaty
Eastern European accent. When he eats, crumbs of food accumulate in
his beard. With time he becomes more and more absorbed in his subject
matter of pure theorems, reaching levels of ever increasing abstraction.
The American public was recently exposed to one of these characters
with the unabomber, the bearded and recluse mathematician who lived
in a hut and took to murdering people who promoted modern

T

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

41

technology. No journalist was capable of even coming close to
describing the subject matter of his thesis, Complex Boundaries, as it
has no intelligible equivalent - a complex number being an entirely
abstract and imaginary number, the square root of minus one, an object
that has no analog outside of the world of mathematics.
The name Monte Carlo conjures up the image of a suntanned urbane
man of the Europlayboy variety entering a casino under a whiff of the
Mediterranean breeze. He is an apt skier and tennis player, but also can
hold his own in chess and bridge. He drives a gray sports car, dresses in
a well ironed Italian handmade suit, and speaks carefully and smoothly
about mundane, but real, matters, those a journalist can easily describe
to the public in compact sentences. Inside the casino he astutely counts
the cards, mastering the odds, and bets in a studied manner, his mind
producing precise calculations of his optimal betting size. He could be
James Bond's smarter lost brother.
Now when I think of Monte Carlo mathematics, I think of a happy
combination of the two: the Monte Carlo man's realism without the
shallowness combined with the mathematician's intuitions without the
excessive abstraction. For indeed this branch of mathematics is of
immense practical use - it does not present the same dryness commonly
associated with mathematics. I became addicted to it the minute I
became a trader. It shaped my thinking in most matters related to
randomness. Most of the examples used in the book were created with
my Monte Carlo generator, which I introduce in this chapter. Yet, it is
far more a way of thinking than a computational method. Mathematics
is principally a tool to meditate, rather than to compute.

THE TOOLS

The notion of alternative histories discussed in the last chapter can be
extended considerably and subjected to all manner of technical refinement. This brings us to the tools used in my profession to toy with
uncertainty. I will outline them next. Monte Carlo methods, in brief,
consist in creating artificial history using the following concepts.
First, consider the sample path. The invisible histories have a scientific name, alternative sample paths, a name borrowed from the field of

42

SOLON'S

WARNING

mathematics of probability called stochastic processes. The notion of
path, as opposed to outcome, indicates that it is not a mere MBA-style
scenario analysis, but the examination of a sequence of scenarios along
the course of time. We are not just concerned at where a bird can end up
tomorrow night, but rather at all the various places it can possibly visit
during the time interval. We are not concerned with what the investor's
worth would be in, say, a year, but rather of the heart-wrenching rides
he may experience during that period. The word sample stresses that
one sees only one realization among a collection of possible ones. Now a
sample path can be both deterministic or random, which brings the next
distinction.
A random sample path, also called a random run, is the mathematical
name for such succession of virtual historical events, starting at a given
date and ending at another, except that they are subjected to some
varying level of uncertainty. However, the word random should not be
mistaken for equiprobable (i.e. having the same probability). Some
outcomes will give a higher probability than others. An example of a
random sample path can be the body temperature of your explorer
cousin during his latest bout with typhoid fever, measured hourly from
the beginning to the end of his episode. It can also be a simulation of the
price of your favorite technology stock, measured daily at the close of
the market, over, say, one year. Starting at $100, in one scenario it can
end up at $20 having seen a high of $220, in another it can end up at
$145 having seen a low of $10. Another example is the evolution of
your wealth during an evening at a casino. You start with $1000 in your
pocket, and measure it every 15 minutes. In one sample path you have
$2200 at midnight; in another you barely have $20 left for a cab fare.
Stochastic processes refer to the dynamics of events unfolding with
the course of time. Stochastic is a fancy Greek name for random. This
branch of probability concerns itself with the study of the evolution of
successive random events - one could call it the mathematics of history.
The key about a process is that it has time in it.
What is a Monte Carlo generator? Imagine that you can replicate a
perfect roulette wheel in your attic without having recourse to a
carpenter. Computer programs can be written to simulate just about
anything. They are even better (and cheaper) than the roulette wheel
built by your carpenter, as this may be inclined to favor one number

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

43

more than others owing to a possible slant in its build or the floor of
your attic. These are called the biases.
Monte Carlo simulations are closer to a toy than anything I have seen
in my adult life. One can generate thousands, perhaps millions of
random sample paths, and look at the prevalent characteristics of some
of their features. The assistance of the computer is instrumental in such
studies. The glamorous reference to Monte Carlo indicates the
metaphor of simulating the random events in the manner of a virtual
casino. One sets conditions believed to resemble the ones that prevail in
reality, and launches a collection of simulations around possible events.
With no mathematical literacy we can launch a Monte Carlo simulation
of an 18-year-old Christian Lebanese playing successively Russian
roulette for a given sum, and see how many of these attempts result in
enrichment, or how long it takes on average before he hits the obituary.
We can change the barrel to contain 500 holes, a matter that would
decrease the probability of death, and see the results.
Monte Carlo simulation methods were pioneered in martial physics
in the Los Alamos laboratory during the A bomb preparation. They
became popular in financial mathematics in the 1980s, particularly in
the theories of the random walk of asset prices. Clearly, we have to say
that the example of Russian roulette does not need such apparatus, but
many problems, particularly those resembling real-life situations,
require the potency of a Monte Carlo simulator.

MONTE CARLO

MATHEMATICS

It is a fact that "true" mathematicians do not like Monte Carlo methods.
They believe that they rob us of the finesse and elegance of mathematics.
They call it "brute force". For we can replace a large portion of
mathematical knowledge with a Monte Carlo simulator (and other
computational tricks). For instance, someone with no formal knowledge
of geometry can compute the mysterious, almost mystical Pi. How? By
drawing a circle inside of a square, and "shooting" random bullets into
the picture (as in an arcade), specifying equal probabilities of hitting any
point on the map (something called a uniform distribution). The ratio of
bullets inside the circle divided by those inside and outside the circle will

44

SOLON'S

WARNING

deliver a multiple of the mystical Pi, with possibly infinite precision.
Clearly, this is not an efficient use of a computer as Pi can be computed
analytically, that is, in a mathematical form, but the method can give
some users more intuition about the subject matter than lines of
equations. Some people's brains and intuitions are oriented in such a
way that they are more capable of getting a point in such a manner (I
count myself one of those). The computer might not be natural to our
human brain; neither is mathematics.
I am not a "native" mathematician, that is, I am someone who does
not speak mathematics as a native language, but someone who speaks it
with a trace of a foreign accent. For I am not interested in mathematical
properties per se, only in the application, while a mathematician would
be interested in improving mathematics (via theorems and proofs). I
proved incapable of concentrating on deciphering a single equation
unless I was motivated by a real problem (with a modicum of greed);
thus most of what I know comes from derivatives trading - options
pushed me to study the math of probability. Many compulsive
gamblers, who otherwise would be of middling intelligence, acquire
remarkable card-counting skills thanks to their passionate greed.
Another analogy would be with grammar; mathematics is often
tedious and insightless grammar. There are those who are interested in
grammar for grammar's sake, and those interested in avoiding solecisms
while writing documents. We are called "quants" - like physicists, we
have more interest in the employment of the mathematical tool than in
the tool itself. Mathematicians are born, never made. Physicists and
quants too. I do not care about the "elegance" and "quality" of the
mathematics I use so long as I can get the point right. I have recourse to
Monte Carlo machines whenever I can. They can get the work done.
They are also far more pedagogical, and I will use them in this book for
the examples.
Indeed, probability is an introspective field of inquiry, as it affects
more than one science, particularly the mother of all sciences; that of
knowledge. It is impossible to assess the quality of the knowledge we
are gathering without allowing a share of randomness in the manner it
is obtained and cleaning the argument from the chance coincidence that
could have seeped into its construction. In science, probability and
information are treated in exactly the same manner. Literally every

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

45

great thinker has dabbled with it, most of them obsessively. The two
greatest minds to me, Einstein and Keynes, both started their
intellectual journeys with it. Einstein wrote a major paper in 1905, in
which he was almost the first to examine in probabilistic terms the
succession of random events, namely the evolution of suspended
particles in a stationary liquid. His theory on the theory of the
Brownian movement can be used as the backbone of the random walk
theories used in financial modeling. As for Keynes, to the literate person
he is not the political economist that tweed-clad leftists love to quote,
but the author of the magisterial, introspective, and potent Treatise on
Probability. For before his venturing into the murky field of political
economy, Keynes was a probabilist. He also had other interesting
attributes (he blew up trading his account after experiencing excessive
opulence - people's understanding of probability does not translate into
their behavior).
The reader can guess that the next step from such probabilistic
introspection is to get drawn into philosophy, particularly the branch of
philosophy that concerns itself with knowledge, called epistemology or
methodology, or philosophy of science, popularized by such persons as
Karl Popper and George Soros. We will not get into the topic until later
in the book.

Fun In My Attic
MAKING H I S T O R Y

In the early 1990s, like many of my friends in quantitative finance, I
became addicted to the various Monte Carlo engines, which I taught
myself to build, thrilled to feel that I was generating history, a
Demiurgus. It can be electrifying to generate virtual histories and watch
the dispersion between the various results. Such dispersion is indicative
of the degree of resistance to randomness. This is where I am convinced
that I have been extremely lucky in my choice of career: one of the
attractive aspects of my profession as a quantitative option trader is that

46

SOLON'S

WARNING

I have close to 95% of my day free to think, read, and research (or
"reflect" in the gym, on ski slopes, or, more effectively, on a park
bench). I also had the privilege of frequently "working" from my wellequipped attic.
The dividend of the computer revolution to us did not come in the
flooding of self-perpetuating e-mail messages and access to chat rooms;
it was in the sudden availability of fast processors capable of generating
a million sample paths per minute. Recall that I never considered myself
better than an unenthusiastic equation solver and was rarely capable of
prowess in the matter - being better at setting up equations than solving
them. Suddenly, my engine allowed me to solve with minimal effort the
most intractable of equations. Few solutions became out of reach.

ZORGLUBS CROWDING THE ATTIC

My Monte Carlo engine took me on a few interesting adventures. While
my colleagues were immersed in news stories, central bank
announcements, earnings reports, economic forecasts, sports results
and, not least, office politics, I started toying with it in fields bordering
my home base of financial probability. A natural field of expansion for
the amateur is evolutionary biology - the universality of its message and
its application to markets are appealing. I started simulating
populations of fast mutating animals called Zorglubs under climatic
changes and witnessing the most unexpected of conclusions - some of
the results are recycled in Chapter 5. My aim, as a pure amateur fleeing
the boredom of business life, was merely to develop intuitions for these
events - the sort of intuitions that amateurs build away from the overly
detailed sophistication of the professional researcher. I also toyed with
molecular biology, generating randomly occurring cancer cells and
witnessing some surprising aspects to their evolution. Naturally the
analogue to fabricating populations of Zorglubs was to simulate a
population of "idiotic bull", "impetuous bear" and "cautious" traders
under different market regimes, say booms and busts, and to examine
their short-term and long-term survival. Under such a structure, "idiotic
bull" traders who get rich from the rally would use the proceeds to buy
more assets, driving prices higher, until their ultimate shellacking.

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

47

Bearish traders, though, rarely made it in the boom to get to the bust.
My models showed almost nobody to really ultimately make money;
bears dropped out like flies in the rally and bulls got ultimately
slaughtered, as paper profits vanished when the music stopped. But
there was one exception; some of those who traded options (I called
them option buyers) had remarkable staying power and I wanted to be
one of those. How? Because they could buy the insurance against
blowup; they could get anxiety-free sleep at night, thanks to the
knowledge that if their careers were threatened, it would not be owing
to the outcome of a single day.
If the tone of this book seems steeped in the culture of Darwinism and
evolutionary thinking, it does not come from any remotely formal
training in the natural sciences, but from the evolutionary way of
thinking taught by my Monte Carlo simulators.
I have to reckon that I outgrew the desire to generate random runs
every time I want to explore an idea - but by dint of playing with a
Monte Carlo engine for years I can no longer visualize a realized
outcome without reference to the non-realized ones. I call that
"summing under histories", borrowing the expression from the colorful
physicist Richard Feynman who applied such methods to examine the
dynamics of particles.
Using my Monte Carlo to do and redo history reminded me of the
experimental novels (the so-called new novels) by such writers as Alain
Robbe-Grillet, popular in the 1960s and 1970s. There the same chapter
would be written and revised, the writer each time changing the plot like
a new sample path. Somehow the author was freed from the past
situation he helped create and allowed himself the indulgence to change
the plot retroactively.

denigration

of

history

One more word on history seen from a Monte Carlo perspective. The
wisdom of such classical stories as Solon prods me to spend even more
time in the company of the classical historians, even if the stories, like
Solon's warning, have benefited from the patina of time. However, this
goes against the grain: learning from history does not come naturally to

48

SOLON'S

WARNING

us humans, a fact that is so visible in the endless repetitions of identically configured booms and busts in modern markets. By history I refer
to the anecdotes, not the historical theorizing, the -grand-scale
historicism that aims to interpret events with theories based on
uncovering some laws in the evolution of history - the sort of
Hegelianism and pseudoscientific historicism leading to such calls as
the end of history (it is pseudoscientific because it draws theories from
past events without allowing for the fact that such combinations of
events might have arisen from randomness; it is mostly pseudoscientific
because there is no way to verify the claims in a controlled experiment2).
It is merely at the level of my desired sensibility, affecting the way I
would wish to think by reference to past events, by being able to better
steal the ideas of others and leverage them, correct the mental defect
that seems to block my ability to learn from others. It is the respect of
the elders that I would like to develop, reinforcing the awe I instinctively
feel for people with gray hair, but that has eroded in my life as a trader
where age and success are somewhat divorced. Indeed, I have two ways
of learning from history: from the past by reading the elders, and from
the future thanks to my Monte Carlo toy.

t h e s t o v e is

h o t

As I mentioned above, it is not natural for us to learn from history. We
have enough clues to believe that our genetic endowment as homo
erectus does not favor transfers of experience. It is a platitude that
children learn only from their own mistakes; they will cease to touch a
burning stove only when they are themselves burned; no possible
warning by others can lead to developing the smallest form of cautiousness. Adults, too, suffer from such a condition. This point has been
examined by behavioral economics pioneers Daniel Kahneman and
Amos Tversky with regards to the choices people make in selecting
risky medical treatments - I myself have seen it in my being extremely
lax in the area of detection and prevention (i.e., I refuse to derive my
risks from the probabilities computed on others, feeling that I am
somewhat special) yet extremely aggressive in the treatment of medical
conditions (I overreact when I am burned), which is not coherent with

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

49

rational behavior under uncertainty. This congenital denigration of the
experience of others is not limited to children or to people like myself; it
affects business decision makers and investors on a grand scale.
All of my colleagues whom I have known to denigrate history blew
up spectacularly - and I have yet to encounter some such person who
has not blown up. But the truly interesting point lies in the remarkable
similarities in their approaches. I have noticed plenty of analogies
between those who blew up in the stock market crash of 1987, those
who blew up in the Japan meltdown of 1990, those who blew up in the
bond market debacle of 1994, those who blew up in Russia in 1998, and
those who blew up buying Nasdaq stocks in 2000. They all made claims
to the effect that "these times are different" or that "their market was
different", and offered seemingly well constructed intellectual
arguments (of an economic nature) to justify their claims; they were
unable to accept that the experience of others was out there, in the open,
freely available to all, with books detailing crashes in every bookstore.
Aside from these generalized systemic blow ups, I have seen hundreds of
option traders forced to leave the business after blowing up in a stupid
manner, in spite of warnings by the veterans, similar to a child's
touching the stove. This I find to resemble my own personal attitude
with respect to the detection and prevention of the variety of ailments I
may be subjected to. Every man believes himself to be quite different, a
matter that amplifies the "why me?" shock upon a diagnosis.
We can discuss this point from different angles. Experts call one
manifestation of such denigration of history historical determinism. In a
nutshell we think that we would know when history is made; we believe
that people who, say, witnessed the stock market crash of 1929 knew
then that they lived an acute historical event, and that, should these
events repeat themselves, they would know about such facts. Life for us
is made to resemble an adventure movie, as we know ahead of time that
something big is about to happen. It is hard to imagine that people who
witnessed history did not know at the time how important the moment
was. Somehow all respect we may have for history does not translate
well into our treatment of the present.

50

SOLON'S

my

WARNING

solon

I have another reason to be obsessed with Solon's warning. I hark back
to the very same strip of land in the Eastern Mediterranean where the
story took place. My ancestors experienced bouts of extreme opulence
and embarrassing penury over the course of a single generation, with
abrupt regressions that people around me who have the memory of
steady and linear betterment, do not think feasible (at least not at the
time of writing). Those around me either have (so far) had few family
setbacks (except for the great depression) or, more generally, are not
suffused with enough sense of history to reflect backward. For people of
my background, Eastern Mediterranean Greek-Orthodox and invaded
Eastern Roman citizens, it was as if our soul had been wired with the
remembrance of that sad April day circa 500 years ago when
Constantinople, under the invading Turks, fell out of history, leaving
us the lost subjects of a dead empire, very prosperous minorities in an
Islamic world - but with an extremely fragile wealth. Moreover, I
vividly remember the image of my own dignified grandfather, a former
deputy prime minister and son of a deputy prime minister (whom I never
saw without a suit), residing in a nondescript apartment in Athens, his
estate having been blown up during the Lebanese civil war. Incidentally,
having experienced the ravages of war, I find undignified
impoverishment far harsher than physical danger (somehow dying in
full dignity appears to me far preferable to living a janitorial life, which
is one of the reasons I dislike financial risks far more than physical
ones). I am certain that Croesus worried more about the loss of his
Kingdom than the perils to his life.
There is an important and non-trivial aspect of historical thinking,
perhaps more applicable to the markets than anything else: unlike many
"hard" sciences, history cannot lend itself to experimentation. But
somehow, overall, history is potent enough to deliver, on time, in the
medium to long run, most of the possible scenarios, burying the bad
guy. Bad trades catch up with you, it is frequently said in the markets.
Mathematicians of probability give that a fancy name: ergodicity. It
means, roughly, that (under certain conditions), very long sample paths
would end up resembling each other. The properties of a very, very long
sample path would be similar to the Monte Carlo properties of an
