
As a result of this regulatory framework, the Bells and the competitors
endlessly debate which elements should be made available and how prices
should be determined. State regulators individually set line-lease rates under
the direction of the FCC, which directly impacts the attractiveness of each
state to competitors.

However, there has been one consolation for the Bells in all this regulatory
upheaval: Once a state is deemed open to competition, the local phone giants
are allowed to enter the long-distance business. This isn’t a huge moneymaking
proposition for the Bells, but it can help them hold on to customers.

The desire of lawmakers and regulators to push fixed-line phone service to
a more competitive model has further eroded the competitive advantage of the
local phone companies. For example, the number of phone lines in service de-
clined in 2001 and 2002 for the first time since the Great Depression. With
local phone service generating the vast majority of the regional Bells’ cash flow,
declining lines in service threatens to diminish their ability to invest in net-
work upgrades and pay out dividends.

One niche of the industry hasn't been as affected by regulatory changes—
rural carriers such as Citizens, Alltel, and CenturyTel, which primarily operate
local phone networks in areas ignored by the old AT&T. These less densely
populated areas don’t attract the level of competition seen in urban markets.
Moreover, the rural carriers actually benefit from regulations, receiving subsi-
dies to help cover the relatively higher cost of serving these areas and in many
cases guaranteeing a certain return on investment.

A favorable regulatory environment, combined with the natural benefits
of owning the only local phone network in town, gives these companies the
strongest competitive advantages in the industry, These companies will never
earn huge excess returns on capital, though, so we still wouldn't consider the
moats wide. In addition, their financial stability means that the shares of rural

carriers rarely trade at cheap valuations.

297


298

TELECOM

Telecom Economics

Building and maintaining a telecom network, whether fixed line or wireless,
is an extremely expensive endeavor that requires truckloads of upfront capi-
tal. This requirement provides a substantial barrier to entry and usually pro-
tects the established players. To raise capital, a new entrant must have a great
story to tell investors. The emergence of the Internet, the opening of local
networks to competition, and rapid wireless growth during the 1990s gave
numerous new players the yarns they needed, which is why the usual barrier
provided by huge capital requirements came crumbling down as investors
lined up to grab a piece of the action.

While the effects of this massive infusion of capital are still being felt in
the industry, ongoing capital needs have sunk many new entrants. Even a
mature telecom firm will need to invest significant capital to maintain its net-
work, meet changing customer demands, and respond to competitive pres-
sures. The Bells, for example, spent nearly 30 percent of their annual sales on
new equipment during the late 1990s, though a spending rate of 20 percent
of sales is more normal. Despite sluggish growth and sharp reductions in cap-
ital budgets in telecom, the Bells still spent a combined $30 billion on their
networks in 2002.

Common Investing Pitfall: Revenues Here Today but Not Tomorrow

Telecom companies can’t expect to recoup the cost of a piece of equipment in any ane
year, so developing recurring revenue streams is important to eaming a sustained
return on investment. Sometimes firms seek out nonrecurring sources of revenue to
boost growth and profits, but these sources of revenue can’t be counted on to deliver
future retums. Owest, for example, spent billians building a long-distance network
and reported fantastic revenue growth as the network was placed into service. Unfor-
tunately, much of this growth came from one-time sales of basic network capacity,
rather than ongoing service contracts. Revenue fram these capacity sales, which gen-
erated high margins, was backed upfront, giving the appearance of rapid growth.
Once demand for this type of capacity dried up, revenues began to fall and margins
shrank. The firm was left with a business too small to suppart its debt load and was
forced to sell off assets.



TELECOM ECONOMICS

Because of the enormous cost to build a network, carriers typically have
very low ratios of sales to assets (asset turnover ratios). Even a mature carrier
typically generates only around $1 per year in sales for each $1 of assets invested.
But building a business of ample size to support interest payments and ongo-
ing capital needs is very important. Because fixed costs are so high, it’s impera-
tive for carriers to have enough customers over which to spread the costs.

Squeezing as much profit from the sale as possible is also crucial. While
size again plays a role here, a telecom company must be able to send bills, pro-
vide customer service, maintain the network, and market services efficiently.
A mature company, either fixed line or wireless, should expect to earn operat-
ing margins between 20 percent and 30 percent. Short of this level, it is ex-
tremely difficult to earn an attractive return on invested capital, given the slow
pace at which assets turn over.

With so many companies raising money and building networks in the late-
1990s, the volume of business needed to support all these huge investments
never materialized. Nowhere was this more true than in the long-distance in-
dustry. New entrants such as Williams Communications and 360 Networks
filed for bankruptcy despite rapid revenue growth because they were never able
to generate the level of sales needed to justify the enormous expense of build-
ing the networks, nor were they able to boost margins anywhere near the levels

needed to support their borrowing costs. Investors eventually refused to give

Common Investing Pitfall: Margins Falling? Look Out Below

Telecom investors must pay particularly close attention to profitability. One measure
commonly used in the industry is eamings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization (EBITDA), which gives a sense of how well operations are generating
cash to support capital spending needs and debt service. To calculate EBITDA, take
operating income and add back depreciation and amortization expenses. Falling
EBITDA margins may be an early indicator of competitive pressures or operating inef-
ficiencies. EBITDA is a blunt tool, however, and should not be mistaken for operating
cash flow, as reported on the cash flow statement. Focusing on EBITDA can obscure
problems such as growing accounts receivable that would be readily apparent on the
cash flow statement.

299


300

TELECOM

the firms more cash when they figured out that the field Was SO crowded that

the odds of success Were low.

Economic Moats in Telecom

Long-distance carriers have extremely small or, in most cases, no economic
moats. There are numerous long-distance networks connecting most major
cities, and competition remains fierce. Companies with strong reputa-
tions—notably AT&T—enjoy a small competitive advantage as business
customers look for carriers with financial strength. And because switching
long-distance service can be a hassle for a large business, companies with
large customer bases often have the upper hand. But the threat of competi-
tion has made it tough for long-distance carriers to raise prices. A rebound
in demand could bring some pricing power, but given the industry’s state,
we doubt long-distance firms will earn returns on invested capital equal
to their cost of capital, which makes it unlikely that they'll be worthwhile
investments.

Compared with the long-distance carriers, local phone companies enjoy
stronger competitive advantages, though we'd still put them in the narrow-
moat category. These firms still control the majority of the local phone market
and are able to earn very healthy margins on this service and generate enor-
mous cash flows. As customers’ demands on the local network grow, the ability

to keep networks up to snuff should increasingly offer an advantage. Regional

Common Investing Pitfall: Bloated Debt Loads

Companies that take on massive debt in the hapes of building a large business are
extremely risky. Mature firms that take on massive debt to expand their businesses are
similarly asking for trouble. AT&T borrowed heavily to fund its push into the cable TV
business. Left with a huge debt load and large capital spending needs to upgrade its
networks, the firm ended up selling the cable business for far less than the purchase
price. The regional Bells, particularly SBC, have been selling assets to pay down debt
and reduce the risk that declining revenues could cause financial distress. A measure
of indebtedness commonly used in the telecom industry is debt divided by EBITDA; a
ratio much higher than 3 should be approached with caution.



HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS IN TELECOM

Bells might upgrade their networks to offer a whole host of services, including
TV, numerous phone lines, and high-speed Internet access, over a single con-
nection. However, the Bells have traditionally moved very slowly into new
technologies, and basing an investment decision on the basis of the Bells’ po-
tential for new product offerings requires a large margin of safety.

Rural carriers (sometimes called rural local exchange carriers [RLECs])
benefit from a relative dearth of competition. The RLEC advantage can be
seen in the number of phone lines lost—about 1 percent on average during
2002 versus about 5 percent at the Bells. Moreover, most of the decline in
phone lines caused by a weak economy has been offset by an increase in
broadband Internet-access services. Rural firms have also maintained even
stronger margins than their Bell brethren, with operating margins exceeding
30 percent in many cases, which is roughly 10 percentage points higher than
the Bells.

Wireless, meanwhile, is almost a textbook case of perfect competition,
with near-zero pricing power and easily substituted services. Only Nextel has
been able to meaningfully differentiate itself with its unique Direct Connect
feature, and even that competitive advantage will likely be eroded away in the
future as competing carriers promote similar push-to-talk capabilities. With
that small—and likely temporary—exception, no wireless carrier has a sustain-
able competitive advantage. To most consumers, the carriers look identical
from the outside, which forces them to compete almost solely on price. Like
the long-distance industry, wireless providers offer calling plans that are nearly
indistinguishable: a finite number of minutes during peak calling hours and
plenty of cheap—or free—airtime on nights and weekends.

Without economic moats, investment opportunities are few and far be-
tween in the wireless industry. The six national carriers continue to scratch and
claw for new subscribers, hoping to benefit from better economies of scale. But
subscriber growth is weakening as the industry rapidly matures, intensifying

cutthroat price competition.

Hallmarks of Success in Telecom

With the long-distance business struggling to survive in its current form,
firms with local operations typically make the best investments. Even on the
local side, though, growth is typically very slow and the future regulatory and

301


302

TELECOM

competitive environments are uncertain. In addition, bankrupt telecom firms,
including WilTel and WorldCom/MCI, are starting to emerge with much
smaller debt loads, making them more able competitors. To weather what
storms may come, it is vital that a telecom carrier be in strong financial health.

Even with a dearth of growth opportunities today, capital spending needs
in the industry are likely to remain high. That makes a strong balance sheet
and solid free cash flows even more important. Healthy and consistent margins
are also vital to success because they mean that free cash flow can remain
strong. Rural carriers, such as Century Tel and Citizens Communications, have
maintained the best margins in the business. Regional Bell SBC has seen its
margins pressured, but as of mid-2003, the firm had arguably the best balance
sheet in the entire sector, with cash flow covering interest expenses about a
phenomenal 12 times over.

The biggest difficulty for wireless carriers will be differentiating their ser-
vices. For a while, Nextel Communications escaped the commodity trap by
offering a unique product and by focusing on business customers, who tend
to be heavy cell phone users and who are more concerned with quality and
features than price. As a result, Nextel has had the highest average revenue
per user and lowest rate of customer disconnection among nationwide wire-
less carriers. Nextel’s strong performance was due primarily to its Direct
Connect feature; because until recently, no other operator offered a similar
push-to-talk service. Unlike rivals that competed mainly on price, Nextel
wasn't forced to promote cheap calling plans to win customers. However,
rival carriers have already rolled out services similar to Direct Connect, which
will substantially erode Nextel’s competitive advantage. As in most industries,
technological superiority can keep the competition at bay only for so long.

Conclusion

The telecom sector of tomorrow will look nothing like the sector of the past.
Competition is far greater throughout the industry and economic moats ex-
ceedingly difficult to come by. The future of the industry will be shaped by
regulatory and technological changes, which means that financial strength
and flexibility are likely to be what separate successful firms from unsuccess-

ful ones over the next few years.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

Investor's Checklist: Telecom

> Shifting regulations and new technologies have made the telecom indus-
try far more competitive. Though some areas are more stable than others,
look for a wide margin of safety to any estimate of value before investing.

> Telecom is a capital-intensive business. Having the resources to maintain
and improve the network is critical to success.

> Telecom is high fixed-cost business. Keeping an eye on margins is very
important.

> Watching debt is also important. Firms can easily overextend themselves
as they build networks.

> The price of wireless airtime is plummeting. Carriers continue to com-

pete primarily on price.

303




23

Consumer Goods

Ip YOU’RE LOOKING for some new investments, consider checking your re-
frigerator, broom closet, or bathroom drawers for plenty of consumer goods
ideas. Many familiar household brands, such as Tide laundry detergent and
Oreo cookies, are made and marketed by companies that can be worthwhile
investments. These companies can be good defensive havens during eco-
nomic downturns because people still use toothpaste and shampoo even if
the economy is in recession.

The consumer goods sector is composed of industries such as food, bever-
ages, household and personal products, and tobacco. Like anything large and
old, it also moves slowly: Consumer goods markets typically grow no faster
than the gross domestic product and sometimes even slower. (Domestic beer
consumption has been growing at a paltry 1 percent annually, for example.)
Despite this slow growth, consumer goods stocks tend to be solidly profitable,
fairly steady performers, which can make them excellent long-term holdings
for your portfolio.

Debbie Wang and Carl Sibilski with Pat Dorsey.


306 CONSUMER GOODS

How Companies Make Money in Consumer Goods

Consumer goods companies generate profits the old-fashioned way: They
make products and sell them to customers, usually supermarkets, mass mer-
chandisers, warehouse clubs, and convenience stores. Kimberly-Clark makes
diapers and sells them to Wal-Mart and Target. Smucker’s cooks up jams,
jellies, and preserves for Safeway and Kroger.

The beverage companies offer a slight twist in the equation by selling
their products to their distribution channels: bottlers and beer distributors.
For example, nonalcoholic beverage firms such as Coca-Cola and PepsiCo
manufacture the concentrate and syrups for the finished soft drink products
and sell them to their bottling partners, who mix them with other ingredi-
ents, package the finished product, and sell it to retailers. In the case of alco-
holic beverage manufacturers, companies such as Coors and Allied Domecq
make and market spirits that are then sold to their network of distributors,
who resell and distribute the finished product to the retail customers.

Key Strategies for Growth
Because of their maturity, most consumer goods industries have already gone
through periods of consolidation. As a result, most industries are dominated
by a handful of huge companies that account for the majority of category vol-
ume and sales. For instance, in 2002 Anheuser-Busch, Coors, and SAB Miller,
the three largest brewers, controlled more than an 80 percent share of the do-
mestic beer market. Wrigley owns close to a 60 percent share of the domestic
The sector’s maturity also means that firms have only a few basic strate-
gies for growth available, and most companies rely on some combination of

these approaches.

Steal Market Share from Competitors, Usually by Introducing New Products

This approach can be a fairly costly proposition. PepsiCo (which makes both
beverages and salty snacks through its Frito-Lay division) spends an estimated
$1.6 million, on average, to develop a new product. That doesn’t include the
cost of consumer marketing support and sales allowances to retailers critical to
the success of any product in the crowded consumer markets. Since PepsiCo

launched 456 new products between 1998 and 2000 (many of which were


KEY STRATEGIES FOR GROWTH

in the Frito-Lay division), the bill for all that innovation was a whopping
$729.6 million.

Unfortunately, the road to a successful new product is littered with many
failures. Of the thousands of new food and beverage products launched in
2002, only 130 generated more than $7.5 million in revenue during the first
year." If sales of a new product do not show signs of positive momentum in
the initial 6- to 12-month trial-building window, store managers are often re-
luctant to leave it sitting on valuable shelf or freezer space.

For companies as large as many of the consumer goods firms, even a
strong lineup of new products can lift revenue by only so much—usually just
slightly above GDP growth. Thus, on the whole, leading firms post no better

than mid-single-digit revenue growth.

Grow by Acquiring Other Consumer Goods Companies

Some companies opt to enter new product lines by purchasing other firms.
For example, Gillette acquired the Duracell Battery business from Ralston-
Purina in 1996 to establish a presence in that market. In 2001, PepsiCo pur-
chased Quaker Oats primarily for the Gatorade franchise. Unfortunately, this
strategy can be hit-or-miss, depending on the companies and price paid. Fol-
lowing some initial bumps in the first year after acquiring Quaker, PepsiCo
managed to iron out problems and was ahead of schedule to achieve operat-
ing efficiencies in mid-2003. There was a high level of synergy in this partic-
ular case because both companies were mainly in the food and beverage
businesses. The distribution systems and retail customers of the firms over-
lapped, and both companies were strong marketing organizations.

On the other hand, Gillette’s acquisitions have not turned out as well.
Gillette is famous for dominating the razor and blades market with nearly an
80 percent share. It’s also a category where product innovation leads to in-
creased pricing power, as customers paid 15 percent to 20 percent more for each
successive product from Sensor to Mach3 and Mach3 Turbo. Gillette thought
it could apply this model to batteries when it bought Duracell in the mid-

1990s. However, several important characteristics of the battery business were

' Times and Trends, IRI, Inc., p. 6 (May 2003).

307


308

CONSUMER GOODS

not the same, and Gillette’s Duracell battery unit failed to produce the in-
tended results. The Duracell division performed poorly from 1999 through
2002 and took up a great deal of top management's time.

Reduce Operating Costs

Because top-line growth for consumer goods companies, whether it comes
from innovation or acquisition, is not much greater than that of the overall
economy, earnings growth must rely more on a streamlined operating struc-
ture than on revenue growth. With large retail customers such as Wal-Mart
dedicated to keeping inventories tight and prices low, a consumer product
maker must have a lean and flexible manufacturing structure. One tried and
true method of becoming leaner has been large-scale restructuring, which is
often very expensive in the short term, but can pay off in longer term effi-
ciency gains. Procter &¢ Gamble, Gillette, and Coca-Cola have consolidated
manufacturing and laid off thousands of workers to reduce administrative
overlap. It is not uncommon to see these companies undergo a substantial re-
structuring over a five-year period. For instance, Colgate-Palmolive racked up
more than $500 million in restructuring charges in 1995, nearly wiping out net
income for that year.

Starting in the mid-1990s, for example, Colgate-Palmolive took several
steps to increase earnings by cutting costs as opposed to boosting top-line
sales. This increased its operating profit margin from about 14 percent in 1997
to 20 percent in 2002. And the company thinks it can squeeze out more costs
by using SAP’s integrated enterprise software to search out inefficiencies in in-
ternational supply lines and operations.

The danger of this strategy is that the firm focuses too much on trying to
achieve earnings growth through cost-cutting and too little on looking for
ways to grow or at least maintain revenue growth. Colgate, which has an in-
novative history, has lagged Procter & Gamble’s new product launches in re-
cent years, and Colgate has also launched less effective products that suggest a
“me too” approach to product innovation. Moreover, Colgate’s focus on cost-
cutting led to reduced media exposure at a time when Procter & Gamble
increased spending because P&G saw low advertising prices as a good oppor-
tunity to invest in its brands. Cost-cutting is important, but it can damage
