
TRADING TACTICS

reverse technical strength increases, gradually overcomes the technical strength of
the preceding movement, and brings about a reversal of price trend.

Reviewing the Reversal Family
Thus we have the Head and Shoulders formation, the Common Turn, the Multiple
patterns, the Complex pictures with double heads
and double shoulders, and the Broadening Top. The
Triangles, we have seen, may lead to either reversal
Certain chart patterns
or continuation, but are probably to be found more
generally suggest
frequently as continuation formations. In the minor
reversal of the previous
area reversal group we have also the Wedge, the
price movment.
Rectangle and the Diamond. All of these reversal
formations are simply the varying pictures which
result from a straight price movement meeting technical strength in the opposite
direction and being gradually overcome by it. More or less in a class by itself we
have the Island Reversal.
Many of these various formations, in actual chart observation, tend to verge from
one picture into another, yet that need not bother us much because their indication
is much more important than their specific pattern to which we can give one name
or another, so long as in any case the indication is for reversal of the previous price
movement. The critical lines – the lines whose breaking becomes the signal for
action – are apt to be clearly defined regardless of the exact classification of the pattern, especially when the all-important volume indications are watched with care.

Reviewing the Continuation Family
In the classification of continuation patterns, the Symmetrical Triangle stands probably at the head of the list. Then we have the various other forms of Triangle, including the Ascending and the Descending types in which the hypotenuse indicates the
direction of the ensuing move. Next we have the Rectangles and the less definite pattern to which we have given the name of Continuation Head and Shoulders. We
have noted the Flags and Pennants as being especially reliable continuation formations. Then we have the price congestions with Drooping Bottoms and Accelerating
Peaks, the Horns, and such minor indications as the Zig-zag formation, One Day
Out-of-line Movements, Scallops, etc.

Other Special Figures and General Consideration
In addition to these specific chart pictures we have the additional helpful sugges– 423 –

STUDY XII

tions resulting from the application of other more general factors, such as resistance
levels, support levels, the factor of sales volume taken in relation to the price movement, and the highly important influence of trend lines, single and parallel, fanning
and flattening. And then, rather in a class by themselves, we have the entire family
of Gaps, which add their suggestions to the general pattern. We have the Common
Gap, the Continuation Gap, the Break-away Gap, and the Exhaustion Gap, as well
as the measuring theories based on single and multiple Gaps for determining the
possible extent of the ensuing move.
We would not for a moment have the student expect that he will make use of
every one of the patterns, chart formations, rules, theories and hypotheses included
in our study, in his every observation of practical chart action. We have tried to point
out the more important points in our catalog but it must also be remembered that it
is somewhat of a catalog none the less. We have attempted to present a complete
study of all the chart forms and theories which have proved to have forecasting
value and, for the sake of completeness, have included many points of minor character which the average reader will perhaps have comparatively few occasions to
use in actual practice.

The Question of Too Much Theory
We are quite sensible, for instance, to the possible criticism that we have presented
too much theory. The skeptical critic may perhaps remark that while any major price
movement is reversing its previous direction the
chart is almost bound to present some sort of a picHave called attention to
ture resembling one of our many reversal formacertain laws and rules
tions, and that when we add the warning that even
which have been working
such patterns may often be fallible and misleading,
from time immemorial
the entire framework of our science falls to pieces in
but have never before
one great shamble of truisms. Such a criticism is so
been clearly defined.
patent a misunderstanding of all that chart theory
claims and implies that it probably would never
even occur to the average reader or the experienced student, but it is only fair to
expose its fallacy to the possible few who have missed the fundamental point of our
theoretical science and reasoning.
The advocate of stock chart theory does not lay claim to having evolved any new
principles of fundamental technical action but merely to have called attention to certain laws and rules which have been working from time immemorial but which
have never before been clearly defined, definitely recognized or cataloged into any
set routine of science. The very simplicity of the logic behind our various chart theories is not only the basis of such criticism as has been above proposed, but is its best
answer as well.
– 424 –

TRADING TACTICS

Chart Science Chiefly a Cataloging of Experience
We can admit freely and frankly, for instance, that practically any process of technical market reversal will fall, naturally and logically, into some one of our many
reversal patterns. But, after all, that is all that we claim, or need to claim, to prove the
usefulness of such patterns. The various patterns are simply a practical aid in detecting the development of a price reversal. Our definition of all these patterns, our various technical names for them, are merely an aid to the study of the laws that have
always existed. They are made much more simple, much more easily understandable, definite and practical by the process of their cataloging and definition.
The science of astronomy does not lay claim to having influenced the movement
of planets in their orbit, but merely to have cataloged facts which have always
existed, simply to make the study of those facts easier and thus to lead into the
observation of additional facts and laws. So the science of technical chart reading
lays no claim to influencing the market or to developing new laws by which the market must act, but rather only to the cataloging of facts, reactions, laws and theories
which have always existed, in order to clarify the study of the market and make easier further additions to the knowledge which goes to make up our science.

Why Charts Are Not Infallible
Unfortunately, the stock market and our stock charts do not move in such fixed and
exact natural cycles as the planets studied by astronomers. Consequently we have
always the danger of false moves and other misleading phenomena in our study of
technical market action. The elements of human fallibility, of unforeseeable news
development, of sudden catastrophe, or sudden improvement and of consequent
quick changes in popular psychology, all make our normal rules of technical chart
action liable to error, to fallibility, to sudden change of forecast. But, in further
defense of chart theories, it may merely be mentioned that in perhaps the majority
of such cases, it is not the fundamental indication of the chart which has gone astray
so much as the plans of the traders or investors whose operations were leading
toward a definite major forecast and movement.
The average investor knows how often his attitude toward the market or a specific
stock changes overnight, either because of some piece of news or merely because of
a psychological reversal of heart. But only the insider knows how often professional
operators are fooled in their carefully laid plans, how often they accumulate a stock
and are just ready to put it up, with the chart already indicating that projected
upward move, when the market grows too weak, when other factors intervene,
when, for any number of reasons, it suddenly becomes impractical to carry out the
– 425 –

STUDY XII

original plans, and the stock is dumped overboard in a hurried scramble to unload,
even with a heavy loss to the insiders. Such developments cannot be foreseen by the
stock chart any more than by the operators whose trading influences the forecast of
that chart.

Chart Deception Engineered by Operators
Insiders and professional traders are by no means unaware of the growing public
interest and education in chart theories and patterns. In normal trading there are certainly not enough chart traders to make it worthwhile for the professionals to play
against them instead of against the general public, but we have learned that the professionals must play against someone in order to make their money. It is quite conceivable, therefore, that the insiders might take a ‘‘crack’’ at chart traders now and
then by manipulating false patterns in their campaign stocks, with the knowledge
that, by arranging certain chart pictures, they could draw in a certain amount of
buying or selling, as they chose, with a view to strengthening their own position.
This theory gives the professional credit for more power, perhaps, than he actually possesses, but it is merely a theory. The student’s best defense, and his best policy in any case, is in keeping and watching a goodly number of individual charts.
The professional can hardly swing more than a handful of his pet individual issues
to suit himself, much less the market as a whole, and the misleading action of a few
individual charts will often be adequately exposed by the contrary indications of a
great many other ones.
And then, of course, there is always available the protection of the stop-loss order,
deserting situations which do not work out properly, as well as the inevitable development of new technical indications which help the student to revise his forecast
and market position. It is reasonably safe to say that even the most powerful and
well-financed of operators cannot long prevent the chart’s showing the true technical picture.

A PROGRAM FOR THE BEGINNER
Having completed this Course, the student is now ready to test himself and his
newly acquired theoretical knowledge in actual market operations. If he was a
trader of some experience to begin with he has, no doubt, already charted stocks and
applied some of his technical theories to them, perhaps has even made a few trades
on the basis of technical action. And the novice, in his quite natural impatience for
action, has probably begun to keep at least a few charts and to try out thereon his
new forecasting rules. Nevertheless, it should be helpful to both if we outline a reasonably complete program of action – the practical steps which the beginner should
– 426 –

TRADING TACTICS

now take to put his studies into profitable use. In outlining this program we shall
simply be bringing together, for the most part, the detailed suggestions as to procedure which have been made in various chapters of our Course, but assembling
them into a definite working plan.
For the student who has already made some sort of start (which, as we have said
in the foregoing, is certainly to be expected in the great majority of cases) this program will serve as a means of checking his technique, calling his attention perhaps
to certain points which he may have overlooked or suggesting certain changes in his
present procedure which he may find it profitable to try out at least. Our program,
however, will be only suggestive; each trader, in the final analysis, will have to discover for himself the methods which are best adapted to his abilities and to the time
and money he can safely devote to his trading operations.

1. Making Up the List
The logical first step in our program is the selection of the list of stocks to be charted
with a view to trading in such of them as develop profitable opportunities from time
to time. The more important points to be considered in making up this list were discussed in Studies I and XI. We may summarize them briefly as follows:
A. Number to Chart.
Time is the limiting factor here. The best results generally speaking, are obtained by
charting as many individual stocks as one is able to maintain and study thoroughly
every day. Fifty is a good number. Less than 25 will hardly provide the necessary
background for comparison or a reliable reading of the general market trends. More
than 50 is fine provided one has the time to both maintain and study them. The personal equation enters here. With a little practice, the entering of the data is simple
and easy, but do not attempt to keep up more charts than you can or will find time
to analyze and interpret. The more charts you keep, obviously the more good, clear
opportunities for trading you will discover, but remember that you will have to discover them yourself, that the mere keeping of a large mass of undigested chart
record will not automatically bring them to your attention. Finally, don’t waste your
time keeping charts of stocks in which you would not be willing to trade.
B. Diversification.
Because some industries prosper while others decline, because the stocks of certain
groups are moving in the market while others are standing still, it is best to select a
well-diversified list for charting. Include at least one or two good trading stocks
from each important industrial group. Beyond that, your personal preferences may
be allowed reasonable scope.
– 427 –

STUDY XII

C. Price Level and Capitalization.
With certain exceptions, stocks in the middle price ranges are most satisfactory for
technical study and trading. Avoid ‘‘cheap’’ stocks – those selling under 10, say –
unless you have some very good personal reason for following one or two of them.
Concentrate on stocks selling in the general 15 to 60 range. Select actively traded
issues with a reasonably large number of shares outstanding, but here again the
middle ground is best. Thin stocks with a very small floating supply are easily
manipulated and are apt to move erratically without developing good chart patterns. Stocks of extremely large issue, on the other hand, are usually sluggish in their
market action and offer limited trading profits except on a very long term basis.
There are, of course, exceptions to both rules.
D. Swing Power.
This consideration in the selection of stocks for charting and trading purposes
entails a study of the back history. If the back weekly or monthly charts, preferably
the former for a period of years, are available for analysis they will show graphically
which of two issues habitually moves in wider and, consequently, more profitable
swings. If charts are not available, the percentage spread between the yearly high
and low prices over several years as published in a great many statistical services
and brokers bulletins will give a fair indication of swing habits.
E. Group and General Market Averages.
Our advice is not to bother with either. They are, as we have previously stated, likely
to be more confusing than helpful to the average trader. However, if you feel that
you want to watch them, general market average charts are published in many magazines and newspapers and may be followed therein. Group charts also are published in certain weekly and monthly magazines. If you wish to chart certain group
averages for yourself a weekly record should suffice for all practical trading purposes.
F. Changes in the List.
This is a question which, naturally, will not come up until after you have kept charts
for some little time. It is brought up here only to introduce the general advice not to
drop a stock from your chart portfolio without good reason for doing so. A certain
chart may present an uninteresting, even tiresome, picture of inactivity for months
but that is no reason to discontinue it in favor of some other issue which may be
attracting public attention at the time by its spectacular action. The chances are that
the inactive stock will eventually have its turn and, when it comes, you will be glad
you have the complete record and early, first-hand information of its movement.

– 428 –

TRADING TACTICS

2. Starting the Charts
Having selected the list of stocks which we are going to chart and study, the next
step, naturally, is to start the charts. The matters of paper to use, time and price scale,
sources of data, etc. were covered in detail in Study I (pages 14–21) and it is hardly
necessary for us to review them here. Start keeping daily charts on the entire list at
once, and weekly charts as the data accumulates and time permits.
There is, however, one important step in connection with the actual charting,
which you should take at this time. Get or make up the weekly charts on your chosen stocks back at least to the beginning of the last completed cyclical trend. Analyze
these back weekly charts carefully to determine the probable support or resistance
levels that may appear in the current trend (see Study IX). Note these levels on the
newly started current daily charts. Analyze also the nearby back history as depicted
on the weekly charts to determine whether any trend lines developed on the weekly
charts should be projected on the current daily charts.
This study of trends, besides enabling you to project what may appear to be
important lines on our new charts, will determine in most cases the basic trends in
which your stocks are moving. You will make use of this information in establishing
your general trading policy later, following the rule of always trading, so far as possible, with the major trend.

3. Studying the Patterns
Having studied the back record and transferred to your new daily charts such information derived therefrom as lends itself to current interpretation, your next step
should be to watch for and try to discover significant patterns or other price and volume action of forecasting value. You will hardly be able to do this with much confidence until you have posted at least a month of new daily record; begin then,
however, to draw (in pencil, very lightly) all lines bounding the minor trends and
areas of price congestions that may appear. It will develop very quickly that some of
these lines have no continuing significance; they should be erased or at least disregarded. Other lines will have to be slightly re-drawn as the price action progresses.
One point which the beginner frequently forgets is that trend lines and pattern
boundaries are drawn across established reversal points. It takes at least two such
points to determine a good chart line. Not until a price movement has actually been
reversed is a reversal point established. The reversal need not be an important one
in extent or duration; it may be a matter of only a minor fluctuation lasting two or
three days and extending over a range of only two or three points, but it must have
actually occurred, nevertheless, before its reversal point is known and can be used
in technical analysis.
– 429 –

STUDY XII

At the same time, follow the action of volume closely, watching particularly the
action of prices when volume tends to decline and when it suddenly increases.
Compare the price levels at which patterns or congestions develop with the support and resistance levels suggested by the back history. Study the action of prices
as these levels are approached and after they have been penetrated.
Compare the patterns formed simultaneously on different charts and make tentative forecasts of the relative possibilities for profit which they present, taking into
account trend action, support and resistance levels and other measuring indications
if any. (See Study X.) Check your forecasts by the subsequent price action.

4. Studying Price Movements
When a profitable price movement takes place, unexpectedly perhaps, look back to
see from what patterns or foundation it proceeded and what break-out signal was
given. If your daily chart does not show what appears to be an adequate foundation
for the move, look back on the weekly chart to see if a forecasting pattern appeared
there.
Watch for break-outs and study the extent of price movement and volume action
attending them. Note the closing price levels. Study the action and reaction of prices
following break-outs.

5. Trading on Paper
After you have charted your stocks for at least a couple of months and have learned
by trial and error which pattern and trend lines are apt to be most reliable, and after
you have made a number of tentative forecasts and checked them by subsequent
events, start trading on paper.
Conduct your paper trading exactly as though you were managing a real trading
account with actual cash capital. Keep an exact record of each buy and sell order,
each stop-loss order, and the results of each trade, as well as brokers’ commissions
and taxes. Keep your commitments within the bounds of your assumed trading capital. Don’t fool yourself by assuming that you had done something which it develops later you should have done but which you did not, in fact, do at the time. Second
guesses don’t count if you are sincerely desirous of perfecting your judgment and
your technique.
Don’t worry about the opportunities you may have missed because you didn’t see
them at the time or because your capital was already tied up in other situations.
Study rather to recognize your mistakes and the reasons for them. Remember that
your mistakes will be of greater value to you in your ultimate success than your correct forecasts. Learn to avoid the losses, and the gains will take care of themselves.
– 430 –

TRADING TACTICS

But remember also that there will always and inevitably be some losses, so don’t
let yourself be unduly upset by an occasional miscarriage of plans. Learn to use
stop-loss orders correctly to cut your losses short when the unexpected happens.

6. The Final Test
After you have traded on paper for several months and have thoroughly demonstrated to your own complete satisfaction that your forecasts are working out profitably, then and not until then, take the final test. Put a part of your cash trading
capital actually into the market. Now you may find that you are beset by an entirely
new set of problems – worries, doubts and temptations which did not trouble you
in your paper trading. Your first cash trades may not work out. But don’t lose your
confidence. Don’t be stampeded into changing your tactics; don’t listen to tips and
rumors any more than you did before; follow the same methods which you followed
in your successful trading on paper. Analyze your mistakes and study how to overcome the tendencies which prevented you from putting theory into successful practice. Go back to paper trading, perhaps, for another course of schooling and then try
again.
