or below the ii breakout pullback setup three bars later.
There was a large two-legged move down from yesterday’s high that ended in a
triple bottom on today’s open. There was a second chance to go long on the higher low
at 9:05 a.m. PST, after the initial strong leg up that tested the high of the open. This
was also a breakout pullback buy setup (even though the market had not yet broken out
above the high of the open).
Bar 1 was an up bar, and it was followed by a down bar and then a second up
bar that tested the moving average. This is a small two-legged correction to the moving average and therefore a low 2 short setup. There were also trapped bulls who
bought above the back-to-back two-bar reversal bottom attempts, and once the low
2 triggered, they would exit their longs with a loss. Their selling adds to the selling
of the new bears and increases the chance of success. Also, since they just lost, they
will be hesitant to buy, and the losses of buyers increase the chance of a successful
short scalp.
A series of overlapping bars is a tight trading range, which is a magnet, and breakouts often fail and the market is drawn back into the tight trading range. This is because
both bulls and bears feel that there is good value in that range. When the market drifts
toward the bottom of the range, the bulls feel that there is even better value and they
buy more aggressively. The bears prefer to short in the middle or top of the range.
Their absence at the bottom of the range and the increased buying by the bulls lifts
the market back up. The opposite happens at the top of the range, where bears become
more aggressive and the buyers stop buying and wait for slightly lower prices. The entire

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Figure 6.12

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

133

process is ampliﬁed on a breakout. Here, the bears were able to overwhelm the buyers
and break the market to the downside. However, instead of ﬁnding new sellers down
there who could push the market down further, the buyers saw these lower prices as an
even better value than that in the tight trading range. The result was that the market was
pulled back into the range.
The market later tried to break out of the top and again was pulled back into the
range. However, there will always be an successful breakout eventually.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

134

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.13

FIGURE 6.13 No Tails Means Strength

A bar with no tail at either end in a strong trend is a sign of strength, and traders
should enter with trend on its breakout. In Figure 6.13, bar 8 was a bear bar in a
strong bear trend, and it had no tail at both its high and its low, indicating severe
selling pressure (they sold it from start to finish). It was likely that there would
be more selling to come. Traders have to be fast in placing their sell stop orders
because the market is moving fast. Alternatively, they can just short at the market
or on a one- or two-tick bounce using a limit order.
The bar after bar 10 had a shaved top in a bear trend but since the market was
not in free fall at this point, that alone was not enough reason for a short.
The bar after bar 16 was a bull trend bar with a shaved top and bottom, but
it was not in a bull trend and therefore it does not function as a buy setup based
solely on the absence of tails.
The bar after bar 17 and the bar before bar 20 were not shaved bar sell setups
because they were not in a free-fall bear trend.
There were many two-bar reversal setups on this chart, as there are on all
charts.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
There was a quiet open in Figure 6.13 that continued the tight trading range of the close
of yesterday. Bar 8 was a two-bar breakout and traders could have shorted on the close

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Figure 6.13

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

135

of the bar because of a likely trend from the open bear trend, or below bar 10, the ﬁrst
pause, or on the bar 13 double top bear ﬂag test of the moving average.
Bar 11 was the second bar of a two-bar reversal and the market might have been
trying to turn up after the sell climaxes. The next bar was a doji inside bar and a low
1 short setup. However, when there is a bear ﬂag where the signal bar mostly overlaps
with the two prior bars and the market might be in a trading range, the odds are high
that the short will fail and will become a bear trap. Do not take these short signals.
The three-bar rally from bar 12 led to a 20 gap bar short, but since the upward
momentum was strong, it was better to wait for a second signal, which occurred at
bar 13.
Bar 19 was a moving average gap bar short and it led to a new low of the day. It was
also a failed breakout above the bars 15 and 17 swing highs and a test of the top of the
trading range. It is common for a trend day to have a strong countertrend move between
11:00 a.m. and noon PST, trapping traders into the wrong direction as it did here. It is
important to realize this so that you will be mentally prepared to take the with-trend
trade, which was a short here.
Since the bar before bar 10 was a large range bar in a trend that had gone on for
a while, it is a sell climax and the market might try to correct sideways to up soon. The
ﬁrst pause in a strong trend is usually a successful short scalp, even in a strong bear
trend, but it might become a ﬁnal ﬂag and lead to a correction up (the breakout below
its low may reverse up within a bar or two). Whenever there is a strong spike down, it is
usually followed by a measured move down based on some aspect of the spike, usually
the distance from the open or high of the ﬁrst bar to the close or low of the last bar of
the spike. The low of the day was a perfect measured move down from the open of the
ﬁrst bar to the close of the ﬁnal bar. Traders should continue to hold short at least until
the market reaches the general area of these targets.
Bar 16 was a large bull inside bar reversing up from a new low of the day, and the
market was now in a trading range. It was also a high 2 in a trading range and therefore
an acceptable long setup. The high 1 formed two bars earlier.
The two-bar spike down into the close of yesterday led to the bear channel that
ended on the bar before bar 11 today. However, the entire channel was steep enough to
likely function as a spike on either the 15 or 60 minute chart, and the market might be
in the process of channeling down into the close of the day.
The bar 21 strong bear trend bar or the bar before bar 20 might have served as a
small spike down that led to the bear channel into the close of the day.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

136

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

PRICE ACTION

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 6.14

FIGURE 6.14 Signal Bar Examples

Apple (AAPL) demonstrated many common signal bars on the 5 minute chart
shown in Figure 6.14. Even though bar 1 was a Hammer doji bar at the bottom
of a swing down and it would make many candle worshipers want to buy, especially since it was a double bottom with the first bar of the day, this was a bad setup
for price action traders. It was the third overlapping doji, meaning that the market
traded both up and down in all three bars. This was an area of two-sided trading
and therefore a trading range, and whenever there is a trading range just below the
moving average, the odds favor a downside breakout. There are always sellers on
any test of the moving average from below, and there was not enough room between the high of the bar and the moving average to make even a scalper’s profit.
If you were to buy above bar 1, you would have to pay attention to the size of the
bars, all of which had relatively large ranges. This increases the risk of the trade
because your protective stop location should be in part determined by the size of
the current bars. If you wanted to keep your risk the same on all of your trades, you
would have to trade fewer shares.
Bar 2 was a much better reversal bar setup because it had a decent-size bull
body and it was the second attempt to reverse up from below yesterday’s low and

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 6.14

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

137

from a new low of the day (bar 1 was the first attempt). The bull bodies of the first
two bars of the day showed some prior bull strength. The tail at the top showed
some weakness, but this was erased by the trend bars that followed it.
Bar 2 was the second bar of a two-bar reversal and the middle of a large two-bar
reversal on some higher time frame chart. You can find a chart where the bar before
or after formed a two-bar reversal, and you could find an even higher time frame
chart where the two bars before and the two bars after formed a two-bar reversal.
As with all two-bar reversals, you can find an even higher time frame chart where
the five bars formed a single bull reversal bar.
Bar 3 was an outside up bar (an outside bar with a bull body) after a pause bar,
which followed the breakout to a new high of the day, and was an entry bar for
the purchase above the high of the small bar. Outside bars in new trends often trap
traders out of great trades because they happen so quickly. Many traders don’t have
enough time to reverse their perspective fast enough from bearish to bullish, and
then they have to chase the market up. The bar before bar 3 was a doji, so it was
not a strong setup for a short, even though the market might reverse down after a
breakout to a new high of the day. Only scalpers and weak shorts would be shorting
below its low because of the signs of bull strength that were accumulating. The bar
before that doji had the largest bull body of the day and closed on its high, and it
was also the third consecutive up bar. All three bars had decent-size bodies, and the
second and third did not overlap more than half of the prior bar. It was likely that
traders were aggressively looking to buy any pullback and had limit orders to buy
both below the low and above the high of the doji, and the buying was so strong
that both sets of buy orders were filled in one bar.
Bar 4 was a bear doji at a new high, but the upward momentum was so strong
and the reversal bar was so weak that a short could be considered only on a second
entry. This was the first bear body after seven consecutive bull bars and the market
rarely reverses very far on the first attempt, especially when the signal bar has a
close in the middle instead of at its low. The bears were not even strong enough to
close the bar on its low so they will unlikely be able to push the market down very
far before the bulls overwhelm them again.
Bar 5 was another outside up bar that tested the moving average and the breakout from the opening range, and it was the end of first pullback in a strong up move.
Bar 6 was a bear reversal bar and a second entry short setup (the first was two
bars earlier) after taking out the bar 4 swing high and yesterday’s high. Since the
bears had enough strength to test the moving average with bar 5 and the bull trend
is even more overdone, the bears should be able to correct to the moving average
or even below it this time. As a trend wears on, the bulls typically will want deeper
pullbacks before looking to buy again.
Bar 7 was an entry bar on an ii short setup at a time when you were expecting
a test of the moving average. Both ii bars had bear bodies, which increases the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

138

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.14

chance of success for a short trade. Although a bull body on a bear entry bar is not
good and the bar after it traded above it, the market did not trade above either of
the ii bars where the protective stop would be. If you are going to take a trade in a
tight trading range, you have to give it a little room. That entry bar became a small
bull reversal bar, but small reversal bars are rarely good and when one forms in
a tight trading range, it should not be looked at as a reversal bar because there is
nothing to reverse. The ii breakout reversed back up a couple of bars later, which is
expected when an ii is in the middle of the day’s range. Also, the market completed
its goals of two legs down and a penetration of the moving average.
Bar 8 was a doji bar at close to a double top in what was now a trading range.
Doji bars are never good signal bars for shorts in strong bulls, but they are acceptable signal bars for shorts in trading ranges, depending on the context. Since the
market was testing the top of the range, it was an acceptable signal bar for a short
since the market might test the bottom of the range.
Bar 9 was a two-bar reversal after a new swing low and test of the bar 5 low. The
entry was above the high of the higher of the two bars, which would be above bar
9. However, this is risky because there will always be shorts at the moving average
when the market tests it from below. Also, the two bars are large, forcing buyers to
come in too high above the low of a down leg. When the risk is greater, it is better
to not take the trade and to wait for a strong setup.
Bar 10 was a two-bar reversal following four bear trend bars with good-size
bodies, small tails, and very little overlap, and therefore a good short setup in a
strong bear trend.
Bar 11 was a bull reversal bar after a third push down and it was an attempt to
hold above the low of the day. The bear trend had gone on for a long time and there
were many pullbacks along the way, so the odds were high for a test of the moving
average. Since it is countertrend, you have to be willing to allow for pullbacks in
the move up to the moving average, so do not tighten your stop too soon.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The market broke below the moving average on the open in Figure 6.14, but the breakout
failed with a strong bull reversal bar. The second bar had a bull body but it also had
prominent tails and it failed to get above the moving average. There was also no followthrough buying on the third bar, which also tested the moving average and failed to get
above it. Bulls should have considered exiting their longs and waiting since the market
was now in a small tight trading range below the moving average and the bars were
large with tails. A tight trading range below the moving average usually breaks out to
the downside, but there was no reliable short setup. Instead, traders should wait for a
better setup. Bar 2 was a strong bull reversal bar that set up a long of the failed breakout
of that tight trading range, which became a ﬁnal ﬂag.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 6.14

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

139

Once the market broke above the opening high, a measured move up was likely.
Bar 2 was also a bear micro wedge that overshot the trend channel line that could
be drawn across the bottoms of the prior three bars. Notice how there is a tail at the
bottom of the bar that followed bar 1. That means the buyers came in around the low
of the bar. The bears were hoping to ﬁnd sellers on the breakout below the low of the
bar and for the close to be well below the low of the bar, but instead there were some
buyers. This happened on the next bar as well and even more so with bar 2. The bears
were ﬁnally able to drive the price even further below the low of the prior bar, but the
bulls became especially aggressive and reversed the market and closed the bar above its
open and near the top of the bar. Although micro wedges by themselves don’t usually
lead to major reversals, the other factors at work here created the low of the day.
Bar 2 along with the bar before it and the bar after it also created a three-bar reversal
and a 15 minute reversal bar because the bar before it would have the same open as the
15 minute bar, the bar after it would have the same close as the 15 minute bar, and that
close is above the open. The next bar would then trigger a 15 minute long entry.
The move down from bars 4 to 5 had several overlapping bars and could be a ﬁnal
ﬂag. Bar 5 and the bar that followed it both had very large bodies and small tails and
therefore formed a two-bar buy climax. When a climax occurs after a trend has been
going on for many bars, the odds of a two-legged sideways to down correction lasting at
least 10 bars increase. The next bar was a bear inside bar after a buy climax and might
become a one-bar ﬁnal ﬂag.
Bar 6 was the second leg up from the bar 5 ﬁrst pullback and from the bar 2 low,
and second legs are often reversals. Also, it was a low 4 and a wedge with the three
pushes being bar 4, the bar after bar 5, and bar 6. It was additionally a larger wedge
with the three pushes being the third bar of the day, bar 4, and bar 6. With this many
factors operating, a trader should expect at least two legs down. It also followed two
buy climaxes, the ﬁrst being the two-bar climax of bar 5 and the next bar and the second being the bar before bar 6. A second consecutive buy climax usually results in
at least a two-legged correction that penetrates the moving average and lasts at least
an hour.
The two-legged pullback that followed the bar 6 short penetrated the moving average and ended with a moving average gap bar. Since it formed in a strong trend, a test
of the trend’s high was likely. It was also a wedge bull ﬂag buy setup with the ﬁrst push
down being the bar before bar 6 and the second push down being the third bar after bar
6. A moving average gap bar often leads to the ﬁnal leg of the trend before the market
has a larger pullback and even a reversal.
Bar 8 was a lower high or double top after a moving average gap bar, which always
breaks the trend line, and therefore a possible trend reversal. There is a good risk/reward
setup for a swing down, and shorts should swing part of their position. It also formed
a one-bar ﬁnal ﬂag reversal, and a micro double top reversal with the tails at the top of
either of the two bars before it.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

140

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.14

Bar 9 was a wedge bull ﬂag with the three pushes down from bar 8, but because the
sell-oﬀ was in a relatively tight bear channel and the market might have reversed into
a bear trend, it is better to wait to see if there will be an acceptable breakout pullback
buy setup. Five bars later, there was an outside up bar but that is not an acceptable long
entry in either a trading range or a bear trend, and therefore buyers would have to wait
some more. Bar 9 was also an attempt to form a double bottom bull ﬂag with bar 5, at
a price level where the market found buyers earlier in the day. Finally, it was the end
of a large two-legged correction from the bar 6 high and therefore a high 2 long and
probably a clear high 2 long on a higher time frame chart, like the 15 minute chart.
Bar 10 was a breakout pullback from the breakout below the bar 9 wedge bull ﬂag
low and the failed high 2, and it followed a breakout below the double top bear ﬂag that
formed after bar 9. The four-bar breakout was a spike down, and the market bounced
back up to test the bar 10 top of the channel by the close. There was a double top bear
ﬂag short setup with the high of bar 10 and the bar that formed four bars later. All
breakouts are spikes and climaxes, and there was a second sell climax two bars before
bar 11; a second consecutive sell climax usually leads to at least a two-legged pullback. A
breakout spike often leads to a measured move down. Take the number of ticks between
the open of the ﬁrst of the four bars and the close of the fourth bear bar and project
down from the top of the ﬁrst pullback (the high of bar 10).
Bar 11 was similar in appearance to bar 1, which earlier found buyers in this price
area and they may be willing to buy again. Since there has not yet been a break of the
bear trend line, the odds of a trading range are greater than the odds of a signiﬁcant
reversal. The move down from bar 6 was in a channel, and a bear channel should be
thought of as a bull ﬂag, so there might be a strong move up before long. Also, the
entire move down from bar 6 is a complex two-legged move with the second leg down
beginning at bar 8; it might be a simple two-legged correction on a higher time frame
chart, like the 60 minute chart.
Bar 11 was a micro double bottom reversal with the tail of the bull doji bar that
preceded it.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

Figure 6.15

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

141

FIGURE 6.15 One-Bar Bear Flag

A bull reversal bar in a bear spike can be a one-bar bear flag. In Figure 6.15, bar 8
was a break below a bull reversal bar (failed reversal bar) in a strong bear trend
and is a great short because the early bulls who bought will be trapped and forced
to sell below its low.
Bars 8 through 14 created a two-bar reversal on a higher time frame chart and
a single reversal bar on an even higher time frame chart.
Bars 9 and 10 formed a small double bottom and bar 11 was the entry bar for
the long, but a doji is not a good signal bar for a countertrend trade against a strong
trend. There were no prior bull pullbacks in the sharp sell-off, and since the first
pullback in a strong trend usually fails, smart traders expected this bottom to fail.
They placed sell stop orders to go short exactly where the losing longs would sell
out of their positions, which was one tick below bar 11.
A doji is a one-bar trading ranges and bars 9 and 10 created a pair of large dojis
with a small doji in between. These three bars formed a small sideways trading
range in a strong bear trend, which is a bear flag, so a downside breakout was
likely. Since bar 11 was the second attempt to rally (the first attempt was two bars
earlier but it could not even get above the bull doji just before it), the longs would
almost certainly exit below bar 11 and not look to buy again until the market moved
down for a bar or two. As these longs sold their positions, their selling added to the
selling pressure from the smart traders who expected this weak bottom to fail and

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

142

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.15

therefore shorted below bar 11. The only traders willing to buy just bought and lost,
so the market became briefly one-sided and destined to fall.
