
52

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Praaice

emotional rat race it is never sure to anyone which side the axe will
fall. One thing is certain, though: the losses of one party will pay for the
profits of the other. Arguably no technical development better illustrates
the pivotal line between victory and defeat than a little squeeze progres­
sion in a critical level of support or resistance.
As prices flipped back and forth between the pattern line and the
25ema, ultimately the market had no choice but to pick sides. For a
brief moment in time, bulls may have felt a sweet tingle of victory when
bar 1 1 managed to break the high of the bullish bar before it. But alas,
as is often seen in a squeeze, follow-through appeared nonexistent and
the break turned out to be a trap.
This is a yet another fine example of how a tiny false break on one
side of the price action can be a harbinger of a major break on the other.
If you were a bull in position and you saw bar 1 1 produce that upside
break only to fully turn around and end on its "lows" (lower region of
the bar), how would you feel? And as the market then proceeded to take
out this bar at the bottom, breaking a major pattern line and round
number in the process, would you still stick around in hopes of sideline
assistance? Or would you rather let go of the rope and sooth your ach­
ing hands. Or better still, take position on the short side yourself1

features of a market slowly turning around from bullish to bearish. It is

The total progression on top of the pattern line shows the typical

interesting to note also that throughout this pattern, plenty of bulls had
taken position on bearish corrections to the round number, and they
even bought a little below it. But the very moment this support caved
in from a buildup situation, the chart dropped 50 pip without a bull in
sight. This shows us most evidently that in the marketplace, it is never
about price, it is all about pressure.

53

Understanding Price Action
IFig 3.61

WW'N,ProRearTtme.com

00:00

eur/usd S-minute

10:00

11:00

13:00

Figure 3.6 From the start of the first bar in the EU Open at 08:00, bulls

had shown their intentions quite unambiguously, which had left little
room for bearish opposition. As prices moved higher, bears repeatedly
tried to squeeze out a pullback of substance, but they were all cut short
even before the 25ema was reached. These . failed counterattacks re­
sulted in a number of false lows during the opening rally, of which bar
1 was probably the most distinctive. That was indeed a terrible break to
open up a short and it didn't take much bullish prowess to shake out
the bears involved in that wager.
As is often seen when the market puts in a strong rally, contrar­
ians of the clever variety tend to back off until at least a former area of
support or resistance is touched upon. If no such level is found within
reasonable distance, round numbers tend to make attractive substi­
tutes. It is seldom a smart idea, though, to short or buy straight into a
round number in the hopes of an immediate bounce. As much as you
can "expect" these levels to put up a fight, not seldom they are taken
out more than a bit before the defenders come in. In that respect, the
perforation of the 50-level in bar 2 was actually quite modest.
Pullback 2-3 ate back about 50 percent of the opening rally, which
we know is very common even in the best of trends. Note how bar 3
slightly undercut the low of bar 1 , but then was quickly bought up. An
interesting false low. As prices moved up again to reclaim their position
above the average, they soon ran into resistance of a pattern line com­

ing down from former highs. The initial perforation of this boundary,

despite being in line with dominance, was poorly built up and thus a

54

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Praaice

likely candidate to provoke contrarian aggression (4).
The horizontal pattern line points out the triple bottom features of
the 1 -3-5 progression. Being so common an occurrence, we may almost
take for granted that prices tend to bounce on a 50 percent correction
of an earlier rally, but let us not discard the bravery involved to make
this happen. After all, plenty of pullbacks do move on to deeper levels.
By comparison, the task of the breakout trader is not nearly as heroic,
for he will not meddle with the forming of the buildup itself. His job is
simply to piggyback the breakout, should one come forth in tradable
fashion. So how about the break of bar 5?
It's not hard to see why bar 5 was a crucial bar. The low of it helped
to form the triple bottom element and the high ran up against an over­
hanging flag line (squeeze variant) . With both pattern lines converging
sharply, a break, either way, was practically unavoidable. Considering
the bullish dominance from earlier on, and not to mention the bullish
close of bar 5, the odds definitely favored a bull-side breakout.
Bar 6 was a false high with bar 2 and another sign of round number
resistance (note the topping tail) . Leaving also a double top behind (26), this development was likely to produce a pullback of sorts; but not
every bull in position will immediately have feared the pending adverse
pressure. In fact, a modest correction can indirectly favor the trend-side
prospects, for it offers sideline parties a chance to join the trend more
economically, which could serve to put new life in it. Of course, not all
pullbacks will "help the trend along", but it is not for nothing that so
many strategies are specifically designed to exploit the corrective mo­
tions of the market.
Shortly after the 50-level was broken in the 7-8 bull swing, prices fell
prey to the pull of the magnet (8-9) , but confident bulls quickly retali­
ated with another upside attack. This time, however, they failed to take
out their former high. And this put in a lower top at 1 0 .
With nothing but higher lows o n the board and with most prices
trading well above the 25ema, there can be no debate as to the bullish
supremacy in this session. In such an environment, conservative trad­
ers are much advised to shun all bets on the sell side. As to the prospects
for further advance, however, there was a notable indication present

55

Understanding Price Action
that the market had entered a zone of stronger resistance. Have a look
at the 7-8-9- 1 0- 1 1 progression, and particularly the part on top of the
round number. It is an interesting variant of the classic double top and
we can refer to it as the M-pattem. Earlier on, we already came across
its bullish counterpart, the W -pattern. Both are very potent buildup
formations and seldom hard to detect; but their breaks are best traded
in line with dominance. When broken the other way around, as with
the M-pattern here, the market's response can still be quite powerful,
because the event could prompt many parties to exit. We should never
take these patterns lightly.
The dotted line is put in to point out a classic ceiling test example
(low of 1 2 tests high of 7), but with the M-pattern block now hanging
ominously above, there wasn't much room for a serious bounce .
. WW'W.ProRealTIma.com

eur/usd 5-minute

IFig 3.71

Figure 3.7 It took the bears a mere five candles in the UK morning to

produce a vicious 80 pip rally that would put its undeniable mark on
the rest of the session ( 1 -2). Once the action calmed down a bit, bulls
tried to regain some of the territory lost, but all they could manage, re­
ally, was to stem the decline. This formed what is generally referred to
as a bear-flag progression (2-4). Common perception has it that a flag
pattern builds up to a break in line with the pole from which it hangs
(continuation break). This is indeed a regular occurrence, but some im­
portant distinctions need to be made; when acting on the implications
of our technical patterns too eagerly, we may end up getting hurt more
than benefit from them.

56

Cllapter 3

Price Action Principles-Praaice

A first major factor in the way a break is received is its location in
relation to the 25ema. On balance, the "further away" entry is taken
from the average, the more riskier the trade, particularly when using
tight stops. Even in a trending market, prices will always try to correct
towards the 25ema, which basically turns the average into a perpetual
magnet. With this tendency in mind, one of the most effective filters you
can build into you trading method is to allow prices, in the vast major­
ity of cases, to reach the average first before participating on a venture
away from it. Such simple selectivity stands to improve the odds for a
successful start of your trade most dramatically.
Another issue to take into account is the shape of the flag in rela­
tion to the size of the pole. When a relatively small flag hangs from a
relatively large pole, participants may view the relation between the two
as a bit "off' and thus be reluctant to trade the break of the flag. This
concept is related to the principle of harmony and we will take it up in
more detail in the section on our entry techniques in Chapter 5 .
A flag break of the poisonous variety is shown below bar 4. Not only
did this break originate from a rather small flag (in relation to its pole
1 -2), just look at the distance away from the 25ema-that is huge!
Another thing that strongly contributes to the danger of trading a

and, rest assured, they do possess a very keen eye for their favorite play.

premature break is that contrarians are always on the lookout for them
In other words, next to finding few companions to get his poor break

going, the premature trader stands to encounter lots of participants
of the dreaded other camp. Further adding to his troubles is the often
treacherous behavior of his fellow traders at the first signs of faltering
follow-through. Consider the 5-6 maneuver. That was not just the doing
of powerful bulls, bears were toppling over one another in their hurried
flight to safety.
Interesting to note also is that it took just one bar to fully crush the
prospect of bearish continuation (5). We can refer to a bar of this cali­
ber (in relation to the average size of neighboring bars) as a powerbar,
meaning that it opens at one end and then closes strongly at the other.
Looking closely, we can detect a virtual copy of this bar at 3 . That, too,
was a strong powerbar in defiance of the bearish pressure, but since it

57

Understanding Price Action
was the first to show up, its intimidating presence possessed less of a
bite. Bar 5 , on the other hand, showed up after a sideways progression
had already stalled the bearish momentum (buildup) , and it confirmed
a failed flag breakout to boot. Understandably, this time around more
bears will have taken heed of the adverse implications, not in the least
since progression 2-5 bore all the characteristics of a W-reversal break.
To visualize the full W-pattern, start out with the left leg at 1 , follow
the up/down motions in the bottom of the bear rally and then imagine
the upside break of bar 5 to provoke a bull rally all the way up to the
level of 1 . In practice, however, such symmetry is quite exceptional, and
not very relevant either. In the vast majority of cases, the element of
most significance in the W-pattern is not the right leg, but the middle­
part progression following the left leg (2-5). The blockier this cluster
shows up, the more likely that bears will bail out on an upside break of
it. Moreover, when this block shows a powerbar on the right, as was the
case with bar 5, bears with tight stops may not even wait for the middle­
part's high to be taken out; they may use the break of the powerbar to
exit immediately. (Naturally, in the highs of a bull swing, the same thing
applies to an M-pattern situation.)
Do bear in mind, though, that when set against the dominant
pressure, a middle-part break may still fail to attract substantial follow­
through, or could even be a trap. In most cases it is recommended not
to jump in on these breaks, but to use them mainly for exiting purposes
when already in position. (See Chapter 6 on Manual Exits.)
On the way to fill the gap with the average, the 5-7 pullback had
encountered little bearish opposition. But the tiny bars in the top of the
correction let on that the bullish enthusiasm was wearing awfully thin.
Surely the round number zone will have played its part here as well;
sooner bears would short from that level than get out of the way above
it. There are multiple ways to have traded this turn, but the conservative
route is to wait for a decent sell signal first. This came presented when
the bull break in bar 7 failed to attract any follow-through whatsoever
and then was followed by a bear break in turn (false high confirmation) .
An added bonus, for the bears, was to see the break coincide with the
perforation of the dotted pullback line.

58

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

On the way down again, suddenly a mean bullish powerbar came to
attack the round number from below (8). It is never a pleasant sight to
see a strong adverse move defy a fresh trade, but it is good to remember
that the markets are not designed for comfort. By remaining calm and
attentive, a bear could assess that none of the favorable elements on
which his position was based had been overthrown by that bullying bar.
The trend was still down, prices were still below the 25ema, the round
number could work as resistance and so could the ceiling test with the
low of bar 7, which was also a technical test of a former breakout.
Given all the violence from earlier on, it may seem a bit odd that no
further follow-through came forth in the new low at 9, but it is actually
quite common. We very often see the UK morning put in a strong rally
in no more than a handful of bars, only to then absorb that action in a
sideways meandering motion until the US Open at 1 5 :30 CET. In these
slower phases, breakout traders tend to be more picky and this usu­
ally sits well with the contrarian game. Their favorite practice, however,
is to counter a break against dominance in a 40/60 percent retrace­
ment area (seen from the viewpoint of the rally) . For example, notice
the typical contrarian response when bar 1 1 had surpassed the high of
bar 10, or when bar 13 had come to take out the high of bar 7. True,
contrarians hadn't back away from the break in bar 9 either, if only for
its total lack of buildup, but this had required more bravery to pull off,
simply because the break through the session low was set in line with
dominance.
There are bear and bull opportunities in any market, but when it
comes to finding substantial follow-through (say, at least 20 pip), it is
much advised to position oneself in line with the dominant pressure.
In a lengthy sideways correction, it may take quite a while for a break
to set up in high-odds fashion, but do not let this discourage you from
staying put. In almost any session, sooner or later an opportunity will
come. Always handy is to already put in a pattern line across the highs
or lows of most relevance and then extend it to the right for future
purposes (9- 1 2- 1 4 plus extension); with a fine line in place, it is then
merely a matter of keeping good track of the buildup.
Note how the bars immediately fattened up around the US Open

59

Understanding Price Action
at 1 5: 30, as is often seen also in the EU and UK Open. The five bars
in the ellipse represent a pattern line battle. Although the 25ema was
running flatly through this progression, this was a squeeze variant too,
because the bars were now caught between support of the pattern line
and resistance of the round number. Despite an initial perforation of
the pattern line, bulls did their best to prevent the break from following
through (note the three identical lows outside of it), but ultimately were
forced to throw in the towel.

IFig 3.81

.....P,oR
w
••lTime. com

eu,fusd 5-minut.

·+·T.!D�l
0ProReelTime£OlTl
I
04:00

05'00

06:00

2

07:00

T
ceoo

09:00

Figure 3.8 We can tell by the slope of the 25ema on the far left that there

had been a decent selloff in the early Asian hours. What followed was a
50-level fight that lasted all the way to the start of UK session. Around
07:00 there was still no denying the bearish dominance, but with the
EU and UK Open coming up shortly (08:00 and 09: 00), it remained to
be seen how this Asian trend would stand its ground against the often
rebellious thrusts of the new morning volume.
Pullback 2-3 was the first bull attack to emerge, but as soon as the
charge petered out, a little above the round number, the market sold
off again (3-T). The subsequent barrier perforation at T, however, was a
break of the poor variety. It is kindly annotated as a tease, but we might
as well classify it as a false break trap (no buildup whatsoever). This
left the bears very exposed, right in the EU Open at 08:00. The T -4 bull
response is the textbook answer to such situation.
Note: Even before the low of 6 had come to match the low of 2 , the

bottom barrier of the box could already have been plotted as depicted.

60

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

Whenever there is a false high or low involved (T), here's a tip: sooner
place your range barrier at the level before the perforation. On subse­
quent touches, the market tends to show more respect for the earlier
high or low (6 matches 2 instead of T). As a technical rationale, we
could say that a false perforation sooner acknowledges the foregoing
level than invalidates it. For another example, have a look at how the
high of bar 9 lined up with the high of bar 1 , thereby ignoring F. (For
an earlier variant, check Figure 3.6 and the 1 -3-5 situation.) Although
applicable in basically any box situation, this principle of barrier prefer­
ence may come in real handy when having to plot a box over a much
wider span, so as not to lose track of the level of most relevance when
buildup starts to form. Of course, when the current price action starts
to line up more neatly with a level of a false perforation, we should see
no problem in adjusting our barriers accordingly.
When the high of bar 4 hit upon the low of bar 3 , a ceiling test was
a fact and it was now up to the bears to take advantage of it. It took a
little skirmish in the round number, and a mini false high at 5 , but then
the bulls were forced to retreat, and not much later prices were pushing
down against the bottom barrier once more (6) .
At this stage, we can imagine the bears to have felt pretty content
with the way things were going. Not only had they successfully fended
off the first bull attack in the EU Open (T -5) , the overall pressure still
pointed pleasantly south and prices were now favorably positioned in
the low of the market again. Little did they know they were in for a rude
awakening.
Ironically, even though the powerful 6- F bull surge had crushed all
bearish hopes for further decline, it ended with a classic bull trap of its
own (F) . Notice also that the F-8 response was a virtual mirror image of
the T -4 response at the other end of the range.
When confronted with a failed breakout, the attacking parties basi­
cally face two options: they could either retreat in full or give it another
shot. Apart from market pressure, an element that tends to have large
say in this matter is whether the initial break was set with or without
buildup. In case of a non-buildup failure, as shown at T and F, chances
are good that the attackers will want to give it another try.

61

Understanding Price Action
Always a strategic base for prices to recoup from a false break rep­
rimand is a level of support or resistance back inside the range. In this
regard, bulls had no reason to complain with what was offered. When
the low of bar 8 came to test the 4-7 cluster (technical support) , this
favorably coincided with a touch on the round number and the 25ema;
on top of that, the correction had hit upon the 50/ 60 percent retrace­
ment level of the 6-F swing. If we further take into account that the UK
Open volume poured in at that very same instant (8), this harbored all
the ingredients for a swift bull attack on the top of the range, perhaps
followed by a break soon after.
Granted, all this may have been in defiance of the earlier Asian bear
pressure, but that is seldom a deal-breaker in the powerful UK Open.
To further examine the market's change of heart, have a look also at
the elongated W-progression-and the triple-bottom element within­
stretching itself throughout the second half of the box ( I -F); this was
already a major hint regarding the shift in consensus from bearish to
bullish. And how about progression 3-F, a W-pattern within a bigger
W-pattern. And lastly, hanging from the right leg of this pattern was a
two-bar squeeze progression, building up pressure between the 25ema
underfoot and the barrier overhead (8-9).
Since the latter element contained only two bars, and not very tight
in span, we cannot blame a conservative bull for deeming the break
above bar 9 a little too aggressive; it would have been nice indeed to
have seen the squeeze fatten up a bit with maybe one or two extra bars,
preferably getting a smaller in span. The UK Open is known to speed
things up a little, though.

62

Chapter 3
IFig 3.91

W!'oW.ProRealTime.com

Price Action Principles-Practice
eur/usd 5-minute

06:00

1 17

07:00

08:00

oaoo

Figure 3.9 Let's take up one last example of price action principles at

work before digging into the finer mechanics of our trading method.
Initially, the top barrier of this range may have been plotted across
the highs of 1 and 2. That would have turned the high of bar 3 in a false
high, or a tease break if you wish. But when not much later the high
of 3 was hit again, and prices retraced from it, a new double top was a
fact (3-4), which allowed us to experiment with the barrier as depicted.
With all the bars closing above the 25ema, bulls had kept the best of
the action since the start of the EU Open at 08:00, but prior to the UK
Open at 09 :00 their dominance was far from outspoken. Their task was
evident, though: to get prices trading away from that round number.
Let's examine how it was done.
Following the double top of 3-4, bar 5 had dipped briefly below the
25ema but managed to close above it; a little sign of bullish resilience.
It was also a higher low in the box.
From the tiny base of bar 6, bulls had forced their way through the
top barrier in powerbar fashion (T). These tease breakouts can be a
bit tricky at times. On the one hand they lack solid buildup, but they
may not be completely devoid of appeal; this could leave many breakout
traders confused on whether to hop along or decline. From where we
stand, tease break perforations are best considered premature, but we
should never lose track of the follow-up action.
Earlier on we addressed the authority of the powerbar and its pow­
erful implications when broken; equally interesting is this bar's little
cousin, the so-called inside bar. By definition, this is any bar that nei-
