
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

24. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

93

Trading Rules
1. Trade only from the long side when the positive Directional line is above the
negative one. Trade only from the short side when the negative Directional line
is above the positive one. The best time to trade is when the ADX is rising, showing that the dominant group is getting stronger.
2. When ADX declines, it shows that the market is becoming less directional.There
are likely to be many whipsaws. When ADX points down, it is better not to use
a trend-following method.
3. When ADX falls below both Directional lines, it identifies a flat, sleepy market. Do not use a trend-following system but get ready to trade, because major
trends emerge from such lulls.
4. The single best signal of the Directional system comes after ADX falls below
both Directional lines. The longer it stays there, the stronger the base for the
next move. When ADX rallies from below both Directional lines, it shows that
the market is waking up from a lull. When ADX rises by four steps (i.e., from
9 to 13) from its lowest point below both Directional lines, it “rings a bell” on a
new trend (Figure 24.2). It shows that a new bull market or bear market is being
born, depending on what Directional line is on top.
5. When ADX rallies above both Directional lines, it identifies an overheated market. When ADX turns down from above both Directional lines, it shows that the
major trend has stumbled. It is a good time to take profits on a directional trade.
If you trade large positions, you definitely want to take partial profits.
Market indicators give hard signals and soft signals. For example, when a moving
average changes direction, it is a hard signal. A downturn of ADX is a soft signal.
Once you see ADX turn down, you ought to be very, very careful about adding to
positions.You should start taking profits, reducing positions, and looking to get out.

Average True Range—Help from Volatility
Average True Range (ATR) is an indicator that averages True Ranges (described in
"How to Construct the Directional System" above) over a selected period of time,
such as 13 days. Since volatility is a key factor in trading, you can track it by plotting
a set of ATR lines above and below a moving average. They will help you visualize
current volatility and you can use that for decision making.
Kerry Lovvorn likes to plot three sets of lines around a moving average: at one,
two, and three ATRs above and below an EMA. These can be used for setting up
entry points and stops, as well as profit targets (Figure 24.3).
Entriesâ•… In the chapter on moving averages, we saw that it was a good idea to buy
below value—below the EMA. But how far below? Normal pullbacks tend to bottom out near the minus one ATR.
Stopsâ•… You want your stop to be at least one ATR away from your entry. Anything less than that would place your stop within the zone of normal market noise,

94

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
D
A

+3

A

+2
+1
C
–1
–2
–3

B

FIGURE 24.3â•… LULU daily, 21 EMA, volume with 8 EMA, ATR channels. (Chart by TradeStation)

ATR Channels
This diary of a trade, Lululemon Athletica Inc. (LULU), was posted by Kerry in SpikeTrade
.com, where we post diaries of our trades. It shows using ATR channels for profit-taking.
LULU gapped down on a wide range bar on September 18 after an earnings announcement. There was no downside follow-through, and as the stock rallied, Kerry
drew a horizontal line at the midpoint of its tall bar A, which tends to serve as short-term
support.
As LULU pulled back, its daily ranges narrowed, and volume dried up in area B. Kerry
bought LULU at $72.02 on Monday, September 30, during bar C, as it recovered from a
false downside breakout. He took profits on 1/3 of his position at $73.70 later that day, as
LULU came within a few cents of plus 1 ATR. On Thursday, during bar D, LULU hit its plus
2 ATR at $76.63, and Kerry exited another 1/3 of his position. He took the remaining 1/3
near the mid-range of bar D.

making it likely to be hit by a random short-term move. Placing your stop further
away makes it more likely that only a real reversal can hit your stop.
Targetsâ•… After you buy a stock, depending on how bullish it appears to you, you can

place an order to take profits at +1, +2, or even +3 ATRs. Kerry likes to get out of
his winning positions in several steps, placing orders for taking profits for one third
at 1 ATR, another third at 2 ATR, and the rest at 3 ATR.
It is highly unusual for any market to trade outside of three ATRs—three times average true range—for a long time. Those tend to be the extreme moves. Whenever
you see a market trade outside of its three ATRs, either up or down, it is reasonable
to expect a pullback.
ATR channels work not only with prices. We can also use them to bracket technical indicators to help identify the extreme levels where trends are likely to reverse.
I use ATR channels on the weekly charts of Force Index.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

26. STOCHASTIC

95

■■25. Oscillators
While trend-following indicators, such as MACD Lines or Directional system, help
identify trends, oscillators help catch turning points. Whenever masses of traders
become gripped by greed or fear, they surge but after a while their intensity fizzles
out. Oscillators measure the speed of any surge and show when its momentum is
starting to break.
Oscillators identify emotional extremes of market crowds. They allow you to find
unsustainable levels of optimism and pessimism. Professionals tend to fade those extremes. They bet against deviations and for a return to normalcy. When the market
rises and the crowd gets up on its hind legs and roars from greed, professionals get
ready to sell short. They get ready to buy when the market falls and the crowd howls
in fear. Oscillators help us time those trades.

Overbought and Oversold
Overbought means a market is too high and ready to turn down. An oscillator becomes overbought when it reaches a high level associated with tops in the past.
Oversold means a market is too low and ready to turn up. An oscillator becomes
oversold when it reaches a low level associated with bottoms in the past.
Be sure to remember that those aren’t absolute levels. An oscillator can stay overbought for weeks when a new strong uptrend begins, giving premature sell signals.
It can stay oversold for weeks in a steep downtrend, giving premature buy signals.
Knowing when to use oscillators and when to rely on trend-following indicators is a
hallmark of a mature analyst (see Chapter 39).
We can mark overbought and oversold oscillator levels by horizontal reference
lines. Place those lines so that they cut across only the highest peaks and the lowest
valleys of that oscillator for the past six months. The proper way to draw those lines
is to place them so that an oscillator spends only about 5 percent of its time beyond
each line. Readjust these lines once every three months.
When an oscillator rises or falls beyond its reference line, it helps identify an
unsustainable extreme, likely to precede a top or a bottom. Oscillators work spectacularly well in trading ranges, but they give premature and dangerous signals when
a new trend erupts from a range.
We’ve already reviewed one important oscillator—MACD-Histogram. We
looked at it “ahead of schedule” because it’s derived from a trend-following indicator,
MACD Lines. We’ll now explore very popular oscillators: Stochastic and Relative
Strength Index (RSI).

■■26. Stochastic
Stochastic is an oscillator popularized by the late George Lane. It’s now included in
many software programs and widely used by computerized traders. Stochastic tracks
the relationship of each closing price to the recent high-low range. It consists of two
lines: a fast line called %K and a slow line called %D.

96

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

1. The first step in calculating Stochastic is to obtain “raw Stochastic” or %K:
C −L
%K = Htod− L n • 100
n

where

n

Ctod = today’s close.
Ln = the lowest point for the selected number of days.
Hn = the highest point for the selected number of days.
n = the number of days for Stochastic, selected by the trader.

The standard width of Stochastic’s time window is 5 days, although some traders use higher values. A narrow window helps catch more turning points, but a
wider window helps identify more important turning points.
2. The second step is to obtain %D. It is done by smoothing %K—usually over
a three-day period. It can be done in several ways, such as:

%D =

3-day sum of (Ctod − Ln)
• 100
3-day sum of (Hn − Ln)

There are two ways to plot Stochastic—Fast and Slow. Fast Stochastic consists
of two lines—%K and %D—plotted on the same chart. It’s very sensitive but leads
to many whipsaws. Many traders prefer to use Slow Stochastic, adding an extra
layer of smoothing. The %D of Fast Stochastic becomes the %K of Slow Stochastic
and is smoothed by repeating step 2 to obtain %D of Slow Stochastic. Slow Stochastic does a better job of filtering out market noise and leads to fewer whipsaws
(Figure 26.1).
Stochastic is designed to fluctuate between 0 and 100. Reference lines are usually
drawn at 20 percent and 80 percent levels to mark overbought and oversold areas.

Crowd Psychology
Each price is the consensus of value of all market participants at the moment of
transaction. Daily closing prices are important because the settlement of trading
accounts depends on them. The high of any period marks the maximum power of
bulls during that time. The low of that period shows the maximum power of bears
during that time.
Stochastic measures the capacity of bulls or bears to close the market near the upper
or lower edge of the recent range. When prices rally, markets tend to close near the
high. If bulls can lift prices during the day but can’t close them near the top, Stochastic
turns down. It shows that bulls are weaker than they appear and gives a sell signal.
Daily closes tend to occur near the lows in downtrends.When a bar closes near its
high, it shows that bears can only push prices down during the day but cannot hold
them down. An upturn of Stochastic shows that bears are weaker than they appear
and flashes a buy signal.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

26. STOCHASTIC

97

FIGURE 26.1â•… CVX daily, 26-day EMA. 5-day Slow Stochastic. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Stochastic
This chart of Chevron Corporation (CVX) illustrates both helpful and dangerous aspects of
Stochastic. As long as the stock stays in a sideways trading range, which is where it was
for most of the time covered by this chart, Stochastic keeps nailing down short-term tops
and bottoms. Stochastic gives buy signals, marked here with vertical green arrows, when
it rises above its lower reference line. It gives sell signals, marked by vertical red arrows, by
sinking below its upper reference line. Those signals are reinforced by broad, down-sloping
Stochastic tops, marked by diagonal black arrows.
A careful reader will find several instances of false breakouts in Figure 26.1 that reinforce Stochastic signals. Using Stochastic signals during a trading range is like going to a
cash machine. That machine stops working and eats your card after a trend erupts from
the trading range. A sharp downtrend near the right edge overrides the Stochastic buy
signal.
A trader may rely on Stochastic in a trading range, but should use protective stops because the last trade in a range always creates a loss when a trend begins. We’ll focus on
stop placement in chapter 54.

Trading Rules
Stochastic shows when bulls or bears become stronger or weaker. This information
helps decide whether bulls or bears are likely to win the current fight. It pays to trade
with winners and against losers.
Stochastic gives three types of trading signals, listed here in the order of importance: divergences, the level of Stochastic lines, and their direction.
Divergences

The most powerful buy and sell signals of Stochastic are given by divergences between this indicator and prices.

98

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

1. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low, but Stochastic traces
a higher bottom than during its previous decline. It shows that bears are losing
strength and prices are falling out of inertia. As soon as Stochastic turns up from
its second bottom, it gives a strong buy signal: go long and place a protective
stop below the latest low in the market.The best buy signals occur when the first
bottom is below the lower reference line and the second above it.
2. A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high, but Stochastic
traces a lower top than during its previous rally. It shows that bulls are becoming weaker and prices are rising out of inertia. As soon as Stochastic turns down
from the second top, it gives a sell signal: go short and place a protective stop
above the latest price peak. The best sell signals occur when the first top is above
the upper reference line and the second below.
Overbought and Oversold

When Stochastic rallies above its upper reference line, it shows that the market is
overbought. It means that a stock or even the entire market is unusually high and
ready to turn down. When Stochastic falls below its lower reference line, it shows
that a stock or even the entire market is oversold: too low and ready to turn up.
These signals work fine during trading ranges but not when a market develops
a trend. In uptrends, Stochastic quickly becomes overbought and keeps giving sell
signals while the market rallies. In downtrends, it quickly becomes oversold and
keeps giving premature buy signals. It pays to combine Stochastic with a long-term
trend-following indicator (see Chapter 39). The Triple Screen trading system allows
traders to take buy signals from daily Stochastic only when the weekly trend is
up. When the weekly trend is down, it allows traders to take only sell signals from
daily Stochastic.
1. When you identify an uptrend on a weekly chart, wait for daily Stochastic lines
to decline below their lower reference line. Then, without waiting for their
crossover or an upturn, place a buy order above the high of the latest price bar.
Once you are long, place a protective stop below the low of the trade day or the
previous day, whichever is lower.
The shape of Stochastic’s bottom often indicates whether a rally is likely to be
strong or weak. If the bottom is narrow and shallow, it shows that bears are weak
and the rally is likely to be strong. If it is deep and wide, it shows that bears are
strong and the rally is likely to be weak. It is better to take only strong buy signals.
2. When you identify a downtrend on a weekly chart, wait for daily Stochastic
lines to rally above their upper reference line. Then, without waiting for their
crossover or a downturn, place an order to sell short below the low of the latest
price bar. By the time Stochastic lines cross over, the market is often in a free
fall. Once you are short, place a protective stop above the high of the trade day
or the previous day, whichever is higher.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

99

27. RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX

The shape of Stochastic’s top often indicates whether a decline is likely to be
steep or sluggish. A narrow top of Stochastic shows that bulls are weak and a
severe decline is likely. A Stochastic top that is high and wide shows that bulls are
strong—it is safer to pass up that sell signal.
3. Do not buy when Stochastic is overbought, and don’t sell short when it is oversold. This rule filters out most bad trades.
Line Direction

When both Stochastic lines are headed in the same direction, they confirm the shortterm trend. When prices rise and both Stochastic lines rise, the uptrend is likely to
continue.When prices slide and both Stochastic lines fall, the short-term downtrend
is likely to continue.

More on Stochastic
You can use Stochastic in any timeframe, including weekly, daily, or intraday. Weekly
Stochastic usually changes its direction one week prior to weekly MACD-Histogram.
If weekly Stochastic turns, it warns you that MACD-Histogram is likely to turn the
next week—time to tighten stops on existing positions or start taking profits.
Choosing the width of the Stochastic window is important. Shorter-term
oscillators are more sensitive. Longer-term oscillators turn only at important tops
and bottoms. If you use Stochastic as a stand-alone oscillator, a longer Stochastic is
preferable. If you use Stochastic as part of a trading system, combined with trendfollowing indicators, then a shorter Stochastic is preferable.

■■27. Relative Strength Index
Relative Strength Index (RSI) is an oscillator developed by J. Welles Wilder, Jr. It
measures any trading vehicle’s strength by monitoring changes in its closing prices.
It’s a leading or a coincident indicator—never a laggard.

RSI = 100 − 100
1 + RS
RS =

Average of net UP closing changes for selected period of days
Average of net DOWN closing changes for the same number of days

RSI fluctuates between 0 and 100.When it reaches a peak and turns down, it identifies a top. When it falls and then turns up, it identifies a bottom. The pattern of RSI
peaks and valleys doesn’t change in response to the width of its time window. Trading signals become more visible with shorter RSI, such as 7 or 9 days. (Figure 27.1)
Overbought and oversold RSI levels vary from market to market and even
from year to year in the same market. There are no magical levels for all tops and

100

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 27.1â•… CVX daily, 13-day RSI. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Relative Strength Index (RSI)
Here we apply a 13-day RSI to the chart of Chevron Corporation (CVX) that we already
examined in Figure 26.1, in the chapter on Stochastic. Both RSI and Stochastic work well
in trading ranges, but give premature and dangerous signals when prices begin to trend.
RSI, based exclusively on closing prices, is less noisy than Stochastic. It calls for rallies
when it rises above its lower reference line, marked here by vertical green arrows. It signals
declines by sinking below its upper reference line, marked here by vertical red arrows.
Comparing both charts, you see that the RSI signals emerge earlier.
A very powerful sell signal is given by a bearish divergence of RSI, marked here by a
diagonal solid arrow and a dashed red arrow. The stock rallied to a new high, while RSI
couldn’t reach its upper reference line, pointing to that rally’s hidden weakness.
The sharp break near the right edge pushes prices lower despite the RSI buy signal.
To avoid getting hurt, we must use protective stops because the last trade in a range can
easily create a loss when a new trend begins.

bottoms. Oversold and overbought signals are like hot and cold readings on a window
thermometer.The same temperature levels mean different things in summer or winter.
Horizontal reference lines must cut across the highest peaks and the lowest valleys
of RSI.They are often drawn at 30% and 70%. Some traders use 40% and 80% levels
in bull markets or 20% and 60% in bear markets. Use the 5 percent rule: draw each
line at a level beyond which RSI has spent less than 5 percent of its time in the past 4
to 6 months. Adjust reference lines once every three months.

Mass Psychology
Each price represents the consensus of value of all market participants at the moment of transaction. The closing price reflects the most important consensus of the
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

27. RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX

101

day because the settlement of traders’ accounts depends on it. When the market
closes higher, bulls make money and bears lose. When the market closes lower, bears
make money and bulls lose.
Traders pay more attention to closing prices than to any other prices of the day.
In the futures markets, money is transferred from losers’ to winners’ accounts at
the end of each trading day. RSI shows whether bulls or bears are stronger at closing
time—the crucial money-counting time in the market.

Trading Rules
RSI gives three types of trading signals. They are, in order of importance, divergences, chart patterns, and the level of RSI.
Bullish and Bearish Divergences

Divergences between RSI and prices tend to occur at important tops and bottoms.
They show when the trend is weak and ready to reverse.
1. Bullish divergences give buy signals. They occur when prices fall to a new low
but RSI makes a higher bottom than during its previous decline. Buy as soon as
RSI turns up from its second bottom, and place a protective stop below the latest minor price low. Buy signals are especially strong if the first RSI bottom is
below its lower reference line and the second bottom is above that line.
2. Bearish divergences give sell signals. They occur when prices rally to a new peak
but RSI makes a lower top than during its previous rally. Sell short as soon as
RSI turns down from its second top, and place a protective stop above the latest
minor high. Sell signals are especially strong if the first RSI top is above its upper
reference line and the second top is below it.
Charting Patterns

RSI often breaks through support or resistance a few days ahead of prices, providing hints of likely trend changes. RSI trendlines are usually broken one or two days
before price trend changes.
1. When RSI breaks above its downtrend line, place an order to buy above the latest
price peak to catch an upside breakout.
2. When RSI breaks below its uptrend line, place an order to sell short below the
latest price low to catch a downside breakout.
RSI Levels

When RSI rises above its upper reference line, it shows that bulls are strong but the
market is overbought and entering its sell zone. When RSI declines below its lower
reference line, it shows that bears are strong but the market is oversold and entering
its buy zone.

102

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

It pays to buy using overbought signals of daily RSI only when the weekly trend
is up. It pays to sell short using sell signals of daily RSI only when the weekly trend is
down (see Chapter 39).
1. Buy when RSI declines below its lower reference line and then rallies above it.
2. Sell short when RSI rises above its upper reference line and then crosses below it.
