
BECOMING A CHART READER

41

charts in different time frames, but the linkages between
them are not as intuitive and are often buggy and unstable.
For most trading purposes this is sufﬁcient, but where you
need the edge of split-second decision making, there is no
substitute for higher quality.
Whatever charting service you use, you should add
the following indicators to your default chart:
• Simple moving averages (SMAs): 20 MA, 50 MA,

200 MA
• Moving average convergence-divergence
(MACD): 12–26–9 periodicity
• Stochastics: 5–3 (or 5–3–3) periodicity
• On balance volume (OBV)
• Relative strength index (RSI): 5 periodicity
• Commodity channel index (CCI): 20 periodicity
If you are confused at this point, don’t worry. Here is
a simple primer on what these indicators mean and how
they tend to be used.

Simple Moving Averages (SMAs):
20, 50, and 200 Settings
• Theory: An MA measures the consensus, or

average, closing price of a stock over a given
period of time. A 20 setting shows the average
price over 20 days, and so on. A simple MA is one
that takes an equally weighted average of price.
• Reading the indicator: SMAs represent price
consensus over a given period of time. When

42

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

price gets too far away from the consensus, it
tends to revert to that consensus like a magnet. In
turn, SMAs tend to act as barriers to price,
putting a stop to any trend that runs into it.
SMAs also indicate trend: if they are sloped up,
the price trend is up (bullish). If they are sloped
down, the price trend is down (bearish). If the
slope is sharp, the trend is strong, and if the slope
is shallow, the trend is weak. A ﬂat or choppy
SMA indicates a range-bound market.
• Uses:
1. To show areas of support and resistance
2. To determine the direction and strength of the
current trend
• Chart example: Figure 2.1 shows the S&P 500
proxy (SPY) with both the 20 (dotted line) and
the 50 (solid line) SMAs overlaid. Note how the

Figure 2.1

Dow Jones Industrial Average with 20/50 SMAs.

BECOMING A CHART READER

43

upward slope on the left of the chart conﬁrms the
uptrend in price and acts as support for that
uptrend, while the right of the chart shows the
SMAs conﬁrming a breakdown in price. The ﬂat
50 SMA in the right third of the chart indicates a
choppy, range-bound market.

Moving Average Convergence/Divergence
(MACD): 12–26–9 Periodicity with
Histogram (a Bar Graph of Daily
MACD Readings) Overlay
• Theory: MACD measures the difference between a

shorter-term consensus of price and a longer-term
consensus, and works on the assumption that when
these diverge, the current price trend is increasing
in strength, and when they converge, the trend is
decreasing in strength. The periodicity settings
represent the following: a 12-day moving average
of price (short-term), a 26-day moving average
(longer-term), and a 9-day average of the
difference between the two averages.
• Reading the indicator: Positive MACD readings
(above the 0-line) indicate that bulls are in charge
of the market, while readings below the 0-line
indicate that bears are in charge. The length of
the histogram bars can be used to determine the
strength of trends: the longer the bars, the
stronger the trend (and vice versa). Also, both the
MACD signal lines and the MACD histogram
can be used to show bullish or bearish divergence

44

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

from price, which can give tradable signals (the
term divergence will be explained later).
Crossovers from positive to negative MACD
readings, and vice versa, do not offer reliable
trading signals, since they tend to lag the market.
• Uses:
1. As a contrarian indicator when it diverges from
price
2. To determine the strength or weakness of price
trends
3. To determine whether a market is currently
bullish or bearish
• Chart example: In Figure 2.2, the SPY has the
MACD below it, showing an interesting relationship between indicator and price. Note how as

Figure 2.2

SPY with MACD indicator.

BECOMING A CHART READER

45

the uptrend matures, MACD fails to put in new
highs even as price does so. This indicates relative
weakness, or bearish divergence. Also note the moves
above and below the 0-line with respect to price
moves. Clearly these shifts cannot be used as
trading signals since they come too late to catch
the move, but they are valuable in indicating the
overall mood (bullish or bearish) of the stock’s
price.

Stochastics: 5 (%K), 3 (%D) Settings
• Theory: Stochastics measures the relationship

between the most recent closing price and the
total price range (highs to lows) over a given
period of time. A declining stochastics indicates
that price is tending to close near the lower end of
its recent trading range (bearish), while a rising
stochastics indicates that price is tending to close
near the upper end of its recent trading range
(bullish). %D is a moving average of %K values
over a given period.
• Reading the indicator: Stochastics gives a clear buy
signal once it passes below the 20-line (oversold)
and then %K crosses over %D. It gives a clear
sell signal once it passes above the 80-line
(overbought) and then %K crosses under %D.
• Uses:
1. To register overbought and oversold levels
in price
2. To register entry and exit signals for trend
trades

46

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 2.3

SPY with stochastics indicator.

3. As a contrarian indicator when it diverges from

price
• Chart example: In Figure 2.3, the SPY has the
stochastics (5–3) below it. Note how dips to or
below the 20-line (oversold) often precede sharp
upward thrusts in price. The signals to sell over
the 80-line (overbought) are less reliable during
the uptrend, but offer proﬁtable trading
opportunities once the index shows some
weakness in the overall trend.

On Balance Volume (OBV)
• Theory: Since OBV is measured by adding the

volume of an up day to a running total of volume

BECOMING A CHART READER

47

and subtracting the volume of a down day from
that total, it gives us a pictorial image of whether
a stock is being accumulated (more shares being
bought than sold) or distributed (more shares sold
than bought) over time. A rising OBV indicates
accumulation, while a falling OBV indicates
distribution.
• Reading the indicator: If a price trend is conﬁrmed
by supportive volume, OBV will move in concert
with price, making new highs or lows along with
new price highs or lows. When it does so, OBV
conﬁrms the current trend. When it does not,
OBV acts as a contrarian indicator. OBV
sometimes acts as a leading indicator: if it rises
ahead of price, price tends to follow; and vice
versa if it falls ahead of price.
• Uses:
1. To conﬁrm the validity of current trends and
breakout moves
2. As a contrarian indictor signaling false
breakouts and weakening trends
3. As a leading indicator useful to taking positions
in breakouts prior to the breakout move
• Chart example: In Figure 2.4, the SPY has OBV
below it. OBV is used to conﬁrm price trends, so
as long as OBV is making new highs, the bullish
price trend should be bought. But note how OBV
gave a divergence warning in late February when
it failed to print a new high as price was hitting
new highs. The market sold off sharply right after
that. The OBV was right—traders were
distributing their shares.

48

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 2.4

SPY with the OBV indicator.

Relative Strength Index (RSI): 5-Period Setting
• Theory: RSI is measured by dividing an average of

net positive changes in closing prices over a given
period of time by an average of net negative
changes in price. As this number increases over
time, a bullish trend is conﬁrmed. When the
number decreases, a bearish trend is conﬁrmed.
• Reading the indicator: RSI should move in concert
with price during major trends. When RSI
diverges from price, this represents a tradable
situation and may indicate a top or bottom to the
current trend. A reading above 70 indicates
overbought levels in price, while a reading below
30 indicates oversold levels in price.

BECOMING A CHART READER

49

• Uses:
1. As a contrarian indicator, foreshadowing

potential reversals of trend
2. To conﬁrm the validity of the current trend or
price breakout
3. To register overbought and oversold levels in
price
• Chart example: In Figure 2.5, the SPY has RSI
below it. Like other oversold-overbought
indicators, RSI can be used proﬁtably to alert us
to buy and sell signals, but only when other

Figure 2.5

SPY with the RSI indicator.

50

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

factors are in place. As a stand-alone indicator, it
is best used to show divergence. On the chart in
Figure 2.5, we can see clear bearish divergence to
price in late February and bullish divergence in
the middle of March.

Commodity Channel Index (CCI):
20-Period Setting
• Theory: CCI is calculated by dividing price

increases or decreases over a period of time by a
mean standard deviation of a consensus or average
of price over time. The resulting plotted line of
this calculation will give visual readings of the
strength of current trends as well as indicate
“hidden” strength or weakness during relatively
ﬂat market periods.
• Reading the indicator: Extreme high and low
readings in the CCI indicator (⫹200/−200) are
used by some traders to signal price waves or
cycles. The indicator can also be used, like other
single line indicators (RSI, OBV), to signal buys
and sells when the indicator diverges from price.
Like other indicators, CCI can be a leading
indicator when it diverges from price. A relatively
ﬂat market with a rising or falling CCI can signal
future direction in price.
• Uses:
1. As a contrarian indicator, foreshadowing potential reversals of trend
2. To conﬁrm the validity of the current trend

BECOMING A CHART READER

51

3. To indicate the beginning and end of price

waves or cycles within a larger trend
• Chart example: In Figure 2.6, SPY has the CCI
indicator below it. Again like the RSI indicator,
we see bearish divergence in late February
and bullish divergence in mid-March. What
is unique about CCI is its ability to pinpoint
cycle changes. The extreme bearish reading we
see at the end of February and beginning of
March signals a change of cycle. The shortlived bearish cycle is likely over, and a new
bullish cycle has begun.

Figure 2.6

SPY with the CCI indicator.

52

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

So that’s it. These “sexy six” are the only indicators I
use consistently in all my trend-trading systems. There are
other indicators I occasionally use, such as a ﬁve-period
exponential MA coupled with an eight-period SMA,
Bollinger Bands, ADX, and Money Flow, but these are used
mostly in special-case trading situations that fall outside
the parameters of ordinary, everyday trend-trading strategies. For most trend-trading purposes, the preceding list is
sufﬁcient.

SETTING UP YOUR CHART
Now it is time to set up your chart. The foregoing gives
you a list of all the indicators you should put on your primary chart, along with the speciﬁc settings. These indicators and settings will remain the same whether you are
looking at weekly, daily, or intraday charts. The trendtrading systems you will learn in this book can be applied
to all time frames, depending on your trading preferences
and goals. But for the purposes of simplicity, we will limit
our examples to the daily chart.
Some of these indicator settings are conﬁgured to the
standard default setting you get with most charting applications. But several (stochastics, RSI, CCI) have been set
to a more sensitive reading, which better supports what we
are trying to do with trend trading. You can ﬁddle around
with these numbers if you want to, but I recommend at
least trying the settings I use ﬁrst.
Figure 2.7 is a chart of the S&P 500 proxy SPY (Spyders) with all the aforementioned indicators. Take note of
several things.

BECOMING A CHART READER

Figure 2.7

SPY with all the indicators.

53

54

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

1. First, look at how the MAs (20, 50, and 200) went
from a period of up and down confusion, crossing
over each other and not giving much of an
indication of trend, to a period where all three are
sharply rising, with the 20 (dotted line) over the
50 (thick solid line) and the 50 over the 200 (thin
solid line). This change of condition we call a
change from a range-bound to a strongly uptrending
market. Both these terms will be deﬁned in greater
detail in the next section.
2. Note the oversold and overbought conditions of
the RSI, stochastics, and CCI indicators and
compare these values to what price did. Not every
oversold or overbought condition marks a valid
buy or sell signal. Indicators need to be taken
together with other triggers on the price chart
itself. Oversold and overbought conditions can
simply become very oversold or very overbought
before they resolve themselves. As a clear example
of this, compare the consistently overbought
action of stochastics during the month of
November with what price was doing (i.e., going
up and up).
3. Note how the OBV indicator can be played with
trendlines—just like price. A breakout of the
downtrend line in early November signaled the start
of a healthy bull run, while the break of the
uptrend line in mid-January may signal a new
downtrend in price.

BECOMING A CHART READER

55

4. Note how CCI marked signiﬁcant cycle changes
whenever it hit extremes of ⫹/⫺200. Except for the
November high, the other three signals circled on
the chart proved proﬁtable. CCI can also be played
like OBV, with trendlines overlaid. The trendline
break to the upside in mid-October signaled a
buying opportunity.
5. Finally, note the bearish divergence that crept into
the last two months of trading. Note how even
though the SPY price was making new near-term
highs, the RSI and MACD indicators were making
lower highs. This is bearish divergence and ﬂashes a
caution sign to market bulls. Indeed, several weeks
later SPY traded down to near 120.00 before
recovering.
Figure 2.8 is another chart of the S&P 500 proxy,
SPY, from a year earlier than the chart that preceded it.
Here I have highlighted a number of divergences between
price and the various indicators we use. Whenever price
sets a higher high or lower low without the indicators following suit, we have a setup that often foreshadows large
market moves. When divergence is seen between price and
one or more indicators, trend traders will fade the price and
trade in the direction of the indicators. Also note again the
use of trendlines on the OBV indicator and how a break of
those lines can signal a change in price direction. And
ﬁnally, take a look at how the indicators, especially stochastics, register oversold and overbought conditions at or
near major market reversals.

56

Figure 2.8

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

SPY with all the indicators.

BECOMING A CHART READER

57

TRENDLINES AND CHANNEL LINES
It is extremely important in trend trading to determine
whether the market in general, and the stocks on our watch
lists in particular, are in a trend, and if so, what kind of
trend it is. Trendlines and channel lines are among the tools
we use to do this.
Trendlines and channel lines are lines drawn over at
least two tops and under at least two bottoms of major price
movements. The more tops and bottoms you can intersect
with the trendline, the more valid the trend. As a general
rule, we recommend only drawing in a trendline that can
intersect at least three price points. Note that these price
points need not be pivots in price (that is, highs and lows
in price), merely touches of the trendline by individual
price bars.
Trendlines help traders identify the dominant trends
that price has tended to trade within, while channel lines
demarcate trendless channels or trading ranges with support and resistance points. In short, these lines give us a
simple, visual reference as to whether the stock is in an
uptrend or a downtrend, or is stuck in a trading range. Furthermore, if we extend those lines beyond the right edge
of the chart, we will have a visual map of where the stock
is likely to trade into the near future. Thus, trendlines are
an invaluable tool in helping us to make proﬁtable trading
decisions.
Trendlines are used to measure uptrends by drawing
the lines under the lows, while downtrends are measured
by drawing the lines over the highs. A series of higher lows
indicates that the bears are getting less aggressive and the

58

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

bulls more conﬁdent. That is all we need to know to call
such movement an uptrend. The reverse is true for a downtrend. An uptrending line drawn below the lows combined
with a ﬂat line over the highs is still an uptrend. A downtrending line over the highs combined with a ﬂat line under
the lows is still a downtrend. Again: In an uptrend, only the
lows count. In a downtrend, only the highs count.
The following are theoretical examples of both an
uptrend and a downtrend. Note that the trend is determined by only one side of the formation: the lows for the
uptrend and the highs for the downtrend. Figure 2.9 is an
example of an uptrend. Figure 2.10 is an example of a
downtrend.
If both trendlines—the one over the highs and the one
under the lows—are ﬂat, the stock is in what we call a trading channel or trading range. The stock’s price is likely to
bounce up and down between these channel lines until
either the upper or the lower line is broken. If the upper

Figure 2.9
highs.

An uptrend deﬁned by higher lows, not higher

Figure 2.10
lower lows.

A downtrend, deﬁned by lower highs, not

BECOMING A CHART READER

59

line is broken, we can expect to see a new uptrend develop.
If the lower channel line is broken, we can expect to see a
new downtrend develop. The same principles apply when
we have an uptrending line under the lows combined with
a downtrending line over the highs. This is still a channel,
but it is now what we call a narrowing channel or a triangle
formation. Any breakout from that formation is a tradable
event.
Figures 2.11 and 2.12 are theoretical examples of the
two most common types of trading ranges or channels.
Both trendlines and channel lines are used in following ways:
• To determine the status of a price trend: up,

down, or range-bound
• To project future points of price resistance and
support
• To calculate where to put stop-losses
• To note areas of price containment in order to
predict breakout moves

Figure 2.11

A sideways trading channel or range.

Figure 2.12

A tightening trading range or triangle.

60

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 2.13

BRCM showing trendlines.

Figure 2.13, the BRCM chart, demonstrates a trading channel or range in August that broke out to the upside.
This led to choppy trade with short-term up- and downtrends, which then led to a more prolonged downtrend in
October, followed by a prolonged uptrend into December.
Note that if a position had been taken during either the
channel or any of the trending patterns, the stop-loss for
shorts should have been placed just over the upper trendline (dotted line) and a stop-loss for longs just under the
lower trendline (solid line) once the trendline was established with at least three points of intersection.
Figure 2.14 is a classic trading range or channel
breakout exhibited by BEAS. The stock bounced up and
down within a 2.00 range for ﬁve months before ﬁnally
breaking out to the upside. This kind of long-term price
containment with breakout sends the bullish signal that
the stock is now ready to trade within a higher price range.

BECOMING A CHART READER

Figure 2.14

61

BEAS showing price channel breakout.

Note also that once the price channel was established by
sufﬁcient price touches in late July, the lower trendline,
once extended out to the right, would have been a reasonable place of support to put a bid in for the stock (and the
same would be true for putting an offer at the upper trendline). Note ﬁnally that the break of the second established
trading range’s lower trendline in early November signaled
that it was time to exit the trade and bank the proﬁt. This
chart thus represents a potential trend trade return of over
⫹40 percent in about nine weeks: buying BEAS at trendline support (near 11.00) and selling on a trendline break
near 15.50.
Two warnings need to be issued regarding the use
of trend and channel lines. The ﬁrst is that these lines
are always subjectively drawn. Even when software is
used to draw trendlines, there is subjectivity at work in
the way the programmer coded the software. This is to

62

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

say that you must always be ready to alter your trendlines in response to new market data. It is all too easy
to draw in a trend channel where none really exists
because we have a predisposed bias to the stock moving
in a certain direction. Trendlines and wishful thinking
are a dangerous combination. For this reason, always
apply the following rule to your use of trend and channel lines:
No trend or trading channel exists until a line can
be placed on the chart that intersects at least
three price points. Two price points can yield a
trendline, but no trading decision should be made
until a third touch of the line is recorded.
There is much debate among market technicians and
traders whether one should run a trend or channel line
over/under intraday prices (the “tails” or “shadows” on the
candlesticks) or only the end-of-day price points. There are
various answers to this question. It has been my general
experience that closing prices trump intraday swings. Thus,
if you draw a trend or channel line across the tops or under
the bottoms of several runs in price, and then ﬁnd that at
numerous points there are intraday swings in price that
cannot be contained by those lines, it is okay. As long as
you contain within the lines the majority consensus represented by the closing price (or the edge of the candle body
if you are using candlestick charts), I believe you can more
or less ignore the extreme opinions represented by a few
wayward intraday runs (or tails). Some do prefer, however,
to use lines to contain all points in price, including intra-

BECOMING A CHART READER

Figure 2.15

63

RIMM with trendlines.

day swings. Hence, a sound compromise position on drawing trendlines can be heard in the teaching of Alexander
Elder, who states, “. . . It is better to draw [the line]
through the edges of congestion areas. Those edges show
where the majority of traders have reversed direction.”
(Elder, p. 88)
In Figure 2.15, the chart of RIMM demonstrates
Elder’s trendline technique in action. Here we see a downtrend line and subsequent uptrend line passing through
areas of price congestion rather than at either intraday or
end-of-day price points.
A second warning with respect to trend and channel
lines is that traders often have the tendency to draw too
many of them. If we keep in mind that such lines are
merely accidental tools we use to give us a very general
sense of price containment and are not nearly as mathematically elegant and precise as the other indicators mentioned previously, we will then have a better attitude
