
FANS

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

208

Fibonacci fans are formed with three diagonal lines using Fibonacci ratios
to help identify major levels of support and resistance. They are created
by drawing an imaginary trendline between the high and low and then
dividing the vertical distance between those two points by the major
Fibonacci ratios: 38.2, 50, and 61.8 percent. Each of these divisions will
represents a point in the imaginary vertical line that measures the distance
between the high and the low, and the lines indicate levels of support and
resistance.

ARCS

AUD/USD 1 Hour - Fibonacci Arcs

Fibonacci arcs consist of three curved lines with the same Fibonacci number proportions that will help anticipate ranging areas and important
support and resistance levels. They are created by drawing an imaginary
trendline between the high and low and then drawing the curves that
will intersect this trendline at the major Fibonacci levels: 38.2, 50, and
61.8 percent. Trading decisions are made when the price crosses through
those levels.

HARMONIC PRICE PATTERNS
Harmonic price patterns are specific series of impulsive and corrective
waves (two impulsive and two corrective) whose calculations and relationships are based on Fibonacci levels and ratios and that have as a continuation
a bigger impulsive wave. The first corrective wave from starting point to the

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

209

top of the first impulsive wave is what determines the kind of pattern you
should expect.

BUTTERFLY
In the butterfly pattern, the first corrective wave from A to B is a deep
retracement to 0.786, or 78.6 percent, of the move from the starting point
0 to A. If this happens, the second corrective move from C to D would have
to reach 1.272 percent retracement of the first impulse wave from 0 to A. In
this pattern, the projections from point B to point C can vary, but the
Fibonacci ratios relative to the first impulse wave from 0 to A are always
formed at those precise levels.
The following figure shows a bullish butterfly pattern, where the first
impulse wave from 0 to A is pointing upward. A bearish butterfly would have
the same measurements but would be inverted, starting from a downward
move, as shown in the model.

bearish

BUTTERFLY

A

0.0

C

direction of impulse
(bullish)
0
starting point

B

0.786
100.0
1.272

D

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

210

GARTLEY
This is an exact pattern where the first A-to-B corrective wave is always the
61.8 percent retracement of the move from 0 to A. The second corrective
wave from C to D then should form at 0.786 of the move from 0 to A. Both
corrective waves always will form precisely at those levels.

bearish

GARTLEY

A

C

0.0

100.0
0.886

direction of impulse
(bullish)
0.618

0.0

B
0.786

D100.0
0
starting point

The figure image shows a bullish Gartley pattern, where the first
impulse wave from 0 to A is pointing upward. A bearish Gartley would
have the same measurements but would be inverted, starting from a downward move, as shown in the model.

BAT
In the bat pattern, the first corrective wave from A to B is a small correction, and it retraces most of the time to the 0.382 level (as a maximum to
0.50). If this happens, the second corrective wave from C to D should form
at the 0.886 Fibonacci retracement of 0 to A.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

211

bearish

THE BAT

A

100.0
0.886

0.0

C

0.382
0.0
0.50

direction of impulse
(bullish)

B

0.886

D100.0

0
starting point

The figure image shows a bullish bat pattern, with a first impulse wave
from starting point 0 to A pointing upward. If the first impulse wave were
pointing downward, the same calculations for the retracements would apply,
and the pattern would be inverted, as shown in the model.

CRAB
The crab pattern is not found very often, and it can be identified only
when the complete five-wave structure has been finished. This happens
because the main factor that allows us to identify this pattern is the second
corrective wave from C to D, which is a very deep move, retracing up to
1.618 of the first wave from 0 to A. The first corrective wave from A to B
can vary between 0.382 and 0.618, making its level completely subjective.
What counts is the exact position of the last move for the pattern to be
considered correct.
The figure above shows a bullish crab pattern, with a first impulse
wave from starting point 0 to A pointing upward. If the first impulse wave
were pointing downward, the same calculations for the retracements would
apply, and the pattern would be inverted, as shown in the model.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

212

bearish
CRAB

A

0.0

C
0.382
0.618

B
100.0

0
starting point

direction of impulse
(bullish)

D
1.618

AB ⫽ CD
D

B

AB = CD

0.0

38.2
50.0
61.8

C
78.6

100.0

A

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

213

This is a pattern where both impulse waves are equal. It is quite common to
find and easy to recognize, and it is one of the most powerful patterns in
trading. The retracement wave between both legs can vary from 0.382 to
0.786, although in a strongly trending market it doesn’t usually go much
further than a 38.2 percent retracement.
Basic characteristics are as follows:
●
●

●

Both AB and CD must be equal.
The retracement cannot go further than the price of the starting point.
This means that the price can’t retrace more than 100 percent.
Point D has to be higher than point B on a bullish move or lower on a
bearish move for the pattern to be valid.

THREE DRIVES
This pattern consists of three consecutive impulse waves followed by a
small correction. The noticeable aspect of this pattern is that each subsequent drive reaches either a 127.2 or a 161.8 percent Fibonacci retracement. In addition, each of the waves should form over equivalent time
periods and be symmetric one to the other.

3
2

1.272
100.0

1

1.272
100.0

0.0

0.0
Three Drives

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

214

FRACTALS
BILL WILLIAMS AND CHAOS THEORY
The idea of fractals was discussed by Bill M. Williams, Ph.D., in his book,
Trading Chaos. From his point of view, he defines an up fractal as a
middle bar with two lower highs on each side of it and a down fractal as a
middle bar with two higher lows on each side of it. Chaos traditionally is
seen as a lack of structure or order, but Williams considers chaos to be a
higher degree of order instead, where there is no relationship between cause
and effect because the financial markets pertain to a nonlinear and thus
nonpredictable situation.
Bill Williams goes against most of the theories of technical analysts in
that he believes that the markets can’t be predictable and that a past behavior can’t determine a future behavior. He affirms that the only way to
achieve a success in the financial markets is to understand and explore its
five-dimensional structure, which consists of the following elements: the
fractal or space phase; the driving-force or power phase; acceleration or
deceleration, which would be the power phase; the zone, which is a combination of strength and power phase; and finally, the balance line.

FRACTALS
A fractal is an indicator developed by Bill Williams for his own trading system, and it allows you to detect the bottom or top of a move. Basic fractals
are composed of five bars. They can be identified with the following rules:
●

●

A pattern forms with a highest high in the middle and two lower highs
on each side; this would be a bearish probable reversal point.
A pattern forms with a lowest low in the middle and two higher lows
on each side; this would be a bullish probable reversal point.

Fractals help to identify the underlying fluctuations in price waves and
also allow larger trends to be broken down into simple and predictable
reversal patterns. They can be used in three different ways:
1. Catch the trending. Depending on the series of fractals that are
successively broken, you can identify whether the trend is bullish or
bearish. More up fractals will be broken in an uptrend, and more
down fractals will be broken in a downtrend. The more they are
broken, the stronger the trend will be.
2. Catch the range. Fractals can help to identify a consolidation area and
will set resistance and support points between which the price will
move. If the price can’t seem to break above or below the most recent

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

215

fractals, price is said to be consolidating and ranging or sideways.
This also can help you to define a strategy for a potential breakout
later on.
3. Catch the break. Finally, fractals simply can be used as breakout
points, especially in longer time frames, for example, above 4 hours.
The fractal points will be very helpful in drawing trendlines because
they signal the bars or candles that have the highest high or lowest
low of a series.

TRADING NAKED (ONLY PRICE ACTION)
Trading without any kind of technical indicators is familiarly described as
trading naked. Naked traders only use price action, along with areas of support and resistance, pivot levels, swing highs and swing lows, tests of tops
or bottoms, etc. Price action is how the money moves.
As you saw earlier, an up bar is a bar with a higher high and a higher
low than the preceding bar. Up bars signal an uptrend. The close is higher
than the open, and on the last bar of the trend, the close will be lower than

216

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the open because there will be more sellers than buyers on that last bar. A
down bar is a bar that has a lower high and a lower low than the preceding
bar. Down bars signal a downtrend. The close will be lower than the open,
and on the last bar of the trend, the close will be higher than the open
because there will be more buyers than sellers on that last bar.
Inside bars represent a market deliberation or indecision. The market is
also denominated a narrow-range bar, in which its high is lower than the
preceding bar and its low is higher than the preceding bar. An outside bar
or engulfing bar has a higher high and a lower low than the preceding bar.
When the open is in the bottom quarter or third of the bar and the close is
in the top quarter or third of the bar, the engulfing bar is bullish engulfing,
and the buyers are in control; conversely, when the open is in the top quarter or third of the bar and the close is in the bottom quarter or third, the
engulfing bar is bearish engulfing, and the sellers are in control.
When the trend is going on, it will be continuously making higher
highs and higher lows if it is an uptrend or lower highs and lower lows in
the case of a downtrend. When the price stops making those higher/lower
highs and lows, the trend is said to be broken. Then comes usually a period
of consolidation or ranging, which thereafter resumes in the same direction, as a continuation of the previous trend, or either breaks out in the
opposite direction in the case of a reversal. You can use multiple time
frames to help you understand the behavior of prices and determine if they
are trending or ranging.
It is perfectly possible that one time frame is trending in one direction
and the other higher or lower time frame is trending in the opposite direction or is showing a consolidation pattern. There are infinite trends within
trends. Price can be rising on a daily chart but meanwhile in a retracement
or correction on a smaller time frame.
The best way to start to understand naked price action is to practice
visually and observe the behavior patterns in several time frames simultaneously, determining the trend that is showing in each of them. For example, a 15-minute price action can be showing only two trends; meanwhile,
the 5-minute price action is possibly showing five different trends for the
same period. You can, of course, trade the smaller time-frame trends, but
waiting for every time frame to align in the same direction as the larger
time frame is signaling would be really trading with the trend.
Trading naked is the ultimate way to trade because in the end, everything
can be narrowed down to the price. Any technical indicator or instrument is
always directly related to price behavior and will only reflect what is already
shown in the numbers.

C

12

H

A

P

T

E

R

SUPPORT AND
RESISTANCE
Two of the most important subjects of FOREX technical analysis are support and resistance, which refer to the price levels at which there seems to
be a barrier beyond which the price of a currency pair may not keep falling
or rising. They are often viewed as quite complex because despite the obvious simplicity behind the concept, support and resistance can be determined in several ways, and it is not always easy to understand how they
work or to master their use.
Support and resistance are key levels, mostly price areas or zones instead
of a particular single price, where supply and demand meet and are of equal
strength, neutralizing each other’s forces. Supply is when traders are selling
the base currency; demand is when a currency is being bought. Prices change
when there is an imbalance between supply and demand, and one of the sides
win. Prices rise when demand is higher and decrease when supply is greater.
When both are at the same level, the market is said to be moving sideways,
and there is a struggle between bulls and bears to take control.

SUPPORT
Support is the level where demand has acquired enough strength to stop the
prices from decreasing further. As the price gets cheaper, more buyers are
looking to hold the currency, and fewer sellers want to give it away. When
217

218

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the prices reach the support level, usually the demand and supply tend to
get even or the number of buyers overcomes the number of sellers, and this
will prevent the price from falling through the support level.
However, support levels sometimes are broken, which indicates that the
selling pressure is still strong and that the bearish sentiment has taken over
the bullish impulse. There is a renewal of the incentive to sell, and buyers
stop wanting to acquire the currency. Since breakouts occur with a certain
momentum, it is not until the next lower support level that buyers might
come back into the picture, and the same struggle will present itself
between bulls and bears. If the support holds, then there will be a bounce
from the support, and the bullish sentiment will have won the battle.
Support levels are established under the current price, but since the
support levels are not set at an exact price but rather mostly in an area of
possible prices, volatility could cause prices to drop a little below a given
support level without effectively breaking it. This is why it is preferable to
establish support zones. A small dip will have no strength to indicate a
breakout; usually a certain number of points and other confirmatory indicators are needed to really consider that a support level has been broken. The
most common confirmation is a retest and bounce from the support level
after it has been crossed. At that moment, the support becomes resistance.

RESISTANCE
Resistance is the level where selling pressure acquires enough strength to
stop the price from a further increase. As the price goes up and keeps
advancing toward resistance, more sellers will want to enter the market,
and fewer buyers will be willing to buy. At the moment the price reaches
the resistance level, as happens with support, both sides tend to get even,
and sellers even may overcome the number of buyers, thus bouncing back
and driving the prices lower.
When resistance does not hold, and a new buying surge pushes the
market, the price will break above the resistance, signaling that the bullish
sentiment has won the battle and bears are not interested in selling anymore. Buyers will be buying at higher prices until they reach a further
resistance level, which will form after the initial momentum of the second
move fades away.
Resistance levels are established above the current price, but in the
same way that happens with support levels. You should consider resistance levels more like a zone, and small rallies or peaks through the level

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

219

shouldn’t be taken as a breakout signal unless the price really has
increased by a fair number of points and there is further confirmation.
This is commonly seen by means of a small pullback and retest of the
recently broken resistance, where the price will bounce back up and confirm the bullish sentiment, making that resistance become a support.

TRENDLINES
A trendline is an ascending or descending price level that can be drawn
between at least two lower highs in a downtrend or two higher lows in an
uptrend. This level then is seen as a constant barrier that prevents the price
from going higher or lower, forming a certain range that can be parallel or
converging in the case of triangular formations.
The level formed by this trendline constitutes a support or a resistance
and usually is a place where the prices will bounce back in the opposite
direction. An upper resistance is formed every time the price action slows
down and pulls back to the trendline in an uptrend and every time a bearish
move runs out of steam and moves back to the lower highs trendline in a
downtrend. This occurs because of profit-taking or market uncertainty after
a prolonged move, creating a defined range between the trendlines and the
series of tops or bottoms.
Traders usually will watch for the prices to reach the top or bottom levels of the range and buy or sell accordingly when other confirmatory conditions are met.

MOVING AVERAGES
Moving averages can be of help in identifying levels of support and resistance. In either of its forms, a moving average is a reflection of the
dynamic price level that has the greater incidence. When the trend is
going up, the price finds its support at the moving average. This indicator
acts as a resistance when the trend is going down. Some values—or number of periods averaged—will work better than others and also depend on
the relative time frames. Experimentation is needed to find which moving
average is best suited to show the levels of support and resistance in each
particular trading situation, but there are specific periods, such as the
exponential moving average (EMA) or the simple moving average (SMA)
200 (which can signify 200 days, weeks, hours, or minutes with regard to

220

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the distinct time frames), that seem to work independently of the time
variable. I personally like how the prices behave when near the SMA 34;
I find this value quite appropriate to predict bounces and potential targets
for taking profits or exiting a position.

OTHER INDICATORS
Many other indicators can be used to identify areas of support and resistance. One of them is the Fibonacci retracement tool, which was described
in detail in Chapter 11.
Being able to determine future levels of support or resistance is an
important way to improve FOREX trading returns by getting a more accurate view of the possible levels that can be reached and the most probable
reaction of the prices when those levels are hit. In this way, targets and
stops can be set in a more precise form, and a trader can avoid entering a
position at places where the price is more likely to reverse.
Independent of the method you use to foresee the levels where price is
going to encounter a pressure against its current direction, in all of them the
significance of the support or resistance is the same: Those are the levels
beyond which the price of the currency pair or financial asset that you are
trading probably will not move in either direction.

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

221

ENTERING POSITIONS
The establishment of areas of support and resistance allows traders to
choose a more precise entry point for their positions. The forces of supply and demand show clear patterns and can be predicted, provided that
other indicators or patterns confirm the potential reversal or continuation
of a trend.
When the market is alternating inside those extreme zones, there is
certain stability between supply and demand. When the forces of supply
overcome the forces of demand, or vice versa, there is a breakout of the
range delineated by support and resistance, and other zones are reached
that will act as such, and the broken levels will turn into their opposite.
There is an old adage that says, “Buy low; sell high.” This means buy
at the support level, and sell at the resistance level, provided that the conditions maintaining the prices inside a given range are still valid. Breakout
entries would respond to the inverse—sell low; buy high—after the breakout point. How can you determine that a particular support or resistance is
holding or if its weakness will lead to a breakout? You saw in Chapter 11
that many technical patterns can help to identify the potential weakness or
strength of a certain move.
A rejection of the support or resistance level, followed by a retest and
subsequent bounce back inside the channel, is a good indication to enter a
position. Candlestick patterns of reversal and moving averages, as well as
pivot lines and any oscillator that can show an oversold or overbought condition, will help in the decision. In the case of a breakout, a break of the
trendline, followed by a retest of the trendline from above or below, and the
subsequent bounce back with the former support becoming resistance or
the former resistance turning into support is also a good confirmation for
an entry point, with the help of the preceding indicators to ensure a safer
decision.
Identifying main support and resistance levels is a key element leading
to a successful technical analysis. When you are aware of their existence
and location, it is much easier to forecast and be prepared when prices
move near those levels. Look for extra signs of an increase in the buying or
selling pressure and potential reversal and volume of transactions. When a
support or resistance level has been broken, this signals that there has been
a change in the relationship between supply and demand. A resistance
breakout signals that the bulls are stronger than the bears, and a support
break indicates that the bears have won the battle.

222

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

EXITING POSITIONS
Support and resistance levels provide excellent areas to set target profits or
simply exit a position manually. You can either chose to trade a single position or split it into two or more parts, which you will be exiting progressively at every level based on a preset plan.
When setting a stop loss based on support and resistance, the stop level
should be set a few points (usually 5 or 10 depending on the time frame that
you will be using) below or above the most recent strong point of support
or resistance. This can be determined through observation of the levels
where the price has stalled most often or with the use of fractals, Fibonacci
levels, pivots, and psychological levels.
A target profit will be set inversely, a few points below a strong projected resistance, pivot, or Fibonacci level or above a support that has
proven to be holding. It is important not to forget the spread of the particular currency pair that you are trading and the side, or direction, on which
your trades are placed because what is commonly defined as actual price is
usually the bid price on most platforms. For example, on short positions,
the price used to close will be the ask or offer price, so be sure to add or
subtract the spread from any calculations.
When there is a strong expectation of a continued trend, positions can be
split into several parts, and actions can be performed sequentially on each of
them. For example, with this approach, a trader would exit one of the parts
at the first perceived strong resistance or support level and set the stop losses
on the remaining parts of the trade to breakeven (the entry price) or, better,
to one positive point, thereafter exiting the next part at the next support or
resistance level and trailing the stop losses or simply letting the free trades
run to gather the most possible profits from the overall position.
