
with you instead of borrowing money from a bank at a fixed rate?
We compete with banks all the time, but there are many reasons why
companies come to us. Sometimes a bank may be willing to give a
company a partial loan but want them to raise an equity cushion elsewhere. For example, one of the companies we invested in is a consolidator in the home alarm industry. They needed $22 million to
*Preferred stock takes precedence over common stock in respect to dividend payments
and asset distribution in the event of liquidation.

C L A U D i O •fiUA.ZZOINl

finance the simultaneous acquisition of three separate targets. The
bank offered to lend them $15 million provided they were able to find
the remaining $7 million elsewhere. We were the ones who provided
that additional financing. Also banks are very bureaucratic and take
two or three months to approve loans. If necessary, we can work
twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week to make a deal happen
quickly. We have provided $10 million to $1 5 million to companies in
as little as five days.
Why would a consolidator have such a great urgency for funds?
Couldn't they just wait the two or three months for the bank to
approve the loan?
Sometimes they think they're going to get a bank loan, and then just
when they need the funds for an acquisition, the loan falls through. A
CEO may play golf with his banker every Sunday and be told that
everything is fine with his loan application. Then at the last moment,
the banker's boss doesn't approve the loan. It happens all the time.
That's where we come into the picture. We not only provide money in
a timely manner, but we also offer strategic help to a company. In a
sense, we become partners with the companies we invest in.
Exactly what kind of strategic help do you provide?
As an example, one of the companies in our current portfolio is a consolidator in the temporary jobs field. Their specialty is hiring out very
highly skilled computer technicians. They might pay their temporary
workers $50 to $75 an hour, and then book them out at $150 to $175
an hour. First, we financed a few of their acquisitions, and then we
brought them two acquisition candidates that we had found, negotiated the transactions, funded them, and caused the transactions to
happen.
Given the way you structure your deals, is there any way you
could lose money as long as the company you invest in doesn't go
bankrupt?
Yes . . . [sighing] One risk we have identified is what we call the "justsay-no risk"—the company refuses to honor the documents they
signed. As an actual example, one company to whom we had loaned
$2 million paid it all back with the exception of the final $50,000.
The new CEO, just appointed by the company's board of directors,

ILIMINATJNfi T H E DOWISIDE

said to us, "You made a lot of money on the deal. You should be happy.
Now, just go away." Well, we had made a lot of money on this transaction, but we didn't go away, because we had to protect our record that
we would never allow something like this to happen without a protracted struggle.
It sounds as if it would have cost you more than $50,000 to litigate the case.
It cost us two years in time and $139,000 in legal fees. But we ended
up winning $1.3 million because of all the penalties the company
incurred.
What was your major in college?
I studied dual fields: comparative literature and economics.
What attracted you to comparative literature?
The origin of languages. I was fascinated by the process in which a
language evolved to become another language.
For example?
Latin was the language spoken by the most powerful people of its
time, similar to the standing of English today, and then it became six
different languages. I was intrigued by how time shaped a language—
particularly everyday words, or words used to express love, anger, or
any other types of passionate feeling, because these are the words
that evolve most rapidly.
Did you have any career goals when you were in college?
No, I did not. I started out postcollege life as a photographer.
That has nothing to do with either economics or literature. How
did that evolve?
It was a passion. I was probably influenced by my mother, who does
large-format photography—in the style of Ansel Adams.
What kind of photography did you do?
Primarily photography of architecture and some portraiture work, but
from the vantage point of looking at people as architecture rather
than as personalities. In the early 1980s, I had a show in the East Village, which went quite well. However, then the gallery owner had
requests from clients who wanted me to photograph certain subjects
according to their specifications—for example, to match their sofa, or
something equally as ridiculous.

UA-UDIWWHM
I decided if my reason for working was to make money, I might as
well go into business. I had a friend who worked at an investment
bank. He said, "You speak five languages; they need people like you."
I interviewed with a number of investment banks and chose to accept
a very lucrative offer from Salomon Brothers. This was before the
term "investment banker" became a household word.
So you ended up in the financial arena simply because you had a
friend who suggested the idea; it was not something you had
thought about.
At the time, I didn't have any real plans. Initially, 1 looked at the job as
a way of paying for my photography [he laughs].
When you started at Salomon, you had no experience whatsoever
in the financial markets. What did they have you do?
1 started out in a training program for the bond department.
What year?

1985.
That sounds as if you must have been at Salomon Brothers dur-

ing the same general period described in Liar's Poker. What did
you think of that book?
I'd rather not comment on that.
Why is that?
Michael Lewis worked with me, and I. prefer to leave that particular
subject out of this interview.
It's a very well-written book.
Yes, it's a very entertaining book.
Entertaining as a laudatory adjective or as a left-handed compli-

ment, denoting less than factual?
It accurately describes Salomon Brothers at the time, but I believe it
inaccurately describes Michael's particular role at Salomon Brothers.
What is the training experience at Salomon like?
I don't know what it's like now, but at the time it was a very rigorous
boot camp where people had to make the grade every week or else
they were thrown out. The training program was six months long,
with the mornings spent in classroom sessions, and the afternoons
helping out at the trading desks.

ELIMINATING THE DOWNSIDE

How were the classroom sessions different from school?
School is a lot more relaxed. These people were paying you $50,000 a
year to learn at a time when $50,000 was a lot of money and other
college graduates were earning $18,000.
Did they use textbooks?
Textbooks and about a foot-high folder of in-house papers. Each manager on the trading floor had two or three days with the training class,
and each of these departmental training sessions had a lot of text
associated with it. Tests were given at the end of each session.
What was your own experience at Salomon?
It was a very awakening experience for me.
In what way?
Here I was, a photographer, an artist, being thrown into a world of
very savvy, streetwise, money-oriented people—a world in which
everything was about how much you made by the end of the day.
Everything was measured in dollars and cents.
As an artistic soul, how do you find comfort in that type of environment?
It fascinated me because I was exposed to personalities with whom I
had never dealt before. They looked at life in a very different way. If
the price of something was right, they bought it, whether they needed
it or not. I never bought things I didn't need. I never thought about
price too much. It took me a year to really "get it," which is probably
about six months longer than anyone else in my class.
By "get it," do you mean the culture?
The culture; the bottom-line, ring-the-cash-register mentality.
What was your job after you completed the training course?
They sent me to the London office because I was multilingual. I was
assigned to the government bond department.
Was the trading you were involved in directional or marketmaking in nature?

Basically market-making in government securities and options.
Although we did make money for the firm, our primary objective was
to provide liquidity for our customers overseas and our domestic customers during time zones not covered by New York.

CLAUD'10 GUAZZOiNI
How long were you at the government bond desk in London?
Three years, and then I transferred to Salomon's merger and acquisi-

tion department in NYC.
Why did you leave the bond department?
The focus was very narrow. I wanted to learn more about companies
and industries. At the time, a lot of people were having great success
in the realm of leveraged buyouts, and I wanted to learn more about
that side of business. I was eventually hired by an LBO firm, run by a
client of Salomon who had his own company that did leveraged buyouts.
Exactly how does a leveraged buyout work?
At certain times, some companies may be trading well below their
replacement value. In other words, the assets of the company are
worth more than its aggregate share price.
Does that happen very often?
Well it happened frequently in the early-to-mid-1980s. Usually the
companies involved were very boring—for example, a company that
made steel shelving and had made steel shelving for the past fifty
years. The basic idea was that a loan could be obtained against the
company's cash flow. Let's say the company's cash flow was $10 million a year. Based on that cash flow, you could get a loan that required
a $7 million annual interest payment, implying a total loan of anywhere between $90 to 100 million at the prevailing interest rate of

the time.
So the basic plan was to repay the loan from the company's
cash flow.
Yes, but then you had to run the company correctly. Once you had
the loan commitment, you could go to the shareholder owners and try
to buy the company for $110 to 120 million. If they agreed, you
would buy the company with a loan from the bank and a very thin
slice of equity from investors. After ten or fifteen years, you would
own the complete company by having used the company's own

money.
I was particularly attracted to the concept of buying undervalued
assets, which I became aware was not something that was confined to
just leveraged buyouts. Every period of time has its own opportunities

E L I M I N A T I N G T H E 1WISIDE

where one can find investments that are extremely discounted and

have a very well protected downside.
At Salomon Brothers, I had gotten to know Lewis Ranieri, who
left before I did. Ranieri taught me there is no reason to buy things at
retail. Anything sold out there you can buy at half price. Everything,
everything out there. Besides the hype and fancy shopping bag, what
is the reason for buying something at a Madison Avenue boutique?
There is none. It's just a trick to separate you from your money. The
same thing is true in the stock market. Why would people buy Internet stocks at such crazy levels? It's just hype to trick people out of
their money. At the time, Ranieri was heavily involved in buying
assets being liquidated by the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The Resolution Trust Corporation was created by Congress in
1989 to dispose of the assets of failed savings and loans institutions in
the wake of widespread bank failures. Ironically, the banking crisis was
precipitated by Congress's earlier deregulation of the industry (1982),
which opened the door to reckless investments and pervasive fraud.
Congress exacerbated the impact of this ill-advised legislation by
blocking attempts by regulators to rein in the industry and repeatedly
ignoring their dire warnings—until the problem became so huge that
it could no longer be avoided. There is ample evidence that political
contributions from the industry heavily influenced Congress's disastrous policy. Estimates suggest that the bailout necessitated by this
political fiasco cost U.S. taxpayers as much as one-half trillion dollars.

Many of the banks had been very sloppy and hadn't kept good
records. Much of the loan documentation was either faulty or missing. You were asked to place a bid on a loan portfolio, with a face
value of say $100 million, without having any solid idea what was in
the portfolio. At the beginning, these offerings attracted very little
interest. Some of these loan portfolios could be had for a bid as low as
10 cents on the dollar. Then you would spend many months going
through the documents and discover that the loans were actually
worth 60 cents on the dollar. There was a very large profit opportunity

CLAWiiiliiliON'l

for limited amounts of risk. As time went on, however, interest in
these loan portfolios built up dramatically, and eventually the winning
bids were as high as 80 cents on the dollar. 1 was fascinated that at
the early stages, the transactions were being clone at levels that
allowed for a very wide margin of error. The downside was protected.
How was the downside protected?
When you are bidding 10 or 20 on a loan portfolio that supposedly
had a value of 100 just twelve months prior, it's hard to go very far
wrong, although it was possible to lose money if you bought a portfolio constructed by fools or crooks, which sometimes was the case.
Did you get involved in buying RTC loans?
No. I spent a lot of time looking into it while I was at that LBO firm, but
to my disillusionment, nothing ever came of it. That was part of the reason why I left to go off on my own. Besides being severely undercompensated, 1 was frustrated by having identified a number of
opportunities where we could have made large profits with what 1 had
believed to be limited risk, and yet nothing was ever allowed to be clone.
By the time I left the LBO firm, it was too late to start bidding for
RTC loans, because they had attracted too much interest, and the
winning bids were 60 cents, 70 cents, or 80 cents on the dollar,
instead of the original 10 or 20 cents. The profit opportunities with
low risk were gone. Also, I didn't have enough funds to participate in
the RTC loans. I started looking for other investment opportunities
that in my opinion had very limited risk.
What other strategies did you come up with?
At the time, there were many CEOs who owned a lortune in their
own company stock, but who could not sell any part of their holdings
on the open market due to restrictions. I thought I could buy it privately for 50 cents on the dollar.
Why couldn't they sell their stock?
Because their company had just done an initial public offering (IPO)
and the stock was restricted [senior management and board members
were prohibited from selling their shares on the open market for a
specified period]. Purchasing restricted stock privately at a discount
represented another form of the same idea that so attracted me—buying an asset for a lot less than what I perceived the true value to be.

E L I M I N A T I N G T H E flHmiDE

Why could they sell their shares to you?
Because it was a private transaction, and I took on the restriction. I
couldn't sell the stock until the restriction period was over. I could go
to an executive in Silicon Valley and say, "On paper you are worth $20
million, but you can't sell any of your shares. I'll pay you $ 1 million for
$2 million of restricted stock." Remember, restrictions back then
were as long as three years.
How did you find managers who wanted to sell restricted stock at
discounted levels?
Management and other insiders have to file SEC forms every year
showing ownership. 1 periodically searched through these filings.
Then I would call a manager and make a proposal to him: "I see that
you own 50 percent of your company. Would you be interested in
cashing out on a small part of it?" Some of them would be.
I assume many of them would say yes but then would lose their
enthusiasm once you told them that you were offering them only
50 cents on the dollar.
I was usually buying only a small piece of their holdings. Look, imagine you have a company that has just had an IPO. All of a sudden you
have $20 million on paper, and you're still living in a $500,000 house.
Well, maybe you might be very happy to trade $2 million of stock that
you can't sell for three years for $1 million in hand.
How did you get the money to buy the stock?
At first, I did these transactions on a deal-by-deal basis, and I primarily raised the money from relatives and friends of relatives.

Is buying restricted stock still one of the strategies you're using
today?
No, because the SEC has since changed the rules: The restricted
lockup period is now only one year. The discount available on
restricted stock has shrunk commensurately.
Was the shift in your current strategy prompted by this change in
the required holding period for restricted stock?
Even before this change, I wasn't fully satisfied. If the company
whose shares we bought had problems, we could still lose. I was
searching for what I call a full "belt-and-suspenders" strategy. How
could I structure a transaction so that if a stock were to go down 50

C L A U D 10
percent due to a market correction, 1 would still come out
unscathed?
How did you do that?
I would ask the company owner if he thought his stock could go down
50 percent. "Of course not," he would answer, "it's going to triple." I
said, "Fine, I'll give you 60 cents on the dollar instead of 50 cents, but
if the stock goes down 40 percent, you give me more shares." That
was the beginning of our protecting the downside.
Did they usually accept this type of deal?
Sure, no entrepreneur will ever think his stock is going down.

There is a common belief that Market Wizards tend to have been
obsessed with the markets from an early age. This is often not the
case. Guazzoni's early interests— photography and the origin of languages—were as removed as could be from the financial sphere. He
fell into a financial career only because of a friend's suggestion.
Although Claudio Guazzoni's approach, which requires tens of
millions of dollars to implement, is hardly accessible to the average
investor, it is important to remember that his firm did not spring
forth full-blown. He started out with a simple idea—buying
restricted stock at a discounted price—and built his enterprise one
deal at a time, with his initial stake raised from others. The pertinence of this chapter to investors is not Guazzoni's methodology, but
rather his premise that "every period of time has its own opportunities where you can find investments that are extremely discounted
and have a very well protected downside."
Guazzoni's strategy of buying restricted stock provides a perfect
illustration of the principle that opportunities arise when some market participants are treated differently from others. (See the
Alphonse Fletcher Jr. interview for a further elaboration of this
theme.) In this case, the owners of restricted stock were prohibited
from selling their shares, whereas ordinary investors were not. This
dichotomy in the treatment of shareholders provided the opportunity
for Guazzoni to buy restricted shares at deep discounts. It may have
been a very simple idea—as Guazzoni himself readily characterizes

iELIMI'NATING T«llffWNSIDE

his strategies at the beginning of this interview—but still a highly
profitable one. The lesson is that complexity is not a necessary ingredient for success.
Guazzoni's entire career has one unifying theme: the search for
undervalued assets. All the strategies he worked on or utilized—
leveraged buyouts, bids on RTC loan portfolios, discounted purchases of restricted stock, and acquisition finance—involved buying
undervalued assets. The idea of buying assets at prices below their
true value as a means of not only generating profits, but also doing so
with very limited downside risk, is a concept that runs through a
number of interviews in this book (for example, Michael Lauer's
stock buying strategy). When asked to summarize his philosophy,
Guazzoni replied: "We try to eliminate the downside. If you eliminate
the downside, you end up making money at the end of the year."

Iff HE Q.UANTI.TATiHMDiB-t

answer. Although he did not use these exact words, the gist of Shaw's

responses to these various queries could be succinctly stated as: "I prefer

DAVID SHAW
The Quantitative Edge

In offices Situated on the upper floors of a Midtown Manhattan skyscraper,
Shaw has assembled scores of the country's most brilliant mathematicians, physicists, and computer scientists with one purpose in mind: to
combine their quantitative skills to consistently extract profits from the
world's financial markets. Employing a myriad of interrelated, complex
mathematical models, the firm, D. E. Shaw, trades thousands of stocks in
more than ten countries, as well as financial instruments linked to these
stock markets (warrants, options, and convertible bonds). The company
seeks to profit strictly from pricing discrepancies among different securities, rigorously avoiding risks associated with directional moves in the
stock market or other financial markets (currencies and interest rates).
Shaw's secretiveness regarding his firm's trading strategies is legendary. Employees sign nondisclosure agreements, and even within the
firm, knowledge about the trading methodology is on a need-to-know
basis. Thus, in my interview, I knew better than to even attempt to ask
Shaw explicit questions about his company's trading approach. Still, I
tried what I thought were some less sensitive questions:
> What strategies were once used by the firm but have been discarded because they no longer work?
> What fields of math would one have to know to develop the same

strategies his firm uses?
*• What market anomalies that once provided trading opportunities
have so obviously ceased to exist that all his competitors would be
aware of the fact?
Even these circumspect questions were met with a polite refusal to
254

not to answer on the grounds that it might provide some remote hint that

my competitors could find useful."
Shaw's flagship trading program has been consistently profitable since
it was launched in 1989. During its eleven-year life span, the program
has generated a 22 percent average annual compounded return net of all
fees while keeping risks under tight control. During this entire period,
the program's worst decline from an equity peak to a month-end low was
a relatively moderate 11 percent—and even this loss was fully recovered
in just over four months.
How has D. E. Shaw managed to extract consistent profits from the
market for over a decade in both bullish as well as bearish periods?
Clearly, Shaw is not talking—or at least not about the specifics of his
company's trading strategies. Nevertheless, based on what Shaw does
acknowledge and reading between the lines, it may be possible to sketch a
very rough description of his company's trading methodology. The following explanation, which admittedly incoq^orates a good deal of guesswork,
is intended to provide the reader with a flavor of Shaw's trading approach.
We begin our overview with classic arbitrage. Although Shaw doesn't
use classic arbitrage, it provides a conceptual starting point. Classic arbitrage refers to the risk-free trade of simultaneously buying and selling the
same security (or commodity) at different prices, therein locking in a
risk-free profit. An example of classic arbitrage would be buying gold in
New York at $290 an ounce and simultaneously selling the same quantity
in London at $291. In our age of computerization and near instantaneous
communication, classic arbitrage opportunities are virtually nonexistent.
Statistical arbitrage expands the classic arbitrage concept of simultaneously buying and selling identical financial instruments for a locked-in
profit to encompass buying and selling closely related financial instruments for a probable profit. In statistical arbitrage, each individual trade
is no longer a sure thing, but the odds imply an edge. The trader engaged
in statistical arbitrage will lose on a significant percentage of trades but
will be profitable over the long run, assuming trade probabilities and
transaction costs have been accurately estimated. An appropriate analogy
would be roulette (viewed from the casino's perspective): The casino's
