TRENDS

moving average or at some other support level (these are discussed in the section
on support and resistance in book 2).
A trend is an area of relative certainty, where the odds are greater than 50–50
that the market will move X ticks further before it moves X ticks in the opposite
direction. A trend is a series of spikes alternating with small trading ranges, and
during each brief spike phase, the odds are better than 50–50, but in each trading
range phase, uncertainty increases and the odds hover around 50–50 again. One of
the difficulties in trading a trend is that the spike phases are often brief, and by
the time you realize that one exists, there may not be enough ticks left with those
increased odds to make a profit. Before you know it, a trading range forms and
the odds are back to 50–50. One of the best ways to trade a trend is to anticipate
when the next spike will begin and to enter on a stop as it is starting. That way, you
can catch a spike with maybe a 60 percent probability or even higher of making
X ticks before losing X ticks, and if you become proficient at this, you will be a
successful trader.
Big traders don’t hesitate to enter a trend during its spike phase, because they
expect significant follow-through, even if there is a pullback immediately after their
entry. If a pullback occurs, they increase the size of their position. For example, if
there is a strong bull breakout lasting several bars, more and more institutions become convinced that the market has become always-in long with each new higher
tick, and as they become convinced that the market will go higher, they start buying. This makes the spike grow very quickly. They have many ways to enter, like
buying at the market, buying a one- or two-tick pullback, buying above the prior
bar on a stop, or buying on a breakout above a prior swing high. It does not matter
how they get in, because their focus is to get at least a small position on, and then
look to buy more as the market moves higher, or if it pulls back. Because they will
add on as the market goes higher, the spike can extend for many bars. A beginning
trader sees the growing spike and wonders how anyone could be buying at the top
of such a huge move. What they don’t understand is that the institutions are so confident that the market will soon be higher that they will buy all the way up, because
they don’t want to miss the move while waiting for a pullback to form. The beginner
is also afraid that his stop would have to be below the bottom of the spike, or at
least below its midpoint, which is far away. The institutions know this, and simply
adjust their position size down to a level where their dollars at risk are the same as
for any other trade.
In every trend, no matter how strong, the market eventually pulls back a little.
For example, if there is a strong bull breakout, or a trend from the open bull, where
there is a bull spike made of four consecutive large bull trend bars with small tails,
and then the fifth bar falls below the low of the prior bar, this is a pullback. If
everyone is looking to buy a pullback, why would one ever develop? It is because
not everyone is looking to buy. Experienced traders who bought early on look for

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

279

price levels to take partial profits (they will begin to scale out of their longs), and
sometimes they will sell out of their entire positions. These are not the bulls who
are looking to buy a few ticks lower on the first pullback. The traders who are
taking partial or full profits are afraid of a reversal, or of a deeper pullback, which
would allow them to buy again many ticks lower. If they believed that the pullback
was only going to last for a few ticks, and then the bull was going to resume, they
never would have exited. They always take their profits at some resistance level,
like a measured move target, a trend line, a trend channel line, or at the bottom
of a trading range above the market. Most of the trading is done by computers, so
everything has a mathematical basis, which means that the profit-taking targets are
based on the prices that anyone can see on their screens. With practice, traders can
learn to spot areas where the computers might take profits, and they can take their
profits at the same prices, expecting a pullback to follow.
Sometimes the spike will have a bar or a pattern that will allow aggressive
bears to take a small scalp, if they think that the pullback is imminent and that
there is enough room for a profitable short. However, most traders who attempt this
will lose, because most of the pullbacks do not fall far enough for a profit, or the
trader’s equation is weak (the probability of making their scalp times the size of
the profit is smaller than the probability of losing times the size of their protective
stop). Also, traders who take the short are hoping so much for their small profit
that they invariably end up missing the much more profitable long that forms a few
minutes later.
Some traders don’t like to buy spikes because they don’t like to risk too much.
They prefer to feel like they are buying at a better price (a discount). These value
bulls will only buy pullbacks and will wait for one to form. Other bulls who missed
the initial buy or did not buy enough during the spike eagerly wait for the first
pullback to buy or to add to their positions. They place limit orders at and below
the low of the prior bar, hoping for a small dip, so that they can get long. Because
of this, the first pullback usually only falls below the low of the prior bar by a few
ticks. When the bulls are particularly aggressive, they will buy above the low of the
prior bar, and what appeared to be a bar that would become a pullback bar might
instead not fall below the low of the prior bar.
If the bulls holding profitable longs think that the bull spike is weakening and
that the next bar will trade below the low of the current bar, some will sell out
of their longs at the market. Others will wait for the bar to close, and if the bar
is not another strong bull trend bar, they will sell at the close of the bar, realizing
that they might be selling too early, but happy with being able to sell at a high
price. Eventually, there will be a true pullback bar, with a low below the low of the
prior bar. Once there is, other bulls will place stop orders to buy above its high,
because this bar is a high 1 buy setup in a strong bull spike and therefore a high
probability buy setup. Some traders prefer to buy on stops above bars and not limit

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

280

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

orders below bars because they want the market going in their direction when they
enter, so that they will have the wind at their backs instead of in their faces. They
are willing to exchange some of their potential profits for a higher probability of
success. Both approaches are reasonable, if the trader’s equation is favorable for
their trades. Bull trends on higher time frame charts tend to have rallies in the final
30 to 60 minutes of trading on the 5 minute chart. Some of the buying is from mutual
funds and some is from short covering, but much of it is simply statistically based
program trading where the programmers have testing that shows that buying into
the close in a bull trend is a profitable strategy. The strong finish often pushes the
close above the open of the day. The result is a bull trend bar on the daily chart.
When the market is in a bull trend, look for buy setups in the final hour. Likewise,
when the daily chart is in a bear trend, look for sell setups in the final hour, as the 5
minute chart will often sell off into the close, causing the bar on the daily chart to
be a bear trend bar.
The most recent bars are at the top of your computer screen in a bull trend
and at the bottom in a bear trend, and psychologically there does not appear to be
any more room for the market to go further. The result is that many traders won’t
take a great buy signal at the top of a bull trend or sell signal at the bottom of a
bear trend and will instead look for reversals. But that computer screen illusion
has nothing to do with the market and if you can add space above or below the
chart, there suddenly will be lots of room for the trend to run. The market draws
in countertrend traders, and if you enter in the direction of the trend exactly where
they exit at a loss, they will drive the market in your direction, even though the
market looks so overextended.
A move above a prior swing high in a bull trend will lead to predominantly one
of three outcomes: more buying, profit taking (by far the most common possibility), or shorting. When the trend is strong, strong bulls will buy the breakout above
the old high (they are “pressing,” or adding to, their longs) and there will be a measured move up of some kind. For example, if a bull trend forms a wedge top, but
then breaks above the top of the wedge, if enough bulls are pressing their long,
the market will often go up for a measured move that is equal to the height of the
wedge. The bears will quickly see how strong the breakout is and will buy back
their shorts. This urgent short covering adds fuel to the breakout and contributes
to the size of the bull spike. The strong bears who were shorting during the wedge
top will now see that their premise is wrong. They will expect about a measured
move up and will quickly buy back their losing shorts and not consider shorting
again for several bars and probably not until the market tests some resistance area,
like the measured move target. This often leads to a strong bull breakout lasting
one or more bars, with follow-through over the next several bars. If the move up is
very strong, the bears might not look to sell again for dozens of bars and possibly
even for the rest of the day.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

281

Whenever the market goes up far enough above the breakout to enable a trader
to make at least a profitable scalp before there is a pullback, then assume that there
was mostly new buying at the high. If it goes sideways, assume that there was profit
taking and that the bulls are looking to buy again a little lower. If the market reverses down hard, assume that the strong bears dominated at the new high and that
the market will likely trade down for at least a couple of legs and at least 10 bars.
In the absence of some rare, dramatic news event, traders don’t suddenly
switch from extremely bullish to extremely bearish. There is a gradual transition.
A trader becomes less bullish, then neutral, and then bearish. Once enough traders
make this transition, the market reverses into a deeper correction or into a bear
trend. Every firm has its own measure of excess, and at some point enough firms
decide that the trend has gone too far. They believe that there is little risk of missing a great move up if they stop buying above the old high, and they will buy only
on pullbacks. If the market hesitates above the old high, the market is becoming
two-sided, and the strong bulls are using the new high to take profits.
Profit taking means that traders are still bullish and are looking to buy a pullback. Most new highs are followed by profit taking. Every new high is a potential
top, but most reversal attempts fail and become the beginnings of bull flags, only
to be followed by another new high. If a rally to test the high has several small
pullbacks within the leg up, with lots of overlapping bars, several bear bodies, and
big tails on the tops of the bars, and most of the bull trend bars are weak, then
the market is becoming increasingly two-sided. The bulls are taking profits at the
tops of the bars and buying only at the bottoms of the bars, and the bears are
beginning to short at the tops of the bars. Similarly, the bulls are taking profits as
the market approaches the top of the bull trend, and the bears are shorting more.
If the market goes above the bull high, it is likely that the profit taking and shorting
will be even stronger.
Most traders do not like to reverse, so if they are anticipating a reversal signal,
they prefer to exit their longs and then wait for that signal. The loss of these bulls
on the final leg up in the trend contributes to the weakness of the rally to the final
high. If there is a strong reversal down after the market breaks above the prior
high, the strong bears are taking control of the market, at least for the near term.
Once that happens, then the bulls who were hoping to buy a small pullback believe
instead that the market will fall further. They therefore wait to buy until there is
a much larger pullback, and their absence of buying allows the bears to drive the
market down into a deeper correction, lasting 10 or more bars and often having two
or more legs.
There is one situation where the breakout in a bull trend is routinely met by aggressive shorts who will usually take over the market. A pullback is a minor trend
in the opposite direction, and traders expect it to end soon and for the larger trend
to resume. When there is a pullback in a strong bear trend, the market will often

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

282

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

have two legs up in the minor bull trend. As the market goes above the high of the
first leg up, it is breaking out above a prior swing high in a minor bull trend. However, since most traders will see the move up as a pullback that will end very soon,
the dominant traders on the breakout will usually be aggressive sellers, instead of
aggressive new buyers or profit-taking longs, and the minor bull trend will usually
reverse back down into the direction of the major bear trend after breaking out
above the first or second swing high in the pullback.
The same is true of new lows in a bear trend. When the bear trend is strong,
strong bears will press their shorts by adding to their positions on the breakout to a
new low and the market will continue to fall until it reaches some measured move
target. As the trend weakens, the price action at a new low will be less clear, which
means that the strong bears are using the new low as an area to take profits on their
shorts rather than as an area to add to their shorts. As the bear trend further loses
strength, eventually the strong bulls will see a new low as a great price to initiate
longs and they will be able to create a reversal pattern and then a significant rally.
As a trend matures, it usually transitions into a trading range, but the first trading ranges that form are usually followed by a continuation of the trend. How do
the strong bulls and bears act as a trend matures? In a bull trend, when the trend
is strong, the pullbacks are small because the strong bulls want to buy more on a
pullback. Since they suspect that there may not be a pullback until the market is
much higher, they begin to buy in pieces, but relentlessly. They look for any reason
to buy, and with so many big traders in the market, there will be some buying for
every imaginable reason. They place limit orders to buy a few ticks down and other
limit orders to buy a few ticks above the low of the prior bar, at the low of the prior
bar, and below the low of the prior bar. They place stop orders to buy above the
high of the prior bar and on a breakout above any prior swing high. They also buy
on the close of both any bull or bear trend bar. They see the bear trend bar as a
brief opportunity to buy at a better price and the bull trend bar as a sign that the
market is about to move up quickly.
The strong bears are smart and they see what is going on. Since they believe,
just like the strong bulls, that the market is going to be higher before long, it does
not make sense for them to be shorting. They just step aside and wait until they
can sell higher. How much higher? Each institution has its own measure of excess,
but once the market gets to a price level where enough bear firms believe that it
might not go any higher, they will begin to short. If enough of them short around
the same price level, more and larger bear trend bars form and bars start to get
tails on the tops. These are signs of selling pressure and they tell all traders that the
bulls are becoming weaker and the bears are becoming stronger. The strong bulls
eventually stop buying above the last swing high and instead begin to take profits
as the market goes to a new high. They are still bullish but are becoming selective
and will buy only on pullbacks. As the two-sided trading increases and the sell-offs

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

283

have more bear trend bars and last for more bars, the strong bulls will want to buy
only at the bottom of the developing trading range and will look to take profits at
the top. The strong bears begin to short at new highs and they are now willing to
scale in higher. They might take partial profits near the bottom of the developing
trading range if they think that the market might reverse back up and break out to a
new high, but they will keep looking to short new highs. At some point, the market
becomes a 50–50 market and neither the bulls nor bears are in control; eventually
the bears become dominant, a bear trend begins, and the opposite process unfolds.
A trend that has gone on for 30 or more bars will often have an unusually strong
breakout, but it can be an exhaustive climax. For example, in a protracted bull
trend, all strong bulls and bears love to see a large bull trend bar or two, especially
if it is exceptionally large, because they expect it to be a brief, unusually great
opportunity. Once the market is close to where the strong bulls and bears want
to sell, like near a measured move target or a trend channel line, especially if the
move is the second or third consecutive buy climax, they step aside. The absence
of selling by the strongest traders results in a vacuum above the market, which
creates one or two relatively large bull trend bars. This bull spike is just the sign
that the strong traders have been waiting for, and once it is there, they appear as
if out of nowhere and begin their selling. The bulls take profits on their longs and
the bears initiate new shorts. Both sell aggressively at the close of the bar, above
its high, at the close of the next bar (especially if it is a weaker bar), and at the
close of the following bar, especially if the bars are starting to have bear bodies.
They also sell below the low of the prior bar. When they see a strong bear trend
bar, they sell at its close and below its low. Both the bulls and the bears expect
a larger correction, and the bulls will not consider buying again until at least a
10-bar, two-legged correction, and even then, only if the sell-off looks weak. The
bears expect the same sell-off and will not be eager to take profits too early.
Weak traders see that large bull trend bar in the opposite way. The weak bulls,
who had been sitting on the sidelines hoping for an easy pullback to buy, see the
market running away from them and want to make sure they catch this next leg up,
especially since the bar is so strong and the day is almost over. The weak bears,
who shorted early and maybe scaled in, were terrified by the rapidity with which
the bar broke to a new high. They are afraid of relentless follow-through buying,
so they buy back their shorts. These weak traders are trading on emotion and are
competing against computers, which do not have emotion as one of the variables in
their algorithms. Since the computers control the market, the emotions of the weak
traders doom them to big losses on big bull trend bars at the end of an overdone
bull trend.
Once a strong bull begins to have pullbacks that are relatively large, the pullbacks, which are always small trading ranges, behave more like trading ranges than
bull flags. The direction of the breakout becomes less certain and traders begin to

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

284

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

think that a downside breakout is about as likely as an upside breakout. A new high
is now a breakout attempt above a trading range, and the odds are that it will fail.
Likewise, once a strong bear trend begins to have relatively large pullbacks, those
pullbacks behave more like trading ranges than bear flags, and therefore a new low
is an attempt to break below a trading range and the odds are that it will fail.
Every trading range is within either a bull trend or a bear trend. Once the twosided trading is strong enough to create the trading range, the trend is no longer
strong, at least while the trading range is in effect. There will always be a breakout
from the range eventually, and if it is to the upside and it is very strong, the market
is in a strong bull trend. If it is to the downside and strong, the market is in a strong
bear trend.
Once the bears are strong enough to push a pullback well below the bull trend
line and the moving average, they are confident enough that the market will likely
not go much higher and they will aggressively short above the old high. At this
point, the bulls will have decided that they should buy only a deep pullback. A new
mind-set is now dominant at the new high. It is no longer a place to buy, because
it no longer represents much strength. Yes, there is profit taking by the bulls, but
most big traders now look at the new high as a great opportunity to initiate shorts.
The market has reached the tipping point and most traders have stopped looking to
buy small pullbacks and instead are looking to sell rallies. The bears are dominant
and the strong selling will likely lead to a large correction or even a trend reversal.
After the next strong push down, the bears will look for a lower high to sell again or
to add to their short positions, and the bulls who bought the pullback will become
concerned that the trend might have reversed or at least that there will be a much
larger pullback. Instead of hoping for a new bull high to take profits on their longs,
they will now take profits at a lower high and not look to buy again until after a
larger correction.
There will still be bulls who bought much lower and want to give the bull trend
every possible chance to resume. Traders know that most reversal attempts fail,
and many who rode the trend up will not exit their longs until after the bears have
demonstrated the ability to push the market down hard. Many longs bought puts
to protect themselves in case of a severe reversal. The puts allow them to hold on
to give the bull trend every possible chance to resume. They know that the puts
limit their losses, no matter how far the market might fall, but once they see this
impressive selling pressure, they will then look for a rally to finally exit their longs,
and as that rally begins, they will take profits on their puts. Also, most of their puts
expire within a few months, and once expired, the traders no longer have downside protection. This means that they cannot continue to hold on to their positions
unless they keep buying more and more puts. If they believe that the market will
likely fall further and not rally again for many months, it does not make sense to
continue to pay for ongoing put protection. Instead, they will look to sell out of their
