
4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

126

11:34 AM

Page 126

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Table 7.6
Size Statistics

Description

Bull Market,
Up Breakout

Bear Market,
Up Breakout

Tall pattern performance

44%

39%

Short pattern performance

34%

25%

Median height as a percentage of breakout price

35.87%

46.95%

Narrow pattern performance

34%

29%

Wide pattern performance

42%

33%

Median length

120 days

98 days

Average formation length

143 days

110 days

Short and narrow performance

31%

24%

Short and wide performance

39%

28%a

Tall and wide performance

45%

38%

Tall and narrow performance

44%

41%a

a

Fewer than 30 samples.

Average formation length. BARRs are long patterns, averaging between
110 and 143 days or about 4 to 5 months long.
Height and width combinations. Patterns that are both tall and wide do
better than other combinations in a bull market. In a bear market, BARRs that
are both tall and narrow perform well. The worst performance comes from
patterns that are short and narrow, so avoid trading those.
Table 7.7 shows volume-related statistics, and it is as disappointing as
watching a helium-filled party balloon getting caught in the trees instead of
playing chicken with airplanes.
Table 7.7
Volume Statistics
Description

Bull Market,
Up Breakout

Bear Market,
Up Breakout

Rising volume trend performance

38%

31%

Falling volume trend performance

38%

31%

U-shaped volume pattern performance

40%

35%a

Dome-shaped volume pattern performance

38%

30%

Neither U-shaped nor dome-shaped
volume pattern performance

32%

51%a

Heavy breakout volume performance

40%

27%

Light breakout volume performance

34%

35%

a

Fewer than 30 samples.

4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

11:34 AM

Page 127

Trading Tactics

127

Volume trend. The volume trend shows no performance difference
for BARRs.
Volume shapes. In a bull market, BARRs with U-shaped volume performed best. In a bear market, BARRs with random-shaped volume did well,
but the samples are few.
Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume helps performance in a bull
market, but hurts it in a bear market.

Trading Tactics
Table 7.8 outlines trading tactics for BARR bottoms.
Measure rule. After properly identifying a BARR bottom, you will want
to determine how profitable is a trade likely to be. You do that using the measure rule. I changed the measure rule from a computation to simply the top of
the chart pattern. The highest high is the target, and prices reach the high 64%
to 68% of the time.
Wait for confirmation. The confirmation point is when price closes
above the trend line formed during the lead-in phase. Should the price close
above the trend line, buy the stock.
Sell at old high. I have discussed how often a stock showing a BARR bottom stops near the old high (which is the start of the formation). Place a sell
order near the price level of the old high. That will keep your profits intact
should the stock then turn down. If you are reluctant to sell your holdings, why
not sell half when the stock reaches the old high, then see what happens?
Stops. As always, place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the nearest support
zone. Move the stop upward as the stock advances. That way, when prices turn
down, you will not lose too much. Only paying taxes is worse than riding a
stock up and following it all the way back down.

Table 7.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic

Explanation

Measure rule

The highest high in the pattern is the target.

Wait for confirmation

Waiting for the breakout improves investment performance.
The close should be above the down-sloping trend line
before you buy the stock.

Sell at old high

When prices rise to the old high, consider selling if the stock
shows weakness.

Stops

Place a stop 0.15 below prior resistance. As prices rise, raise
the stop.

4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

128

11:34 AM

Page 128

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms

Sample Trade
Perhaps the most interesting way to illustrate trading tactics is by example.
John is new to investing, and he did not take the time to learn thoroughly
about BARR bottoms. As he flipped through his stock charts one day, he
noticed an intriguing situation developing in the stock depicted in Figure 7.6.
During August, the stock peaked, declined a bit, then formed a second minor
high. As the stock declined from the second high, John drew a tentative trend
line down connecting them. Soon, he noticed that the stock was descending in
a sort of channel. He drew a second trend line, parallel to the first, that connected the lows.
However, the stock soon pierced through the second trend line and
moved lower. When it declined even further, John thought he recognized a
BARR bottom forming. He drew a third trend line, parallel to the other two
and lead-in height apart.
As the stock dipped below the lowest trend line, he believed that the
decline was at an end. So, the following day he pulled the trigger and bought
100 shares at 18.25. He was pleased to acquire the stock a bit below the closing price for the day.
For the next week, the stock shot upward and pierced the second trend
line. John was brimming with enthusiasm and believed that picking stocks was
an easy game, as he put it. As the stock moved into a consolidation period, John
showed no concern. Flat periods of trading often follow quick rises.

Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT)
BARR Trend Line

Parallel Trend Lines, Lead-in Height Apart

Stock Bought

Stock Sold

Aug 91

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan 92

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

– 27
– 26
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
– 8
– 7
– 6
– 5
Jun

Figure 7.6 A bump-and-run reversal bottom failure in which John invested. He
finally sold the stock just 2 days before it reached its low.

4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

11:34 AM

Page 129

Sample Trade

129

When the stock neared the top trend line, John calculated the target
price, using the old method instead of the highest high in the pattern. He
computed the lead-in height by subtracting the daily low from the trend line at
its widest part in the first quarter of the formation. He used the low of August
20, at 24, and subtracted this from the trend line value of 26, measured vertically. This left him with a lead-in height of $2. John believed that the stock
would likely break out at about 21.25, so this gave him a target price of 23.25,
which is the lead-in height added to the breakout price.
John was confident that he could hold out for larger gains. From his purchase point, he calculated that he would receive at least a 25% return if everything worked out as planned.
For about a month, the stock moved sideways, but this did not alarm him.
He even expected the stock to decline a bit and recapture some of its quick
gains. Secretly he hoped that the stock would soon break out of its trading
range and head higher. He was confident that it would move up—it was only a
question of when.
He was wrong. Indeed, the stock did break out of its trading range, but it
headed lower, not higher. After it approached the top trend line, the stock continued down and touched the middle trend line. John knew that a stock often
retraces 38% to 62% of its gains. He grabbed his calculator and computed the
retrace value.
The stock reached a high of 21.43 in a straight-line run from the low at
18, a rise of about 3.50 points. Now the stock was retracing the gains and had
moved down to 18.75, a 78% retrace. Clearly, this was out of the realm of a
simple retrace. John suspected that a trend change had occurred, but hoped
that the pause he was seeing as it touched the middle trend line would give the
stock support and call an end to the decline. For a while, it did. The stock
paused for 3 days at the trend line then started moving lower again. It quickly
fell below the purchase price and headed down.
Although John had purchased the stock as a short-term play, he convinced himself that he really liked the company and would not mind holding it
for the long term. Now, at least, that is what it would take for him to recoup
his losses and get out at breakeven.
The stock moved through the third trend line, heading lower. The easy
game was now turning into a disaster. John first considered selling on December 11, when the stock reached 12.75, for a 30% loss. He delayed the selling
decision by saying that the holding was a long-term one and he should expect
to come across such declines in the short term.
The next day, the stock closed higher, and it gave him renewed hope.
Indeed, it closed even higher the following day. But the 2-day recovery was an
illusion and the stock declined again. As it plunged below 12.75, John threw up
his hands and told his broker to dump the dog. He received a fill at 12.25, the
low for the day. Two days later, the stock bottomed out at about 10.75. From
the buy point, John lost 35%.

4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

130

11:34 AM

Page 130

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms

As upset as this made John, the stock was not finished tormenting him.
He continued to follow the stock and watched it move higher. He extended the
BARR trend line downward (Figure 7.7) and noticed that a new, larger BARR
had formed. After suffering through the large bump, the stock moved higher
until it touched the BARR trend line. Then, the stock followed it lower, unable
to pierce the resistance line.
During the week of March 27, 1992, the stock closed above the trend line
for the first time in months. The BARR was complete and a confirmed breakout was occurring. Did John buy the stock? No. For several months, he
watched its progress as it moved higher almost week after week. Disgusted, he
quit following the stock.
In April 1994, John took another look at the stock and was surprised to
see that it continued moving higher. It had just reached a high of 50.13, a
climb of almost 370%. He grabbed his calculator and realized that his mistake
cost him over $3,000.
What did he do wrong? Several things. He did not wait for the BARR to
pierce the trend line and move higher. If he had, he would have purchased
closer to the low, saving him precious capital. Next, he did not cut his losses
short. After he bought the stock, he should have determined his sell point. The
middle trend line would have been a good place for a stop-loss order. In this
case, it would have taken him out of the stock at about 17.88, a small decline
from the purchase price of 18.25. Instead, he followed the stock down and
changed his investment philosophy from a short-term trade to a long-term
holding.
Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT)

New, Larger BARR Bottom

– 48
– 46
– 44
– 42
– 40
– 38
– 36
– 34
– 32
– 30
– 28
– 26
– 24
– 22
– 20
– 18
– 16
– 14
– 12
– 10
– 8

Figure 7.7 A bump-and-run reversal bottom on a weekly scale. After the breakout, the stock climbed over 350%.

4366_07.qxd

2/23/05

11:34 AM

Page 131

For Best Performance

131

For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations on selecting BARR bottoms
that perform well. Consult the associated table for more information.
• Use the identification guidelines to help select the pattern—Table 7.1.
• Select reversals in a bull market. They rise higher than in a bear market—Table 7.2.
• Bear market failure rates start small, but bull markets do better for
gains over 10%—Table 7.3.
• Pick patterns with breakouts near the yearly low—Table 7.4.
• Throwbacks hurt performance. Look for overhead resistance before
trading—Table 7.4.
• Look for price weakness 5 to 6 weeks after the breakout—Table 7.5.
• Select patterns that are tall or wide. Avoid those that are both short and
narrow—Table 7.6.
• Heavy breakout volume helps bull market patterns, but light breakout
volume helps bear market BARRs—Table 7.7.

4366_08.qxd

2/23/05

11:36 AM

Page 132

8
Bump-and-Run
Reversal Tops

RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Downward Breakouts
Appearance

Prices rise steadily along a trend line, bump
up, round over, then decline through the
trend line and continue down.

Reversal or continuation

Short-term bearish reversal
Bull Market

Bear Market

Performance rank

3 out of 21

4 out of 21

Break-even failure rate

5%

1%

Average decline

19%

27%

Change after trend ends

53%

48%

Volume trend

Upward

Upward

Pullbacks

62%

65%

Percentage meeting price target

78%

90%

Surprising findings

The best performing patterns have breakouts
in the middle of the yearly price range.
Pullbacks hurt performance but breakout day
gaps help. Tall patterns perform better than
short ones.

132

4366_08.qxd

2/23/05

11:36 AM

Page 133

Tour

133

If you were thinking of buying stock in a company, wouldn’t it be wonderful if
you knew the purchase price would be less tomorrow? Of course! But how do
you predict tomorrow’s price? That is the problem I was researching when I
discovered the bump-and-run reversal top formation. I was trying to figure out
a reliable way to determine if tomorrow’s price would be higher or lower than
today’s and by how much.
I tried all sorts of mathematical games to boost the accuracy of the prediction with only limited success. Then I moved to the visual world. I drew a
trend line along a stock chart and wondered if I could determine how far prices
would decline below the line. I looked at many stock charts and trend lines trying to see if there was a relationship between a trend line and the breakdown
of the trend. That is when I discovered it: the bump-and-run formation—
BARF for short. I toyed with the idea of leaving the name as is but decided that
the investment community would not believe the veracity of the new formation. So, I changed the name to bump-and-run reversal (BARR), a slightly
more descriptive and palatable acronym.

Tour
As I looked at the various trend lines, I discovered that pronounced breakdowns share several characteristics. Look at Figure 8.1, a good BARR example.
The overall formation reminds me of a mountain range. The foothills at the
start of the formation are low and subdued, not venturing too far above the upsloping plain. Volume at the start of the formation is high but quickly recedes.
The mountains themselves rise well above the foothills on high volume.
Investor enthusiasm continues as prices round over at the top, then diminishes
on the far side. When the mountains end, prices decline sharply and continue
moving down. That is a BARR. Prices bump-up, round over, and run back
down again. The formation is the visual representation of momentum. The
base of the formation follows a trend line that always slopes upward. It signals
investors’ eagerness to acquire the stock. As each day goes by, investors bid
higher to reluctant sellers and the price rises.
Other momentum players eventually notice the rise in the stock price.
Many jump on the bandwagon the day after a surprisingly good earnings
announcement. That is when the bump begins. Volume spikes upward along
with the stock price. Quickly rising prices entice others to join the fray
and that, in turn, sends the stock even higher. As momentum increases,
prices jump to form a new, higher-sloping trend line. Then things start going wrong.
Supply catches up with demand. As that happens, the rise slows and the
smart money turns cautious. Investor enthusiasm wanes and the war between
supply and demand turns. The stock rounds over and starts heading down.

4366_08.qxd

2/23/05

134

11:36 AM

Page 134

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. (Textile, NYSE, FLD)

– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29

Bump
Phase

Lead-in
Phase

– 28
Downhill
Run

Bump
Begins

– 27
– 26
– 25

Trend Line

– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21

Nov 93

Dec

Jan 94

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

– 20
Aug

Figure 8.1 Good example of a bump-and-run reversal. Prices move up along the
trend line in the lead-in phase, jump up during the bump phase, then crash down
through the trend line during the downhill run. Volume at the start of the formation and again at the start of the bump is usually high but tapers off as the bump
rounds over. About half the time volume picks up as prices pierce the trend line.

When the smart money sees prices falling, they sell and the decline picks up
speed. Downward momentum increases and returns prices to the trend line.
At this point, buying enthusiasm may increase and send prices back up for
one last try at a new peak. Usually, however, prices do not bounce off the
trend line but continue moving down. Sometimes there is a pause and sometimes prices just plunge straight through the resistance line, as illustrated
in Figure 8.1.
Once prices pierce the trend line, volume increases as investors dump the
stock. This selling alarms more investors and the downward trend feeds on
itself. Eventually, after several months of declining prices, the selling pressure
abates and buying enthusiasm halts the downward slide. Prices tentatively level
out and perhaps even rebound a bit. Once the cause of the reversal fades from
memory, prices start rising again and the process begins anew.

Identification Guidelines
Table 8.1 outlines the various parts of the formation that are illustrated in
Figure 8.1.

4366_08.qxd

2/23/05

11:36 AM

Page 135

Identification Guidelines

135

Table 8.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic

Discussion

Arithmetic scale

Do not use a semilogarithmic scale; instead us an arithmetic one.

Rising trend line

A trend line connecting the lows rises steadily: no horizontal or
near-horizontal trend lines. The trend line usually rises at about
30–45 degrees (although this varies with scaling). Avoid trend
lines that are too steep (over 60 degrees): There is not enough
room for the bump.

Lead-in, lead-in height

The lead-in is the section just before prices move up sharply in
the bump phase. Lead-in prices should have a range of at least
$1 (preferably $2 or more), as measured from the highest high
to the trend line, vertically, during the first quarter of the
overall formation length. Minimum lead-in length is 1 month
with no maximum value.

Rounded bump

Prices rise up (trend line slope is 45–60 degrees or more) on
high volume usually after a favorable event (unexpectedly good
earnings, an analyst recommends or upgrades the stock, higher
store sales, that sort of thing). Prices eventually round over and
decline back to the 30 degree trend line. The bump must be at
least twice the lead-in height, measured from highest high to
the trend line, vertically.

Downhill run

After returning to the trend line, prices may bounce back up
and form additional bumps or slide along the trend line. Eventually prices drop through the trend line and continue down.

Arithmetic scale. Use the arithmetic scale not a semilogarithmic one
because the semilog scale distorts vertical distance.
Rising trend lines. In the figure, a trend line drawn below the lows in the
stock extends until it intersects prices as they decline in May. Volume is high
at the start of the pattern and the trend is up. That is a key consideration:
Prices must be rising. The trend line should be approximately 30 degrees, but
the degree of slope depends on the scaling used to view the chart. If the trend
line is flat or nearly so, it is not a good BARR candidate. A rising trend line shows
investor enthusiasm for the stock. However, the trend line should not be too
steep either. Steep trend lines (over 60 degrees or so) do not allow enough
room for the bump to complete properly.
Lead-in, lead-in height. The first part of the formation, called the leadin phase, leads to the bump phase. The lead-in phase should be at least 1 month
long and usually falls in the 2- to 3-month range, but can be considerably
longer. Prices oscillate up and down in this phase and have a range of at least $1
as measured from the highest high to the trend line. This range, called the leadin height, is calculated using prices from the first quarter of the formation.
Figure 8.1, for example, shows that the highest high during the first quarter of the formation occurs on January 12, 1994, at 25.63. The trend line

4366_08.qxd

2/23/05

136

11:36 AM

Page 136

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops

directly below this date has a value of about 24.25, giving a lead-in height of
1.38. The height is important because the minimum bump height and target
price, calculated later, use this value. A more accurate approach is to use the
largest distance from the trend line to the high, which is not necessarily found
between the highest high and the trend line. Use whatever method makes you
feel comfortable.
During the lead-in phase, subdued price action looks as if the stock is
gathering strength for the bump phase. Prices do not move very far away from
the trend line and usually appear rounded. If you visualize the formation as a
mountain range, the lead-in phase represents the foothills.
Volume during the lead-in phase is high at the start. Often this is due to
events that occur just before the formation begins. Volume drops off until the
start of the bump, when it suddenly rises. The higher share turnover and
expanding enthusiasm for the stock forces prices up. In Figure 8.1, this price
rise occurs on February 17 and is accompanied by volume that is the highest in
half a year.
Rounded bump. Prices jump up at the bump start and quickly rise from
a low of 26.50 to a high of 34.38 during late March. Volume remains high
throughout this period then quickly tapers off as prices round over at the top.
Many times, the top takes on the appearance of a head-and-shoulders formation or a double or triple top. If you recognize any of these formations on your
chart, ignore the BARR top formation and obey the implications of the individual formations.
The bump height, as measured from the highest high to the trend line,
should be at least twice the lead-in height. In this example, the bump height is
8 (that is, 34.38–26.38). This is more than twice the lead-in height of 1.38.
The reason for the minimum two-to-one ratio is arbitrary. The idea is to
make sure that investor enthusiasm and, hence, momentum are getting carried
away. An up-sloping trend line that turns into a bump with a higher sloping
trend line emphasizes the rising momentum. Sustaining such unbounded
enthusiasm for too long is difficult and the stock price eventually declines. In
Figure 8.1, that is exactly what happens. Prices round over and start heading
down. Sometimes the decline is orderly and sometimes it is choppy. In nearly
all cases, prices return to the trend line. Once there, the stock may do several
things. Fairly often prices bump up again, and that is called a BARR with a dual
bump or a dual BARR. Occasionally, a dual BARR consists of several bumps
but the result is still the same. Prices eventually fall below the trend line.
Downhill run. Sometimes prices slide up along the trend line for a
month or so before continuing down. At other times, prices drop straight
through the trend line, turn around and climb again, before ultimately dropping. In a few rare cases, prices descend from the bump high and never make
it back to the trend line before moving higher. These cases commonly appear
on weekly or monthly price charts.
