
what stock would you invest? The trick was to find a company with the strongest franchise, one least subject
to the corroding forces of competition and time: Munger’s idea of the great business. As Henry Brandt took
copious notes on the various answers, Buffett delivered his own choice: Dow Jones, owner of the Wall Street
Journal. His interest in newspapers was growing and would only become more intense, yet curiously he did
not actually own this stock.
The gathering ended much as it had begun, with more displays of rudeness from the hotel staff, who had no
idea they were hosting anything other than a third-rate group of stockbrokers at a time when the market was
falling.28 The staff had officiously shooed the Grahamites away from the jewelry cases on the hotel
mezzanine. On the last day, as the group was departing, Ed Anderson approached the front desk, and asked
how best to get to the airport. Most of our guests go by limousine, he was told, but for you folks we’ll call a
cab.29
Buffett would go on to describe the Colony Club as “a friendly family hotel—that is, friendly if you were
the Kennedy family.”30 It was a “low-class performance by a high-class place,” says Anderson. Later, when
a Fort Lauderdale businessman who held the mortgage on the Colony Club asked Buffett to advise him on a
financing deal, Buffett told the man he would be happy to do it without taking a fee, but “if you ever have a
chance to foreclose on them, do it.”31
One of those Buffett had invited to the Colony Club was Hochschild-Kohn’s Louis Kohn. Buffett had grown
fond of Kohn and his wife, and he and Susie had vacationed with them in Cozumel. But inviting them to the
Colony Club gathering proved awkward, since no sooner had the meeting been planned than Buffett and
Munger started to realize that Hochschild-Kohn was not going to work out for them.
“Retail is a very tough business,” says Charlie Munger. “We realized that we were wrong. Practically every
great chain-store operation that has been around long enough eventually gets in trouble and is hard to fix. The
dominant retailer in one twenty-year period is not necessarily the dominant retailer in the next.” Their
experience had given them a deep wariness of retailing—one that would only grow, not lessen, over time.
They wanted businesses that would marmalade them with money, businesses that had some sort of
sustainable competitive advantage and could outwit the natural cycle of capital creation and destruction as
long as possible. Not long after the meeting in Florida, Munger and Buffett sold Hochschild-Kohn to
Supermarkets General for about what it had cost them.32 Buffett wanted to act fast in order to unload the
company before winding down the partnership and distributing the assets. And along with the company, the
Kohns disappeared from the Buffetts’ lives.33
Diversified Retailing had issued unsecured debt (“debentures”) to finance the Hochschild-Kohn purchase.
Buffett had taken special care with this, his first public financing, and insisted to his underwriters that the
bonds have several unusual features. The bankers had objected that a novel structure would make the bond
harder to sell.
“I said, ‘Well, but bonds should have this in there.’ That was the first bond issue I ever sold, and I put a few
things in there that the underwriters had no interest in whatsoever. But I had thought a lot about bond
issues over the years. And I had thought about how bondholders got taken.”
Bondholders historically earned less than stockholders because they gave up the potentially unlimited
opportunity of a shareholder in favor of lower risk. But Buffett knew that in the real world this was not
necessarily true.
“One of the things I put in was that if we didn’t pay the interest on the bond for any reason, the
bondholders took over voting control of the company, so they didn’t have to get Mickey Moused by
bankruptcy and all that kind of stuff.” Ben Graham had written about this in Security Analysis, with as much
passion as he mustered on any subject, describing how courts rarely allow bondholders to seize the assets that
back those bonds unless the assets are nearly worthless. Unsecured bondholders’ interests were worked over
in receivership through a strangling process that delayed payment almost to the point of irrelevance. Thus,

DRC’s debenture also provided that the company could not pay dividends while the debentures were
outstanding, meaning that equity investors could not siphon off profits while interest on the bonds was in
arrears.
The second unusual provision was that the debentures paid eight percent but, depending on the earnings of
the company, could pay up to an additional one percent.
And Buffett added a third provision. Because he felt that the bonds would be sold mainly to people who
knew him or his reputation, he wanted the bonds to be redeemable if he sold enough stock in DRC that he
was no longer the largest shareholder.34
“And nobody had ever stuck anything like this in a covenant. I said, ‘You know, they’re entitled to have this
in there. They may not want to redeem them, but they’re entitled if they want to. They lent money to me,
basically.’” When his own banker, Nelson Wilder, protested that such clauses were unprecedented and
unnecessary, Buffett overruled him.35
Now that interest rates had risen, and banks were newly reluctant to lend, the debentures suddenly became a
valuable form of cheap financing, a powerful consolation prize. Nevertheless, since Buffett thought of a
dollar today as the fifty or hundred dollars that it could become someday, it was as if he had lost many
millions on Hochschild-Kohn because of the forgone opportunity to use the money more effectively. He drew
a conclusion that he would later state as:
Time is the friend of the wonderful business, the enemy of the mediocre. You might think this principle is
obvious, but I had to learn it the hard way…. After ending our corporate marriage to Hochschild-Kohn, I had
memories like those of the husband in the country song ‘My Wife Ran Away with My Best Friend and I Still
Miss Him a Lot.’…It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company at a
wonderful price. Charlie understood this early; I was a slow learner. But now, when buying companies or
common stocks, we look for first-class businesses accompanied by first-class managements. That leads right
into a related lesson: Good jockeys will do well on good horses but not on broken-down nags.36
Even as Buffett and Munger were working on the sale of Hochschild-Kohn in the fall of 1969, Forbes hit the
newsstand with a story about Buffett titled “How Omaha Beats Wall Street.” The article opened in such an
arresting manner that other writers covering Buffett would copy it for decades afterward.37
“$10,000 invested in his Buffett Partnership in 1957,” Forbes said, “is now worth $260,000.” The
partnership, which now had assets of $100 million, had grown at an annual compounded rate of thirty-one
percent. Over that twelve-year period, “it hasn’t had one year in which it lost money…. Buffett has
accomplished this through following consistently fundamental investing principles.” The anonymous
columnist for Forbes then wrote one of the more insightful statements ever made about Buffett:
“Buffett is not a simple person, but he has simple tastes.”
This not-simple Buffett with simple tastes had insisted on total secrecy in his stock dealings when he ran his
partnership, and was never once profiled in an interview. Now, however, when secrecy was no longer
important, he had cooperated with a high-profile article about himself.
The article did not print, or even whisper, his net worth. The reporter did not know that since Buffett closed
the partnership to new partners in 1966, his fees, reinvested, had quadrupled his net worth to $26.5 million in
just three years—nor that, with no money coming in from new partners to dilute him, his share of the
partnership’s assets had risen from nineteen percent to twenty-six percent. The story cited his “rambling old
Omaha house” 38 and the lack of computers and vast staff in his unimpressive office. True, the man with
simple tastes still chugged four or five bottles of Pepsi a day, asked for it instead of wine at dinner parties,
and ate only the dinner rolls if anything more complicated than a steak or hamburger was served. A helpless
captive of whoever happened to be doing the laundry at home, he still sometimes turned up in public looking
little better than a hobo and barely noticed the condition of his clothes. He would have been happy in a

two-room garage apartment; the money was just his scorecard. It was Susie who cared about living well, and
it was she who thought that money was pointless unless used for some purpose.
Nonetheless, the Buffetts had for some time lived the life of a well-to-do couple—though not, of course, a
life as luxurious as they could have afforded. Susie had even upgraded Warren to a Cadillac like her own, but
only the most stripped-down version with no extra features, and after she had called every dealer within
miles to get the cheapest deal. People found the contrast between his homespun tastes and his ever-growing
fortune refreshing. His genial manner, self-deprecating wit, and air of calm put them at ease. He had shed
some of his earlier gracelessness and most of his arrogance along with the more obvious signs of insecurity
—though his tolerance for criticism had not increased. He was learning to hide his impatience. He showed
great loyalty to longtime friends. People were especially struck by his fundamental honesty.
Those who spent long periods in his presence, however, found the unleashed whirlwind of his energy
exhausting. “Insatiable,” they whispered, and sometimes felt a guilty relief when his attention lapsed. He
inhaled information and was prone to deluging his friends with mountains of clippings and reading material
that he thought would interest them, before realizing with a start that they had fallen months behind his pace.
His conversations were less casual than they seemed. They always seemed to have a purpose, however
obscure it might be to those on the receiving end. People sometimes realized he was somehow testing them.
Buffett vibrated with an inner tension that belied his outwardly casual style.
It was hard to imagine what he was going to do with all that energy and intensity without the partnership.
Many of the partners found it hard to imagine what they were going to do without him. Many of them had
become his trainbearers and were reluctant to let go. Their reluctance struck an ironic note next to the fate of
the other Buffett family business. Concurrent with its centennial, Fred Buffett threw his hands in the air and
gave up on the Buffett grocery store. Neither of his sons wanted to take over, and even though it had a half
million dollars a year in sales, when he tried to find a buyer, there were no takers. The grinding wheel of
capitalism had spoken.
***
The Buffetts were not socialites and had never thrown a really large party. But with both the store and the
partnership closing, they celebrated with a bash one night during the last weekend of September 1969. Nearly
two hundred people of all ages and races poured into their house. Businessmen, society matrons, poor
adopted “clients” of Susie’s, teenagers, friends who were now rich from the partnership, Susie’s women pals,
assorted priests, rabbis, and ministers, and local politicians made their way through a string of flashing lights,
past the three-foot Pepsi bottles in the windows. Susie had chosen a New York theme—Stage Door Deli food
and decor—and told people to dress in “casual kosher.” They showed up in everything from culottes to
cocktail dresses. A half-cut beer barrel burst with chrysanthemums in her favorite color, sunshine yellow. A
table was set up like a deli cart, covered with pastrami sandwiches and cheeses and hung with sausages and a
real plucked chicken, in keeping with the theme. A piano player next to the beer keg in the sunroom
encouraged guests to sing along. The aroma from a popcorn machine outside the racquetball court welcomed
guests into an impromptu basement movie theater. The court’s ceiling bobbed with giant helium balloons;
films with W. C. Fields, Mae West, and Laurel and Hardy ran all evening long. In the solarium, the elderly
Fred Buffett “protected” two bikiniclad models as the guests covered them with body paint.
“I had such a good time that I hate to think it’s over,” Susie said afterward.39

PART FOUR
Susie Sings

34
Candy Harry
Omaha • 1970–Spring 1972

Two months after the Stage Door Deli party, as Buffett took the formal steps to unwind the partnership, the
Dow broke 800 on the downside. A month later, in January 1970, his friend Carol Loomis highlighted his
spectacular performance over the course of the partnership’s history—and his dour view of the prospects for
stocks—in an article on hedge funds in Fortune.1 Shortly before the article appeared, as the market started to
snowplow downhill, he sent the partners a letter explaining what they owned.
• Berkshire Hathaway, which he said was worth about $45 per share.2 Of this, about $16 was tied up in
textiles, a business that he said was not satisfactory and had an even smaller chance of being so in the future.
But even though that was one-third of the value, he would not liquidate it to free the cash. “I like the textileoperating people,” he wrote. “They have worked hard to improve the business under difficult
conditions—and, despite the poor return, we expect to continue the textile operation as long as it produces
near-current levels.” Berkshire Hathaway also owned the much more profitable insurer, National Indemnity.
• Diversified Retailing, which he valued at $11.50 to $12 per share. DRC consisted of only the scroungy
Associated Cotton Shops and cash and notes from the sale of Hochschild-Kohn, which he planned to use “for
reinvestment in other operating businesses.” He did not specify what these might be, implicitly requiring the
departing partners to trust his judgment, just as they had when they joined the partnership.
• Blue Chip Stamps, revealed for the first time. Buffett told the partners he would probably cash them out of
this investment because the company was planning a sale of stock around the end of the year.
• Illinois National Bank & Trust Company of Rockford, Illinois, also owned by Berkshire Hathaway.
• Sun Newspapers, which he described as “not financially significant.”3
The departing partners were floored to find that through their ownership of Berkshire Hathaway, they owned
a trading-stamp company, a bank, and an insignificant newspaper.4 Now they had to decide whether to hold
these cards or trade them, because they could have all cash instead.
“He would cut the pie and you would be able to get the first choice on the pieces,” says John Harding. This

was a brilliant move on Buffett’s part. He, of course, wanted them to choose the cash, leaving the Berkshire
Hathaway and Diversified Retailing stocks for himself. Nevertheless, he was honest with them. In a letter of
October 9, 1969, he made a market forecast, which he had previously declined to do. With the market at
such heights, “…[f]or the first time in my professional life,” he wrote, “I now believe there is little choice
for the average investor between professionally managed money in stocks and passive investment in
bonds”5—although he did allow as how the very best money managers might be able to squeeze out a few
percentage points over the earnings of bonds. Nonetheless, the departing partners shouldn’t have high hopes
for what they could do with the cash.
Two months later, on December 5, he gave a prediction about how these two stocks would do, along with
telling the partners what he was going to do himself. “My personal opinion is that the intrinsic value of DRC
and B-H will grow substantially over the years…. I would be disappointed if such growth wasn’t at a rate of
approximately ten percent per annum.” That was an important statement. He was telling them that Berkshire
and Diversified would not only do better than bonds, but better than he had said in October the partners
could expect from even the very best money managers.
“I think both securities should be very decent long-term holdings and I am happy to have a substantial
portion of my net worth invested in them…. I think there is a very high probability that I will maintain my
investment in DRC and B-H for a very long period.”6
Separately, Buffett wrote the partners a dissertation on how to invest in bonds, again extending himself
considerably more than a typical money manager would ever do. Even so, “I had four people panic when I
closed down. All four were divorced women. They trusted me, and they didn’t trust anybody else. They had
had bad experiences with men, and they didn’t feel they could make it again if they lost what money they’d
gotten. They would call me in the middle of the night and say, ‘You’ve got to keep earning me money,’ and
all this sort of thing.”7
But he refused to act as what he considered to be a fiduciary if he could not perform to his high standards.
“Basically, if I’m the guarantor, I just can’t do it, knowing how hard it was on me once,” he says, harkening
back to what he had felt at age eleven when Cities Service Preferred had disappointed his sister.
He continued working on the partnership dissolution over Christmas in Laguna Beach. He had bought his
Christmas gifts with his usual efficiency. As with most things, he had a system: He went to Topps, the best
dress shop in Omaha, and gave them a list of the different sizes for all the women in his life.
“I would go over, and they’d wheel out the dresses. I’d make a variety of decisions and buy presents for my
sisters, Susie, Gladys, and so forth. I kind of enjoyed it. Bertie’s more conservative, so I’d move her up a
notch in style, and she’d accept it from me but nobody else.
“You know, clothing holds its value better than jewelry.”
On December 26, after the exchange of Christmas gifts, he sent the partners another long letter, going out of
his way to answer at length a number of their questions.8 A few of the partners had been challenging him.
They were deciding whether to hold the Berkshire stock. If it was such a lousy business, why not get rid of
the Berkshire Hathaway textile mill?
“I have no desire to trade severe human dislocations for a few percentage points additional return per
annum,” he wrote, echoing what he had said to them in his letter of January 1969. But since the whole point
of his business was to eke out a few additional percentage points per annum, this kind of rationalization
would have been unthinkable earlier in his career.
What is Sun Newspapers? they asked. It’s worth a buck a share, he replied, kind of skipping the rest of the
economics. Then he added some famous last words. “We have no particular plans to expand in the
communication field,” he wrote.9

Why didn’t you register the Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified stock so that it could be freely traded?
Berkshire was so closely held that it traded “by appointment”—which made it hard for anyone to know what
the stock was actually worth. Diversified did not trade at all.
A long, complicated explanation followed, in which Buffett argued that a freely traded and liquid public
market for these stocks would be less efficient and less fair and “the more sophisticated partners might have
an important edge over the less sophisticated partners.” And it was certainly true that the more naive of his
departing partners would be kept from the clutches of the manic-depressive Mr. Market, who might at times
have valued the stock at a severely discounted price. It lowered the odds that a pack of brokers would talk
them into selling just to buy IBM or AT&T. But it also meant that Buffett was limiting his partners’ options
—making it harder for them to buy and harder for them to sell—and, if they did sell, making it more likely
that they would sell to him.
As general partner of the partnership, he was used to having total control of these two companies. Letting go
and giving up control to the anonymous Mr. Market—he just couldn’t do it. Moreover, as soon as he handed
these stocks to his departing partners, for the first time his own self-interest and theirs might be at odds. This
complicated rationale to justify keeping the stocks unregistered danced a little do-si-do around the fact that
Buffett was the most sophisticated partner of all. It was he who would have the most important edge over his
former partners. No matter how honest his intentions, the decision widened the potential conflict between his
interests and theirs. The painfully earnest tone of Buffett’s letter sounds like someone who has had to talk
himself into thinking that he is doing the right thing. But the conflict was guaranteed to cause hard feelings.
Anyone who sold to him and was later sorry could look back with hindsight and think: He had an edge on me.
Still, the Howard in Warren demanded that he present their options with scrupulous honesty. The way he
answered the next question told the departing partners exactly what to expect.
Should I hold my stock? they asked.
Buffett gave as clear and direct advice as he would ever give in public about a stock.
“All I can say is that I’m going to do so,” he said, “and I plan to buy more.”10
The departing partners were also going to have a third stock to deal with. In this same letter of December 26,
Buffett told them that the Blue Chip stock sale had fallen through.11 The stock had plunged in a short time
from a high of $25 to $13 a share because Safeway Stores had dropped Blue Chip stamps, its customer base
was eroding, and no buyer was in sight for the one-third of the business that the Justice Department had
mandated it sell. Two new lawsuits had been filed against it in the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, one by
Douglas Oil Company and the other by a group of filling stations, who said Blue Chip had broken the
antitrust laws—that it was a monopoly—and asked for treble damages and attorneys’ fees.12
Yet even as Blue Chip’s problems multiplied and the price fell, Buffett had been buying the stock instead of
selling. He had bought it for Diversified Retailing and for National Indemnity. He had bought it for
Cornhusker Casualty and National Fire & Marine, two little insurance companies that Berkshire had
acquired. He had also bought it for himself and for Susie.
Now the partners knew that Buffett wouldn’t sell, and indeed planned to hoover up more of all these stocks.
They would get whichever they wanted—stock or cash. If they took the money, he would get the stock. If
they kept their stock, they would still be his partners, in a sense.
In his anxiety over whether people accepted and liked him, Buffett valued loyalty more than almost anything.
He looked for loyalty in all of his relationships. The dissolution of the partnership had elements of a loyalty
test, as his behavior afterward would make clear.
When the partnership unwound, Buffett had more money to buy even more stock, for even while holding on
to his shares—he personally owned eighteen percent of Berkshire Hathaway, twenty percent of Diversified,
