
100

Timing Your Entries and Exits

Identifying Resistance Levels to Sell into Strength
Any ETF that is not trading at a fresh 52-week high will have some type of technical
resistance. Prior highs are known as “horizontal price resistance” because a horizontal
line marks the highest level to which an ETF previously rallied before heading lower.
Do you remember from the previous chapter the “hope” traders that bought near the
highs, right before a sell-off? These are the people who create the areas of horizontal
price resistance. Other types of technical resistance you can use include trendlines,
moving averages (MAs), and Fibonacci retracement levels.
On all ETFs with any type of overhead resistance, price targets at which to sell
into strength are derived from various technical levels of resistance. Downward price
targets for short sales are conversely determined by locating major areas of support,
and then attempting to cover the positions into weakness. Before buying any ETF not
at a new high, simply scan the chart and note what you see.
Here are some questions to ask yourself: Are the 20-day and 50-day MAs overhead?
Is there resistance of a 50 percent or 61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement? Do you see
any trendline resistance? What about prior highs that have formed horizontal price resistance? Each of these indicators creates substantial areas of resistance that can cause a rally
attempt to run into a wall and reverse. The greater the number of overhead resistance
levels, the more difﬁculty the ETF will have moving much higher. For this reason, it’s
important to look at a few time frames, such as the 60-minute, daily, and weekly charts.
When comparing the same ETF on various time frames, remember that one chart
may look bullish while another looks bearish. But the longer the chart interval, the
more bearing its pattern will ultimately have on the price. Therefore, you wouldn’t
really care about the resistance of a 2-day, 15-minute downtrend line if your projected
time horizon in the trade is several weeks. If you did a good job with trade selection,
the ETF should break out above that short-term downtrend line just a few days later.
The opposite scenario is when a signiﬁcant level of overhead resistance presents
itself on a time frame greater than your projected time horizon. If you’re trading shortterm momentum with an anticipated hold time of only two to ﬁve days, you should
not be very concerned if the ETF happens to be nearing resistance of a downtrend line
on a longer time frame such as the weekly chart.
In addition to assessing resistance levels on various time frames, be on the lookout
for the convergence of several different resistance levels. Within the same chart interval, you might notice that the 20-day MA, 50-day MA, and primary downtrend line
have all converged within several cents of one another. Obviously, the more resistance
levels that converge with one another, the more difﬁcult it will be for the ETF to move
above the price at the convergence.
Just as longer interval chart patterns have more bearing on the price of an ETF
than shorter ones, the same is true with moving averages. A 20-day MA provides signiﬁcantly more support or resistance than a 10-day MA, while a 50-day MA is going
to be more difﬁcult to break through than a 20-day MA.
When assessing horizontal resistance levels, pay attention to the length of the
consolidation that marked the prior high. Did the price rapidly spike to that level and

Strategies for Exit

101

trade there for just a few days before moving lower, or did the prior high coincide with
weeks and weeks of consolidation that failed to break out? More bulls are trapped in
the latter scenario than in the former. This will make it more difﬁcult for the ETF to
move higher. Horizontal resistance levels that were formed through a lengthy period
of price consolidation are more difﬁcult to rally above than those that were formed
through a short-lived spike. Be sure to always observe not only the actual price of the
prior high, but how “thick” the resistance is at the area of resistance. The thickness is
determined by the amount of overhead supply that likely remains from traders being
trapped at buying the ETF at a higher price than the current market price.

Exiting the Winning Position into Resistance of Its Price Target
After recording the types of overhead resistance the ETF will need to contend with
and the corresponding prices, you need to set the actual “target.” The reason I put the
word target in quotation marks is that a target is only intended to be an approximate
projected price extension, not an exact price you must see before selling the position.
Any price target is merely an educated guess as to where the ETF will at least pause,
based on the technical facts before you.
Viewing your target as an approximate price range to sell into, you wait for bullish price action to provide you with the opportunity to take proﬁts near the projected
target. This often comes in the form of an overnight gap that causes the ETF to open
much higher than the prior day’s close. When those gaps occur near your price targets,
you should view them as a gift and consider selling at market, on the open. If no bullish gap arises as you near the major area of resistance (the target), you can then shift
to using support of the prior day’s low as your new protective stop. Each day, you may
want to wait for either the bullish opening gap or a breakdown below the prior day’s
low, whichever comes ﬁrst, as the level to sell your winning position. You can also use
trendlines on short-term 15-minute or 60-minute intraday charts to assist in ﬁnetuning an exit when a position nears its price target.

Determining Exit Prices on Winning ETFs at New Highs
Aside from the virtually unlimited proﬁt possibilities from ETFs trading at their 52-week
highs, one of the best things about buying them is their complete lack of overhead supply. Since such resistance levels can be created only when prior highs exist, the absence of
prior highs translates to an absence of technical price resistance. The secret to maximizing proﬁtability on ETFs at new highs, without risking the possibility of giving back all
the proﬁts, is the use of trailing stops. This is covered in detail in Chapter 9.
Strategies for Closing Losing Positions

Before diving into this subject, let’s start by assuming that you already have a ﬁrm
understanding of the seriousness of having protective stops on all new trade entries.
Entering a single stock or ETF trade without ﬁrst having a predetermined maximum

102

Timing Your Entries and Exits

level of risk you are willing to accept is not something you should ever do. Because of
the paramount inﬂuence of risk management on the length of your trading or investing career, entire books have been written on the subject. Simply be sure to know the
maximum percentage of capital you are willing to risk on any one trade, and also be
sure that your share size is in line with your maximum dollar risk if the trade were
to hit its protective stop. A conservative rule of thumb for many investors is to risk
no more than 2 percent of your total account capital on any one trade. Before you
ever attempt to use the strategies taught in this book, I strongly advise you to do two
things: Use a protective stop on each and every trade, and be sure your maximum
amount of capital risk per trade is clearly deﬁned before entering any trade.
Professional traders know that maintaining a consistently proﬁtable performance
is not the result of winning on every trade. In fact, that’s far from the reality. Rather,
they realize that the business is simply a numbers game. They know that approximately
ﬁve to seven trades out of every 10 are going to be winners, depending on their strategy. What makes a trader net proﬁtable over the long run is ensuring that the winning
trades are of a greater dollar amount than the losing trades. If they are, then a trader
who has just a 50 percent batting average will still be net proﬁtable at the end of most
months and the year. As a rule, the lower the batting average (percentage of winning
trades), the greater the dollar amount the average winner to average loser ratio must
be. Because the business is purely a numbers game, there will obviously be quite a few
losing trades in the course of an average month.
Just as clearly deﬁned exit strategies on winning positions help keep emotions
out of the decision-making process, so too do exit strategies on positions that have
gone against you. Having an objective methodology for cutting losses, and then having the discipline to stick to it, prevents you from having a normal, predetermined
loss amount spiraling into a position that has damaging consequences to your trading
account.
For exiting winning positions, the strategy used depends primarily on the
original type of technical setup when the trade was entered. With closing losing
positions, however, the basic concept is the same, regardless of whether it was a
breakout to a new high, a breakout above a downtrend line, or a pullback to support entry.
Just as prior highs represent major areas of resistance, prior lows constitute key
levels of support. The same is true of MAs and trendlines that are below the current
price level. Convergence of multiple support levels provides more signiﬁcant support
than just one MA or prior low does. Essentially, the same methodology for determining price targets based on resistance levels can be used for setting stops below support
levels. Everything is just reversed. Above all else, the number one rule is to promptly
close the position when it hits your predetermined stop price. Nevertheless, there are
a few subtly nuanced techniques you can use that can help to minimize losses when
your ETFs move in the wrong direction.
The ﬁrst way to signiﬁcantly reduce the average dollar amount of your losing
trades is to have a plan for failed breakouts. When breakouts above downtrend lines or
to new highs follow through as intended, they typically yield a large amount of proﬁt

103

Strategies for Exit

in a rather short period. The downside, however, is that they reverse swiftly when they
don’t hold above their prior resistance levels.
Rarely do I intentionally make a round-trip trade on an intraday basis, but when
failed breakouts occur, having the ability to manage the trade intraday is wise. This
special rule applies when an ETF moves above its pivotal level of resistance at some
point during the regular session, but closes the day below it. On a daily candlestick
chart, you would see a wick or tail above the pivotal resistance level, but the body
would be below it.
If the afternoon rolls around and it looks as though your breakout entry is poised
to close below its pivotal resistance level, it’s crucial to exit the trade the same day,
rather than sticking around to see what happens the next day. Occasionally, the breakout attempt can be just a little early and will follow through properly the next day.
But more often than not, an ETF that fails to close the day above its resistance marks a
short- to intermediate-term top in which specialists ﬁrst run a stop hunt before taking
the market lower in the coming days.
With all the other bulls who bought the breakout now trapped, you don’t want
to be left holding the bag. Instead, exit promptly when the ETF is positioned to close
more than a few cents below its breakout level. Note that this refers only to trades on
the same day as entry. If the ETF closes above the pivot but dips below it the next day,
you would still go with your original stop price below the next major level of support.
Figure 8.1 shows how vicious the reversals can be when breakouts fail.

FIGURE 8.1 Failed Breakout on iShares Russell 2000 Index (IWM) Daily Chart, Followed by Swift

Selling
IWM – Daily
On October 11, IWM attempted to break
out above its bullish consolidation, but
failed intraday. This marked the high and
led to a bearish reversal.

When breakout attempts fail,
it’s important to quickly close
the position on an intraday basis.

85.00
84.00
83.00
81.94
81.00
80.57
80.00
79.72
79.00
78.00
77.00
76.00
75.00
74.00
300,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
00,073,200.00
59,123,104.00

Aug

Source: TradeStation

Sept

Oct

104

Timing Your Entries and Exits

At this point, you may be thinking, “That’s a great idea, but what if the ETF rips
the next day and I’m not in it?” No problem. Failed intraday breakouts that follow
through the next day can easily be reentered over the prior day’s high.
As a novice trader, I used to have an illogical mental block against reentering
stocks at a higher price than I sold just a day or two before. I used to think that perhaps I was getting in at too high of a price, but the stock would then go on to rally
many points higher. Although it’s certainly true that paying up a dollar or two on the
entry price results in lower proﬁt than staying with the original entry, the beneﬁts
are worth it. Would you rather net a 6-point gain out of a 10-point move, or net
0 points out of it? As long as the reward/risk ratio is not signiﬁcantly skewed by your
reentry price, you should by all means reenter. Further, ETFs that scared everyone out
the prior day are all the more likely to zoom higher when they resume their bullish
upward momentum the following day. This is due to some of the overhead supply
immediately being absorbed.

Making the Best of a Losing Position
Most of the time, predetermined stop-losses can be easily adhered to, as the ETF will
usually hit its stop under normal market conditions. Nevertheless, there are sometimes situations in which sudden news or geopolitical events cause rapid changes in
the direction of the market. (The afternoon of September 18, 2007, was one such
example.) I suggest a strategy for when this happens that you can use to exit the position in a calm, controlled manner.
To refresh your memory, the stock market entered a correction and began to get
very jittery in July 2007 due to concerns over liquidity in the subprime mortgage
arena. By September 2007, traders were speculating on whether or not the Fed would
make an aggressive move to cut interest rates, in the hopes of at least temporarily
saving the stock market. On September 18, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) met to discuss economic policy, with a widely anticipated announcement to
follow at 2:15 p.m. Eastern time.
Looking to the upcoming Fed meeting, I expected the subsequent market reaction to be even wilder than usual, given the fact that both the S&P 500 and the Dow
had been stuck to their pivotal 50-day MAs for three days. When major news events
happen to coincide with major areas of support or resistance in the major indexes, the
resultant reaction is often quite volatile. This time was no exception.
Much of Wall Street predicted a quarter-point reduction in the federal funds rate,
but the FOMC surprised traders by announcing a half-point cut in both the federal
funds rate and the discount rate. The stock market’s reaction was immediate and swift,
causing both the S&P 500 and the Dow to rocket above their 50-day MAs.
Going into the Fed announcement, I was positioned short in both the S&P
500 and the Dow, through being long the inversely correlated UltraShort S&P500
ProShares (SDS) and UltraShort Dow30 ProShares (DXD). Rather than viewing it
as risky to hold positions through such a highly anticipated meeting, I thought the
reward/risk ratio looked good. My protective stops were equivalent to both the S&P

105

Strategies for Exit

500 and the Dow moving above their 50-day MAs. Conversely, my potential proﬁt
if the primary downtrends resumed was much greater than the capital risk of getting
stopped out. I knew only that I needed to act fast if the positions moved against me.
As I often do, I canceled my mechanical stop orders on open positions minutes
before the Fed announcement. This did not mean I intended to ignore the stops.
Rather, I just wanted to avoid getting whipsawed from a violent knee-jerk reaction that
often goes nowhere. Literally seconds after the 2:15 p.m. rate cut announcement, both
the S&P 500 and the Dow catapulted higher with a ferocious tenacity. This, of course,
had the opposite effect on my SDS and DXD positions, both of which collapsed below
their stop prices in the blink of an eye. Nevertheless, I managed the positions in such a
way as to avoid panic selling when the surprise announcement hit the markets.
I’ve learned that, on the rare occasions when these sudden moves occur, immediately hitting the panic button to sell usually results in much lower sell prices than
calmly waiting for the ﬁrst small bounce to sell into strength. The idea is not to wait
for a full reversal back to the prior prices, as that’s only wishful thinking, but simply
to wait for a normal intraday bounce.
When micromanaging an intraday exit on a position, I often use the 20-period
exponential moving average (EMA) on the 2-minute chart. In strong intraday trends,
bounces off that level often result in a resumption of the primary trend. In this case,
I waited for both SDS and DXD to approach their 20-day EMAs on the 2-minute
charts before closing the positions. This enabled me to get out near the top of the ﬁrst
bounce. That day’s 2-minute chart of SDS is shown in Figure 8.2.
Because the downtrend in SDS was so strong, it reversed lower before actually
touching its 20-day MA (circled in Figure 8.2). Nevertheless, I sold SDS when it
FIGURE 8.2 UltraShort S&P 500 ProShares (SDS) 2-Minute Chart, September 18, 2007
SDS – 2 min

After SDS promptly fell off a cliff, I waited for a
bounce toward the 20-EMA on the 2-minute chart
before selling it. When SDS neared the 20-EMA and
formed the first down candle, I sold it at $52.89, near
the high of the bounce off the low.

14:00

Source: TradeStation

14:30

15:00

15:30

16:00

9/19

54.00
53.80
53.60
53.40
53.20
53.00
52.80
52.60
52.40
52.20
52.00
51.80
51.75
51.60
51.56
51.45
51.40
800,000
500,000
200,000
151,551
2,500

106

Timing Your Entries and Exits

formed the ﬁrst down candle, as it neared the 20-day EMA. This got me out within a
few cents of the top of the bounce and only about $0.30 below the original stop price.
The same applied to DXD. Often, waiting for such a bounce on a position that hits
your stop will enable you to get out at a better price than the original stop. The important point, though, is not to fall into hope mode and get greedy during the bounce.
The objective is merely to make the best of a losing position. That being said, it’s also
imperative to have an absolute “mercy” level at which you will close the position no
matter what the circumstances.
Trailing Stops

Just as important as knowing when to cut your losses is ensuring the maximum proﬁt
potential on winning trades, particularly those that have broken out to new highs.
When I was a new trader around the turn of the millennium, one of the following
two scenarios often happened to me: I immediately sold as soon as I had a little proﬁt
on the table, or I had a large proﬁt on the table, did not close the position, and gave
it all back.
In both cases, I was not making any headway. In the ﬁrst scenario, I often missed
the bulk of the move. In the second scenario, I was kicking myself for not taking the
proﬁts. It ﬁnally dawned on me that the only way to break the cycle was to ﬁgure out a
way to catch the bulk of a price move without risking giving back all the proﬁts. That
is the whole goal of a trailing stop. Once I began using trailing stops, my proﬁtability
shot through the roof.
A trailing stop is a method of continually raising (if you are long) or lowering
(if you are short) your protective stop after the position is showing a proﬁt. Rather
than trying to pick a top for where to sell and take proﬁts, you can use trailing stops so
that ETFs are only sold when the trailing stops are eventually hit. With trailing stops,
“getting stopped out” has a whole different meaning because it does not necessarily
mean the trade was a losing trade. On the contrary, getting stopped out because a
position hit your trailing stop usually means it was a proﬁtable trade.
The beneﬁts of using a trailing stop versus a ﬁxed stop that never changes are that
maximum proﬁts are realized by not trying to guess when a rally (or sell-off ) will end.
Of equal importance, by adjusting the trailing stop, proﬁts are continually locked in,
preventing the possibility of giving back all the unrealized gains.
The two types of trailing stops are “manual trailing stops” and “automatic trailing
stops.”
With a manual trailing stop, you must continually change the price of the updated
stop each time it needs tightening, doing so as the price of the ETF rises. This requires
traders to cancel old stop orders and place new ones each time.
An automatic trailing stop is a feature that allows traders to specify an amount
that the software will automatically raise a stop as the price moves higher. For example, for a 10-cent automatic trailing stop, the software would continuously raise the
stop price to be 10 cents below the current market price each time the price rises.

107

Strategies for Exit

Automatic trailing stops can be either in the form of a percentage or an actual dollar
amount.
Most online brokers now offer this automated capability, which is handy for those
who are not able to follow the markets full time. Nevertheless, you may prefer manual trailing stops if you are using the top-down strategy in this book, because my stop
prices are based on breaks of support or resistance, as well as trendlines. An automatic
stop only takes into account ﬁxed prices or percentages, not technical indicators.
When an ETF nears the upper end of its ascending trend channel, the odds are
good that it is due for a pullback. Obviously, it may not be a problem to sit through
a pullback in anticipation of a subsequent high. But when you’ve determined that it’s
soon time to lock in the gains, intraday charts and trailing stops are the way to go.
Figure 8.3 shows how you can use an intraday trailing stop on an ETF that is nearing the top of its range. In this example, I sold the position after it fell below support
of its hourly uptrend line. Regardless of which time frame you trade in, you can use
trailing stops with equal effectiveness. Day traders can use 5-minute intraday charts,
while long-term position traders might trail stops below the daily or weekly trendlines.
This is clearly a personal choice based on your comfort level. The best strategy is to use
a combination of time frames to look for the conﬂuence of support or resistance levels.
The longer the time interval, the more weight the support or resistance will provide.
When an ETF eventually falls below the support of its trendline (or rallies above
its downtrend line on a short position), it’s important to distinguish between a stop
hunt that does not follow through and a legitimate reversal of momentum. To help
differentiate, it is important to look for a volume spike that coincides with a large
down candle.
FIGURE 8.3 Hourly Chart of Trending ETF Hitting Its Stop after Breaking Trendline
SPY – 60 min
157.00
