
Many traders find themselves armed with the equivalent of a
powder-actuated nail gun when they approach the market. It’s been
said that if the only tool you know how to use is a hammer, everything starts to look an awful lot like a nail. An interesting twist to this
phenomenon is that it becomes more frequent with the more arcane
technical indicators. A trader who uses a simple moving average, for

c04.indd 68

11/2/07 12:17:40 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

69

example, generally has no problem with using the indicator when
appropriate and disregarding it when not appropriate. However,
we’ve met more than just a few traders who, upon learning about
Fibonacci retracement levels, wouldn’t dream of entering the markets if you took away their Fibonacci lines. Why is this? Perhaps it’s
an extension of the nail gun story. The trader finds a tool that not
only looks good but is also a lot of fun to apply. Eventually, they convince themselves that they have their hands on the best tool in the
toolbox.
The difference between finishing out a basement and the market
is this: If you try to use your nail gun to cut lengths of board in the
basement project, your folly will be readily apparent. If you attempt
to apply Fibonacci lines to every chart you read, the charts will let
you. In fact, the chart data will be more than sufficient to allow you
to “see” the pattern in just about every application, thereby reinforcing your belief that you’re using the best tool. When the trade moves
against you and you start to lose money, there are a multitude of
other factors to which you can attribute the loss. Then when the next
trade opportunity arises, out comes the nail gun.
This chapter is designed to give you a solid understanding of
some of the more common tools that you have at your disposal,
including their strengths and limitations. Each technical indicator
that we cover will follow this format:
1. Overview
2. Calculation
3. Application
4. Example
Remember that the goal is to keep everything simple. Calculations are included to enhance your understanding of how the indicator is derived, but if you want to skip past them, you won’t lose
anything in your ability to learn the application. One more point
to note is that the charts shown are black and white. Therefore,
when we refer to candlesticks on the charts, a white candlestick
is an up day where the closing price is higher than the opening
price. A black candle is a down day where the closing price is lower
than the opening price. Most charting programs allow for color
charting, and green is up while red is down. In our discussions,

c04.indd 69

11/2/07 12:17:41 PM

70

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

green and white are interchangeable while red and black are
interchangeable.

Trend Lines
Overview

Trend lines are not much more than the adult version of connectthe-dots. We introduced these handy tools in the previous chapter.
They are used to create a smooth picture of the prevailing direction
of the stock price movement. Of course, as the name suggests, trend
lines are drawn when we identify a trend, either an uptrend or a
downtrend. The simplest definition of an uptrend is higher highs
and higher lows. Along with that, a downtrend is identified as lower
highs and lower lows. Both parts of the definition must hold for the
trend to be in effect. For example, if a stock is making higher highs
and lower lows, it is not an uptrend. The picture that is created from
higher highs and lower lows is an expanding fan resulting from the
widening range over where the stock is trading.
Another important consideration of the trend line is that it may
change frequently. As we learned from Dow Theory, prices tend to
exhibit different trends over various time horizons. When we switch
our view from intraday charting to weekly charting, we may see
different trends in effect. Over the previous few hours, we see the
prices trending down, but they suddenly stop and begin to rise into
an uptrend. A short-term downtrend may be halted by a longer-term
uptrend. Along with this, the shorter-term trends will, by definition,
fluctuate between uptrends and downtrends. That’s what makes them
short term.
Calculation

One of the nice features of the trend line is that there is no calculation per se. As such, it is appealing because it is so easily understood
by even a beginner. The trend line is drawn as a best-fit line based on
a subjective review of the chart. By definition, a line is defined by any
two points. Therefore, we can initially create a trend line by identifying two price points on the chart and connecting them with a
straight line.
For an uptrend, we want to connect the lows of the trend. As
we mentioned in the overview, the uptrend will exhibit higher lows
along the trend. The trader needs to find these lows and draw a line

c04.indd 70

11/2/07 12:17:42 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

71

that best crosses through these lows. A downtrend is marked by lower
highs, and it is this level that defines the downtrend line. Therefore,
we want to draw a straight line that best captures the falling highs
along the downtrend.
The question often arises as to which price point to use in connecting the higher lows in an uptrend. Should you connect the lowest low for the day? What about the closing price of the day? Some
traders suggest that you use the bottom of the candlestick body,
regardless of whether that happens to be the open or the close. In
practice, you may actually incorporate multiple price points as you
view the trend and decide where to strike the trend line. Dr. Richard
M. Wyskida, associate dean of the College of Engineering at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, often advised his students to plot a
data set and then step back and “let the data talk to you.” The point
he was making is that it is helpful to get a picture of the data before
rushing into various analyses. The fact is, our eye will usually see pictures and patterns emerge from the price chart before the technical
indicators reveal them quantitatively. So how does this help us with
drawing a trend line? As we look at the chart, we will see the pattern
of cycles along the trend. We’ll identify the price swinging to new
highs, stalling and dropping to the next higher low. The low will
reverse and the stock will rally to the next higher high. Sometimes,
the reversal points will fit nicely to the candlestick bodies; sometimes it
will fit better to the shadows (highs and lows). This is illustrated in
Figure 4.1. Notice at point A that the three points that the trend line

Figure 4.1 Connecting the Higher Lows in an Uptrend

c04.indd 71

11/2/07 12:17:42 PM

72

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

crosses are all the lows for the trading days. The candlestick bodies
of the first two days are much higher than the trend line itself. At
point B, the first day’s low penetrates below the trend line, the second day is slightly above and the third day rests quite close to the line.
At point C, the first day’s low is on the trend line while the second
day’s candlestick body sits on the trend line with the low dropping
below. If we were to set rigid rules regarding which price point to
use, you can see how this would create trouble for us. However, a
glance at the chart shows that we’ve drawn a trend line that captures
the higher lows quite well because we’ve given ourselves a little flexibility in where the line is placed.
Application

The trend line will help us define support in an uptrend and resistance in a downtrend. Since we’re connecting the higher lows in an
uptrend, we expect that the price will trade above the trend line. As
the price rises, each pullback will drop down to the trend line. We consider that to be normal and expected movement as long as the trend
holds. Support, by definition, is the price level at which the buying
pressure overcomes the selling pressure and the stock begins to move
higher. Since we’ve created the trend line based on just this activity
occurring, our expectation is that it will continue. If the stock price
should drop significantly below our trend line, then it has moved
into an area that is not normal and expected in the uptrend. Notice
that we say “significantly” because as we saw in Figure 4.1, occasional
and minor drops below the trend line are not unusual. They are the
result of the subjective placement of the trend line itself.
We already mentioned that a line is defined by two points but it
becomes more robust as we add more points. Figure 4.1 shows three
distinct reversals where the lows are successively higher at points A, B
and C. Once the trend line is established, it becomes the basis for entering a trade as well as exiting a trade. Since we expect the price to rise off
of support as long as the trend holds, we look for buying opportunities
shortly after the stock hits the trend line and begins to move back up.
We then protect ourselves by placing a sell stop order below the trend
line. Based on our expectation, if the stock should drop below the support indicated by the trend line, we assume that the trade is moving
against us and we exit the position. As you can see, the trend line got us
into the trade and will tell us when it’s time to move on.

c04.indd 72

11/2/07 12:17:42 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

73

Example

Look at Figure 4.2 and see if you can quickly identify the higher lows
that define the trend line. Of course, we’ve already drawn the line
for you, but you should still observe the upswings that were used
to place the line. The first low is at the extreme lower left side of
the chart. The second point, which initially defines the line, is at the
center of the chart. Point A is the third point and confirms the trend
line that was established by the first two points.
In our example in Figure 4.2, we could enter a long trade at
point A based on the fact that we have already established the trend
line, and now we see the stock moving up and away from the line.
Notice that immediately before the very long up day, the stock price
dipped slightly. It even penetrated the trend line before closing back
above the line. This is why we place the stop order below the trend
line. It allows for minor intraday dips without stopping the position
prematurely.
Let’s look at what happened at point B. The stock price dropped
hard to the trend line, as evidenced by the long black candle. On
that day the sellers were clearly in control. That’s the very reason
why we wouldn’t buy the stock on that day, even though the trend
line still appeared to be holding as support. We want to buy when
the buyers are buying, not when the sellers are selling. The next day
would have been the day we would have expected to enter the trade,
but instead of holding support, the price dropped hard below the

Figure 4.2 Uptrend Example

c04.indd 73

11/2/07 12:17:42 PM

74

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

trend line support. Once that trend line support was broken, the
sellers established control and moved the stock progressively lower
from that point.
Any trader with a long position would likely have exited the week
or two before point B based on a trailing stop after the quick rally or
perhaps the warning signs given by the side-by-side long black candles. However, if you were still holding on to a long position after
point B, the first drop where the stock closed below the trend line
support would have been the must-exit point. Sure, you would have
allowed the stock to drop quite a bit from the high, but holding and
hoping would clearly have compounded the loss.

Channel Lines
Overview

Many times, we observe prices bouncing between cyclical highs and
lows, where the peaks seem to be running parallel to the valleys. The
price may be slightly trending or simply running sideways, but
the highs can be connected by a line, and the lows can be connected
by another, parallel line. When this occurs, we consider the price to
be channeling, and the lines we draw are the channel lines.
Channeling goes by various names, including oscillating, channeling, sideways, and consolidating. If the channel occurs without
an underlying trend—that is, the price moves sideways without a
change in the highs or lows—many traders will look for a breakout
from the channel before taking on a new position. Channels often
continue for long stretches, which confirms the channel lines with
multiple points. These long channels allow us to clearly see the support and resistance, which makes it easier to identify the level at
which we would exit the trade.
Calculation

As with the trend line, once again there is no calculation in drawing
the channel lines. What we look for is a best-fit line that connects the
highs of the channel range. A second best-fit line is then drawn,
which connects the lows. The upper and lower channel lines should
run approximately parallel to each other. Look at the upper channel line in Figure 4.3. Notice how the high of the first candle almost
touches the line, while the highs of the second cycle are a bit lower.
Several points actually penetrate above the line during the day but

c04.indd 74

11/2/07 12:17:43 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

75

Figure 4.3 Channeling Stock

close at or below the line. The same picture can be seen along the
lower channel line. Some points are above, some dip slightly below,
and others are right at the line. This is what we mean by a best-fit
line. It is the rare chart that will let you draw a line with all points
sitting squarely along the line with no variations.
In Figure 4.4 the price is channeling but with an upward
trend. The upper and lower channel lines are drawn with a bestfit line and run parallel to each other. However, both channel
lines run upward at the same angle. Notice that if we omit the

Figure 4.4 Channeling Stock with an Uptrend

c04.indd 75

11/2/07 12:17:43 PM

76

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

upper channel line, we are left with simply an uptrend support
line since we’re connecting the higher lows.
Application

Channeling stocks may be traded either within the channel to capture short-term moves along the cycles or as breakouts when the
price finally penetrates one of the channel lines. If you choose to
trade within the channel, you want to ensure that the channel is
wide enough to allow for a reasonable profit from the trade. Some
prices move within a well-defined channel but with so little distance
between the highs and lows as to make it hardly worth the effort.
When trading within the channel, the goal is to buy as close to
the lower channel line support as possible. Keep in mind that you
still need to buy with the buyers, which means that a long trade
should only be entered following a green (or white) candle. The
target for a long trade is the upper channel line resistance. It takes
some practice to recognize when the trade may not reach the target and profits need to be taken early. As we saw from drawing the
lines, sometimes the cycles don’t reach the channel lines, so you
shouldn’t tenaciously hold a position until it absolutely reaches the
target line. For a long trade that was entered at the lower channel
support line, the sell stop order should be placed slightly below the
lower channel line. If the channel fails and the price drops, you
want to exit the trade.
Channels with a downward trend may be traded in the same way,
except you’ll be looking for short trade opportunities. Always trade a
trending channel in the direction of the overall trend. If the channel
has a downward trend, the best trade is when you can enter a short
position close to the upper channel resistance. Again, remember to
wait until the sellers are in control, as evidenced by a red (or black)
candle as the price drops off the resistance. A short trade would be
protected with a market buy stop placed slightly above the upper
channel resistance line.
A channel breakout is the alternative approach to trading channels and is the favorite of many traders. With a channel breakout,
we’re not going to predict which way the price will break out; we
just want to pounce on the opportunity when it arises. A channel
breakout to the top occurs when the price reaches the upper channel resistance line and rallies to close decisively above the line. This
trade is especially significant when the volume rises on the breakout

c04.indd 76

11/2/07 12:17:43 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

77

day. A breakout with very low volume relative to recent volume has
to be approached with caution. That’s not to say you can’t trade a
breakout with low volume but it is not the preferred setup.
Sometimes the price within the channel will give early warning
signs that a breakout may be imminent. For example, if the price rises
up toward the upper channel line and then hovers at the line instead
of falling back into the channel, the buyers are not backing down in
the face of expected selling. Don’t buy yet, but be on the lookout
for the buyers making the next push, which would result in a breakout.
There are two entry points for a breakout. The first is to buy the
stock on the initial breakout. If the breakout is strong, however, you
may not be able to buy close to the upper channel line. Alternatively,
you could wait for the stock to pull back to the upper channel line
and retest it as a support level. When this happens, enter the long
trade on the pullback following a green candle. The only danger
with waiting for a pullback to the upper channel line following a
breakout is that it may not happen. Some breakouts are so strong
that the breakout is followed by a rally that never again reaches the
upper channel line.

Example

Point A in Figure 4.4 is an example of where to enter a long trade
within an upward trending channel. Notice that although point A is
the third day that the price was at the lower channel line support, it
was the first day with a green candle. The green candle was not so
long that you would be entering the trade well into the channel. It
is close enough to the lower channel support line that we still have
plenty of room within the channel from which to profit. The following day was a sharp rally, and it was followed by five days of sideways
trading. Since the price wasn’t making new highs, the trade should
be closed even though it had not quite reached the upper channel
line. In this case, close was good enough!
Figure 4.5 shows us a channel breakout with both options for
entering a long trade. Notice that the price hovered close to the
upper channel line for about a week before it finally broke above. At
point A, you would have been able to enter a long trade on the initial
breakout. While the volume associated with the breakout wasn’t as
strong as the ideal, it wasn’t weak, so the trade could be taken. Upon
entering the trade at point A, you would place your sell stop slightly

c04.indd 77

11/2/07 12:17:44 PM

78

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 4.5 Channel Breakout

below the upper channel resistance line. Once the breakout occurs,
we expect the upper channel line to become support.
As we can see at point B, we’re given a second opportunity to
enter a long trade when the price falls back to test the support line.
If you had entered the long position at point A, you may have taken
a profit with a trailing stop when the price started to fall. If not, you
would still be in the trade at point B, because the price didn’t dip
below the support line. Either entry would have allowed you to profit
from the subsequent rally that followed point B.

Moving Averages
Overview

Moving averages are perhaps the most commonly used technical
indicator for a variety of reasons. First, they are easily understood
by most traders. The concept of an average is one that is applied in
everyday life. We talk about average salary, average height, and average fuel economy in a new vehicle. The moving average updates the
average value each time a new data point appears on the chart. Second, moving averages have always shown their utility as a support
level when the price is above the average and as a resistance level
when the price is trading below the average. Third, moving averages may be calculated over multiple periods, which gives the trader
great flexibility in applying them as single indicators or combining
them together as multiple indicators.

c04.indd 78

11/2/07 12:17:44 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

79

Calculation

We’ll focus this discussion on the two most popular moving averages:
the simple moving average (SMA) and the exponential moving average (EMA). There are a number of other moving averages available,
including weighted moving average and linear displaced moving
average. We’ve found through practice that the SMA and EMA capture the utility of moving averages very well.
The SMA is the arithmetic mean of the data set. The equation
for the SMA is as follows:
SMA  (X1  X2  . . .  Xn)/n
Where
Xi  closing price of period i
n  number of data points
Therefore, the 20-day SMA would have 20 data points consisting
of the closing price of the most recent 20 days. The 20 points are
totaled and divided by 20 to arrive at the average value. When a new
trading day is complete, the new closing price is added into the total
while the oldest is dropped. In this way, the average “moves” with the
progression of time.
The exponential moving average differs from the SMA in that
the data is weighted to give the most recent price more significance
than the older price data. Since the most recent price is factored
more heavily in the calculation, it follows that the EMA signals price
changes more quickly than the SMA.
The equation for the exponential moving average is as follows:
1. The exponential smoothing factor is calculated as
ESF  2/(n  1)
Where n  number of data points
So for a 20-day EMA, the ESF is 2/21 or 0.095.
2. Next, the EMA is calculated as
EMA  (Today’s closing price  ESF)
 (Previous EMA value  (1  ESF))

c04.indd 79

11/2/07 12:17:44 PM

80

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

We want to emphasize that the calculations are provided here for
your reference. Understanding the mathematics behind the indicator is not required for your successful application to trading.
Application

SMA and EMA are most commonly used as support and resistance
levels that follow the action of the price. Trend lines and channel
lines, as we’ve discussed, are straight lines that must be manually
adjusted as the movement of the price changes. Moving averages,
however, follow the change in price movement because they are
calculated indicators rather than subjectively drawn. Therefore,
while various traders will interpret trend lines and channel lines
differently, an EMA or SMA will be exactly the same for different
traders who are examining the same chart.
As we mentioned in the calculation, EMAs will respond more
quickly to changes in the price movement. Therefore, the EMA
will follow the price more closely than the SMA, resulting in more
instances of price touching or crossing the moving average. While this
yields more buy and sell signals, it will also tend to yield more false
signals. That is, it may tell us to sell when we really shouldn’t be selling. There is no right or wrong when it comes to deciding whether to
use the EMA or SMA; it is simply a question of how sensitive you want
your indicator to be when generating buy and sell signals.
Another question to answer besides which moving average to use
is how many periods to include in the moving average. Should you
use a 20-day or 50-day moving average? What about a 21-day versus
a 20-day? In general, we recommend three basic periods for traders
who are just starting to use moving averages. First, the 20-day moving average is a good short-term indicator since it approximates the
number of trading days in a month. You could refine the number to 21,
but we’ve observed in practice that 20 is more easily understood,
and the extra day doesn’t buy a significant improvement in performance. Second, the 50-day moving average is a good intermediateterm indicator since it approaches the number of trading days in a
quarter. Once again, purists may gravitate toward the 63-day moving
average, but we believe the 50-day is sufficient for beginners. Finally, the
200-day moving average is widely recognized as the best long-term
indicator. Many money managers, traders, and others follow the 200-day
moving average as a measure of the overall trend. We’ve seen cases
