
chapter
S I G N A L S FROM MOVING
AVERAGES ARE
F R E Q U E N T L Y A B S E N T IN
REAL-TIME CHARTS

4i 1 1 ow d i d I miss such an obvious signal like that one?" Chances
I

I are that you d i d not miss the signal; it may not have been

present w h e n you were considering the trade. M a n y traders suspect
that signals may have appeared differently to t h e m i n real t i m e , but
few take the t i m e to really explore the character of the indicators
f r o m w h i c h they trade. W h a t do I mean by the "character of an
indicator"? T h e character of an indicator is how it moves across the
computer screen relative to other indicators or data. T h e character
is also the psychological change we experience because the c o m puter changes the y-axis scale to display for us a range defined by
the m a x i m u m h i g h and low w i t h i n a fixed number of bars. As new
data enter on the right side of our screen and old data scroll o f f on

107 •

and improves timing. I recall the day the DJIA fell nearly 1,000

lead to a new y-axis scale to accommodate the data.

use 22 and 88-minutes together as a 1 to 4 ratio filters false signals

the left, new extreme highs or lows in price or an indicator may

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 109

108 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

cepts, though market ranges have changed dramatically.

as possible toward the most current data. It will be important to

levels. Just recognize please these examples remain to to their con-

indicators. Scroll forward from the first bar in your database as fast

was trading intraday off the monthly chart support and resistance

view historical data. Scrolling offers an interesting means to observe

points and recovered much of the loss in a single day. Incredibly, I

Technical analysis software allows traders to scroll backward to

tics, MACD, or for that matter any indicator that has a smoothed

the changes that occur in the most current bar.

the same indicator peak or low viewed at a later time. Slow Stochas-

the still pictures that are normally viewed as static charts except for

appearance of the indicator at time 1. The T2, or time 2, label is

bar charts for the same market. In a sense you will be animating

are looking at the exact same indicator and market. T l shows the

subset or micropicture for what will develop in longer time-horizon

in the left window and T2 on the right. In each figure pairing, you

ter you will see in your indicators in a 15-minute bar chart will be a

All three examples have an oscillator high or low that is marked TI

view a 15-minute chart that has 500 bars in its history. The charac-

intraday bar charts for different markets that remain anonymous.

many new data points as possible for this exercise. As an example,

time grid mark on the x axis. Figures 5.2 and 5.3 are much longer

gained from a monthly chart as the objective is to scroll through as

three-minute S&P bar chart. A good point of reference is the 11:06

data entering the screen on the right. Clearly, not much will be

Figures 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 are all intraday charts. Figure 5.1 is a

scroll forward and watch the movement that occurs nearest the new

By not looking at specifics and animating our indicators, just for
the purposes of observation, we are able to see that the undulations
of our indicators may dramatically change their relative positions and
scale as new data are added to the right-hand side of the computer
screen. Traders must know if the indicators they trade from rescale or
operate within fixed boundaries. Do the indicators we use as graph
additions on prices or other indicators shift their positions over time?
As mentioned eariier, I often take a snapshot or freeze-frame picture of a trading screen just after an order has been entered. The

f

Jw
7
/

T2

purpose is to allow a later evaluation of why the trigger was pulled
at that precise moment to enter or exit the trade. These figures are
extremely short horizon as this discussion was appropriate for the
markets in 1998. However, the figures remain true to the principles
being discussed. Markets in 2011 require longer intraday periods. I

P

1 mllllllll /

'IIP'

lliii.,

12/24

11:06 1:00

11:06

Figure 5.1

110

• DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts * 111

variable in its formula calculated by applying a moving average,
is capable of experiencing the dramatic changes demonstrated in
Figures 5.1 through 5.3. The degree to which you will see such a
dramatic shift will depend on the following:
1. Consider the formula of the indicator and the type of moving
average that is used. Does it use a simple or exponential average, for example? The impact on the current period will be
affected by the type of weighting applied to the number of bars
being averaged. The smoothing technique selected will also
determine how significant it will be for the current bar when
extreme ranges drop out of the moving average calculation.
2. The time period or number of bars to be averaged remains
the same, but the time interval is volatile. Also, the fewer the
elements averaged, the greater will be the displacement that
occurs. Short moving averages are extremely dynamic.
3. The size of the window you have chosen to display an indicator
will define the number of bars used to chart the y-axis scale.
In Figures 5.1 through 5.3, the charts are all narrow-width windows displaying a limited number of bars at any one time. This was
deliberately done to exaggerate the distortion possible with indicators plotted from intraday data on a computer using Microsoft's
Windows 95/98 platform. As soon as we are given the ability to
define our own dimensions for a chart's size, our natural tendency
is to overdo our adjustments. If you like your trading screens to display a mosaic of numerous small windows at one time, just beware
that you may want to enlarge a single smaller window to full screen
size before making a final judgment.

112

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 1 1 3

same time interval charted.

peak to the far left of T l has now scrolled off the screen and the com-

low of a prior oscillator extreme recorded a few weeks earlier for the

from T l in Figure 5.1 is that the histogram indicator with the highest

manner. T l was in fact an oscillator at an extreme low equal to the

under resistance. In real time it was not. The reason T2 is so different

So now T l is at least two bars behind. The M A C D operates in this

an interpretation in hindsight that the oscillator was peaking directly

histogram is the differential of the two moving averages on price.

scale and has moved directly under the moving averages, allowing

was not the case at T l , and what complicates the matter is that the

interval T2, the exact same oscillator peak appears much larger in

ideal support was tested by an oversold oscillator in hindsight. This

ages charted above the oscillator at time interval T l . However, at time

The averages near T2 have been recalculated, and it appears that

In Figure 5.1 the oscillator peak is nowhere near the moving aver-

pattern or a price projection system to this oscillator extreme, and we

time environments.

weeks is a major piece of technical information. Add an Elliott wave

averages and make allowances in their interpretation of them in real-

currently at an extreme position that has not been seen in over two

cognizant of the dynamic character of shorter period simple moving

averages are ignored. An oscillator tracking intraday data that are

able to displacement. They are of great value, but a trader should be

be different. In this situation only the histogram is viewed and the

common Fibonacci numbers of five and eight are extremely vulner-

Sometimes the same indicator is used, but the interpretation can

for simple moving averages. Simple moving average periods using the

ignore those that are known to perform pooriy in a different climate.

ing forward calculations as the oldest data drops out of the formulas

tors that have been expressly tested for extreme situations only and

look-back period for the averages no longer uses extremes in its roll-

y axis. When markets are in extreme conditions, I will use indica-

ages relative to the oscillator histogram. The change occurs when the

couple of weeks earlier would reappear as the computer rescales the

There is also a dramatic change between the T l and T2 moving aver-

port for oscillators. In this case an "extreme" trend line marked a

two moving averages on prices that are charted in the top window.)

historical displacement extremes of maximum resistance and sup-

in all three of the figures is the spread or differential between the

Recall the discussion about using a horizontal trend line to mark

puter has rescaled the y axis to plot the histogram. (The histogram

situations, a trader might have sold at the precise low of T l just prior

their formulas, and they do not know that the market is in a freefall.

you did not know how this indicator performed in different market

indicators for T l are actually off by one bar because of the nature of

Such an indicator move would likely produce a new price low. I f

tion of the indicator until the next bar forward. In Figure 5.2 the

test the prior support lows that defined the range for the last week.

indicators do not see current bars as they cannot calculate the posi-

would also be known that the oscillator would most likely decline to

indicators—use the closing price to calculate the indicator. Some

two weeks ago and had entered a new range for the indicator, it

appeared in real time. Stochastics, RSI, and M A C D — i n fact, most

rebound. As the oscillator had declined to the extremes made over

bar at T l records the oscillator and moving averages as they

know a signal to buy exists at T l that could lead to a sharp slingshot

In Figure 5.2 a sharp market decline develops. The most recent

market.

to this type of trap. It will also be a high-risk scenario for the Elliott

be able to forecast the future travel of their indicators and the

to a short squeeze rally. The breakout trader is the most vulnerable

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts * 1 1 5

114

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

to pull the trigger with confidence because the signal in real time

offer confirmation that the larger trend will resume.

in fact shift upward into a permanent position will allow a trader

be discussed in the price projection section of this book which will

was being monitored. The knowledge that the moving average will

rules defined for oscillators. There are oscillator patterns that will

the price data remains much higher than the moving average that

such a rebound is a countertrend rally in addition to the range

decide to buy when the market has declined to an objective but

stops. There are specific oscillator patterns that will warn us that

new data have been added to the screen. As an example, we may

that has a minimal capital exposure because we can use tighter

we know they will appear perfectly aligned once 10 bars or so of

least allowing a market position to be entered with the larger trend

we must knowingly jump in front of the indicator signals because

can be applied, allowing trades in the market from both sides or at

part of the historical record constantly building. In some cases,

Once market direction is anticipated, price projection methods

tions once the most recent bar moves to the left and becomes a

pate the next indicator signals before they even appear on the screen.

tors on other indicators, are dynamic and will change their posi-

high-probability patterns that develop in oscillators, we can antici-

It is important to recognize that indicators on prices, or indica-

wave trader who relies on price patterns alone. By understanding the

placement.

seem hard to believe that T l and T2 are identical indicators that

especially if they use moving averages to define initial or trailing stop

jump up and move to just under the oscillator at point T2. It may

so weekly position traders are not excluded from this discussion,

extreme to the left of T l scrolls out of view, the moving averages

weekly charts, the capital exposure in question will be far greater,

compared to the new price lows that develop. Once the oscillator

can be correctly interpreted. While the shift will appear minor in

In Figure 5.3 the oscillator at T l shows bullish divergence

are being viewed at a later time.
This demonstration does not discredit technical

analysis;

We must know how our indicators are constructed, the impact of
our trading time horizon on these indicators, the scale that is nor-

tor changes become finely woven into the fabric of our intuition.

evaluations. Most analysts are unaware of the dynamic nature

It is only after endless hours of careful observation that these indica-

differences between real-time trade decisions and postmortem

in normal and extreme market movements in real-time conditions.

extremely short horizon trading is even more vulnerable to these

mal for charting an indicator, and then, how the indicator responds

it does, however, discredit some display setups and warns that

after extensive training and preparation. Intuitive knowing is the

calculates and incorporates current data into their formulas will

direct knowing without conscious use of reasoning can come only

the indicators used and understands how their quote vendor

some traders are blessed to have had since birth? I think not, as a

the analyst or trader who does have intimate knowledge about

Is intuition a gut feeling, some sixth sense, or inner wisdom that

that surrounds the current bar on our trading screens. However,

116

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 1 1 7

software.

tion about indicator dynamics is new to you, it will open the door to

tics will require some custom setup changes to most quote vendors'

of the indicators displayed in the first three figures. If this informa-

Adding moving averages to traditional plots for the RSI or Stochas-

"Sell." Some readers will be disturbed by the dramatic displacement

Stochastics, the RSI, and the custom oscillator Composite Index.

The easiest part of our job is to pick up the phone and say "Buy" or

cussion will focus on applying moving averages to three oscillators:

elaborate study that what we learn becomes effortless and automated.

New Commodity Trading Systems and Methods. For now, our dis-

minimize the results. We need to know our indicators through such

try, a good reference can be found in Perry Kaufman's book, The

the critical timing of making the trade will be destroyed and will

understanding of the different types of averages used in our indus-

worry about how an indicator might change with the passing of time,

has already been well traveled. But if you need to reinforce your

of times until their actions became intuitive. As traders, if we have to

tives to closing prices. I have elected not to cover ground here that

hit at the same time?" Both sports legends had to practice thousands

kinds of moving averages and comparisons of how to use alterna-

process." Yogi Berra, baseball legend, stated, "How can you think and

discussions elsewhere in published books that detail the different

happens after the ball hits my hands, it might screw up the whole

and discuss using moving averages profitably. There are numerous

Player Joe Montana once stated, "If I ever stopped to think about what

will be dynamic in real-time conditions, we can now move forward

the luxury of time to think. Three-time Super Bowl Most Valuable

With the knowledge that moving averages on oscillators or prices

essential key for success in fast-paced environments. We do not have

unknown variables X, Y, and Z within the first lines that state

questions will be answered over time.

ventions. The periods that work best for you should replace the

tor questions before the markets answer them for you. Either way, the

convert these equations for you to fit their system's charting con-

about your own indicators in real-time scenarios. Answer the indica-

ing averages to Omega's TradeStation. Other vendors will gladly

the questions this discussion will undoubtedly leave behind with you

In Figure 5.4 are the PowerEditor formulas required to add mov-

many hours of hard work that must be done. You will need to resolve

look at the results and interpretation.

accustomed to viewing. This will train and prepare us for those

you know how the charts can be constructed, let's take a detailed

respond to market movements and conditions that we may not be

fixed period of 14 for reasons that will be addressed later. Now that

do not trade so that we can experience how our indicators will

L E N G T H ( X ) , PERIOD(Y), and PERIOD2(Z). The RSI will use a

It is also helpful to apply indicators to markets that we normally

ply offers more flexibility. Both of these industry leaders add two

cial market as it did in the 1980s.

it is smoothed by a moving average. This chart alternative sim-

which now acts more like a commodity market rather than a finan-

averages. When a Slow Stochastics is used, or % D is smoothed,

the recent transition that occurred in the 1990s in the S&P 500,

lar is charted with a Fast Stochastics study that includes two moving

begins to adopt some other market's action. A n example would be

In Figure 5.5 the Weekly German Deutsche Mark per U.S. Dol-

occasions when our principal market changes its character and

118 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts

119

FXUSDMMUL'Weckly

Indicator: Stochastics+Avgs
Input: Length(X),PERI0D(Y).PERI0D2(Z];
ploti (FastK(Length),"FastK'l;
plot2(FastD(Length),"FastD'l;
plot3(Average(FastD(Length),PERIOD),"Plot3"|;
plot4(Average(FastDlLength),PERIOD2),"Plot4'l;

Indicator: RSI+Avgs
Input: LENGTH(14),PERIOD(Y),PERIOD2(Z);
Ploti (RSIlCloseXENGTHj/'Plotl "I:
Plot2(Averagel(RSIlClDseXENGTH)),PERIOD);'Plot2'l;
Plot3|XAverageHRSI(Close,LENGTH)I,PERIOD2),"Plot3'1;

Figure 5.4 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., © 1996-2011,
www.aeroinvest.com
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

Figure 5.5
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

would form i f the oscillator failed to break above the longer aver-

difference is that at point 2 the Stochastics indicator is staying above

may otherwise be easily overlooked.

indicator breaks above the longer average and fails. The important

dous clarification and depth in the oscillators' interpretation that

age. At point 2 the moving average is tested by Stochastics after the

moving averages to their oscillators because doing so adds tremen-

ing a stronger signal than that which is present in this chart.

is bearish i f the indicator fails at this intersection. In real time the

would have been slightly higher than the short-period average, giv-

ing average is crossing down through the longer period, the signal

tions from the real-time chart position, and the Stochastics indicator

moving averages are crossing over one another. I f the shorter mov-

moving averages will shift upward into their permanent chart posi-

where the Stochastics study has rolled up to test the point where two

tor was below the short-period average. As we know, short-period

moving average. We begin the chart evaluation at point I , which is

the shorter average, and in previous attempts the Stochastics indica-

In Figure 5.5 the Stochastics study has a short- and longer period

average. Is Stochastics really under the average at point 3? The

average would be accurate, and one can easily see that an intersection

as a double top provided the pattern forms under the trending

averages. The sharp angle of descent in the shorter period moving

moving average. A n M pattern in the indicator can be interpreted

ger period average, but Stochastics would still be failing under the

Point 3 shows a double top i n the indicator under the longer

shorter moving average would most likely not have crossed the lon-

the same, but the shift in hindsight could have been anticipated.

point 4, as the dollar does in this chart. The oscillator then travels

the %D would have been testing the longer average. The signal is

jump from a trampoline. The market accelerates from signals like

relationship would have been important in real time as more likely

quently respond to such formations in the same way as one would

moving average while %K tests the slower moving average. This

4 occurs at an intersection and is a stronger signal. Oscillators fre-

at point 6 that the %D component of Stochastics is above the shorter

as it is soon to intersect the slower moving average. Therefore, point

pulls back a second time to test the longer moving average. Notice

the average. The angle of ascent in the shorter period is important

important signal. The Stochastics indicator then jumps upward and

%K breaks below the moving average, but the slower %D stays above

other than divergences at extremes, they would not be aware of this

viewed as a market failure signal. At point 4 the faster component

because most traders do not read information from the Stochastics

slower component of Stochastics remains under resistance so it is

Signals from Moving Averages Are Frequently Absent in Real-Time Charts • 121

120 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS
