
H A R V E S T I N G S&P PROFITS

What about the flip side—winning streaks—any advice there?
Never increase the size of your positions on a winning streak. Otherwise you guarantee that you will have your largest position on a losing
trade.
How long was it until you started trading again after the Cities
Service disaster?
Almost two years. The first trade I put on was in April 1984, right
after the birth of my first daughter.
Were you profitable when you resumed trading?
I was approximately breakeven for 1984 and 1985. My first big profitable year was 1986.
Did something change then?
Yes, I had developed my cumulative tick indicator. In 1986, I began
keeping a daily trading diary. Every day I wrote down recurrent patterns that I noticed in the market. One indicator that appeared to be
useful was what is called the tick, which is the number of New York
Stock Exchange stocks whose last trade was an uptick minus the
number whose last trade was a downtick. When the market is going
up, the tick will be positive, and when it's going down, it will be negative. I noticed that whenever the tick became very negative, the market would tend to snap back on the upside. Conversely, strongly
positive tick readings seemed to be followed by sell-offs.
I asked a broker who had been in the business for thirty years
what it meant when the tick got very positive or negative. He said, "A
negative tick means the stock market is going down, and a positive
tick means it is going up."
"Yeah, I know that," I said, "but what do I do when the tick is very
positive or negative?"
"Well, if it's a high plus, you buy, and if it's a high minus, you sell,"
he answered. I asked a number of other brokers the same question,
and they gave me the same advice.
Since this advice contradicted my observations, I did just the
opposite: When the tick went above plus 400, I would sell, and when
it went below minus 400, I would buy. I recorded the results in my
diary and confirmed that this strategy was making money. I noticed,

D. C O O K

HARVESTING S&P P R O F I T S

however, that the more minus the tick became, the more the market
would snap back, and the more positive it became, the more the market would sell off. That's how I got the idea of keeping a cumulative
count on the tick, which evolved into my cumulative tick indicator. I
have never had this indicator fail, but you need nerves of steel to
trade with it because the market is always in a panic situation—usually because of an external news event—when the readings get
extreme.
I know your cumulative tick indicator is a proprietary measure,
but what can you tell me about it?
The calculation ignores periods when the tick is in a neutral band,
which I define as a reading between -400 to +400. When the tick is
beyond these thresholds, a reading is recorded at fixed time intervals
and added to a running total. When this total gets below the historical
5th percentile,. it signals an oversold situation [a buying opportunity],
and when it gets above the 95th percentile it signals an overbought
situation [a selling opportunity].
How long did it take you to recover the $350,000 trading deficit
that was left over from the Cities Service trade?
Five years, measured from the Cities Service trade, which was three
years after I resumed trading. The big year was 1987. When I say
that, people automatically assume that I must have been short during
the October crash, but I actually made most of the money during the
bull market earlier that year.
At that time I wasn't day trading yet. In May 1987 I saw what I
believed was a phenomenal buying opportunity in stock index call
options. Two factors had converged: my cumulative tick indicator was
giving extremely bullish readings, and the decline in volatility had
made the option premiums very cheap. My grandfather used to tell
me, "Buy things when people don't want them, and sell things when
people want them." I put $55,000 into long-term, out-of-the-money
stock index calls that were trading at !/2 to 5/s. [In this type of option
position, the trader can make multiples of the initial outlay if there is
a huge price advance, but lose the entire investment in any other
price scenario.] I bought well over a thousand options. During the

next few months, stock prices exploded and the volatility shot up—a
combination that caused the value of my options to soar.
Ever since the Cities Service disaster in 1982, I had wanted to
demonstrate to my parents that I wasn't a failure. On August 7, 1987,
I went over to see them. I told them, "I'm trading options again."
"Oh no!" exclaimed my dad. "What is the bad news this time?"

"Well, Dad, that is why I'm here," I answered.
"Why do you trade those things, Mark? Didn't you learn your lesson? Do you have a problem again?"
"Yes, I have an income tax problem," I answered. "The calls I
bought are worth $750,000."
"How much did you invest?" my father asked.
"Fifty-five thousand dollars," I answered.

"Gosh, take it!" he said.
"No," I said, "they are going up more tomorrow." The next day I
cashed out the position for a $1.4 million-dollar profit.
What else do you base your trading decisions on besides the
cumulative tick indicator?
The cumulative tick indicator is an intermediate tool that only sets up
about two to four times a year; the rest of the time, it's in a neutral
reading. I have a variety of different trades I use.
Can you give me an example of some of them.
One trade I do I call a "conjunction trade" because it requires two simultaneous conditions for a buy signal: the tick going below -400 and the
tiki, which is a tick indicator based on the thirty Dow Jones stocks, going
below —22.1 give this trade only twenty-one minutes to work. Whenever
I get a signal, I set my egg timer. [He winds up the egg timer on his desk,
which ticks, audibly as it unwinds during the ensuing conversation.} I
picture the egg timer as a bomb, and I have to be out of the position
before it goes off. I will liquidate the position when any of the following three things happen: I get my 3-point profit objective, my 6-point
stop-loss is hit, or the twenty-one-minute time limit is running out.

!

Why twenty-one minutes?
Because of the trading diaries that I keep. I've recorded these trades
time and time and time again. The best trades work the quickest. I

M A R K D.

found that you should make three points within the first ten minutes.
After ten minutes, the trade could still work, but the odds are much

lower. Once you get to fifteen minutes, the odds are so reduced that
all you want to do is get out the best you can. The more time that goes
by, the lower the probability that the objective will be reached.
I note that you are using a risk point that is twice as large as your
objective. That's fairly unorthodox.
It's all a matter of probabilities. I like high-probability trades. This
trade, as many of the other trades I do, works approximately seven out
of eight times on average. If I make 3 points seven times and lose 6
points one time, I still come out ahead 15 points across eight trades.
Another trade I do involves watching the ratio between the S&P
and Nasdaq. I use this information to decide which market I will
trade if I get a signal. If I get a buy signal on one of my other indicators, I will buy the index that is relatively stronger that day. And if I get
a sell signal, I will sell the index that is relatively weaker.
What would be an example of a signal?
I have a trade that I called a "tick buy," which means that if the tick
gets to -1000, I will buy because the market will tend to snap back
after that point.
In other words, if you get a tick buy signal, which implies a
sharply declining market, you'll buy the index—S&P or Nasdaq—that is less weak.
That's right.
Can you give me any other examples of trades that you do.
One trade I call a "catapult trade" because it's just like a catapult,
which gets bent back until it springs and then the projectile flies over
a threshold. For example, if the S&P is trading back and forth in a
range between 1350 and 1353, and each time it pulls back, it holds a
little higher, then I'll expect it to catapult above the top of the range
by the width of the range, or to 1356. The reason the trade works is
because stops tend to build up right above the catapult point.
Another trade I do is the bond ratio trade. The bonds and S&P are
like a couple. The bond market always leads, so it is the female,
because the male always follows the female. When a couple first start
to date, they don't know each other yet, and they will be a bit out of

H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O F I T S

harmony. On analogous markets days, when the bonds go up, the S&P
may also go up, but it won't follow very tightly. Then they get engaged,
and the relationship becomes closer. Then they get married and go on
a honeymoon. When they are on a honeymoon, everything they do is
synchronous. On "honeymoon days" in the markets, when I see the
bonds go up a few ticks, I know the S&P will immediately follow, and
I will buy the S&P for a quick trade. After the honeymoon, when they
settle into married life, the bonds will drag the S&P husband along,
but they are not quite as joined as they once were. Then the couple
gets estranged, or in market terms, whenever the bonds go up, the
S&P will likely go down. Then comes the bitter divorce. On "divorce
days" the bonds and S&P will move in exactly opposite directions.
Every day, I make a determination of what type of day it is. Today, for
example, the bonds were going up, and the S&P was selling off. The
Street called it a "flight to quality," but to me it was just a "divorce day."
Did you ever manage money, or have you always traded just your
own account?
In 1989, I decided to get into money management. I asked people I
knew in the business what I needed to do as an unknown in the middle of nowhere to attract investors. One person suggested that I enter
the U.S. Investing Championship [a now defunct real money trading
contest] to attract greater public visibility. That was the first time I
had ever heard of this trading competition. Back in 1989, the contest
was held for four-month intervals. I entered the options division category and finished second, making 89 percent for the four months.

That gave me enough confidence to think that I could do this. I
decided to give up my brokerage business and concentrate just on my
own trading.
Why couldn't you continue to do both?
It seemed to me that just about every time I was in a trade and had to
do something quickly, a client would call and want to talk about utility stocks or something equally urgent.
I opened a personal account with a clearing firm in New York that
also did business with other money managers. After my account had
been active for about three or four months, I received a call from
compliance [the company department responsible for making sure

M A R K 0. C O O K

that all accounts are traded in accordance with government and
industry regulations]. My immediate thought was, "Oh no, what's the
problem now?"
"I've been looking at your account," the caller said, "and it appears
that you only trade options."
"That's right," I answered warily.
"It also looks like you only buy options," he said.
"That's right," I answered. "1 don't believe in selling options."
"Why not?" he asked.
"Too much risk," I said.
"I reviewed all your trades since you opened your account with
us," he said.
"Is there a problem?" I asked.
"No, as a matter of fact, I have never seen anybody who can trade
like you do."
"What exactly does that mean?" I asked.
"Well, for starters, you are the shortest-term trader I have ever
seen. In fact, it seems like you never hold a position for more than
three days. Why is that?" he asked.
"That's because after years and years of trading experience, I have
learned that if I hold positions for more than three days, it diminishes
my return. When you buy an option, the premium steadily evaporates
over time. It's like holding an ice cube in your hand: the longer it's
there, the more it diminishes until finally it doesn't exist at all. You are
in the compliance department," I said. "Is there a problem?"
"We have been looking for someone like you for a long time. We
are waiting for you to get a one-year track record before offering you
as a money manager to our clients. I wasn't supposed to contact you
until this point because we thought it probably would change your
trading pattern if you knew you were being watched."
"You don't know me," I said. "That's not going to happen."
"We'll see," he said.
Had he been tracking your account because he was looking for
potential in-house money managers?
Oh no, he started following me from a compliance standpoint to shut
me down. I assume the fact that I was trading only options and turn-

HARVESTING S&P PROFITS

ing over my trades very quickly must have sent up all sorts of red
flags.
He continued to monitor my account, and after the account
reached the one-year mark, he called again. "You actually did better
after you knew I was watching you," he said.
"I guess you gave me a bit of incentive," 1 answered.
"I can't sell this, though," he said.
"Why not?" I asked.
"You did too well. No one is going to believe these numbers. But
don't worry, I'm going to raise money for you anyway. I don't have to
show your track record. People will just invest with you based on my
recommendation."
He pulled together a number of small accounts into a single milliondollar account, which I started trading at the beginning of 1991. If
you recall, that was right at the brink of the United States' launching
an attack on Iraq, and the stock market had been selling off precipitously. The cumulative tick indicator was signaling that the market
was heavily oversold. On January 4, 1 started buying S&P index calls
[an option position that bets on a rising market], I continued to add to
the position over the next few days.
Wait a minute. I thought you held positions only for a maximum
of three days.
That's true for most of my trades. There is one major exception: if my
cumulative tick indicator, which only sets up a few times a year, is still
telling me to buy, then I will hold a position beyond three days. When
the tick indicator sets up, the market sometimes responds immediately, but I've also seen it take as long as seven weeks. As long as the
indicator is still providing a signal, I will only trade in the same direction. If it's oversold, I will only buy calls, and if it's overbought, I will
only buy puts. [Puts are option positions that give the buyer the right
to sell the stock or index at the strike price and will therefore make

money in a declining market.] I still traded in and out of the market,
but I kept a core position of long calls. This core position was down
about 25 percent. Since for this account I used a money management
plan that limited my total investment to one-third of the equity, I was
down about 8 percent in terms of total equity.

M A R K D. C O O K

On January 7, for the first time, I received a call from the president of the company. I had only been trading the account for one
week. "What do you think about the market? he asked.
I knew what was happening. He was getting worried calls from the
investors who were faceless people to me. "Well," I said, "my cumulative tick indicator is very oversold." 1 explained to him that whenever
my index was deeply oversold, it signaled a major buying opportunity.
"How soon until the market goes up?" he asked.
"It can spring at any time," I said. "We need a catalyst, but I can't
tell you exactly when that will be."
"Your indicators don't work at all," he said. "The market is going
straight down."
"You can pull the plug," I said, "but I want you to understand that
if you do, the investors are going to know that you were the one who
closed out the positions, not me."
My secretary had been sitting there, listening to my end of the
conversation. When I hung up, she said, "Gosh, you were pretty
rough with him."
"Don't worry," I said, "he is not going to close the account and take
responsibility. He's going to leave me out there to hang."
On the night of January 10, the United States began its air attack
on Iraq, and the next day the market exploded on the upside. Not
only did the market go up tremendously, but the sharp increase in
volatility also caused option premiums to expand. On January 12, the
president of the company called me back.
Where was the account at this point?
The option position I held had nearly quadrupled. [Since Cook had
invested one-third of the equity, this implies that the account equity
had nearly doubled.] By this time, 1 had already started to take profits
on my position. Of course, he knew that I had started liquidating the
position when he called.
"What do you plan to do?" he asked.
I plan to continue to scale out of the position," I answered.
"But it's really going up now," he said. "Do you think it will continue?"

H A R V E S T I N G S&P PROHTS

"Yes I do," I answered, "because my cumulative tick indicator is

still oversold."
"Then why don't you hold the position?" he asked.
"You don't understand," I said. "One reason the option premiums
have gone up so much is because of the explosion in volatility. [Option
prices depend on both the underlying market price and volatility]
Once the volatility starts to ease, option prices may not go up much
even if the market continues to rise. Also, 1 realize now, which I didn't
before you called me last week, that your investors are pretty nervous,
and they probably want money in their pockets. Isn't that right?"
"That's true," he answered.
"Fine," I said, "we'll continue to liquidate the position and take it
from there."
"Mark," he said, "that's why you are the trader you are." Those
were his exact words.
"Thanks for telling me I'm a good trader," I said for my secretary's
benefit, who had been listening to the conversation intently. "Now
you realize that my indicators work—don't you?"
"Oh yes," he answered, "your indicators work."
After I hung up the phone, my secretary said, "Wasn't that nice of
him to call and compliment you."
"Just watch," I said. "He will jerk this money just as soon as he can."
"Why would he do that?" she asked in disbelief.
"Because he can't stand the volatility, and he can't handle the
clients. He also doesn't understand what I am doing, which makes
him a terrible intermediary. His involvement will only lead to doubt
and skepticism among the clients. It would be different if I were talking to the clients directly and they could hear the confidence in my
voice." Ironically, I had chosen this type of structure because I
wanted to be at arm's length from the investors so that I wouldn't be
influenced by their emotions. Instead, I ended up with someone in
the middle who was just aggravating the situation. "He'll find some
excuse to pull the account," I told my secretary.

"How could he find an excuse," she asked, "when you have nearly
doubled their money?"

M A R K D. C O O K

"I don't know," I said, "but he will find something."
By that point, the option premiums had expanded so far that it virtually eliminated any profit opportunities if you were only a buyer of

options, as I was. Buying options then was like paying Rolls-Royce
prices for a Yugo.
Did you stop trading?
Yes, 1 had to back off. I have to believe a trade has at least a 75 percent chance of being right or else I won't put it on. I continued to
trade very lightly over the next few months, and the account drifted
sideways.
At the end of April, the president of the company called again.
"How come you're not trading anymore?" he asked. "Are you afraid?"
he sneered.
"Yes, I'm afraid, but not of what you think. I'm afraid of the marketplace. 1 don't see trades that will give me my 75 percent probability of winning, and I'm not going to do any coin-flip trades."
"Well, my investors are expecting you to trade," he said. "Why
can't you do the same thing you did in January?"
"Because the market is not the same," I said. "We could do nothing for the rest of the year and still have a good year."
"Yeah, you're still up 85 percent for the year," he admitted.
"And the investors aren't happy with that?" I asked.
"They saw you double their money in January, and they want you
to really go for it. You better do some more trades, Mark," he said.
"What does he want now?" my secretary asked after I hung up the
phone.
"Now he wants to force me to trade. Isn't that interesting. In January he wanted me to shut the account down, and now, when 1
shouldn't be trading, he wants me to trade more."
What did you do?
I thought I would put on one trade to keep him happy. Then if it
didn't work out, I could talk him out of pressuring me to trade. But as
soon as I put on the trade, I thought to myself that this is stupid; I'm
putting on a trade that I think may lose money to prove a point. Sure
enough, the trade lost money—not much, maybe 5 percent of the
equity. I backed off and stopped trading.

How were you getting compensated for these accounts?
I was supposed to get a percent of the profits.
The standard 20 percent of profits?
This will give you an idea of how naive I was at the time. They told
me, "Don't worry, we will make it right by you." I had nothing in writing. I went along with that because I was mainly interested in getting
a track record rather than earning anything on this account. I was so
hungry to get started that I would've taken virtually any deal.
At the end of May, the president called again. He told me that two
of the accounts were pulling their money. "Oh, I guess they have
some pressing financial needs," I conjectured.
"I'll be honest with you, Mark," he said, "there are more investors
that are right at the cusp of closing their accounts."
"Why?" I asked.
"Well, you haven't done anything for us lately," he answered.
"Do you realize how much the account is up?" I asked. "If you had
told these investors at the beginning of the year that they were going
to make 80 percent on their money, don't you think they would've
been ecstatic?"
"Yes, but you did more than that in the first month," he replied.
"During the past four months, you haven't made anything."
"Wait a minute," 1 said. "What expectations did these investors
have?"
"I showed them your track record for last year."
"You did what!" I exclaimed. "That track record was based on my
own account, which trades up to 100 percent of the equity. My
account will make three times as much as this account because of the
leverage, but the drawdowns will also be three times as large, and I
don't think your investors could handle 40 percent drawdowns."
Ten minutes later he called back and said, "We're shutting the
account down."
I was so mad, I could have spit blood. 1 don't know what he told
the investors to make them all pull their money simultaneously. That
was my first and last experience in managing any pooled money.
Did they ever pay you anything on the profits you had made?
Not a cent.
