
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

182

January 18, 2011

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

However, each time, momentum to the downside could not be sustained
and the price rebounded back above the trend line. The momentum is starting the fade, but the bias remains bullish.
The dips below the trend lines at each point ignite the “If . . . Should”
rule. That is, “If the price moves below the trend line, the price should
go down.” However, on each move below, the price did not develop any
downward momentum. The price moved back above the trend line a few
bars later. Traders who went short on the break looking for selling momentum should look to cover the position at a small loss. The market simply
did not do what it should have done (i.e., go down).
Would it be appropriate to buy or go long when the price moves back
above the trend line? Answer the following questions:

r Is the trend still up? Yes.
r When the price moves above the 100 hour MA, does that confirm the
trend? It sure does.

r Can risk be defined and is it low? Yes, risk is a move back below the
MA or trend line.
Even if buying is not done, what is certain is that there is no reason to
sell or become bearish as long as the price is still comfortably above the
trend line and the 100 bar MA. Eventually, a more meaningful break lower
or bearish clue will occur where risk can be defined. However, until then
listen to what the trend tools are saying.

The End of the Trend
The price continues higher and the peak is reached at 1.3333 (see Figure 8.2). From there the price starts its retreat back lower. When the price
moves below the trend line and then the 100 hour MA (solid line), the
bullish trend is officially over. In fact, the break is a selling opportunity
(10–20 pips risk) with multiple reasons for a short:

r The trend line is broken.
r The 100 bar MA is broken.
r The 100 bar MA is going sideways and looking like it wants to slope
down.

r The market has enjoyed a 600-pip rally and is ready for change.
Overall the trend from the low to the high lasted for 12 days. The trend
line was in place by the second day. The trend line was tested five times. A
total of seven hourly bars traded below the bullish trend line, and of those,
only three had closing prices below the trend line. The total number of bars

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:24

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

Printer: Yet to come

183

FIGURE 8.2 Bullish Move Ends and Bias Turns Bearish

in the trend was approximately 300 (97.6 percent of the bars were above
the trend line).
Are trend lines too simple to ignore? Not if you are interested in making
the most money with the least amount of risk.

BEARISH TREND LINES
Needless to say, the bearish trend line has the same dynamics as the bullish
trend line, except in the opposite downward direction. In Figure 8.3, two
trend lines are drawn. One comes off the high near point 1 on the chart.
The second downward trend line starts at point 3.
In this example, I would like to outline not only the clues from the trend
lines, but also the clues given by the 100 and 200 bar moving averages. By
using the tools in combination, it helps confirm the trend and define the
risks. They also can be used together to find profit-taking opportunities.
The trade and trend starts at point 1 at the 1.5558 level. Note how the
100 and 200 bar moving averages represented by the solid and dashed lines
are converged with the price. This is the “three’s a crowd” setup that was
outlined in Chapter 7. As we learned, this formation is often a precursor to

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

184

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 8.3 Bearish Trend Lines Follow the Downward Path

a trend move. When the price falls sharply below the two moving averages
at point 1, the bias is bearish and to the downside. Traders should sell at
the trigger area of 1.5558. The risk is a move above the 100 and 200 bar
MA. A trader could put an initial stop 10 to 20 pips above the two moving
average levels to account for any volatility at the outset.
The price does what it should do and moves lower and consolidates.
The market gives a second sell opportunity at point 2 at the price of 1.5534.
As discussed in previous chapters, traders who have the fear of success
typically cover their shorts after a small profit and can push the market to
test the 100 bar MA line (solid line). They make a small profit and likely
cannot wait to tell all their friends on the message boards about their good
fortune.
Meanwhile, while the quick profit traders buy at point 2 in Figure 8.3,
the smart, trend-anticipating traders sell with great joy as the risk is low
and defined and the trend is likely just starting. Both moving averages are
now sloping down, the correction is testing the 100 bar MA, and the 200 bar
MA at 1.5549 (dashed line) is not far above. The 200 bar MA would be the
logical risk or next stop level (15 pips). The new stop is never approached
as the 100 bar moving average line holds; the price moves lower and the
trend down resumes.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

185

After the moving average holds the correction at point 2, the bearish trend line can be drawn. That line—in conjunction with the moving
averages—is now in control of the bearish trend. If the price remains below the trend line, the bias is down. If it stays below the 100 bar MA as well,
the bias is down. This defines the trend and also defines the trader’s risk
or stop-loss levels along the way. In essence, the trader has two stop levels
from the two tools.
With risk defined, the price continues its way lower. At point 3, the first
major test of the trend occurs as the bearish trend line is broken. The trader
has a decision to make. The price is above the trend line, turning the bearish bias to bullish. However, the price is still below the 100 bar MA at the
1.5509 price level. This keeps the bearish bias for the moving average.
With one tool switching to bullish and one still bearish, would it be acceptable to cover the short position when the price crosses above the trend
line? The answer is yes, it would be acceptable, but it is not necessarily the
right trade to do. A gain of 70 pips is a good gain. However, if any profit is
taken, I would argue for only partial profit. There are several reasons for
this trading judgment.
One, since the trend is fairly new (70 pips), and the clues at the start
of the trade were that the market was nontrending and therefore likely to
trend, taking the full profit is probably not warranted until the price moves
above the 100 bar MA at the 1.5509 level.
The second reason is that in terms of risk, the worst-case scenario if
nothing is covered is a profit of 49 pips (short at 1.5558 − stop at the 100 bar
MA at 1.5509 = 49 pips). That is still a good profit and a multiple of the
initial risk on the trade. It is not great, but it is good, and most importantly,
it is a gain. Traders who get in the position to manage gains, and are not
forced to manage losses, are ahead of the game.
However, the traders who are most successful know that trends can
run longer than 70 pips. They also know that corrections can gather even
more downside momentum if the price can test key levels, but hold the
level and maintain a bearish bias.
Thinking of it another way, if you started your trading day at point 3
and saw the price testing the 100 bar MA, would you be more inclined to sell
or buy at that point? I would be more inclined to sell against a stop above
the 100 bar MA (risking 10 to 12 pips), and I think the smart successful
traders would concur.
I want to trade trends, and so do the smart traders. Just hours before
the trend started, the market was nontrending. Little money is typically
made in that type of market. Traders are paid to make money. You as a
retail trader have a mission to make the most money. Nontrending is not a
good way to make the most money. The most money is made in trending
markets.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

186

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

The smart traders want the price to trend in a directional way. If they
have a profit, can define their risk, and use part of that profit as seed money
for a bigger profit, they will do it. They will attack currency trends and
make profit happen when the time is right. No one knows for sure what is
going to happen at point 3, or even point 4 in Figure 8.3, which is the same
scenario but comes after the trend is more established. The price could
have reversed to the upside, broken above the 100 bar MA, and stopped
the trade out. That is trading. The market does not always do what it is
supposed to do.
However, the more likely outcome is what actually happened. Risk was
defined, the trend had started from a nontrend, the correction was modest,
and the overall bias remained bearish. Attack the currency trends. Stay
on the currency trends. Use the clues from the tools just like the smart,
successful traders do. Everyone has the same opportunity to sell against
a borderline like a trend line and moving average and benefit from a subsequent trend. It is a matter of recognizing those opportunities and taking
advantage of the power of a trend.
In summary, the gain on a bearish trend move down, with little risk,
should have been around 140 to 160 pips. There were a total of 12 bars that
traded above the two trend lines (at point 3 and point 4). The price did not
trade above the 100 bar MA until after the trend lines were broken and the
market started the obvious consolidation phase. The bearish trend lines
and the two MAs provided the clues for entering the trade and defining the
risk, and provided the clear path lower for the pair to follow.
The next few sections will outline other sloping trend line patterns that
can be used to stay on trends and anticipate trend moves. The chapter will
end with a look at nonsloping trend lines I call remembered lines.

CHANNELS: HIGHWAYS TO RIDE
THE TREND
A channel draws two parallel trend lines that connect lows to lows and
highs to highs. The purpose is to define boundaries for a downtrend or an
uptrend. I like to think of them as a highway with guardrails for the trend to
follow. The market will use the lines to create a borderline to take profit or
to initiate a trade along the trend. Since both lines are borderlines, they also
define risk. With risk defined, fear is dispersed. The game plan of trading
the trend and controlling fear is maintained.
In Figure 8.4 following the chart from left to right, the trend is down for
the AUDUSD. A bottom trend line can be drawn between the white circles
1 and 2. With the line in place, a parallel line can be drawn that uses the

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

187

FIGURE 8.4 Bearish Trend Channel

black circle 1 as the anchor. The price corrects higher and the borderline
is defined at black circle 2. The price holds the line and moves back lower.
The trend remains between the guardrails.
Toward the bottom of the chart the price tries to break below the trend
line (shaded areas) and through the guardrail. What should a currency
trader looking to attack the trends be thinking when the market breaks
the floor?
The trend is down, the pace of the decline is steady. The lines are neither too steep nor too flat. A general rule that some use is if the slope of a
trend line is 10 to 4 on a clock for a downtrend (or 8 to 2 for an uptrend),
then that is just right. In this trend, it is 10 to 4 o’clock. The pace of decline
is just right.
What traders need to always guard against is getting out of the trend or
trading against the trend. At the shaded area below the bottom trend line,
a trader who is short from higher levels should remain comfortable being
short. The price is breaking the trend line floor. The price could accelerate
to an even lower level on the break of the trend line. The reason is that
“wrong-way traders” who trade against the trend have too much fear when
the trend line is broken, and they liquidate their positions.
On the other side are the “right-way traders” who are short, making
money, and are anxious to take some profit. The move from the blackcircled 2 to the first shaded area was a relatively steep descent of around

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

188

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 8.5 Failed Breaks of the Channel Often Lead to Quick Corrections

60 pips in a little more than an hour’s time. The trend has moved from a high
of 0.8990 to 0.8832 in less than a day. The price fell below the 100 bar MA
at around the 0.8840 level, which is where the first shorts were triggered.
The bottom trend line is a borderline level. Taking profit or some profit is
prudent. Nevertheless, when the price breaks the trend line, having some
short is still the smart and preferred decision. There is no reason to not
be anything but short below the bottom trend line. Being long would be
trading against the trend.
However, what all traders should guard against is the failure on a break
of a trend line or any borderline level. Figure 8.5 takes a closer look at
the breaks. Note that in each instance, the price trades below the trend
lines but only for a brief period. In the first instance, there are only two
closing bars below the line before the price moves back above. The second
instance also has two five-minute bar closes below the line before popping
back within the confines of the channel.
When the price moves back above the trend line after failing on the
break, the trend-following bearish traders with profits in their accounts reverse their bias to bullish and take profit or even buy for a quick rebound.
The trend is somewhat mature. In addition, the failed break reestablishes
the trend line support at the floor, and therefore the trader can define risk

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

189

(i.e., if the price breaks the trend line again, then sell). Traders should
anticipate—when this happens—the urge to take profit by the winners often leads to a bounceback rally. It may be temporary and limited, but it is
a good opportunity to benefit from a quick move against the trend.
I will often look to buy or cover some of the short position. I tend
not to be too greedy. On the bounce back, I will look for realistic targets
and also look for the move to happen fairly quickly. The longer the rebound takes to develop, the more disinterested I become in trading against
the trend.
In Figure 8.5, the first two failed breaks of the trend line had modest
corrective moves of 30 pips once the price moved back within the channel. The third failed break saw the rebound move much quicker. It provided much more “you are right” feedback. In 25 minutes the price had
rebounded from 0.8803 to 0.8867 or 64 pips (see Figure 8.5). The correction moved above the 100 bar MA, it moved above the upper trend line, and
it stalled at the 200 bar MA.
Let’s look at another example, this time a bullish channel.

An Example of Bullish Channels
Figure 8.6 shows a bullish trend channel. Notice that at the black circled 3
that the price moves above the channel guardrail and fails. This is the equivalent of the example in Figure 8.5. The subsequent move lower, against the
trend, takes the price down from 1.2283 to 1.2166—a significant correction of 117 pips. At point 4, the price found resistance again at the upper
guardrail for the channel and corrected down to test both the trend line and
100 hour MA at white circle 3. The subsequent move back higher was quick
after that test of the trend line, and the 100 hour MA level held support.
This is fully expected as risk is defined. Risk is limited. There are plenty
of traders who see the line and will assume the limited risk to get on the
trend.
The trading lesson is that channels provide a nice highway with
guardrails to travel between. They provide both floors and ceilings. The
goal is to stay on the trend and use the clues from the borderlines to execute low-risk trades. When a defined channel is in place, be on the lookout
for failed breaks because they can either lead to an acceleration of the
trend or provide clues for quick bouncebacks with defined risk. When risk
can be defined, there are ways to profit even on moves against the trend.
However, be sure to look for the rebounds to be quick. If not, remember to
err on the side of trading with the trend because the most money is always
made with the trend, while the most money is always lost trading against
the trend.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

190

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 8.6 Bullish Trend Channel

FLAGS AND PENNANTS
There are other line patterns that I will use to help attack a trend and stay
on a trend. Classic technical analysis looks for flags and pennants as trend
continuation patterns.
A flag is formed after a trend move higher or lower. We know that
trends transition into nontrends, and it is during the nontrend period that a
flag is formed. The characteristic of a flag is a parallel countertrend move.
The countertrend should be shallow when compared to the initial trend
move. Once the flag formation is broken and the trend resumes, traders
will look to measure a target using the initial trend or flagpole.
Figure 8.7 shows a bullish flag being formed. In the example, the
EURUSD moved up from a low of 1.1876 to a high of 1.2467 for a move of
591 pips. The price consolidated/corrected from 1.2467 to a low of 1.2151. A
flag was formed with a shallow downward channel containing the bottom
correction. The second move lower to the 1.2151 low provided a low-risk
trading opportunity for traders. The reasons included the following:

r The channel support came in at the level.
r The bullish trend up from the low remained firmly intact.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:24

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

Printer: Yet to come

191

FIGURE 8.7 Flags Can Lead to a Trend Move

r The market had corrected for seven trading days.
r Risk could be defined.
r Risk was limited.
Traders who bought near the flag’s lower trend line low had that line
defining the risk. Confirmation of the likely trend continuation would be on
a break of the flag’s top trend line (at 1.2356). It was time to anticipate a resumption of the currency trend, and that is what happened in the example.
Once the flag trend line has been broken, as it was on July 1 in Figure
8.7, technicians have a heuristic for measuring flag formation targets. The
first thing to do is measure the distance from the low to the top of the flag
(or flagpole). Once the bottom of the flag formation is determined, adding
the distance of the initial trend move to the bottom of the flag gives the
target measurement.
For example, in Figure 8.7, the initial trend move of 591 pips was added
to the low of the flag at the 1.2151 level. The topside target of 1.2741 was
reached 10 days from the low. Not a bad trend trade.
Of note in the example is that the trend continued much higher before
correcting back down to the 1.2732 level. It is important to understand that
just because a measured target is met, like the 1.2741 level, it is not a reason
to start thinking that the trend is over. The market surge higher continued
from 1.2741 all the way to the 1.3029 level, or 288 pips more. Selling at

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

192

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

the measured target (at 1.2741) without a defined reason is trading against
the trend. It is acceptable to measure a target, but be sure to let the trend
develop until there is bearish reason to sell.
What is also important to realize is because there is a measured target,
it does not automatically mean that the target will be met. Too many currency traders correctly uncover a flag formation, measure out a target, and
stubbornly wait for it to be reached. When it does not happen, they ignore
the countertrend clues and wonder why they book a big loss.
For this reason I will use tools like moving averages, Fibonacci retracements, trend lines, and remembered lines to map out the targets or exits
along the way. If it ends up that the trade gets to the measured objective,
all the better. If, however, the price was to fail and the bullish bias turned
to bearish, I would exit the trade.
In this example, the clues from the formation signaled a trend-type
move higher and indeed that is what the market provided. The total move
higher from the bottom of the flag to the top encompassed a stellar 877
pips. The flag trend line support held like a charm, giving the smart traders
a low-risk buying opportunity at the base of the flag near 1.2151. The risk
was clearly defined. Could traders anticipate a trend-type move? Sure. A
break of the top flag trend line would confirm the bullish bias. From there
it was a matter of the market’s continuing to give bullish clues from the
hourly and the five-minute charts. Surely, there would have been instances
when the price corrected in the shorter term and the bias may have turned
bearish for a day or so. However, when the trend was reestablished, the
market trended higher.
Overall, it took 14 days to cover the 877 pips, with five down days and
nine up days. That is a trend I want to anticipate, catch, and stay on as long
as possible.

FINDING THE GOLDEN TICKET
I can imagine that most retail traders might dismiss the notion of staying
in the trend for 877 pips as not being realistic. Some common justifications
for not being able to stay on the trend include:

r The risk during releases is too great.
r It’s impossible to trade 24 hours a day.
r Not wanting to take weekend risk.
All have merit. I have a risk phobia myself. However, successful traders
are able to see certain opportunities and are able to seize them when they

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c08

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:24

Printer: Yet to come

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines

193

FIGURE 8.8 The Trend Move Higher Starts Innocently, Then Surges

arise. What is most valuable in catching and staying on any trend is trading
near the borderlines and getting not just good, but great trade locations.
Once that great trade location is had, it can be like having the golden ticket.
It’s the ticket that everyone wants, but you have; the ticket that will make
or break the subsequent trend for you.
In the example, the initial surge higher occurred on July 1. It was on
this day that the price broke the upper flag trend line that paved the way to
the upside surge of 877 pips. It paved the way for the golden ticket.
What was that day like? Was there a big gap move (or moves) as a result
of some news event that made the trade good on paper, but unrealistic in
real life? To the contrary. In fact the day got off to a very sleepy start.
Figure 8.8 shows the five-minute chart from that day. There were not any
gaps from unexpected major news events.
However, there were a number of clues from the market that paved the
way for the bullish surge higher.
Clue 1: Nontrending market. The market was in a narrow 51-pip trading range for the first 11 hours of the trading day (shaded area).
If the day ended with a range of 51 pips, it would have been the
narrowest trading range in years. An extension of the nontrending
trading range could be anticipated. The extension could be to the
upside or downside. It wasn’t necessarily known until Clue 2.
