
The first level is based on the price/volume relationship on the candle itself. The second level is based on the
collective price/volume relationship of a group of candles, which then start to define the trend. It is in the latter
where Wyckoff's second law of ‘cause and effect’ can be applied. Here the extent of the effect (price changes in
trend) will be related to the size of the cause (the volume and period over which it is applied - the time element).
In this simple example, we have a very neat picture. The price action on each candle has been validated with
the associated volume, and the overall price action has been validated by the overall volume action. This can
all be summed as rising prices = rising volume. If the market is rising, and we see rising volume associated with
the move, then this is a valid move higher, supported by market sentiment and the specialists. In other words,
the specialists and insiders are joining in the move, and we see this reflected in the volume.

Fig 4.15 Multiple Bar Validation In Down Trend
I now want to examine the opposite, and look at an example where we have a market which is falling as shown
in Fig 4.15.
In this case the market is moving lower, and perhaps this is where some of the confusion starts for new VPA
students. As humans, we are all familiar with gravity and the concept that it takes effort for something to move
higher. The rocket into space, a ball thrown into the air, all require effort to overcome the force of gravity. As
traders, these examples of gravity are fine in principle when the market is moving higher, as in our first example.
Where these examples using gravity fail, is when we look at markets which are falling, because here too we
need rising effort (volume) for the market to fall.
The market requires effort to both rise AND fall, and it is easier to think of in these terms.
If the specialists are joining in the move, whether higher or lower, then this will be reflected in the volume bars. If
they are joining a move higher, then the volume will be rising, and equally if they are joining a move lower, then
the volume bars will ALSO be rising in the same way.
This is Wyckoff's third rule again – effort vs result, and whether the price action is higher or lower, then this rule
applies.

Looking at the four candles in the example in Fig 4.15, the first down candle opens and closes with a narrow
spread. The associated volume is small, and therefore validates the price action. The next bar opens and
closes with a wider spread, but with higher volume than on the previous candle, so once again the price action
is valid.
The third candle opens and closes with higher volume, as we expect, and finally we come to our last candle
which is wider still, but the associated volume is also higher than all the previous candles. Once again, not only
has volume validated each individual candle, it has also validated the group of four candles as a whole.
Again we have two levels of validation. First, we check the individual candle and the associated volume for
validation or anomaly. Second, we check to see a validation or anomaly in the trend itself.
One of the questions that hasn’t been answered in either of the above examples is this – is the volume buying
or selling? And, this is the next question we ALWAYS ask ourselves as the market moves along.
In the first example in Fig 4.14, we had a market that was rising nicely with the volume also rising to support the
price action, so the volume here must all be buying volume, after all, if there were any selling volume, then this
would be reflected somewhere in the price action.
We know this because there are no wicks on the candles, as the price moves steadily higher, with the volume
rising to support the price action and validating the price. It can only be buying volume and a genuine move.
Therefore, we can happily join in, knowing that this is a genuine move in the market. We join the insiders and
buy!
But perhaps much more importantly – it is also a low risk trading opportunity. We can enter the market with
confidence. We have completed our own analysis, based on volume and price. No indicators, no EAs, just price
and volume analysis. It's simple, powerful and effective, and reveals the true activity within the market. Market
sentiment is revealed, market tricks are revealed and the extent of market moves are also revealed.
Remember, there are only two risks in trading. The financial risk on the trade itself. This is easy to quantify and
manage using simple money management rules, such as the 1% rule. The second risk is far more difficult to
quantify, and this is the risk on the trade itself. This is what VPA is all about. It allows you to quantify the risk on
the trade using this analytical technique, and when combined with all the other techniques you will learn in this
book, is immensely powerful, and even more so when combined with analysis in multiple time frames.
As a result, you will become much more confident as a trader. Your trading decisions will be based on your own
analysis, using common sense and logic, based on two leading indicators, namely price and volume.
To return to our second example in Fig 4.15 and the questions we ask ourselves here. Is the volume buying or
selling, and should we join the move?
Here we have a market which is moving firmly lower, with the volume validating the candles and the overall
price action. We have no wicks to any candles, and the market is falling with rising volume. Therefore, this must
be a valid move and all the volume must be selling volume, as the specialists are joining in the move and
selling. Market sentiment is firmly bearish.
Again, another low risk opportunity to enter the market, based on common sense, logic and an understanding of
the price and volume relationship.
I now want to round off this chapter on the first principles of VPA by considering multiple candles with an
anomaly. In the examples that follow, there is more than one anomaly, as we are considering the concept of
VPA on two levels. The first level is that applied to each candle, the second level is to the overall trend.

Fig 4.16 Multiple Bar Anomalies In An Uptrend
Fig 4.16 is the first example, and here we have what appears to be a bullish trend, with the first narrow spread
up candle accompanied by relatively low volume. This is fine as the volume is validating the price and is in
agreement. The second candle then forms and on the close we have a slightly wider spread candle than the
first, but with high volume.
From experience and looking back at previous bars, this appears to be an anomaly. With high volume we would
expect to see a wide spread candle. Instead, we only have a candle which is marginally wider in price spread
than the previous candle, so something is wrong here. An alarm bell is now ringing!
Remember Wyckoff's third law, effort vs result? Here the effort (the volume) has not resulted in the correct result
(the price), so we have an anomaly on one candle, which could be an early warning signal, and the alarm bells
should now be starting to ring!
The third candle then forms, and closes as a wide spread up candle, but with volume that is lower than on the
previous candle. Given the spread of the bar, it should be higher, not lower. Another warning signal.
The fourth candle then forms and closes as a very wide price spread up, but the volume is even lower! We now
have several anomalies here, on candles two three and four.

Candle 2 Anomaly
This is an anomaly. We have a modest spread in price, but high volume. The market should have risen much
further given the effort contained in the volume bar. This is signalling potential weakness, after all the close of
the bar should have been much higher given the effort. The market makers are selling out at this level! It is the
first sign of a move by the insiders.

Candle 3 Two Anomalies!
This is two anomalies in one. The price spread is wider than the previous candle, but the volume is lower. The
buying pressure is draining away. Second, we have a market that is rising, but the volume has fallen on this

candle. Rising markets should be associated with rising volume, NOT falling volume. This is also signalling
clearly that the previous volume is also an anomaly, (if any further evidence were required).

Candle 4 Two Anomalies Again!
Again, we have two anomalies in one, and is adding further confirmation that the volume and price on this trend
are no longer in agreement. Here we have a wide spread up candle and even lower volume than on previous
candles in the trend. Following the effort vs result rule, we would expect to see significantly higher volume, but
instead we have low volume.
Second, the falling volume is confirming that we have an anomaly on the trend, as we expect to see rising
volume with a rising trend, whereas here we have falling volumes on a rising trend. The alarm bells would be
ringing loud and clear now.
What are the conclusions we can draw from these four candles? The problems start with candle two. Here we
have effort, but not an equivalent result in terms of the associated price action. This is therefore the first sign of
possible weakness. The market is what is known as 'over bought'. The market makers and specialists are
starting to struggle here. The sellers are moving into the market sensing an opportunity to short the market. This
creates the resistance to higher prices at this level, which is then confirmed on the third and fourth candles,
where volume is falling away.
The specialists and market makers have seen this weakness, and are selling out themselves at this level,
preparing for a move lower, but continue to mark prices higher, to give the appearance of a market that is still
bullish. It is not. This may only be a temporary pause, and not a major change in trend, but nevertheless, it is a
warning of potential weakness in the market.
The high volume is as a result of an increasing number of sellers closing out their positions, and taking their
profits, whilst the remaining buyers do not have sufficient momentum to take the market higher. The specialists
and market makers are also selling out at this level adding to the volumes, as they have seen the weakness in
the market. This is the reason that volumes fall on the next two candles, as they continue to mark the market
higher, but are no longer involved in the move themselves. They have withdrawn and are trapping traders into
weak positions.
The initial weakness appeared on candle two, which was then FURTHER confirmed by candles three and four.
This is often the sequence of events that unfolds.
Initially we see an anomaly appear using the single candle analysis. We then wait for subsequent candles to
appear, and analyse them against the initial anomaly. In this case, the anomaly was confirmed, with prices
continuing to rise on falling volumes.
Now we have a market which is apparently weak, and confirmed as such. The next step is to move to the final
level in our analysis which is to consider the analysis in the broader context of the chart. This will determine
whether what we are seeing is a minor pull back, or the pre-cursor to a change in trend.
This is where Wyckoff's second rule comes into effect, the law of cause and effect. If this is simply a minor pull
back or reversal, then the cause will be small, and the effect will be small.
In point of fact, the anomaly we have seen here, might be enough to result in minor short term weakness, a pull
back due to one weak candle. The cause is weak, so the effect is weak. Before expanding further on this latter
in the book, let us look at one more example of multiple bar anomalies.

Fig 4.17 Multiple Bar Anomalies In A Downtrend
In the example in Fig 4.17 we have what is known as a price waterfall, where the market sells off sharply.
The first candle opens and closes, and is associated with low or relatively low volume, which is as we expect.
We then start to see the anomalies starting with the second price bar in the waterfall.

Candle 2 Anomaly
The candle has closed with a marginally wider spread than the previous bar, but the volume is high or very
high. What this is signalling is that the market is clearly resistant to any move lower. After all, it this was NOT the
case, then the price spread would he been much wider, to reflect the high volume. But, this is not the case, and
is therefore an anomaly. And, just as in the previous example, the alarm bells are now ringing. What is
happening here is that bearish sentiment is draining away with the sellers now being met with buyers at this
level. The market makers and specialists have seen the change in sentiment with the buyers coming in, and are
moving in themselves, buying the market at this price point.

Candle 3 Two Anomalies
Now we have two anomalies, similar to the example in Fig 4.16. First, we have a wide spread candle, but with
only average to low volume. Second, the volume is lower than on the previous bar – in a falling market we
expect to see rising volume, NOT falling volume. With falling volume the selling pressure is draining away,
something that was signalled in the previous bar.

Candle 4 Two Anomalies Again!
Once again we have two anomalies here. First, we have a wide spread down candle, accompanied by low
volume. The volume should be high, not low. Second, we now have falling volume over three candles in a
market that is falling. Again, this is an anomaly as we should expect to see rising volume in a falling market.
As with the example in Fig 4.16, the first candle too in Fig 4.17 closes, and the volume validates the price. All is
well! However, it is on candle 2 that the first alarm bells rings. Once again we have effort (volume), but not an
equivalent result in terms of the associated price action. This is, therefore, the first sign of possible weakness.
The market is what is known as 'over sold'. The market makers and specialists are starting to struggle here. The

buyers are moving into the market in increasing numbers, sensing an opportunity to buy the market. This
creates the resistance to lower prices at this level, which is then confirmed on the third and fourth candle, where
volume is falling away.
The specialists and market makers have seen this weakness on candle 2 and moved in, but continue to mark
prices lower, to give the appearance of a market that is still bearish. Once again, it isn't! This may only be a
temporary pause, and not a major change in trend, but nevertheless, it is a potential warning of strength coming
into the market.
The high volume is as a result of an increasing number of sellers closing out their positions, and taking their
profits, whilst the remaining sellers do not have sufficient momentum to take the market lower. The specialists
and market makers are now buying at this level adding to the volumes, as they have seen the strength coming
into the market, and are happily absorbing the selling pressure. This is the reason that volumes fall on the next
two candles, as they continue to mark the market lower, but are no longer involved in the move themselves.
They have bought their stock on candle 2, and are now simply trapping additional traders into weak short
positions in candles 3 and 4.
The initial signal appeared on candle two, as in the previous example, which was then FURTHER confirmed in
candles three and four. The insiders have shown their hand on candle two in both of the above examples, and
all from the volume and associated price action!
In both of these examples we would now be ready and waiting for any further signals, to give us clues as to the
likely extent of any reversal in trend, or whether this might simply be a minor pull back. Even if it were merely a
minor change in a longer term trend, this would still offer a low risk trade that we could enter in the knowledge
that the position would only be open for a short time.
This brings me neatly to the point I mentioned earlier, namely the framework of Wyckoff's second law, the law of
cause and effect.
In learning to base our trading decisions using VPA, the analytical process that we go through on each chart is
identical. The description of this process may sound complicated, but in reality once mastered only takes a few
minutes to execute. In fact, it becomes second nature. It took me around 6 months to reach this level by chart
watching every day. You may be quicker or a little slower – it doesn't matter, as long as you follow the principles
explained in the book. The process can be broken down into three simple steps:

Step 1 – Micro
Analyse each price candle as it arrives, and look for validation or anomaly using volume. You will quickly
develop a view on what is low, average, high or very high volume, just by considering the current bar against
previous bars in the same time frame.

Step 2 - Macro
Analyse each price candle as it arrives against the context of the last few candles, and look for validation of
minor trends or possible minor reversals.

Step 3 - Global
Analyse the complete chart. Have a picture of where the price action is in terms of any longer term trend. Is the
price action at the possible top or bottom of a longer term trend, or just in the middle? This is where support and
resistance, trend lines, candle patterns, and chart patterns all come into play, and which we will cover in more
detail shortly.
In other words, we focus on one candle first, followed by the adjacent candles close by, and finally the entire
chart. It's rather like the zoom lens on a camera in reverse – we start close in on our subject, and then gradually
zoom out for the complete picture.
I now want to put this into the context of Wyckoff's second law, namely the law of cause and effect, as this is
where the elements of time come into our VPA analysis.
As I mentioned in the introduction, one of the classic mistakes I made time and time again when first starting all
those years ago was to assume that as soon as I saw a signal, then the market would turn. I was caught out

repeatedly, getting in too early, and being stopped out. The market is like the proverbial oil tanker – it takes time
to turn and for all the buying or selling to be absorbed before the insiders, specialists and market makers are
ready. Remember, they want to be sure that when they make their move, then the market will not be resistant. In
the simple examples above, we just looked at four candles, with the insiders moving in on just one. In reality,
and as you will see shortly, there is a great deal more to it than this, but this sets the basic principle in place,
which is what this chapter is all about.
Therefore, on a daily chart this ‘mopping up’ phase could go on for days, weeks and sometimes even months,
with the market continuing to move sideways. Several consecutive signals of a reversal could appear, and
whilst it is clear that the market will turn, it is not clear when this will occur. The longer this period of
consolidation, then the more extended any reversal in trend is likely to be. And, this is the point that Wyckoff
was making in his second law, the law of cause and effect. If the cause is large, in other words the period over
which the market is preparing to reverse, then the more dramatic and long lasting will be the consequent trend.
Let's try to put this concept into context as this will also explain the power of using VPA combined with multiple
time frames.
If we take one of the simple examples above, where we were looking at four candles, and the associated
volume bars. This is really step two in our three step process. Here we are at the macro level, and this could be
on any chart from a tick chart to a daily chart. All we know is that over this four bar period there is a possible
change being signalled. However, given the fact that this is only over a handful of candles, any reversal is
unlikely to last long as any potential change is only based on a few candles. In other words, what we are
probably looking at here in the micro stage, is a minor pull back or reversal. Nothing wrong with that, and
perfectly acceptable as a low risk trading opportunity.
However, step back to the global view on the same chart, and we see this in the context of the overall trend, and
immediately see that this four bar price action is in fact being replicated time and time again at this level, as the
market prepares to reverse. In other words, the cause is actually much greater than a simple reversal and we
are therefore likely to see a much greater effect as a result. Therefore, patience is now required and we must
wait. But, wait for what? Well, this is where the power of support and resistance comes into play, and which I
cover in detail in a later chapter.
Returning to Wyckoff’s second law of cause and effect and how this principle can be applied to multiple time
frames, the strategy I would like to share with you is one I use in my own trading. It is based on a typical set of
charts on MT4 and uses the 5, 15 and 30 minute charts. This trio of charts is for intra day forex scalping and
trades are taken on the 15 minute chart. The 5 minute chart gives me a perspective closer to the market, whilst
the 30 minute chart, gives me a longer term view on a slower chart. The analogy I always use in my trading
rooms is that of a three lane highway. The 5 minute chart is in the middle while the two charts either side acting
as 'wing mirrors' on the market. The faster time frame, the 5 minute chart, tells us what is happening in the 'fast
lane', whilst the 30 minute reveals what is happening in the 'slow lane', the slower time frame.
As the sentiment in the fast time frame changes, if it ripples through to the slower time frames, then this will
develop into a longer term trend. For example, if a change occurs on the 5 minute chart, which then ripples
through to the 15 minute chart, and ultimately through to the 30 minute chart, then this change has now
developed into a longer term trend.
Returning to our VPA analysis. Imagine that on the 5 minute chart we see an anomaly of a possible change in
trend which is then confirmed. This change in trend is also reflected in the 15 minute chart. If we take a trade on
the analysis seen here, and the trend ultimately ripples through to the 30 minute chart, this reversal is likely to
be more developed as a result, as it has taken longer to build, and is therefore likely to have further to run. The
analogy I use here is of a clockwork model car.
If we only wind the mechanism by a few turns which takes a few seconds, then the car only runs a small
distance before stopping. If we spend a little longer and add a few more turns to the mechanism then the car
runs further. Finally, if we take a few minutes and wind the mechanism to the maximum, the car will now run the
farthest distance possible. In other words, the time and effort we put in to define the strength of the cause, will be
output in terms of the strength of the effect.
This is the power of VPA when used in multiple time frames and in conjunction with Wyckoff's second rule. It is
