
UMBRELLA DAYS
Remember, an umbrella day occurs when the body is at the upper end
of the day’s range and the lower shadow is considerably longer than

311 䊏
The Philosophy behind Candle Pattern identification

the body. One must also take into consideration the length of the
upper shadow, if one exists. The body and lower shadow relationship
is defined as a percentage of the body length to lower shadow length.
Umbrella Body / Lower Shadow (0 to 100%)
If this value is set to 50, then the body cannot exceed 50% of the
size of the lower shadow. In this example, the lower shadow would
be at least twice the length of the body. The upper shadow on an
umbrella day can be handled in a similar fashion, such as:
Umbrella Upper Shadow / High to Low Range (0 to 100%)
The upper shadow is related to the entire day’s range. A value of
10 means that the upper shadow is only 10% (or less) of the high-low
range. These variables will help identify the Hanging Man and Hammer candle patterns. Patterns such as the shooting Star and Inverted
Hammer use just the inverse of these settings.

DOJI DAYS
Doji occurs when the open and close prices are equal. This is an exceptionally restrictive rule for most types of data and should have some
leeway when identifying candle patterns. The formula lets you set a
percentage difference between the two prices that will be acceptable.
Doji Body / High to Low Range − Maximum (0 to 100%)
This value is a percentage maximum of the prices relative to the
range of prices on the Doji day. A value in the neighborhood of 1 to
3% seems to work quite well.

䊏 312

Chapter Six

EQUAL VALUES
Equal values occur when prices are required to be equal. This is used
for patterns like Meeting Lines and Separating Lines. Meeting Lines
require that the close price of each day be equal; while Separating
Lines require the open prices to be equal. The same concept used in
determining a Doji day can be used here as well. There are a few
instances when setting the parameters to the literal definition will
restrict, rather than enhance, the pattern concept.

