
The key here is to avoid being seduced by leverage. Just because you’re able to get 100:1
leverage doesn’t mean you have to use it all. Trading a larger position may seem sexy, but no
one ever said prudent, risk-aware trading was supposed to be sexy. Use leverage as a tool to
facilitate your trading strategies, not as an ego booster.

Knowing your margin requirements
Online forex brokers require margin posted as collateral to cover any losses on your trading
account. To protect themselves from client losses eating up the entire margin (or going negative) in
adverse market movements, online brokers typically require you to have 100 percent of available
margin for any open positions.
For example, at 50:1 leverage, if you’re holding a $100,000 position in USD/CHF, you’ll need to
have at least $2,000 of available margin to hold the position ([$100,000 ÷ 100] × 0.50 = $500). If
your available margin balance falls below $2,000 at any time, even for a second or just by pip,
your broker has the right to liquidate your position, which is a fancy way of saying it closes out
your position for you. Your losses are locked in, and your available margin balance is reduced.

Margin balances are typically monitored by computer programs based on current market
prices. If a price move causes your available margin to fall below the required level, the
position will be closed — no margin call, no notification to you, just a liquidated position.
You may think that’s unfair, but the reality is that brokers need to liquidate losing positions at
some point, or your loss will become theirs.
As a trader, it’s your responsibility to read the fine print and to know the minimum margin
requirements and liquidation policies before you start trading. Regulated forex brokers must
disclose their policies in your customer account agreement.
Liquidation policies can vary among brokers with some closing all open positions at once (in the
case of multiple open positions) and others closing the largest losing position first until the
minimum requirement is met to close remaining open positions.

From a trader’s perspective, you never want to be in the situation where your positions are
liquidated due to insufficient margin. It means you’re trading too large a position for your
available margin or you’ve let the losses run for too long relative to your available margin.
Each trade plan needs to factor in the minimum margin requirement, and it should never even
come close, or you’re better off with a smaller position size. I look at the critical relationship
between position size and margin later in this section.

Market liquidity, volatility, and gap risk
The forex market is routinely described as the most liquid financial market in the world, and that’s
true. But it doesn’t mean that currencies are not subject to varying liquidity conditions.
Liquidity refers to the amount of market interest (the number of active traders and the overall

volume of trading) present in a particular market at any given time. From an individual trader’s
perspective, liquidity is usually experienced in terms of the volatility of price movements. A
highly liquid market will tend to see prices move very gradually and in smaller increments. A less
liquid market will tend to see prices move more abruptly and in larger price increments.

Shifting liquidity conditions can increase volatility
Forex market liquidity will vary throughout each trading day as global financial centers
open and close in their respective time zones. Reduced liquidity is first evident during the
Asia-Pacific trading session, which accounts for only about 21 percent of global daily trading
volume. Japanese, Chinese, or Australian data or comments from regional finance officials
may provoke a larger-than-expected or more-persistent reaction simply because there is less
trading interest to counteract the directional move suggested by the news.
Peak liquidity conditions are in effect when European and London markets are open, overlapping
with Asian sessions in their morning and North American markets in the European afternoon.
Following the close of European trading, liquidity drops off sharply in what is commonly referred
to as the New York afternoon market.
During these periods of reduced liquidity and interest, currency rates are prone to drift in narrow
ranges, but are also subject to more sudden and volatile price movements. The catalyst could be a
news event or a rumor, and the reduced liquidity sees prices react more abruptly than would be the
case during more liquid periods.
Another common source of erratic price moves during less liquid periods is short-term market
positioning. A classic example is a strong rally in a currency pair during the North American
morning/European afternoon. As Europe heads home, the currency pair typically settles into a
consolidation range near the upper end of the day’s rally. If sufficient short positions have been
established on the rally, further price gains may force some shorts to buy and cover. With reduced
liquidity, prices may jump abruptly, provoking a flood of similar buying from other shorts,
resulting in a short squeeze higher.
The same phenomenon can occur following market declines, where market longs are forced to exit
in a rush on further price declines. Still another variation on this theme is sharp price reversals of
an earlier rally, where longs take profit in thin conditions and the resulting price dip brings out
selling by other longs rushing to preserve profits. After a sell-off, profit-taking on short positions
can provoke a sharp short-covering reversal.

There’s no way to predict with any certainty how price movements will develop in such
relatively illiquid periods, and that’s the ultimate point in terms of risk. The bottom line is
that if you maintain a position in the market during these periods of thin liquidity, you’re

exposed to an increased risk of more volatile price action.
Liquidity is also reduced by market holidays in various countries and seasonal periods of reduced
market interest, such as the late summer and around the Easter and Christmas/New Year holidays.
Typically, holiday sessions result in reduced volatility as markets succumb to inertia and remain
confined to ranges. The risks also increase for sudden breakouts and major trend reversals.
Aggressive speculators, such as hedge funds, exploit reduced liquidity to push markets past key
technical points, which forces other market participants to respond belatedly, propelling the
breakout or reversal even further. By the time the holiday is over, the market may have moved
several hundred points and established an entirely new direction.

Just because you’re enjoying an extended holiday weekend doesn’t mean you’re not
exposed to risk from higher volatility in holiday markets. You are — and you need to factor
liquidity conditions into your overall trading plan.

Getting a handle on volatility
Volatility is a statistical term referring to average price fluctuations (standard deviation) relative
to the average price over a specified period of time. Volatility is what makes the trading world go
’round, and without it, speculators would have a lot of time on their hands.
But not all volatility is created equal, and you need to be aware of two main types of volatility that
can alter the currency playing field:
Market volatility: Market volatility is the overall level of price volatility in various
financial markets at any given time. The VIX S&P 500 volatility index is a good overall
barometer of market volatility. Market volatility typically increases during periods of
uncertainty or unexpected economic data or monetary policy developments. If you’re
trading on a short-term basis or using a model that relies on relatively low volatility (for
example, mean reverting systems, moving averages, or regression channels), you need to
be aware that increased volatility can quickly swamp such strategies. Better to stay on the
sidelines and sit out the upheavals than jump in with a strategy unsuited to higher
volatility.
Currency-pair volatility: Different currency pairs trade with different volatility
characteristics, both in the short and long term. Before you go with a trade setup in a
currency pair you’ve spotted on a chart, make sure you’re aware of the pair’s relative
volatility. (I discuss individual currency-pair volatility and other trading characteristics in
greater detail in Chapters 8 and 9.)

Minding the gap

Gap risk refers to the potential for prices to gap, or jump from one price level to another with no
tradeable prices in between. Gap risk typically is associated with events such as economic data
reports, central bank rate decisions, and other major news events. In that sense, most gap risk is
identifiable in advance by looking at data and event calendars. Unexpected news or official
comments can also trigger price gaps. Breaks of key technical levels are another source of price
gaps.
Gaps vary in size depending on the nature of the news, but price gaps of 20 to 80 pips or more are
not uncommon in currencies after major news and data events. Gaps occur because the interbank
market reduces its bids and offers in the minutes or so immediately before and after major
announcements, leaving online currency trading platforms with no prices to show individual
traders.
After the news is out, interbank traders adjust their prices to reflect the news, resulting in a price
gap higher or lower. It may be up to 30 seconds (or more depending on the news or event) before
normal pricing returns.

If you’re holding open positions at the time of major data releases or events, you’re subject
to gap risk. The same goes for stop-loss orders left with online brokers — stop-loss
executions are subject to gap risk. Depending on market circumstances, stop-loss order
executions will see slippage (meaning, your stop-loss order may not be filled at the rate you
specified). In the case of price gaps, brokers are obligated only to fill your order on a “best
efforts” basis.

Don’t expect to be able to leave a stop-loss order nearby on either side of the market before
a major news or data event and have it filled at your order rate. Occasionally, the market will
take out both sides of the stop-loss orders before the release ever hits the market, locking in
your loss. If that doesn’t happen, and the market gaps through one side of your order, you’re
subject to slippage, and you’ll be filled where the market resumes trading, which could be
substantially different from where you left your order.
If you’re thinking that this is some trick that online brokers cooked up to sock it to individual
traders, keep this in mind: The big players in the interbank market are subject to the same gap risk
as individuals trading online. Even if you were a prop trader (see Chapter 3) at some big bank,
with one of your own bank’s traders watching your order, you’re going to get filled where your
trader is able to execute the order in the market. The same applies to online brokerages. Bottom
line: No market-maker will survive very long if he fills his customers at rates even he can’t
access.

The other type of gap risk stems from events that occur over weekends, potentially resulting

in a substantial gap between Friday’s closing level and the Sunday/Monday opening price.
Weekend gap risk is typically also identifiable in advance because it most often occurs
around scheduled events like a G20 meeting or a Chinese data release.
That said, there’s still plenty of potential for unexpected events (earthquakes, terrorism, and
currency revaluations or devaluations, to name just a few) to happen over weekends. To judge the
risks of a weekend gap, you need to have a good sense of what’s going on in the major currency
nations and a healthy sense of expecting the unexpected. The safest approach is simply not to hold
positions over a weekend.

We have a winner here! Protecting your profits
It’s one thing to speculate in the market and get the direction wrong. That’s good old-fashioned
risk-taking, and it’s just part of the business of trading. But it’s another result entirely to get the
direction right and still lose money, or not make as much as you could have, or not keep as much
as you’d already made.
Most traders can readily accept the idea of getting the direction wrong. They shrug it off and get
back to work in short order. But take a trader with a winning position in the morning that goes
south in the afternoon, and you’re suddenly looking at a case study of negative trader emotions.
With a wrong-way trade, it’s a simple case of not missing what you never had. With a good trade
gone bad, it’s hard not to feel regret or think the market is out to get you.

Experienced traders know that keeping what you’ve made is often as hard as making it in
the first place, so they guard their profits aggressively. The best way to do that is by adjusting
your stop loss in the direction of the trade once it’s in the money. You can do this by using
either a trailing stop loss or manually changing your original stop loss based on specific
price levels being surpassed.
A trailing stop loss is a stop-loss order that automatically trails the market at a user-defined
distance (say, 40 pips). For example, if you’re short at 55, and you have a 40-pip trailing stop
loss, the stop starts out at 95. As the market moves lower, the trailing stop will adjust so that it is
always 40 pips from the low. If the market trades down to 10, your trailing stop is now at 50,
guaranteeing you at least a 5-pip profit. Trailing stops are great for catching longer-term
movements, because they rely on a market reversal of x pips before being triggered.
If you’re more inclined to trade according to technical levels, you may want to consider manually
adjusting your stop loss after specific levels are broken. For example, if you’re long, you may
raise your stop loss from its original level after technical resistance has been broken.

Above all, if the market reverses and your profit starts to decline, don’t worry about getting

back what you’ve just lost — worry about keeping what you’ve still got.

Placing your orders effectively
Currency traders rely on orders to take advantage of price movements when they’re not able to
personally monitor the market and also to protect themselves from adverse price movements. If
you’re going to be trading currencies, odds are that you’ll be relying on orders as part of your
overall trade strategy. I cover the various types of orders in greater detail in Chapter 4.
The two main types of orders are limit orders, used to buy or sell at rates more favorable than
current market prices, and stop-loss orders, which are used to buy or sell at worse rates than
prevailing levels. The key difference between the two types is that you generally want your limit
orders to get filled, but you don’t want your stop-loss orders to be triggered. That’s because limit
orders are used to take profit and enter positions (which you want), and stop-loss orders are used
mainly to exit losing positions (which nobody likes). (The exception is stop-loss entry orders, in
which you use a stop-loss order to enter a position — on a breakout, for example [see Chapter
14].)
The risk with using orders is that you miss having your take-profit limit or entry orders filled or
that your stop-loss orders are triggered at extreme price points. The catch here is that markets have
a penchant for going after stop-loss orders and shying away from limit orders in the routine noise
of daily fluctuations.
That makes where you place your orders a critical factor in your overall trading strategy. Deciding
where to place orders is definitely more art than science, and even the most experienced currency
traders continually grapple with the question of where to place their orders.

Factoring in the dealing spread with orders
Online currency traders face two other complicating factors: the dealing spread of the currency
pairs and the order execution policies of online currency trading platforms.

Most online platforms execute on the basis that a limit order to sell is filled when the bid
price reaches the order rate and a limit order to buy is filled when the offer price reaches the
order rate. In the case of stop losses, a stop-loss order to sell is triggered if the bid price
reaches the order rate, and a stop order to buy is executed if the offer price reaches the order
rate. In both cases, the dealing spread works against the order, and traders need to take that
into account.
For example, you may be long USD/CHF at 1.0250 with a limit, take-profit order, to sell at 1.0330
and a stop-loss order to sell at 1.0200. For your take profit to be executed, the dealing price must
print 1.0330/33. If the highest price quoted is 1.2329/32, no cigar. Your stop loss would be

triggered if the dealing price ever trades at 1.0200/03; if the lowest quoted price is 1.0201/04,
your order is still alive. As you can see, it’s frequently a game of inches played out in
milliseconds.

Factoring in technical levels when placing orders
Many traders focus on technical levels to decide where to place their orders. Continuing the order
example from the last section, if there is resistance from a trend line or hourly highs at the 1.0330
level, many other sell orders could be grouped there. If the selling interest is strong enough, the
market may never get that high because sellers step in front of the resistance level, start selling,
and stop prices from rising.
In the case of the stop-loss level, it may be placed on Fibonacci retracement support or recent
daily lows, which may also attract other technically minded traders to place their stops at the same
level. If the market starts to move lower, sellers will frequently try to test key technical-support
levels to see if they hold, in the process triggering stop-loss orders left at those levels. The stops
may be triggered and the level exceeded briefly, only to see prices rebound and the support
ultimately hold.
Getting stopped out at a market top or bottom is a very frustrating experience, but it’s happened to
everyone at one point or another. Remember: Someone has to sell at the low and buy at the high.

Margins of error and market extremes
One way to prevent getting stopped out by market extremes is to factor in a margin of error
when placing your orders. Using a margin of error is a fairly sophisticated practice, but the
idea is to err on the side of getting your limit order filled — leaving a sell order a few points
below key resistance levels or a buy order a few points above support levels. At a minimum,
the margin of error should account for the dealing spread of the currency pair you’re trading.
For stop losses, the concept is to err on the side of not allowing your stop to be triggered —
leaving a stop-loss sell order several points below key support levels and a stop-loss buy order
above technical resistance levels.
In both cases, the margin of error will depend on the relative volatility of the currency pair you’re
trading as well as overall market volatility at the time. Generally speaking, the greater the
volatility, the greater the margin of error, and vice versa. (I look at individual currency pair
volatility and trading behavior in greater detail in Chapters 8 and 9.). My own preference for limit
orders is for a small margin of error of around 5 to10 pips. For stop losses, I like to use a wider
margin of error of around 20 to 40 pips, allowing for a greater cushion in case others’ stops get
triggered and the technical level is briefly broken.

Using a margin of error in placing orders will also require you to rethink the overall trade
strategy, especially in terms of position size. If you’re going to place stops with a margin of
error, and the stop ends up getting triggered anyway, your losses will be greater. So you may
need to reduce the position size to mitigate the impact on your margin.

Placing stop-loss orders based on technical or financial levels
There are generally two schools of thought when it comes to the basis for deciding where to place
stop-loss orders:
Technical stops: Placing a stop-loss order according to price levels identified through
technical analysis. Whatever technical approach you choose to follow, you’ll be looking
to identify key technical points that, if exceeded, will invalidate the trade setup and signal
that it’s time to get out of the trade.
Financial stops: Based on the amount of money you’re prepared to risk on a given trade.
You may base the trade on a fundamental view of future developments, but you’re willing
or able to risk only a certain amount of money on the trade.
Financial stops may be appealing to highly conservative traders who don’t want to risk more than
a fixed amount on any single trade. If that’s your way of maintaining trading discipline, by all
means go with it. But I think it’s important to note that financial stops are essentially arbitrary and
have no relation to the market. They’re much more a function of position size and entry price —
elements you control — than any objective market measure.
Technical stops, on the other hand, are based on past price action, which is about the only concrete
way traders have of gauging future price movements. If GBP/USD has repeatedly failed to trade
above 1.6215 in recent weeks, to pick a random price as an example, a move above that level
suggests that something has changed. And the market, in its infinite wisdom, has decided that
GBP/USD should move higher. We have no way of knowing for sure whether the break will be
sustained; we can only go with our best analysis.

My own preference is to base orders on technical levels rather than financial
considerations, but the ultimate limiting factor is the amount of money at risk. That may sound
like I’m trying to have it both ways — I explain this idea further in the next section.

Applying Risk Management to the Trade
When it comes to trading, risk management is frequently an afterthought —that is, until you take a
loss that you weren’t expecting. Suddenly, the wisdom of the ages is upon you, and you vow never

to let it happen again.
By the way, who in her right mind would ever put on a trade expecting to take a loss, anyway?
Sounds crazy, right? But all the experienced traders I know calculate the risk they’re facing in
every trade before they ever enter it. It’s part of their decision-making DNA and goes a long way
to determining which trade opportunities they pursue and which ones they skip.
I strongly recommend that traders approach the forex market with risk management as the first
thought. It’s how you’ll be able to get some trades wrong and still survive to get other trades right.
