
One day, Buffett walked a couple of blocks over to American Express to have lunch with its CEO, Jim
Robinson. “Jim,” he said, “I didn’t think it was possible, but I just paid out nine hundred million dollars in
bonuses.” Yet he felt that everybody, other than Maughan and one or two people he had brought in to fix the
place, was mad at him.53
“They took the money and ran. Everybody just peeled off.
“It was just so apparent that the whole thing was being run for the employees.54 The investment bankers
didn’t make any money, but they felt they were the aristocracy. And they hated the traders, partly because
the traders made the money and therefore had more muscle.”
He had just saved Salomon and had thought that that would matter to the employees. But no, “We were
grateful for about five minutes,” was the verdict of one ex-employee. The fact that they wouldn’t have a job
without Buffett was forgotten in the grim shadow of the Bad Bonus Day. “Warren didn’t understand how to
run a people business” became the refrain among ex-employees. Salomon wasn’t the kind of place where you
could just raise prices, cut overhead, and pull cash out of the business up to the parent company (although
Buffett did as much of that as he could). You had to keep very smart people motivated when they had other
options instead, during a time when “you were dying by a thousand cuts a day,” as Olson put it. Buffett
viewed the new pay deal as a cultural litmus test: Those who left were mercenaries whom the firm could do
without, and those who stayed had signed on to the kind of firm he wanted.
Wall Street being a mercenary kind of place, little by little many of the top employees continued to drift
away, carrying books of business to competitors as they departed. Buffett couldn’t sleep. “I couldn’t turn off
my mind,” he says. He had spent his whole life avoiding commitments to anything where there was no escape
hatch and he didn’t have total control. “I’ve always been leery of getting sucked into things. At Salomon I
found myself defending things I didn’t want to defend; and then I found myself being critical of my own
organization.”
Months had passed and Obermaier was still pondering whether Salomon’s conduct was bad enough to indict.
He knew “it would have been the death knell of the company.”55 In considering the phony bids, he thought it
important that Mozer’s actions were motivated more by rebellion against the Treasury rules than simply to
enrich Salomon. Likewise, no serious financial losses had occurred from the phony bids.56 He also weighed
Buffett’s promises and the new culture.
Together with Breeden at the SEC, he began to work on settlement talks with Salomon that would allow the
firm to escape indictment. Frank Barron, the lawyer from Cravath, went down to the SEC to negotiate its
share of the settlement in a meeting with Bill McLucas, Breeden’s deputy, who informed Barron the fine
from the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department would be $190 million plus a $100 million
restitution fund. Barron was shocked—the fine was huge for the transgressions of a single trader who had
violated Treasury rules without causing serious harm to customers or the market. Why? he asked. “Well,
Frank,” said McLucas, “you have to understand that it’s going to be $190 million because that’s what
Richard Breeden says it’s going to be.”57
The moment when John Meriwether had rushed into the conference room that Sunday morning, white and
shaken, quoting Dick Breeden, who had called Salomon “rotten to the core, rotten to the core,” came to
mind. There would be no appealing this decision. Salomon agreed to pay the extraordinary fine.
Buffett was trying to undo the “rotten to the core” image as fast as he could. Dubbed “Jimmy Stewart” by
the staff, he nixed deal after deal that he thought was too close to the line, despite the resulting internal
backlash. Then another crisis erupted that almost derailed the settlement.
Mozer made a proffer to the government to plea-bargain his case. He revealed some tax-motivated trades
done by him with other traders that involved making secret side deals with other firms to guarantee the other
firms against losses. The tax trades would give the prosecutors an even stronger reason to press criminal

charges against the firm.
Besides the obvious motivation of trying to save his own neck, Mozer had ample reason to harbor bitter
feelings toward Salomon. Had the firm’s former leaders handled the situation properly, he still would have
been fired, and he might have still been charged with fraud and be going to prison—but his name would not
be splashed all over the newspapers as the man who had nearly caused the largest financial failure in history.
During an emergency board meeting, Obermaier called Olson about the tax trades to settle things down. He
said that he had decided not to scuttle the settlement over Mozer’s new revelations. Whatever this new issue
was, Salomon would take that up with the IRS. The rest of the firm’s misconduct, he thought, was serious,
and should “bring the corporate entity to its knees, at least for a slight genuflection,”58 but not require the
death penalty.
On May 20, Obermaier’s office called Olson to say that the government was not going to indict and had
dropped all charges. The U.S. Attorney and the SEC announced a settlement with Salomon over fraud and
record-keeping charges; including the $100 million restitution fund, it was in total the second largest fine in
history. The settlement found no evidence of wrongdoing other than Mozer’s illegal bidding, which had been
discovered by Salomon itself. Mozer was going to prison for four months, and would pay a $1.1 million fine.
He was barred from the industry for life.59 Gutfreund, Meriwether, and Strauss were reprimanded for failing
to supervise him, given small fines, and suspended for a few months from working in the industry.60
Some thought Salomon got off easy compared to Drexel Burnham Lambert, which had paid $650 million and
imploded after settling felony charges of stock parking and stock manipulation. But most observers were
dumbstruck at the size of the fine for what amounted to technical violations by one employee. In fact, by
acknowledging its guilt to the government so freely, some thought Salomon had given up its negotiating
leverage. But what the large fine really reflected was that the firm had bungled its reporting responsibilities so
badly, and had made the regulators look asleep at the switch in front of Congress. In other words, thumbsucking and obfuscation had nearly bankrupted Salomon. Thus it was, as the well-exercised saying goes, the
cover-up, not the crime.
Three days after the announcement, Dan Cowin died of cancer. Buffett wrote out a heartfelt eulogy, meaning
to deliver it himself, and asked his secretary, Paula Orlowski, to stop by his hotel room and pick it up to have
it typed. But when she arrived, he met her at the door and said, with an agonized look, that he could not bring
himself to speak at Cowin’s service. Instead, Susie was going to read it for him.61 Buffett went to the service.
“I sat through it shaking all over the whole time,” he says.
Then he went back to work. Salomon estimated that the $4 million profit Mozer had made from his trades
had cost the firm $800 million in lost business, fines, penalties, and legal fees. The firm’s status as a primary
dealer remained unresolved, although it now seemed a foregone conclusion that this would be resolved in
Salomon’s favor.62 Employee defections had slowed to a trickle, and the rating agencies were starting to
upgrade Salomon’s debt. Customers started coming back. As Salomon stock crept above $33, Buffett, who
could not wait to return permanently to Omaha, announced that he was stepping down. Deryck Maughan
took over as permanent CEO, and Buffett appointed MTO lawyer Bob Denham as chairman. When it was
over, says Gladys Kaiser, “I could almost see a big sigh of relief. It was as if, almost overnight, we got
Warren back.”
In that mournful spring of 1992, as Salomon staggered to its feet, the question of how to deal with those who
had nearly brought it down remained unresolved. Second only to Mozer in the public’s assessment of
culpability was John Gutfreund. In the end it was he who was responsible, despite all the legal advice that
reporting was not required.
When the time came for Gutfreund to discuss what money he would receive from the firm, he asked for the
“fair treatment” he had been promised as long as Buffett and Munger were alive. Now, however, it turned
out that the parties’ opinions of what was fair differed dramatically.

Gutfreund’s lawyer thought that he had made a deal with Charlie Munger on that fateful weekend in August
of the previous year, and that Munger had accepted a resignation letter conditioned on the lengthy list of
severance terms. Gutfreund felt that he had fallen on his sword to save the firm and thought he was owed $35
million in back pay, stock, and severance. Salomon, however, took the position that Charlie Munger had
made no deal at all. The board agreed to interpret Gutfreund’s employee-benefit plans strictly and also took
back the stock options he had earned, even though the stock-option plan contained no provisions allowing for
forfeiture under this or any circumstances. It countered with $8.6 million.
Insulted and outraged, Gutfreund turned it down. “It seemed wrong,” he said. “As a matter of principle, I
fought.”63 His lawyers interpreted the offer not as meant to inspire negotiation but as so insultingly low that it
must be dismissed. In 1993, Gutfreund took Salomon to arbitration.
Arbitration is a process in which a panel of neutral parties listens to both sides and reaches a binding decision
to resolve a dispute. Arbitration is also a throw of the dice, for its very nature cuts off negotiation forever
once a decision is reached.
John Gutfreund had been reduced to sitting in a small three-room office, where he answered his own phone
when his part-time secretary was away. He brooded over the fact that Susan, now dubbed “Marie
Antoinette” by the press, had told him not to resign—as if he had had an option—saying it would make him
unemployable. They had been cast out of the New York social set. The press had turned on him savagely, in
a way he had never imagined could happen, comparing him to felons like Boesky and Milken.64 Many of his
former friends had abandoned him. Unassisted by Salomon, he was running up huge bills to defend himself in
civil lawsuits.
Gutfreund wanted vindication through the arbitration. But a public raking and digging over the whole
Salomon mess, which might have salved his wounded pride, was guaranteed to alienate Buffett and make him
less likely to compromise. After Buffett had staked much of his image on Salomon, Gutfreund had let him
down, and to retell this story in an arbitration, covered at full yelp by a dogged press, could not possibly
inspire Buffett to reinterpret Gutfreund’s behavior more generously. Now that he and Gutfreund were no
longer partners, in Buffett’s special sense of the word, transgressions he might once have eventually forgiven
became larger with hindsight. They were many, and even without benefit of hindsight they were large:
• The stock-option repricing in 1987, which had cost Buffett so much money.
• The Sternlight “cocked gun” letter from the Fed, which Buffett had not learned about until it was too late.
• The meeting with Bob Glauber at the Treasury, when Gutfreund had kept silent, which had also been kept
from Buffett and the other board members.
• An equity plan that allowed an employee to keep his stock if fired for cause, which Gutfreund had put
before the board and shareholders late in that fateful spring of 1991.
Buffett felt the whole thing was a tragedy that should never have happened and that Gutfreund’s behavior
had been some sort of weird aberration. Although he normally avoided conflict, if forced into battle, his
proxies fought for him like cornered hyenas. Charlie Munger, who was inclined to say things such as that
Gutfreund made Napoleon look like a shrinking violet, was the appointed bad guy in the arbitration.65 His
testimony would be crucial, because he was the one who had negotiated with Gutfreund’s lawyer, Philip
Howard.
It was the young president of the New York Stock Exchange, Dick Grasso, who chose the three graying
arbitrators who would decide Gutfreund’s fate in a dingy conference room at the Exchange.66 A team of
lawyers from Cravath—backed by testimony from Salomon board members, employees, ex-employees,
Buffett, and Munger—began to pulverize Gutfreund in a process that took more than sixty sessions and
several months before the arbitrators.

Over and over, the arbitrators heard about the meeting between Munger and Philip Howard in which Howard
reviewed the list of compensations Gutfreund wanted and Munger listened in some fashion or another. All
agreed that Howard left without a signature on Gutfreund’s severance papers, but there was no agreement
about how to interpret the rest of the events of that evening. Howard was certain that Munger had made a
deal with him.
Gutfreund’s lawyers called Charlie Munger as a witness. Frank Barron of Cravath, Swaine & Moore had
attempted to prepare Munger, who was utterly impatient with the process. Although Barron had prepared
Munger by himself, Munger, a lawyer who disliked paying legal bills, extemporized to the arbitrators that, in
preparing him for testimony, Cravath had employed an excessive number of expensive paralegals and
“aspirin-carriers.”67 When he began to testify, every word that came out of his mouth “had nothing to do
with what we had gone over,” says Barron. “Putting Charlie Munger on the witness stand was the most
nerve-racking, hair-raising experience I ever had as a lawyer.”68
Munger’s confidence as a witness was unmatched. A number of times the lead abitrator, growing irritated,
admonished him: “Mr. Munger, would you please listen to the questions before you answer them.”
Munger insisted that on the night when he had met with Philip Howard, he was “deliberately not
listening…being polite, but I wasn’t paying much attention…I sort of turned off my mind…. I was just sitting
there politely with my head turned off.”
Gutfreund’s lawyers asked him whether he had made a conscious decision not to talk as well as not to listen.
“No,” said Munger, “when the time came to talk, I talked. One of my faults—I am fairly outspoken. I may
well have discussed some individual things that got through my band of indifference. This is one of my most
irritating conversational habits. It followed me through the course of my life.
“So every time something would get through and I would see a counterargument,” he said, he would give it.
Howard had asked for an indemnification for Gutfreund against lawsuits. Being a legal matter, this had gotten
through Munger’s band of indifference.
“I think I said to him, You don’t even know what you are going to need. God knows there will be litigation,
there will be a big mess, who knows how things are going to work out. You are misrepresenting your own
client if you think it makes sense to get into any of those issues at this time.”
Was that also a conversation in which you were tuning out? asked Gutfreund’s lawyer.
“No, I tend to tune in when I am speaking myself,” said Munger, under oath. “I tend to remember what I
say.”
Was this also a conversation in which you were deliberately not listening at various times?
“What did you say?” said Munger. “I just tuned out again, and I wasn’t doing it on purpose.”
Was this also a conversation in which at various times you were deliberately not listening?
“I am ashamed to say I have done it again. Will you please do it one more time? This time I will use an
effort.”
Gutfreund’s lawyer repeated the question for the third time.
“You bet,” said Munger. “I was going through the motions.”
In what mental state the arbitrators, the lawyers, and Gutfreund heard these words can only be imagined.
Regrettably, much of the misunderstanding seems to have lain in Philip Howard’s unfamiliarity with the
outward signs of the workings of Charlie Munger’s mind. He had labored that night under the illusion that he

and Munger were having a conversation. He did not recognize Munger’s occasional replies as intermittent
thought-bursts ignited by some random mite that had pierced Munger’s band of indifference. Whenever
Munger objected, Howard assumed they were negotiating, not that he was simply being lectured. When
Munger said nothing or emitted a grunt to move the conversation along, Howard inferred that Munger agreed,
or at least that he had no objection to whatever had just been said. Nobody had explained to him that
Munger’s head was turned off.
Gutfreund’s lawyer reminded Munger of Buffett’s testimony, in which he had acknowledged saying to
Gutfreund that he had the power to make all this happen. Did Mr. Munger recall Mr. Buffett saying that?
“I don’t remember Mr. Buffett’s words as well as I remember my own,” said Munger. “But certainly the gist
of the thing was that you can count on us to be fair.”69
The issue was what was meant by fair. Salomon never disputed that the money was Gutfreund’s and that he
had already earned it. The argument boiled down to whether Gutfreund would have been terminated had all
the facts been known. Thus, the case became an exercise in proving that Gutfreund should have been
terminated. Even Donald Feuerstein agreed that in concealing what he knew from Glauber, Gutfreund had
been dishonest with the government. Although everyone thought this bizarre and out-of-character behavior,
nonetheless, it had happened.
In fairness to Salomon, Gutfreund understood why the firm was expending so much effort to prove he should
have been fired. He knew it was in everybody’s interest to vilify him, but the lack of proportion bothered
him. At some point it should have ended, he thought.
Nonetheless, everyone, Buffett included, felt that Gutfreund was entitled to some of the money. Buffett had
Sam Butler, a fellow GEICO board member and friend of Gutfreund’s, call him twice and offer $14 million.
Butler whispered, “I can probably get you a little more.” Buffett would have gone to $18 million.70 But
Gutfreund had been humiliated by the process. He considered Charlie Munger mean-spirited and
self-righteous. He turned the offer down indignantly. The arbitrators would decide.
After months of testimony, lasting until spring 1994, the arbitrators were showing their impatience at the
endless, circular, and conflicting arguments, one side professing complete innocence and the other portraying
Gutfreund as an archfiend. Then, at the closing statements, Gutfreund’s lawyers showed up with a chart,
raising the demand to $56.3 million by adding interest, penalties, stock appreciation, and other items.
The lawyers and people involved at Salomon had set up a betting pool as the arbitration crawled at an
agonizingly slow pace toward its conclusion. How much money would the arbitrators give Gutfreund? The
lowest bet was $12 million. The highest was $22 million.71
No one will ever know what factors the arbitrators weighed in their decision. When the decision was
announced, they awarded Gutfreund nothing, not a dime.

50
The Lottery
Halfway Around the World • 1991–1995

Buffett’s testimony in Congress as the reformer and savior of Salomon had turned him from a rich investor
into a hero. Salomon was more than a simple white hats/black hats story. The success of his unorthodox

approach to scandal—embracing regulators and law enforcers instead of hunkering down—touched the
yearning for nobility in many people’s hearts: the dream that honesty is rewarded; that the besmirched can be
redeemed through honor. Even as the furor from the crisis died, Buffett’s star rose. Berkshire stock took off
on a meteoric streak, bursting past $10,000 a share. Buffett was now worth $4.4 billion. Susie’s stock alone
was worth $500 million. His original partners would now have $3.5 million for every $1,000 they had laid out
in 1957.
When Buffett walked into a room, the electricity was palpable. In his presence people felt brushed by
greatness. They wanted to touch him. They became dumbstruck before him, or babbled inane remarks. No
matter what he said, people listened uncritically.
“I was at my best at giving financial advice when I was twenty-one years old and people weren’t listening to
me. I could have gotten up there and said the most brilliant things and not very much attention would have
been paid to me. And now I can say the dumbest things in the world and a fair number of people will think
there’s some great hidden meaning to it or something.”
He went about surrounded by a little haze of fame. Reporters called all the time now. He was followed and
asked for his autograph, and photographers started to shadow him. Zsa Zsa Gabor wrote and asked for a
signed photo. As writers began working on books about Buffett, people who saw him every day—his
protectors—found the frenzy incomprehensible. A woman showed up at Berkshire’s office and began bowing
and scraping to him. Gladys Kaiser was overcome with annoyance. “Don’t bow to him!” she said.
Many Salomon employees and ex-employees, of course, were less impressed with Buffett than was the rest
of the world. He had reined in their freewheeling culture, ruined their bonus day; he disdained their business
and they knew it. Plenty of employees had unhappy stories to tell. Soon enough, the contrast between
Buffett’s aw-shucks image and his coldly rational side hit the radar screen of the national press. How to
explain the dichotomy between Buffett figuratively sitting on a front porch with a glass of lemonade, telling
folksy stories and teaching through homilies, and his long history of sophisticated business feats? What was
he doing as interim chairman of an investment bank while talking and writing about Wall Street as a gang of
con men, sharpies, and cheats?
What he was doing was trying to align the way people were paid at Salomon with the interests of
shareholders, but his concern about compensation was just one aspect of his fundamental objection to a
business in which almost every department had some sort of inherent conflict of interest with its customers.
And without decimating Salomon by jettisoning everything but proprietary trading, he could not do much
about that. But even by 1991, the Wall Street Journal and the New Republic1 took note of his straddling of
two worlds, and both ran stories pointing out the disparities between them. The mismatch between Buffett’s
representation of himself as a middle-class Midwesterner who had woken up in Oz and the elephant-bumping
in which he routinely engaged with his collection of jumbo-dumbo celebrity friends only heightened the
press’s eagerness to do some debunking. The Wall Street Journal story ran a sidebar to its article, “Buffett’s
Circle Includes the Moneyed and Powerful,” namedropping people like Walter Annenberg.2 Several of those
mentioned in the story later said they were misquoted. Among them were Tom Murphy and a new friend, Bill
Gates, CEO of Microsoft Corporation, who had gotten into a casual discussion with Murphy about how he
was being “ripped off,” as Charlie Munger put it, by the cost of producing television commercials. This
conversation, which took place at a Buffett Group meeting, was portrayed by the Journal as musing over
where the price of advertising was headed and what advertising rates should be, which might fall into a “gray
area of antitrust.”3 Buffett and his friends sparred with the Journal’s editors with little effect. Meanwhile,
Gates—who might have gotten annoyed at finding himself tangled in this public-relations mess involving
antitrust issues less than a year after the Federal Trade Commission had launched a probe into possible
collusion between Microsoft and IBM in the PC software marketplace—instead wrote Buffett an earnest
letter apologizing for having embarrassed him.4 At the time, Gates had known Buffett for less than five
months.
The two had met that summer over the Fourth of July holiday, when Kay Graham and her Washington Post
editorial-page editor and friend Meg Greenfield had dragged Buffett to Greenfield’s house on Bainbridge
