ed and it can be used to spot market divergences. A new high in
the Dow, for example, that is not matched by a corresponding new
high in the high-low line could be a sign of weakness in the broad-
er market. Trendline and moving-average analysis can be applied
to the line itself. But its major value is in either confirming or
diverging from the major stock trends and giving early warning of
potential trend changes in the overall market. Dr. Alexander Elder
describes the New High-New Low index as “probably the best lead-
ing indicator of the stock market” Trading for a Living, (Wiley).
Elder suggests plotting the indicator as a histogram with a
horizontal reference point at its zero line, making divergences eas-
ier to spot. He points out that crossings above and below the zero
line also reflect bullish and bearish shifts in market psychology.


Stock Market Indicators 443

UPSIDE VERSUS DOWNSIDE
VOLUME

This is the third and final piece of data that is utilized to mea-
sure the breadth of the market. The New York Stock Exchange
also provides the level of volume in both the advancing and
declining issues. That data is also available the next day in the
financial press. It is then possible to compare the upside vol-
ume versus the downside volume to measure which is domi-
nant at any given time. (See Figure 18.6.) The upside volume
and downside volume can be shown as two separate lines (just
as we did with the new highs and new lows figures) or the dif-
ference can be shown as a single line. Either way, the interpre-
tation is always the same. When the upside volume is domi-

Up Volume (10 Day Average)

Down Volume (10 Day Average)

bh TApel May Mune Wuly Taunuat” sep" “oatober” Nov’ Decomberliene February March

Figure 18.6 A 10 day average of stock market upside volume (dark line)
versus downside volume. A strong market should have more upside than
downside volume.


444 Chapter 18

nant, the market is strong. When downside volume is greater,
the market is weak. It’s possible to combine the number of
advancing and declining issues with advancing and declining
volume. That’s what Richard Arms did in the creation of the
Arms Index.

THE ARMS INDEX

The Arms Index, named after its creator Richard Arms, is a ratio
of a ratio. The numerator is the ratio of the number of advancing
issues divided by the number of declining issues. The denomina-
tor is the advancing volume divided by declining volume. The
purpose of the Arms Index is to gauge whether there’s more vol-
ume in rising or falling stocks. A reading below 1.0 indicates
more volume in rising stocks and is positive. A reading above 1.0
reflects more volume in declining issues and is negative. On an
intraday basis, a very high Arms Index reading is positive, while
a very low reading is negative. The Arms Index, therefore, is a
contrary indicator that trends in the opposite direction of the
market. It can be used for intraday trading by tracking its direc-
tion and for spotting signs of short term market extremes. (See
Figure 18.7.)

TRIN VERSUS TICK

The Arms Index (TRIN) can be used in conjunction with the TICK
indicator for intraday trading. TICK measures the difference
between the number of stocks trading on an uptick versus the
number trading on a downtick. The TICK is a minute-by-minute
version of the daily advance-decline line and is used for the same
purpose. When combining the two during the day, a rising TICK
indicator and a falling Arms Index (TRIN) are positive, while a
falling TICK indicator and a rising Arms Index (TRIN) are nega-
tive. The Arms Index, however, can also be used for longer range
analysis.


Stock Market Indicators 445

co 530,
‘$20
New York Composite Index E ae
cc 400,
E a0
— 470,
— 4
E aso
440
c 430)
a)
a 410
om 400:
a 300)
ae)
cc a70
Cc 30
Cc 350:
aa 340)
ee)
E 22
Arms Index at
E 20
E 19)
Eis
E 17
Ee 18
E 18]
Eta
| E43
coal 12]
wal MND cil WE
i i FE rs)
E 08
E or
= 08
10 di om Os
E ry)
aa 3
hecember "hee? Fetrusy” Darch bet Pay: Tune. Tay Tugast”  Beptamber  ocmber

Figure 18.7 | The Arms Index (also called TRIN) trends in the opposite
direction of the market. Exceptionally high spikes usually signal market bot-
toms. A 10-day moving average of the Arms Index is a popular way to view
this contrary indicator.

SMOOTHING THE ARMS INDEX

While the Arms Index is quoted throughout the trading day and
has some short term forecasting value, most traders use a 10 day
moving average of its values. According to Arms himself, a 10 day
average of the Arms Index above 1.20 is considered oversold,
while a 10 day Arms value below .70 is overbought, although
those numbers may shift depending on the overall trend of the
market. Arms expresses a preference for Fibonacci numbers as
well. He suggests using a 21 day Arms Index in addition to the 10
day version. He also utilizes 21 day and 55 day moving-average
crossovers of the Arms Index to generate good intermediate term


446 Chapter 18

trades. For more in-depth treatment, read The Arms Index (TRIN)
by Richard W. Arms, Jr.

OPEN ARMS

In calculating the 10 day Arms Index, each day’s closing value is
determined using the four inputs and that final value is smoothed
with a 10 day moving average. In the “Open” version of the Arms
Index, each of the four components in the formula is averaged
separately over a period of 10 days. The Open Arms Index is then
calculated from those four different averages. Many analysts pre-
fer the Open Arms version to the original version. Different mov-
ing average lengths, like 21 and 55 days, can also be applied to the
Open Arms version. (See Figure 18.8.)

E 20
510
‘500

New York Composite index E bd

FE 470)
- «eo
F 450]
E 4
F aaa)
E aaa
E 10
E «to
EF 360)
f 300
cb (30
E 380
E 350
EF (30
nr)
a)
Es
E 1.90]
E 128
E 120
E 18
E 105
E 109
E 0.96
Open Arms index - 10 day E gga
E aes
ioy "Tne Dhay Viugeie” Bog” Bese” Rev" Tone” Woot” Fao” Mace” Wed "Wanye ay Turgut’ beep

Figure 18.8 The 10 day Open Arms Index gives a much smoother look to
this indicator, but still trends in the opposite direction of the market. A cross-
ing of its 10-day moving average (darker line) often signals turning points.


Stock Market Indicators 447

EQUIVOLUME CHARTING

Although Arms is best known for creating the Arms Index, he has
also pioneered other ways of combining price and volume analy-
sis. In doing so, he created an entirely new form of charting called
Equivolume. In the traditional bar chart, the day’s trading range is
shown on the price bar with the volume bar plotted at the bottom
of the chart. Since technical analysts combine price and volume
analysis, they have to look at both parts of the chart at the same
time. On the Equivolume chart, each price bar is shown as a rec-
tangle. The height of the rectangle measures the day’s trading
range. The width of the rectangle is determined by that day’s vol-
ume. Heavier volume days produce a wider rectangle. Lighter vol-
ume days are reflected in a narrower rectangle. (See Figure 18.9.)

Equivotume Chart (intel)

tia

tember lovember 908 rebruary,

BSSSSAxAAVaAaAATSSRSLAFSSSSLSBLSSIeSSs

Figure 18.9 Equivolume charts combine price and volume. The width of
each rectangle (daily bar) is determined by the volume. Wider rectangles
show heavier volume. The rectangles started to widen during Intel’s last sell-
off—a negative sign.


448 Chapter 18

As a rule, a bullish price breakout should always be accom-
panied by a burst of trading activity. On an Equivolume chart,
therefore, a bullish price breakout should be accompanied by a
noticeably wider rectangle. Equivolume charting combines price
and volume analysis into one chart and makes for much easier
comparisons between price and volume. In an uptrend, for exam-
ple, up days should see wider rectangles while down days should
see narrower rectangles. Equivolume charting can be applied to
market averages as well as individual stocks and can be plotted for
both daily and weekly charts. For more information, consult
Volume Cycles in the Stock Market by Richard Arms (Dow Jones-
Irwin, 1983).

CANDLEPOWER

In Chapter 12, Greg Morris explained candlestick charting. In a
1990 article published in Technical Analysis of Stocks and
Commodities magazine entitled “East Meets West: CandlePower
Charting,” Morris proposed combining candlestick charts with
Arms’ Equivolume charting method. Morris’ version shows the
candlestick chart in an Equivolume format. In other words, the
width of the candlestick is determined by the volume. The greater
the volume, the wider the candlestick. Morris called the combi-
nation CandlePower charting. Quoting from the article: “. . . the
CandlePower chart offers similar if not better information than
Equivolume or candlestick charting and is as visually appealing as
either of them.” Morris’ CandlePower technique is available on
Metastock charting software (published by Equis International,
3950 S. 700 East, Suite 100, Salt Lake City, UT 84107 [800] 882-
3040, www.equis.com). However its name has been changed to
Candlevolume. (See Figure 18.10.)


Stock Market Indicators 449

CandlePower Chart (Inte!)

" h
“hy

{ f
yl id Lh

tember lovember 1998 ‘ebruary jerch

RBISSSANAVATITTISSRBLSRVSSSLSSLKSSSSSe

SARA DABS At Ad AAAS AOS GE ASA dE O08 ba Bd BO Od Ok BB Bk Bd Bd BD BBG

Figure 18.10 A CandlePower chart (also called Candlevolume) combines
equivolume and candlesticks. The width of each candle (daily bar) is deter-
mined by volume.

COMPARING MARKET AVERAGES

At the start of the chapter, we mentioned that another way to
gauge market breadth was to compare the different market aver-
ages themselves. We’re talking here primarily about the Dow
Industrials, the S&P 500, the New York Stock Exchange Index, the
Nasdaq Composite, and the Russell 2000. Each measures a slight-
ly different portion of the market. The Dow and the S&P 500 cap-
ture the trends of a relatively small number of large capitalization
stocks. The NYSE Composite Index includes all stocks traded on
the New York Stock Exchange, and gives a slightly broader per-
spective. Breakouts in the Dow Industrials should, as a rule, be
confirmed by similar breakouts in both the S&P 500 and the NYSE
Composite Index if the breakout is to have staying power.


450 Chapter 18

Most important divergences involve the Nasdaq and the
Russell 2000. The Nasdaq Composite has the largest number of
stocks (5000). However, since the Nasdaq is a capitalization-
weighted index, it is usually dominated by the one hundred
largest technology stocks like Intel and Microsoft. Because of that,
the Nasdaq is more often a measure of the direction of the tech-
nology sector. The Russell 2000 is a truer measure of the smaller
stock universe. Both indexes, however, should be trending
upward along with the Dow and the S&P 500 if the trend of the
market is truly healthy.

Relative strength (RS) analysis plays a useful role here. A
ratio of the Nasdaq to the S&P 500 tells us whether the technolo-
gy stocks are leading or lagging. It’s usually better for the market
if they’re leading and the ratio line is rising. (See Figure 18.11.) A

Nasdaq / S&P 500 Ratio

Nasdaq Is
leading

bh Taba!” "Biay " "Tune "ay" Tasgust” Isao" Besooer” Nov" beosmberliabs”  Februsnyhaach

Figure 18.11 The Nasdaq/S&P 500 ratio tells us whether technology
stocks are leading or lagging the market. It’s usually better for the market
when the ratio line is rising.


Stock Market Indicators 451

comparison of the Russell 2000 and the S&P 500 tells us whether
the “troops” are following the “generals.” When the small stocks
are showing poor relative strength, or are lagging too far behind
the large stocks, that’s often a warning that market breadth is
weakening. (See Figure 18.12.)

Dow Industrials

Russell 2000

In” Tape” "Way ” "Dune" ‘uly ” ” Tauguet” Sep’ Baton hav’ besnberlioge” "Febuary bterch

Figure 18.12 An overlay comparison of the small cap Russell 2000 and
the large cap Dow. It’s usually better when both lines are rising together.


452 Chapter 18

CONCLUSION

Another example of comparing two market averages for signs of
confirmation or divergence involves the Dow Theory. In Chapter
2, we discussed the importance of the relationship between the
Dow Industrials and the Dow Transports. A Dow Theory buy sig-
nal is present when both averages hit new highs. When one
diverges from the other, a caution signal is given. It can be seen
then that the study of market breadth, and the related issues of
confirmation and divergence, can take many forms. The general
tule to follow is that the greater the number of stock market aver-
ages that are trending in the same direction, the greater the
chances are for that trend continuing. In addition, be sure to
check the advance-decline line, the new highs-new lows line, and
the upside-downside volume lines to make sure that they're also
trending in the same direction.


As this book has demonstrated, technical analysis is a blend of
many approaches. Each approach adds something to the analyst's
knowledge of the market. Technical analysis is much like putting
together a giant jigsaw puzzle. Each technical tool holds a piece of
the puzzle. My approach to market analysis is to combine as many
techniques as possible. Each works better in certain market situa-
tions. The key is knowing which tools to emphasize in the current
situation. That comes with knowledge and experience.

All of these approaches overlap to some extent and com-
plement one another. The day the user sees these interrelation-
ships, and is able to view technical analysis as the sum of its parts,
is the day that person deserves the title of technical analyst. The
following checklist is provided to help the user touch all the
bases, at least in the early going. Later on, the checklist becomes
second nature. The checklist is not all-inclusive, but does have
most of the more important factors to keep in mind. Sound mar-

453


454

Chapter 19

ket analysis seldom consists of doing the obvious. The technician
is constantly seeking clues to future market movement. The final
clue that leans the trader in one direction or the other is often
some minor factor that has gone largely unnoticed by others. The
more factors the analyst considers, the better the chances of find-
ing that right clue.

TECHNICAL CHECKLIST

1.
. What is the direction of the various market sectors?
- What are the weekly and monthly charts showing?

wh

OMAN AN

What is the direction of the overall market?

Are the major, intermediate, and minor trends up, down,
or sideways?

. Where are the important support and resistance levels?

. Where are the important trendlines or channels?

. Are volume and open interest confirming the price action?
. Where are the 33%, 50%, and 66% retracements?

. Are there any price gaps and what type are they?

10.
11.
12.
13.
14,
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Are there any major reversal patterns visible?

Are there any continuation patterns visible?

What are the price objectives from those patterns?
Which way are the moving averages pointing?

Are the oscillators overbought or oversold?

Are any divergences apparent on the oscillators?
Are contrary opinion numbers showing any extremes?
What is the Elliot Wave pattern showing?

Are there any obvious 3 or 5 wave patterns?

What about Fibonacci retracements or projections?
Are there any cycle tops or bottoms due?

Is the market showing right or left translation?


Pulling It All Together—A Checklist 455

22. Which way is the computer trend moving: up, down, or
sideways?
23. What are the point and figure charts or candlesticks showing?

After you've arrived at a bullish or bearish conclusion, ask
yourself the following questions.

1. Which way will this market trend over the next several
months?

Am I going to buy or sell this market?

How many units will I trade?

How much am I prepared to risk if I’m wrong?
What is my profit objective?

Where will I enter the market?

What type of order will I use?

Where will I place my protective stop?

SNAP WN

Going through the checklist won’t guarantee the right
conclusions. It’s only meant to help you ask the right ques-
tions. Asking the right questions is the surest way of finding the
right answers. The keys to successful trading are knowledge, dis-
cipline, and patience. Assuming that you have the knowledge,
the best way to achieve discipline and patience is doing your
homework and having a plan of action. The final step is putting
that plan of action to work. Even that won’t guarantee success,
but it will greatly increase the odds of winning in the financial
markets.

HOW TO COORDINATE
TECHNICAL AND
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

Despite the fact that technicians and fundamentalists are often at
odds with one another, there are ways they can work together for


456 Chapter 19

mutual benefit. Market analysis can be approached from either
direction. While I believe that technical factors do lead the known
fundamentals, I also believe that any important market move
must be caused by underlying fundamental factors. Therefore, it
simply makes sense for a technician to have some awareness of
the fundamental condition of a market. If nothing else, the tech-
nician can inquire from his or her fundamental counterpart as to
what would have to happen fundamentally to justify a significant
market move identified on a price chart. In addition, seeing how
the market reacts to fundamental news can be used as an excel-
lent technical indication.

The fundamental analyst can use technical factors to con-
firm an analysis or as an alert that something important may be
happening. The fundamentalist can consult a price chart or use a
computer trend-following system as a filter to prevent him or her
from assuming a position opposite an existing trend. Some
unusual action on a price chart can act as an alert for the funda-
mental analyst and cause him or her to examine the fundamental
situation a bit closer. During my years in the technical analysis
department of a major brokerage firm, I often approached our
fundamental department to discuss some market move that
seemed imminent on the price charts. I often received responses
like “that can never happen” or “no way.” Very often, that same
person was scrambling a couple of weeks later to find fundamen-
tal reasons to explain a sudden and “anexpected” market move.
There's obviously room for much more coordination and cooper-
ation in this area.

CHARTERED MARKET
TECHNICIAN (CMT)

A lot of people use technical analysis and offer opinions on the
technical condition of the various markets. But are they really
qualified to do so? How would you know? After all, you wouldn’t
go to a doctor who didn’t have a medical degree on the wail. Nor


Pulling it All Together—A Checklist 457

would you consult a lawyer who hadn’t passed the bar exam. Your
accountant is undoubtedly a CTA. If you asked a security analyst
for an assessment on a common stock, you would certainly make
sure that he or she was a Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA). Why
wouldn’t you take the same precautions with a technical analyst?

The Market Technicians Association (MTA) resolved this
question by instituting a Chartered Market Technician (CMT) pro-
gram. The CMT program is a three step examination process that
qualifies the analyst to carry the CMT letters after his or her name.
Most professional technical analysts have gone through the pro-
gram. The next time someone offers you his or her technical opin-
ion, ask to see the CMT.

MARKET TECHNICIANS
ASSOCIATION (MTA)

The Market Technicians Association (MTA) is the oldest and best
known technical society in the world. It was founded in 1972 to
encourage the exchange of technical ideas, educate the public and
the investment community, and establish a code of ethics and pro-
fessional standards among technical analysts. (On March 11, 1998
the MTA celebrated the 25th birthday of its incorporation. The
event was highlighted by a special presentation at the New York
monthly meeting by three of the organization’s founding mem-
bers—Ralph Acampora, John Brooks, and John Greeley.) MTA
membership includes full-time technical analysts and other inter-
ested parties (called affiliates). Monthly meetings are held in New
York (Market Technicians Association, Inc., One World Trade
Center, Suite 4447, New York, NY 10048 (212) 912-0995, e-mail:
shelleymta@aol.com), and an annual seminar is held each May at
various locations around the country. Members have access to the
MTA library and a computer bulletin board. A monthly newsletter
and a periodic MTA Journal are published. Some regional chapters
have even been formed. MTA members also become colleagues of
the International Federation of Technical Analysts (IFTA).


458 Chapter 19

THE GLOBAL REACH OF
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

During the fall of 1985, a meeting was held in Japan with techni-
cal representatives of several different countries to draft a consti-
tution for the International Federation of Technical Analysts
(IFTA, Post Office Box 1347, New York, NY 10009 USA). Since
then, the organization has grown to include technical analysis
organizations from more than twenty countries. One of the nice
things about being a member is that annual meetings are held in
places like Australia, Japan, Paris, and Rome since a different
national organization hosts each seminar. I’m proud to say that in
1992 I received the first award ever given at an IFTA conference
for “outstanding contribution to global technical analysis.”

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS BY
ANY NAME

After a century of use in this country (and 300 years in Japan),
technical analysis is more popular than ever. Of course, it’s not
always called technical analysis. In my book, The Visual Investor, I
called it visual analysis. That was simply an attempt to get people
beyond the intimidating title of technical analysis and to get
them to examine this valuable approach more closely. Whatever
you want to call it, technical analysis is practiced under many
names. A lot of financial organizations employ analysts whose job
it is to number-crunch market prices to find stocks or stock groups
that are expensive (overbought) or cheap (oversold). They’re
called quantitative analysts, but the numbers they crunch are
often the same ones the technicians are crunching. The financial
press has written about a “new” class of trader called “momen-
tum” players. These traders move funds out of stocks and stock
groups that are showing poor momentum and into those that are
showing good momentum. They use a technique called relative
strength. Of course, we recognize “momentum” and “Telative
strength” as technical terms.
