
176

Currency Strategy

in August 1993 the governments of the ERM countries gave in and widened the ERM currency
trading bands to ±15% from ±2.25%, thus de facto allowing a depreciation of their currencies
against the ERM anchor, the Deutschmark. The idea of recrimination after a currency crisis is
thought of these days as a feature of the emerging markets, indeed currency crises themselves
are thought of as an emerging market phenomenon. Thus, it is important to remember the sense
of outrage, fury and a desire almost for vengeance that permeated ofﬁcial Europe in the wake
of that exchange rate band widening. The enemy of the European project, of the European
dream of integration and eventual uniﬁcation was clear, and it was “Anglo-Saxon” speculators.
After the ERM crises of 1992–1993 however, it was indeed the turn of the emerging markets
to see one currency crisis after another. Here the sense of betrayal at the hands of the “market”
was particularly acute because many emerging market countries had adopted free market
practices precisely to progress economically and eventually bridge the perceived gap between
the emerging and developed worlds. Thus, the 1994–1995 currency crisis in Mexico was a very
rude awakening indeed, not just for Mexico and its neighbours but also for the emerging market
countries as a whole. After that, came the Czech koruna currency crisis in 1996–1997. Like the
Mexican peso, it was pegged to a base currency. In the Czech case this was the Deutschemark,
and like the Mexican peso it eventually was forced to de-peg from that base currency and
promptly collapsed.
In 1997–1998, the Asian currency crisis exploded on the international scene. I remember it
in the context that I was living and working in Hong Kong when it took place. It is an important
realization in discussing the subject of currency speculation that countries facing a currency
crisis experience a stage of siege followed by something very akin to bitter defeat. Blame is
sought, or more accurately in some cases scapegoats are found. It is easy to forget in the 24/7
information society that we now live in just how that time was. It was a time of high drama and
higher emotion. In September of 1997, the IMF held its annual meetings in Hong Kong (for the
most part in the huge, new exhibition and conference centre made famous by the signing of the
Handover of Hong Kong from the UK to China in that same year). The Thai baht had devalued
on July 2 of that year and thereafter most Asian currency counterparts followed suit, albeit
unwillingly. Answers to this crisis were sought and not surprisingly many were found, of varying accuracy. At those meetings, in front of a packed audience, the Malaysian Prime Minister
Dr. Mahathir Mohammed, in all else a most erudite and educated man, thundered that currency
trading was “unnecessary, unproductive and immoral”, that it should be “banned . . . it should be
made illegal”, that the proﬁts of currency speculation “came from the impoverishing of others”.
It should be reiterated that it was a time of high emotion, a keen sense of betrayal and
great pain. Asian economies up until then had been viewed as the model for emerging markets
generally within the ofﬁcial community. The World Bank itself coined the phrase the “Asian
miracle” — as close as the ofﬁcial community has ever come to verbal irrational exuberance —
to deﬁne the Asian boom from 1985 to 1996. Asia was a success story for other regions within
the emerging markets to only hope of emulating. Indeed, the Asian-related optimism, both
within and without, went so far as to have the western media suggest that the economic centre
of power was shifting from the West to the East. Given all the fundamental progress made
and the resulting praise globally, how else to explain Asia’s collapse in 1997–1998 other than
by malign, almost “terrorist” means? Indeed, the terrorist analogy was used speciﬁcally at
the height of the crisis to describe the suspected hand of unnamed evil forces at work. While
the remarks by Dr. Mahathir were undoubtedly the most prominent in reﬂecting the backlash
within Asian countries against the perceived evil of currency speculation, they were by no
means the only example of this backlash. In Thailand, there was talk that the Bank of Thailand

Managing Currency Risk III

177

was keeping a “black book” of suspected foreign banks which had speculated against the
Thai baht, though the Bank of Thailand denied the existence of such a list. In Indonesia,
the Indonesian Justice Minister was reported as considering that currency speculators could
face subversion charges if their activities were found to damage the economy, and that the
ultimate penalty for economic or political subversion was death. At around the same time,
the Indonesian Republika newspaper published a public service announcement featuring a
westerner (presumably a currency speculator) wearing a terrorist mask and kefﬁyah in the
form of US 100 dollar bills, with an underlying question “Are you a terrorist of this country?”
Indonesians were exhorted to “Defend the Rupiah, defend the nation”. Even in the Philippines,
where the authorities had traditionally taken a benign view of market forces, there was some
suggestion of blaming foreign speculators.
The effort to ﬁnd blame for the calamities which befell the region in 1997–1998 reﬂected
not only the political desire to ﬁnd convenient scapegoats and lay the blame on others, but also
a deep sense of injustice and anger at the way Asia had been treated and abused by ﬁnancial
markets, at the way much of Asia’s economic progress over decades had been destroyed so
savagely in so little time. Initially, it was more expedient to blame foreign speculators for the
Asian currency crisis than to try to discover the fundamental economic reasons why the crisis
should have happened, since the latter might have involved laying some of the blame at the feet
of the Asian governments themselves. This was not only for politically pragmatic reasons, but
also more seriously for reasons of political survival. It should be seen as no coincidence that
the dictator Soeharto was overthrown in the aftermath of the Asian crisis. Equally, in Thailand,
a series of corrupt governments gave way to signiﬁcant political reform and the administration
of Chuan Leepkai. Needless to say, there may have been some Asian governments opposed
to such ideas of change, preferring the old social pact of stability and prosperity. The only
problem with this was that there was no longer any prosperity. Whoever was to blame for it,
the Asian currency crisis impoverished millions. After the crisis, it was said that in Indonesia
the economic work of three decades had been all but wiped out, and that as a result half the
country lived in a state of absolute poverty as deﬁned by the World Bank, living on USD1 a day.
An ofﬁcial backlash against currency speculation was certainly not limited to the Asian crisis
or to the emerging markets as a whole. Following sterling’s ejection from the ERM in September
1992, the UK government’s ﬁrst public reaction was to blame the German central bank for either
not coming to the aid of the UK in defending the ERM parity, or in fact deliberately seeking
its ejection. There was talk that the Bank of England was drawing up a list of banks which
had played a part in speculating against sterling — a ridiculous measure given that the whole
market had been selling sterling and the Bank of England had effectively been the only buyer.
Equally, after the forced widening of the ERM bands to 15% on August 1, 1993, the hysterical
reaction by ofﬁcials within the French and German governments, lambasting the implied
devaluation of the ERM currencies as the result of nefarious activities by heinous “AngloSaxon speculators” — presumably the German ofﬁcials simultaneously forgetting their own
ethnic origins — would have made Asian government comments seem tentative by comparison.
Europe’s best and brightest didn’t only talk either. Some of them sought to punish those who had
dared go against their precious plans for currency union, by keeping interest rates at punitive
levels subsequent to the band widening — in the process, hurting the “innocent” along with
the “guilty”.
In Asia, the response was also not just verbal. Thailand created a two-tier foreign exchange
and interest rate system, while the Philippines and Indonesia slapped on limits to swap market
trading and Malaysia went so far as to ban offshore trading in the ringgit and peg it at MYR3.80

178

Currency Strategy

to the US dollar. While the dividing line is somewhat thin, these measures were not so much
aimed at punishing speculators after the fact as they were efforts at self-defence during the
climax of the speculation and panic. The reaction to the Asian crisis by governments was
initially in many cases one of recrimination, however with one notable exception that eventually
turned to one of pragmatism and the realization of a need for accelerated reform. The essence
of Asia’s ofﬁcial protest at its rough handling was two-fold: ﬁrstly, a natural reaction to such
treatment whatever the reasons, and secondly an issue of control — the authorities had lost
control, or at least a high degree of it, and the market had gained it. Of necessity, control is
a subject close to the heart of any government or central bank. This was the case in Europe
after the two ERM crises, and it was also the case with Asia. Control was relevant not only
for economic reasons but also because the previously strong growth had masked or postponed
underlying political and social problems.
The Asian currency crisis was followed swiftly by the Russian currency crisis of August
1998. It is interesting if not amusing to remember now that a high-ranking Russian ofﬁcial said
at the 1997 IMF annual meetings in Hong Kong (which I attended) that the Asian crisis had
prompted a re-think of currency policies generally, and of Russia’s in particular. That Russia
would not act immediately but would clearly have to reconsider their exchange rate policy in
the face of such events. Politicians say a lot of things, but that is not to say that they actually
do them. In the case of Russia, clearly the process of reconsideration was neither speedy
nor decisive enough. In August 1998, the Russian rouble de-pegged from the US dollar and
collapsed, and Russia defaulted on its domestic debt. This was followed shortly by a currency
crisis on the other side of the world, in Brazil. In January of 1999, the Brazilian real also
de-pegged and collapsed in value. It seemed to some almost as if some immense and malign
force was at work, triggering currency crises and devaluations and in the process setting these
countries back years if not decades in terms of economic progress. Just to bring this book
up-to-date, in February of 2001, the Turkish lira experienced the same fate, de-pegging against
the US dollar from 600,000 and falling to a low of around 1.65 million in October of that
year.
It is without doubt that these experiences over the last 10 years have coloured our judgement
and opinion on the subject of currency speculation. It would be difﬁcult for that not to happen.
The aim here, in this chapter, is therefore to attempt a difﬁcult task, namely that of looking at
the issue of currency speculation from a fair and unbiased perspective. At the offset, I must say
if it is not already clear, that as a currency strategist in a global investment bank I am obviously
(to a limited extent!) a participant in the currency market. My own experience should also be
taken into account. That said, I am no more biased than anyone in the ofﬁcial community on
this issue. They have their (biased) perspective, a currency strategist has his/her own. Moreover
I have considerably more experience of seeing currency speculation than many, certainly most
within the ofﬁcial community. With that in mind, the aim here is neither to see currency
speculation as a benign or as a malign force. Rather, it is ﬁrst to draw the fangs of emotion and
morality from the debate and then to seek a balanced, unemotional and practical perspective
of this issue of currency speculation. The very ﬁrst thing one has to do in this regard is to seek
some sort of deﬁnition for what one is talking about. There are probably as many deﬁnitions
of this issue as there are people on the planet, however clearly that is not helpful. The broad
deﬁnition I have used so far in the book is the following:
Currency speculation is the trading in currencies with no underlying attached asset
This is of course far from a perfect deﬁnition. However, any weakness of this deﬁnition does
not detract from our essential need to have a deﬁnition in order to put this whole debate — and

Managing Currency Risk III

179

indeed this chapter — in context. This is clearly not the only kind of currency speculation, but
it is a useful reference, not least for the incentive of a currency speculator. Their main aim has
nothing to do with an underlying, attached asset such as an equity or ﬁxed income product.
Their aim is purely to achieve what academic text books suggest is impossible — consistent
excess returns from currency directional trading.

9.2 SIZE MATTERS
So armed with this deﬁnition, however inadequate, let us now look at the issue of currency
speculation in more depth. The second aspect of currency speculation to realize is its size. On
the face of it, it is immense. The global currency markets turn over some USD1.2 trillion in
daily volume, according to the 2001 report by the Bank of International Settlements. That is
the rough equivalent of world trade in global goods and services every day. In the last two
decades, as barriers to capital have broken down and capital markets become liberalized, in
line with the move to liberalize trade in goods and services, capital ﬂows have played an
increasingly important role in global currency markets. By comparison, world trade has seen
its role diminish proportionally as a determining factor in exchange rate movement. Trying to
work out the percentages of global currency volume is very far from an exact science given
that one is faced with issues such as double counting and so forth. Nevertheless, it is possible
to get a rough idea of the relative ﬂow importance of the different sectors of the market. Put
together, and being generous rather than conservative in one’s estimation, world trade and
investment (portfolio and direct) makes up around 30% of currency market volume. The rest,
using our deﬁnition, is currency speculation, with no underlying asset behind it. I have not the
slightest doubt that these ﬁgures will cause debate, if not outright rejection. The truth however
is that I have been charitable and generous with the ﬁrst half of the equation, that of trade
and investment. The imbalance in favour of currency speculation should actually not be that
surprising. If one thinks about it, the economic text book deﬁnition of a currency speculator as
a liquidity provider to the productive areas of the economy might suggest an eventual 50/50
role between the two sides. The liberalization and deregulation process seen over the last three
decades has meant that we have gone far beyond that.

9.3 MYTHS AND REALITIES
On the face of it, this may seem only to conﬁrm the worst fears of those who see currency
speculation as an intrinsically malign force, ready to bring down currency systems and governments on a whim. Surely, if currency speculation is such a dominating force within the
global currency markets, then it is currency speculation that is responsible for currency crises.
Following on with this logic, some may take the view that action should be taken to ensure
that currency speculation cannot cause such devastation and damage again! On the face of it,
these are understandable conclusions. However, just because they are understandable does not
make them right. Indeed, I would suggest that they are at best overly simplistic and at worst
ﬂatly wrong for the following reasons:

r Currency speculation does not act or take place in a vacuum. Rather it is a response to
changes in fundamental or technical dynamics.

r The essential aim of currency speculation is not to bring down governments, nor to hurt
countries economically, nor for that matter to break currency pegs. Simply put, the aim is to
make money, pure and simple.

180

Currency Strategy

r Currency speculation therefore is neither benign nor malign. Both of these terms have
emotional if not moral connotations. Currency speculation is amoral. It aims to make money,
whether buying or selling a currency, and it will do that in direct and proportional response
to government economic policy.
r In cases such as currency crises where substantial destruction is caused, currency speculation is the symptom rather than the underlying disease. Indeed, in the case of the UK in
1992, currency speculation was the cure to the disease, which was a ridiculously overvalued
exchange rate value of sterling within the ERM.
r Currency speculation does indeed provide a valuable service, in giving liquidity to the
productive areas of the economy.
r The idea that a speculator is a seller and an investor is a buyer is worse than nonsense. It is
propaganda designed to cover policy mistakes.
r In line with this, there are many more kinds of speculation than just currency speculation.
Was not the NASDAQ bubble of 1999–2000 speculation? When Alan Greenspan dared to
try to temper that irrational exuberance did he not get shouted down by the public and by
congress?
This chapter is for both those who seek a clearer understanding of currency speculation, why
and how it takes place, and also for the currency speculators themselves. The latter is done
with some humility for there are currency speculators who are amongst the most revered and
respected — and honourable — participants within the currency markets. In my career, I have
met many of these and many are amongst the most brilliant minds out there. Thus it is with
care that I have the temerity to suggest that some of these still have a few things to learn about
the currency markets! That said, another perspective is always useful. I have certainly found
that myself. My experience is as someone who has followed the currency markets for the last
decade, ﬁrst as a journalist, then as an analyst, then as a manager of a currency business and
ﬁnally as a currency strategist for an investment bank. Perspective is important and being able
to look at an issue from several different angles sometimes critical. Thus, I hope I can say that
I have gained immeasurably from the wisdom of my economist colleagues. We look at the same
question from two completely different perspectives. Equally, it is my hope that even some of
the most experienced currency speculators may gain from my no doubt different perspective.

9.4 THE SPECULATORS — WHO THEY ARE
Much has been written about currency speculators in the past, much of it with a few rare
exceptions utter nonsense. As noted above, the very term “speculator” can create an emotional
reaction. Here, in this section, we seek a dispassionate analysis of just who are the currency
speculators, how and why they operate and their function within the overall currency market.
The benchmark for this analysis is obviously the deﬁnition of currency speculation given
earlier; that is someone who trades in currencies without an underlying, attached asset. Trade
and investment do not count because of necessity they have attached, underlying assets. What is
left — the vast majority — in currency market volume is speculation. So who takes part in this
activity? Broadly speaking, currency speculators can be divided into the following main groups.
9.4.1 Interbank Dealers
This group makes up the vast majority of currency speculation and therefore of the currency
market as a whole. The primary task of an interbank dealer is to provide liquidity and make
@Team-FLY

Managing Currency Risk III

181

markets in currencies for the bank’s clients. The principle is that all client positions have to be
offset in the market (i.e. if a client sells you Euros against dollars, you the dealer are buying
the Euros and therefore have to sell those Euros back to the market to keep a ﬂat exposure).
In theory, the proﬁt you make is the difference between your bid and the market’s offer. In
practice, as bid–offer spreads have narrowed substantially, there has been a general shift within
the currency markets towards keeping some exposures one gains or loses from clients in order
to take speculative positions in the market to support the P&L of the dealing desk. In addition, a
dealing desk can use the bank’s balance sheet to take speculative positions irrespective of client
ﬂow. Thus, while the reduction in bid–offer spread has reﬂected greatly increased information
transparency and competition in the market, it has also resulted in a move to increase the
“position taking” of an interbank or liquidity dealing desk. Such position taking may be more
proﬁtable, and there is no question that it is when a highly experienced and professional chief
dealer is in charge. However, this move has also undoubtedly added to the volatility of the
dealing desk’s P&L. Equally, it may also have added to overall market volatility.
This may seem a contradiction, as narrower spreads should be a reﬂection of greater volume
and liquidity. However, the reality is that as those spreads have narrowed, so position taking
has increased. Larger positions are taken on by interbank dealing desks in order to maintain
or boost P&L, and therefore as a result larger positions have to be unwound during periods of
adverse price action. Equally, those narrow spreads can be an illusion. For instance, the normal
spread in spot Euro–dollar may be one pip — i.e. 0.8910/11 — but try transacting USD500
million in that spread when the spot exchange rate is moving two or three “big ﬁgures” — 0.89
to 0.90 — a day!
Readers should note that when I say interbank dealers, I mean currency forward and options
dealers as well as spot dealers. These also take positions as well as provide liquidity for the
bank’s clients. Here too, like any market where competition has increased over time, spreads
have narrowed and the emphasis to position taking has shifted proportionally. In addition, as
the needs of clients have changed and become signiﬁcantly more speciﬁc and sophisticated,
so there has also been a move by forward and options interbank dealing desks to meet these
needs with more exotic forward and options structures. The advantage for the bank concerned
is that the spreads on these products are usually larger than those for plain vanilla forwards
or options. However, markets work in real time. Here too, competition has quickly moved to
narrow those spreads.
9.4.2 Proprietary Dealers
