
book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

178

2:39 PM

Page 178

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

a low-interest-bearing currency. This way, I’m basically paying myself extra
for holding onto a trade.”
“I like what I’m hearing. But how would you be hedged?” he asked.
“Hedged?”
“Yes. How would you balance out the risk?”
“Well, for one, I would come up with a series of stop loss rules to exit
the buy trades. That would limit the downside risk.”
He nodded. “That is a start. But is there a way you can use options or
futures contracts to hedge yourself, in case of a big, sudden decline?”
“I’m not sure I understand. I’ve never traded options or futures.”
“Well, Harry, you’ve made a good start here. But if you want to be a
world-class trader, you are going to have to go one step further. You have
to nearly eliminate your risk. As low as you can get it. Meaning, you want
to have the least amount of exposure to losses as possible. And I bet that
you can find a way to hedge the trade so that you can hold onto it for a long
time, without worrying about having to open and close the trades.”
“That sounds good to me. I am not sure that would be possible.”
He laughed. “It’s definitely possible. We do it here all the time. We do it
with options and futures. I’m not sure those financial instruments will be
available on your retail trading platforms. But there has got to be a way to
make it work.”
“If there is, I am dedicated to finding it.”
“Very good. Here is what I want you to do. It’s not going to be easy, but
it will be worth it. I want you to do some very, very deep research into interest rates now. I want you to go way down. Do you know how to use
spreadsheets?”
I was embarrassed to explain to him that I didn’t.
“All right, then. Find yourself someone who does.”
Roddy and George! “I know just the people.”
“Good. Now I am going to start you off by giving you some data on a
CD,” and then he called over to a trader across the room. “Bobby! Bring
over the spot rates CD.”
“Which one, Mr. Sisler?”
“Sterling, Swiss, and Yen.”
“You got it.”
Bobby walked over and handed me a compact disc. George nodded to
it. “Now, please don’t give out that data. It took us a long time to compile.
It’s got spot rates for more than 20 years back on two cross currency pairs:
the GBP/CHF, and the GBP/JPY.”
“All right.”
“I want you to look up interest rates for the United Kingdom, for
Switzerland, and for Japan, going back that far. And then I want you to plot
on a graph how interest rates have affected currency rates over time. I know

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 179

Homework

179

you’ve already told me that you know that interest rates drive currency values, but now I want you to show me exactly how that is true. Understood?”
“Yes. I understand. When do you want this?”
“A week from today. Monday, April 19. I will see you here at the same
time.”
“If I get some help on this, can I bring a couple of other people?”
“Of course. Now I gotta run. See you in a week.”

POUNDING THE YEN
Winnipeg George and Roddy were excited, to say the very least. After I finished work at 7:00 P.M., I visited with them and explained everything. Apparently, they believed the interest rate information was going to be easy to
find. “We can stay here tonight and we’ll have all of it by tomorrow morning,” Roddy told me.
Up all night? During the week? I was missing a lot of family time, and I
was also not going to be in great shape for work the next day, if I didn’t get
any rest at all. “I don’t know. Can we do this on the weekend?” I asked. “If
it’s really this easy?”
“Sure,” answered Winnipeg George. “Meanwhile, we can plan more
trades, and you can learn how to use spreadsheets.”
“Deal,” I said, and with that I decided that for the rest of the week I
would split my time between planning more trades and learning to use a
spreadsheet.
And over the next few days, both endeavors worked out very well.
Learning the spreadsheets was easy. And overall, the trades worked out
very, very well. Some of them stayed open for over a month. Some were
over nearly as soon as they were opened.
The first trade expressed my desire to benefit from the interest rates
differential between the United Kingdom and Japan. So I looked at the
GBP/JPY, starting as usual with the four-hour chart. I wanted to find a
place to buy. The first thing that I noticed was that this pair tended to move
up and down a lot—it seemed to trade inside a range all the time. The next
thing that I noticed was that recently, the 193.00 level offered a reasonable
amount of support to the pair. In the last part of March, the pair had not
been able to rise through the level and stay above it; then a week later it
was able to burst through the level, but not fall back down below it. This
was a perfect example of resistance becoming support.
Roddy and Winnipeg George had their own views of why the 193.00
level was a good support or resistance zone, and it had something to do
with the fact that their CCI oscillator was overbought or oversold every

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 180

180

FIGURE 18.1

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Stops and profit targets.

time the line was hit. Although I was happy that their tested system was
also confirming the trade, I was ready to write it down and paper-trade it
no matter what. We did agree that although the currency pair had stopped
stone-cold on the 193.27 mark previously, we would wait for it to hit 193.00
even because, according to my new trading partners, this was a currency
pair that tended to obey the round numbers. At this point, I was ready to
talk about stops and profit targets (see Figure 18.1).
Winnipeg George believed that 195.00 represented a perfect exit for
the pair; it would give us a 200 pip target, and it was also the same place
where the currency pair had stalled on three different occasions: first, on
March 18, when the currency pair had fallen to the 195.00 figure and
stopped dead in its tracks before heading lower. Second, on April 6, when
it had finally risen above the 193.00 level. And third on April 8. On each of
these collisions with 195.00, the currency pair had only managed to break
through by 50 pips or so. What I liked the most was that 195.00 had already
played the dual role of support and resistance.
I wrote down:
Long GBP/JPY 193.00, Stop: 192.00, Profit target: 195.00
Roddy and Winnipeg George took the trade for the firm (Figure 18.2).
It was enough for me to watch them with the trade.
This trade opened and closed while George and Roddy were working
the overnight shift—it opened on April 13 at 3:00 in the morning and closed
almost exactly 48 hours later.

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 181

181

Homework

FIGURE 18.2

George and Roddy’s trade.

I still didn’t have any desire to do any trading of my own. The losses
from the week before were still fresh in my mind. Maybe I would be ready
in a month when Wakeman gave me my first check. Maybe sooner. This
was a decision better made with Harvey Winklestein’s help, and I hoped to
see him again soon.
Harvey’s absence certainly didn’t keep me from planning more trades,
however. Together with Winnipeg George and Roddy, I analyzed and
planned for four more trades. Two of them were based on the GBP/USD
one-hour chart and each of them netted 40 pips. I was not present to see
either of those trades open. Another trade was based on the EUR/USD 15minute chart and gave us 50 pips. I didn’t like the short-term chart as much,
but Roddy and Winnipeg George convinced me that I needed to know if the
system I was using would work on the short-term charts. It did, and that
was enough proof for me. I was still determined not to base my trading
plan on the short-term charts.
During this time, we also began to call this trading system the “Winnipeg Special,” mostly because Roddy forced us to do so, in honor of Winnipeg George’s home province and also because it confused people who
asked what we were doing. Roddy thrived on that. Most traders, including
Craig, had generally left us alone for the entire week and my trade ideas
were no longer the popular flavor. I realized that most traders at EW were
interested in the hottest ideas, wherever they could be found. But they
didn’t focus for very long on any idea in particular. Also, they were engaged
in a lot of other stuff, like quoting prices for customers, trading options,

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

182

2:39 PM

Page 182

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

futures, and other instruments. My Post-it notes were simply not sexy
enough to hold their attention for long.
My focus on learning to trade for myself made up for the lack of interest other EW traders showed in my ideas. With each trade, I grew more
confident in my abilities. I had a goal to test 1,000 trades by the weekend
and record the results in my spreadsheets, and I was making excellent
progress.
Winnipeg George showed me how to build a spreadsheet that would
log the entry price, the original stop, the profit target, the largest drawdown during the trade, and the final result in pips. It also showed my
overall win percentage and the size of the average win and loss. He said
that this information was absolutely critical to my success. I would learn
why later.
By Friday I had done over a thousand practice trades and logged them
into the spreadsheet. I had been operating all week long on very little
sleep and had essentially avoided my family entirely. It was then I realized
that I owed George Sisler a ton of research on interest rates, and I had
hardly started.

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 183

CHAPTER 19

Team
Banes
Begins Anew

innipeg George and Roddy were positive that the interest rate research was easy to do, and invited me to spend all of Saturday
night into Sunday with them, to gather the results. But I had promised my wife that I would attend Sunday morning Mass with her and the
kids—something that I rarely did—and I was determined not to let them
down. I’m glad that I didn’t.
Sunday morning was bright and cheerful and I was happy to spend
time with my family. Over breakfast, Gini was excited to hear about the
progress I’d made at the law firm, where I had been able to interview several promising candidates for my replacement. I hadn’t told her much
about Winnipeg George and Roddy, so I explained that they were helping
me compile a lot of research. I told her about the trades from that week
and what I might be looking for in the weeks to come. She was more interested in hearing that I was finally figuring out how to do my own analysis
and less about how much money I was helping George and Roddy make.
“It would only seem fair that Anderson or even George or Roddy
would pay you something for the work you’ve done. You’ve made them a
lot of money.”
“Over 300 pips in the last week alone. It’s hard for me to believe that I
could help plan those trades at all. And they really are paying me back by
doing a bunch of research for me today while I spend time with you.”
“Maybe. But I still think that if you’re helping them make money then
you ought to be paid for it. I’m not surprised that you’re doing well at it. I
knew you could.”

W

183

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 184

184

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Hearing this made the week’s hard work worthwhile, and I smiled for
the entire walk down to our church, where the priest was standing at the
door, greeting the faithful one by one. Father Gonzales pulled me aside
when I approached him, and I was sure that he would suggest that I could
gain great blessings by attending more regularly with my family. I couldn’t
disagree with that, but it wasn’t what he wanted to say.
“There is a gentleman inside who would like to see you. We had a nice
chat about you this morning, Harry,” and then he patted me on the back
and handed me back to my family.
Inside, I knew exactly who to look for.
Harvey Winklestein was sitting in the last pew and grinned broadly
when he saw me. He rose to introduce himself to my wife and children. He
had a large paper bag beside him, which, he explained, contained treats
and surprises for whoever behaved themselves the best during the services. My wife invited him to our home for dinner and he agreed.
He then told us that he would take a walk around Brooklyn, say hello
to an old friend, and then meet us again after our services were over.
I hardly listened to Mass that day. I lost track of where to stand up, sit
down, and kneel. Instead I thought of Harvey’s wide smile and happy face.
Just over a week ago I had decided that I was the worst trader in the world.
Harvey had agreed with me, or at least agreed that I was bound to lose all my
money if I continued to trade. What a difference a week could make! I hadn’t
traded at all, but I had proven that I knew how to do my own analysis and testing. I had spreadsheet upon spreadsheet that I wanted to show to Harvey later.
Harvey Winklestein also turned out to be the best dinner guest we had
ever known. He read to the children while Gini and I prepared the meal and
he finished two helpings of my wife’s meatloaf, and then demanded the
recipe. When the kids finished and left the table to go play in their bedroom, Harvey was ready to talk about trading.

THE BANES TEAM IS FORMED
HARVEY: I wanted to talk to both of you today. From this point on, you are
a team in this, and you both need to be involved. This includes you, Gini,
even though you will probably not be doing any of the trading.
GINI: I want to be involved. I think I have been included in most of it up to
this point. Even if I heard about trades or whatever a few days late, at
least I’ve heard about them.
ME: I do want her to be a part of all of this. I can see how that
will help.
HARVEY: How?

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Team Banes Begins Anew

Page 185

185

ME: She needs to be aware of the amount of money we have in the account, the amount of money we have at risk at any given time. This is
her money, too, and I am hoping to be ready to trade again soon. But not
on my own completely.
HARVEY: This is good to hear. Gini, this means that you are going to have
to meet with Harry at least once every day. Preferably before any new
trades are open, to talk about what trades are being planned, what
trades are already profitable or not, and how much is at risk. There
might be times that you both agree to scale down the risk, or scale it up
and make a bigger trade. You will know how to do those things as you
work together.
ME: I want to show her my spreadsheets, too.
HARVEY: I want to see those as well. Tell me what you learned about testing.
ME: I learned, first of all, that the money management principle you taught
me—the 75/25 rule—made so much more sense after I did huge
amounts of testing.
HARVEY: Why is that?
ME: Because I had an appreciation for the benefits of a winning system.
You taught me never to let my account go below 25 percent. Testing
showed me that I could develop a system, test it, and give myself a positive expectancy of gains. By filling up a thousand rows in a spreadsheet,
I found that I didn’t have to trade on emotion. And that trading on emotion didn’t have a positive expectancy.
HARVEY: No, it doesn’t. It has a negative expectancy, in fact.
ME: And while I did the testing, I realized that I wanted to only take trades
that I could feel confident about. And I couldn’t feel confident about
trades unless I understood how those trades fit into a larger picture, a
bigger overall system. It wouldn’t bother me now to lose 100 pips on a
trade because I know that first of all, I won’t ever risk very much on the
trade in the first place, and second of all, that over time I am going to
have more winners than losers. And the winners are going to be bigger
than the losers, on average.
HARVEY: How much bigger?
ME: It depends. When I tested the daily charts, I tested at least three hundred trades across the GBP/USD, the GBP/JPY, and the EUR/USD. My
average winner was 212 pips, and the average loser was 88. So for that
time frame, I had a win-to-loss ratio of 2.5.
GINI: What exactly does that mean?
ME: It’s good news, because it means that on average, my winning trades
are going to be two and a half times larger than my losing trades.
GINI: But what if you lose more than half the time?

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

186

2:39 PM

Page 186

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

HARVEY: Great question! Harry, in those three hundred trades, did you
tally the wins and the losses?
ME: Sure did. Two hundred thirty-two winners and seventy-eight losers.
That means that over the course of a few hundred trades, I am likely to
have 77 percent winning trades.
GINI: So this is a good system. A really good one.
ME: Right. But it wasn’t the best. I did better on the four-hour chart than
any other. I tested over six hundred trades across the same currency
pairs. I ended up with an average winner of 267 pips and an average
loser of 94. I had a 74 percent win percentage as well.
HARVEY: Impressive. Is that the chart you are going to focus on now with
live trading?
ME: Yes, as soon as I’m ready. Until then I am going to keep paper trading.
HARVEY: Good. We’ll talk about that in a moment. For now, I have more
questions for the two of you.
ME: Okay.
GINI: All right.
HARVEY: Gini, what if Harvey starts trading, let’s say, this week, and for the
rest of April he only has losses. He has ten trades and all are losers.
What should he do?
GINI: I’m not sure what you want me to say. I think I would tell him to
keep trading.
HARVEY: Why?
GINI: Because over time he is going to make money with the system that
he tested.
HARVEY: That’s right. That’s a brilliant answer. But, Harry, what’s the other
side of that answer? What are we assuming about your trades?
ME: We’re assuming that I am only risking very small amounts on each
trade, so ten losses really does not damage the account.
HARVEY: Perfect! That’s the next point to make. If you open another account
with five thousand dollars, then I suggest that you trade for just one dollar
to three dollars per pip. If you have an average loss of 100 pips, then each
time you’re only risking a few percentage points of the account. The
smaller the trades, the better. That way you can last much longer.
GINI: It’s going to be hard to earn a lot of money from trades that small,
don’t you think? Why not put in more money and take the same percentage risk, but at least have the chance to earn more money?
HARVEY: That’s not a bad question, but it takes the focus off where it
should be. For the next month, Harry should concentrate on taking
good trades, checking them with you, continuing his testing, and proving the validity of his system. He is working at Wakeman again so it’s not
a question of how much money he can make from trading now. It’s a

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Team Banes Begins Anew

Page 187

187

question of how much he can make from trading down the road, if he
can prove that he can do it now.
GINI: That makes sense. Trade with as little money as possible now, while
he is still learning to trade.
ME: And learning to be responsible with the money. If I lose five thousand dollars more, at least we know that I can stay at Wakeman for a
while longer. In a way, it’s money that we can afford to lose.
HARVEY: There is no such thing as money that you can afford to lose.
GINI: [silence]
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: Do you move into an apartment, and say to each other, well, it’s
okay if the apartment burns down? We’re only going to move into apartments that we can afford to burn down?
ME: No.
HARVEY: Your trading account is your next apartment. It’s the Park Slope
brownstone you want to buy. Do you want to trade to earn the money to
buy the brownstone, and then lose that money? Would that be money
that you can afford to lose?
GINI: No way. Harry?
ME: Whoa, I’m sorry! I didn’t ever think of it that way. But it’s true. If I lost
25 percent of my account now, it would be like losing 25 percent of our
future home. That’s right. That is exactly why I didn’t treat the first account with a lot of respect. I didn’t think about what it took me to earn
the money in the first place, or what future goals I was throwing away
by not being responsible.
HARVEY: I could not agree more. If you can learn to show respect for a
one-hundred-dollar account for these reasons, then you can take care of
a million-dollar account. The amount of money won’t make a difference
because you will agree that you will never do anything to damage your
dreams.
ME: Agreed. I promise. And Gini will oversee it.
HARVEY: Harry, where do you stand on the emotional scale? How have you
felt the past week or so, not trading?
ME: I haven’t cared much about it until now. I don’t feel compelled to
trade on emotion anymore. If I had any desire at all to start making
trades this week, it came in just the last day or so because I now have a
tested system and I had seen so many examples from that system that I
can’t really know much more about how it works until I trade it with
real money.
HARVEY: All of this is exactly what I wanted to hear. Now we’ll get down to
the last law of trading: I will hold myself accountable. Harry, your wife is
going to hold you accountable, and she is going to make sure that you

book_c19.qxd

12/20/06

188

2:39 PM

Page 188

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

follow everything that we’ve said so far. You will need to keep a notebook of your trades. In that notebook, you’ll write down your trade
plans, including the size of the trade, the entry, the stop, and the limit.
You’ll write down your thoughts about the trade, and how it compares
with other trades you’ve already taken. You’ll include thoughts and a review once the trade is closed. If you can, you should print off a screen
shot of the chart from the trade and include that in the notebook as well.
Gini will sign off on every closed trade, which means she will have seen
exactly what you planned and if you followed through on the plan.
GINI: I like this. I like the idea of being included in the trading.
ME: I like it too. This is going to definitely help me maintain some discipline.
HARVEY: Gini, how do you feel about Harry doing some trading, starting
this week?
GINI: As long as we abide by the rules you’ve laid out, then I am excited to
give it another try.
HARVEY: Then let’s see what Harry Banes can do. For real this time.
