
6

c01.indd 6

1/13/09 9:51:59 AM

Open 24/5

exchange is the type of trading that most individual traders in the
retail forex market are primarily concerned with. While some individual traders get involved with currency futures and other derivative financial instruments, the growth of the spot foreign exchange
arena has largely eclipsed these smaller markets.

O pen 24/5
Besides the sheer size and liquidity of the foreign exchange markets,
which can certainly be a great advantage to the average speculative trader, another distinguishing characteristic of forex is its global,
decentralized nature. Essentially, it is an over-the-counter (OTC)
market, where the different currency trading locations around the
globe electronically form a unified, interconnected market entity.
Among other advantages stemming from this fact, all currencies can
be traded electronically 24 hours a day as the major global markets
open, overlap, and close, one after another.
From the perspective of New York time (U.S. Eastern Time), the
markets open up as follows.
The very beginning of the week falls on Sunday afternoon in
New York, when the New Zealand banks open at 2:00 pm New York
time. At 5:00 pm (still New York time) the financial markets in Sydney,
Australia, open. Tokyo then opens at 7:00 pm, followed by Hong Kong
and Singapore concurrently at 9:00 pm. At this point, all five of these
currency-trading financial markets are open: New Zealand, Australia;
Japan; Hong Kong; and Singapore.
In the wee hours of Monday, Frankfurt, Germany, opens up
the primary euro market at 2:00 am, New York time. By this time,

7

c01.indd 7

1/13/09 9:51:59 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

New Zealand and Australia are already closed, and the East Asian
markets of Tokyo, Hong Kong, and Singapore are on their last legs.
The European time zone continues shortly thereafter with the
opening of the pivotal London session. Customarily the market with
the most liquidity (as most foreign exchange trading has traditionally occurred within the London market), London session opens an
hour after Frankfurt, at 3:00 am NY time.
Finally, at 8:00 am on Monday morning, the New York financial markets are the last of the major global markets to open. Since
New York is also a strong foreign exchange trading market, much like
London and Frankfurt, the overlap between these three markets—
around 8:00 to 11:00 am NY time—represents among the most
active, liquid, and volatile trading hours available in forex. At the same
time, however, the period surrounding the London opening currently
takes the crown for the most active foreign exchange market.
A couple of hours before the close of the New York market, the
New Zealand market opens up again at 2:00 pm to begin the whole
globe-hopping process all over again. After Monday, this seamless
process continues on every weekday until Friday, when the close of
the last foreign exchange market in New York signals the end of the
trading week at around 4:00 to 5:00 pm New York time. Therefore,
from around 2:00 pm on Sunday to 5:00 pm on Friday, forex trading
takes place 24 hours a day, five days a week.
One important note to keep in mind about trading currencies at
all hours of the day and night is that even though a particular market
happens to be closed, it does not mean that the currency specific to
that market is not being traded. For example, when London opens
in the middle of the night in New York while the U.S. markets are

8

c01.indd 8

1/13/09 9:51:59 AM

Playing in the Majors

closed, some of the most active trading of the U.S. dollar occurs.
Beginning traders are often under the mistaken impression that a
country’s currency is only traded when that country’s markets happen to be open. This is untrue only because the foreign exchange
markets are traded by people and institutions around the world via
a global, decentralized network. Therefore, U.S. dollar trading, for
example, is not dependent on the business hours of any centralized,
physical exchange located in the United States.
The fact that foreign exchange can be traded 24 hours a day
means that traders have the advantage of choosing when it is most
convenient to trade, considering their own personal schedules. For
this reason, many traders hold full-time jobs while trading forex during off-hours. This provides a tremendous amount of flexibility that
is not offered in other major trading markets. Of course, those traders
that choose to take advantage of the most active markets must necessarily watch the currencies during the most active times, like during
London or New York market openings. But the fact that all currencies can be traded 24 hours a day means that there is almost always
price movement available upon which to trade.

P laying in the Majors
Just because there is price movement in a given currency does not
necessarily mean that the currency is liquid and heavily traded.
On the contrary; although the number of currencies in regular use
around the world comes close to the number of countries in existence,
only a very small handful of these currencies make up the vast majority of forex trading volume.This is yet another unique characteristic of

9

c01.indd 9

1/13/09 9:52:00 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

the foreign exchange market in comparison to other financial markets,
and it can certainly be considered an advantage for traders.
According to the BIS, the most-traded currency, by far, is the
U.S. dollar, with consistently greater than 85% of the average daily
turnover in foreign exchange trading. The distant second place currency is the Eurozone’s euro, with around a 37% share. Rounding
out the top currencies are the Japanese yen with approximately 16%,
and the British pound with 15% (because there are two currencies
in each traded pair, the percentages of all the currencies combined,
including the top-traded currencies cited above, will equal 200%
instead of 100%.). The structure of currency pairs as they are traded
in the foreign exchange market will be discussed in Chapter 2,
which covers basic trading mechanics.
Because of the fact that only a few currencies form most of the
activity in the foreign exchange market, which means that these
currencies are the most liquid and active, it is usually recommended
for beginning traders to concentrate initially just on the major
currencies. This avoids confusion and promotes focus in trading.
When matched together into predetermined currency pairings
(as will be described further in Chapter 2), these currencies make up
the four “majors.” These majors are all U.S. dollar-based and include,
first and foremost, the EUR/USD (euro against U.S. dollar). This
key currency pair is considered not only the most actively traded
currency pair available, but also the most actively traded financial
instrument in the world.
Following behind EUR/USD are USD/JPY (U.S. dollar against
Japanese yen), and GBP/USD (British pound against U.S. dollar).

10

c01.indd 10

1/13/09 9:52:00 AM

Playing in the Majors

Finally, USD/CHF (U.S. dollar against Swiss franc) has even less
liquidity because of the progressively diminishing market activity of
the Swiss franc over the years, but it is still considered one of the
majors. AUD/USD (Australian dollar against U.S. dollar) and USD/
CAD (U.S. dollar against Canadian dollar) are next in line in terms of
trading activity, but are not generally considered among the majors.

IN THE REAL WORLD

Currency Terminology
As in other businesses and industries, foreign exchange trading
has evolved its own vernacular over time. To outsiders, some of
the terminology used by professional forex traders may seem a
bit peculiar. But it has become virtually a language unto itself for
those that deal with currencies on a daily basis. Here are some
of the most common examples of currency terminology:
Currency or Currency Pair

Common Terminology

GBP (British Pound)

Sterling

CAD (Canadian Dollar)

Loonie

USD (U.S. Dollar)

Greenback

AUD (Australian Dollar)

Aussie

NZD (New Zealand Dollar)

Kiwi

EUR/USD (Euro/U.S. Dollar)

Euro

GBP/USD (British Pound/U.S. Dollar)

Cable

USD/JPY (U.S. Dollar/Japanese Yen)

Dollar-Yen

USD/CHF (U.S. Dollar/Swiss Franc)

Dollar-Swiss or Swissy

USD/CAD (U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar)

Dollar-Canada

11

c01.indd 11

1/13/09 9:52:00 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

Unlike stock trading, where there are countless possible securities
to choose from, foreign exchange trading is much simpler and more
straightforward in terms of selecting trades. Sticking to the majors—as
many foreign exchange participants are wisely apt to do—allows traders to focus their efforts in an efficient manner rather than disperse
their attention among a multitude of different securities. In a time
marked by progressively increasing information overload, a limited set
of trading options can certainly be seen as a significant benefit.

L everaged to the Hilt
Another feature of foreign exchange trading that differentiates it
from other financial markets is the astronomical levels of leverage
that are commonplace in the forex world. The specifics of utilizing this leverage will be discussed in Chapter 2. For now, though, it
should be known that many foreign exchange brokers will offer up
to 400:1 leverage on the average retail trading account. This means
that $1 in a trader’s forex account can control up to $400 in a currency trade. The implications of this are mind-boggling. No other
major financial market offers even close to this kind of leverage.
As will be discussed further in Chapter 2, however, this can be
both a very positive feature as well as a very negative one. By definition, leverage is a type of financial magnification. While it is true
that high leverage magnifies profits, it will also magnify losses equally.
Oftentimes, it is this high level of leverage that summarily wipes out
otherwise healthy trading accounts. Used with a great deal of caution,
however, high leverage of the magnitude found in forex trading can
offer tremendous possibilities to the upside as well as to the downside.

12

c01.indd 12

1/13/09 9:52:01 AM

The Players

T he Players
Knowing and understanding who the primary players are within the
foreign exchange market goes a long way in helping individual traders approach the market in an informed manner. In terms of market impact, the most influential group of participants in the forex
market would have to be the major banks. From the perspective of
speculative trading, these banks have a great deal of funds to throw
around, and the traders at many of these banks are responsible for
moving astronomical amounts of money. Of course, banks also do a
lot of nonspeculative currency exchanges for clients, but the speculative activity is really what moves the currency markets in the most
dramatic manner. When there are big, sudden moves in currency
prices, more often than not the banks, as a collective entity, are behind
a good portion of the move.
Next in the hierarchy of speculative currency traders would
have to be the hedge funds and other investment firms. In recent
years, these entities, which often control a great deal of discretionary
client equity, have progressively increased their speculative activities
in foreign exchange. Because of the sheer enormity of the funds at
their disposal, some of these firms come close to rivaling the major
banks in their power to influence the currency markets.
Other participants in the foreign exchange market are not generally considered speculative players, and therefore may not be as influential in their trading activities as the participants described above.
These include the central banks, which, as discussed earlier, are not
considered speculative in their market activities. Rather, central banks
get in the game primarily to further their economic policy agendas.

13

c01.indd 13

1/13/09 9:52:01 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

Because of their vast importance in helping ultimately to determine
currency value, however, central banks certainly have the potential to
impact currency prices with their attempts at currency manipulation.
Companies wishing to convert their funds to a foreign currency
in order to purchase foreign goods or services are another example of nonspeculative market players. When their currency exchange
activities are factored in collectively, these companies may help partially determine the course of international trade flow. Though this
collective activity can certainly have some lasting impact on the currency markets, it is perhaps not influential enough to be of great significance to speculative foreign exchange traders.
The last group of market participants in foreign exchange is, by
far, the smallest and least significant with regard to influence on the
market as a whole. This group consists most notably of people like
you, the individual retail trader. Whether you have $100 or $100,000
or even more to trade through your retail forex broker, none of
your trading activity will likely ever move the currency markets in
any appreciable way. That is not to say that you are at all unimportant. Rather, it just means that your trades, along with those of every
other individual forex trader combined, will probably never influence the direction of the vast foreign exchange market. This, again,
goes back to the sheer size and liquidity of the market, as well as
the fact that its activity is so overwhelmingly dominated by wellheeled financial institutions whose funds dwarf those of individual
retail traders.
But while retail traders, via their brokers, will unlikely ever
influence the course of the foreign exchange market, they can
certainly learn how to trade it effectively and hopefully to extract

14

c01.indd 14

1/13/09 9:52:01 AM

What Moves the Forex Markets?

profit from it. That is precisely the goal for the rest of this book.
From basic forex trading mechanics to common analytical methods
to specific trading strategies and risk management techniques, this
book is intended to steer individual traders effectively through the
maze that is foreign exchange trading.

W hat Moves the Forex Markets?
In order to steer through this maze successfully, foreign exchange
traders should become familiar with the forces that drive this market. Although there are many traders who insist that market drivers,
or causes of price fluctuations, are unimportant because everything
is already reflected in price action on the charts, it would be a grave
mistake to ignore the fundamental roots of market movement.
As will be discussed further in Chapter 4 on fundamental analysis,
knowing what moves the forex market is integral to becoming an
informed, and therefore well-equipped, foreign exchange trader.
The primary movers of currency exchange rates are all tied to
the basic forces of economics, as will be described in detail within
Chapter 4. For now, though, a simplification of the cause of currency exchange rate movement can be said to relate directly to the
process of international capital flow. This is simply the movement of
money from one currency to another. International capital flows, in
turn, are caused by basic economic supply and demand factors.
As will be expounded on in Chapter 4, supply and demand are
determined by a number of different factors. Most notably, these factors include a country’s interest rates, inflation situation, GDP growth,
employment, trade balance, and other barometers of economic

15

c01.indd 15

1/13/09 9:52:01 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

health. If demand for a currency increases (and/or supply decreases)
as a result of one or a combination of these factors, that currency’s
exchange rate will generally increase in relation to other currencies. Conversely, if demand for a currency decreases (and/or supply
increases) as a result of one or a combination of the factors above,
that currency’s exchange rate will generally decrease in relation to
other currencies. It is a simple concept, but one that is not so simple
to utilize in attempting to forecast market directions.
Aside from the fundamental market drivers just described, technical factors are often overlooked or underestimated in their ability
to help move the forex markets. Although this will all be discussed
in great detail in Chapter 3, a brief explanation here will help illustrate the point.
Traders in many banks, hedge funds, and other potential marketmoving institutions will often use certain techniques of technical
analysis to help them make trading decisions. These traders all have
access to the same price charts. Furthermore, these charts all show
the same patterns, key price levels, and technical phenomena, with
perhaps just some minor differences due to variations in the traders’
individual interpretations.
This means that these influential players are generally all seeing
the same types of technical events on the charts, which will often
prompt many of them to buy at a similar price level, as well as sell at a
similar price level. When a great deal of institutional money is on the
same side of the market at the same approximate price level, prices
can and will be influenced in one direction or another. In fact, this
phenomenon of collective trading activity by influential market players is considered one of the primary causes of support and resistance

16

c01.indd 16

1/13/09 9:52:02 AM

What to Expect from This Book

levels being respected so precisely in many instances. One of the most
significant concepts in foreign exchange trading, support/resistance
will be explored in much more detail in Chapter 3, which covers
technical analysis.

W hat to Expect from This Book
The core of this book begins with in-depth descriptions of basic foreign
exchange trading mechanics in Chapter 2. This includes all of the terminology and explanations necessary to get started in foreign exchange
trading. From the structure of a currency pair to the intricacies of margin and leverage as they pertain to forex trading, Chapter 2 will get
true beginners up and running quickly. The chapter is also directed at
experienced traders coming from other financial markets, serving as a
thorough discourse on the unique intricacies of trading currencies.
Following the chapter on basic trading mechanics is Chapter 3,
which is a comprehensive discussion of technical analysis as it is
applied to foreign exchange trading. The tools of technical analysis are perhaps the most tangible and accessible trading tools available to the individual foreign exchange trader. Software programs
used specifically for charting prices in the foreign exchange market abound, and they provide the most popular way for most currency traders to make trading decisions. From free-hand trendlines
to mathematically derived chart indicators to complex pattern formations, the primary tools of technical analysis, as they are used to
trade forex market movement, will be the sole focus of Chapter 3.
Next is Chapter 4, which is devoted exclusively to fundamental analysis as it applies to foreign exchange trading. This important

17

c01.indd 17

1/13/09 9:52:02 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

discipline can best be described as the study of factors that drive
currency exchange rate movement. From interest rates to inflation
to economic growth and much more, the fundamental concepts
described in Chapter 4 provide an essential foundation of knowledge for forex traders who wish to understand what really makes
the foreign exchange markets tick.
Moving on to Chapter 5, this is where the knowledge gained
in previous chapters can be put to practical use. Chapter 5 is all
about foreign exchange trading methods and strategies, or the ways
in which top currency traders tackle the markets on a daily basis.
Included in this chapter are sections on strategic trading based on
trends, breakouts, chart patterns, news, interest carry, divergences,
multiple timeframes, and much more. The methods and strategies
contained in this chapter provide traders with practical ideas that
can be used almost immediately to trade forex.
Finally, Chapter 6 closes the book with some extremely important elements of trading. This chapter is found at the end of the book
because it introduces perhaps the most advanced concepts in the
book, and not because its contents are any less important than other
subjects. On the contrary, concepts like risk and money management,
trading discipline, and the optimal trader’s psychology, are often considered by experienced traders to be among the most important
components of a successful trading career. Since many beginning
traders instead believe that finding the best trade entry point is the
most crucial aspect of good trading, it is especially imperative that
these novice traders pay particularly close attention to Chapter 6.
As a whole, this book should serve as a solid introduction and
guide to the fascinating world of foreign exchange trading. Much

18

c01.indd 18

1/13/09 9:52:02 AM

Chapter Summary

more can be said about the minute intricacies of how this market works. But in order to learn how it really works, the very best
teacher beyond this book on the essentials is a lot of hands-on experience. Nothing beats getting your hands dirty by getting in there
and actually practicing. Fortunately, this is extremely easy in today’s
retail currency trading environment. Virtually every reputable forex
broker offers free practice account demos of their trading platforms,
complete with real-time prices, charting software, and newsfeed
services. With these convenient resources at every prospective forex
trader’s fingertips, there is absolutely no excuse not to get out there
and start trading currencies with play money in a practice account.

C hapter Summar y
In this introduction to Essentials of Foreign Exchange Trading, a brief
history and description of the development of the foreign exchange
market was touched upon. After the collapse of the Bretton Woods
Agreements, which essentially fixed exchange rates, speculative currency trading was able to develop in an extremely rapid manner.
Fast forward to the past decade or so, and this development
became even more rapid with the help of the Internet and technology enhancements. Modern-day spot forex trading via retail electronic platforms has opened up new opportunities for legions of
individual traders.
Characteristics inherent in the foreign exchange market that differentiate it from other financial markets include the fact that it is
the most heavily traded market in the world, by far. This ensures that
its liquidity is second to none. Another differentiating characteristic
