
Of course, the fact that pair trading of stocks is not very profitable in the
highly efficient U.S. markets does not mean that they are not profitable in
other countries. But for the U.S. market, we have the alternative of profitably pair trading ETFs instead.
■ Trading ETF Pairs (and Triplets)

91
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

The one advantage of trading ETF pairs instead of stock pairs is that, once
found to be cointegrating, ETF pairs are less likely to fall apart in outof-sample data. That is because the fundamental economics of a basket of
stocks changes much more slowly than that of a single company. For example, since both Australia and Canada are commodity-based economies,
EWA and EWC (their respective stock index ETFs) are good candidates
for cointegration tests. And, indeed, we confirmed their cointegration in
Chapter 3. I mentioned this pair back in 2009 on my blog (http://epchan
.blogspot.com/2009/11/in-praise-of-etfs.html?showComment=125743
4002472#c1235760260813269054), and their cointegration continues as
of this writing (November 2012). The pair selection process for ETFs is
quite easy: we need to find ETFs that are exposed to common economic factors. Besides country ETFs, sector ETFs are another fertile ground
for finding cointegrated instruments. For example, the retail fund RTH
cointegrates with the consumer staples fund XLP. With the proliferation of
ETFs tracking more or less the same sector, pair-trading opportunities are
steadily increasing.
Another favorite ETF pairing of mine is between a commodity ETF and
an ETF of companies that produce that commodity. The gold fund GLD
versus the gold miners fund GDX is a good example. The rationale is that
since the main asset of a gold-mining company is gold, their values should
cointegrate with gold spot prices. And, indeed, they have done so—until
July 14, 2008, or thereabout. If we test for cointegration of GLD versus
GDX between May 23, 2006, and July 14, 2008, using the Johansen test,
we find that they cointegrate with 99 percent probability, but if we test over
the period July 15, 2008, to April 9, 2012, they have lost the cointegration.
What happened on July 14, 2008? That’s when oil (the West Texas Intermediate flavor) price peaked at around $145 per barrel, an all-time high. What
has oil price got to do with the cointegration between gold price and gold
miners’ share prices? A lot, apparently. It turns out that when oil prices are
expensive, it costs a lot more to mine gold, and therefore the profits of gold

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

92

miners are reduced, leading to the underperformance of their share prices
relative to gold spot prices (“The Wacky World of Gold,” 2011).
To gather empirical support for this explanation, we can introduce the
oil fund USO into the portfolio and see if this triplet cointegrates over the
entire period from 2006 to 2012. The Johansen test shows that they do,
with a 99 percent probability that there exists one cointegrating relationship. Hence, instead of just trading GLD and GDX, we can trade this portfolio of triplets instead. Even if you find trading a triplet too cumbersome,
you should at least have a rule in place to cease trading GLD versus GDX
whenever oil price exceeds a certain threshold.
This example has particular significance. When scientists first come upon
an unexplained phenomenon, they form a hunch about its cause, and then
they find ways to test this hunch empirically. We should adopt the same
scientific process in approaching trading. When a trading strategy stops
working, we should form a hypothesis of the reason, and then test empirically whether that hypothesis is supported by data. The outcome of this process is often a modified strategy that regains profitability.
One might think that the oil fund USO versus the energy sector fund
XLE is another example of a commodity versus commodity producer pair,
but there is a problem with this pairing. While GLD owns gold, and thus
reflects the gold spot price, USO doesn’t actually own oil. It invests in oil
futures contracts. As we will discuss in Chapter 5, futures price of a commodity differs from its spot price. Even if XLE cointegrates with the spot
price of oil, it may not necessarily cointegrate with USO. Of course, this
problem plagues any commodity futures fund versus commodity producer
fund. Mean reversion trading of such pairs would be much less risky if the
commodity fund holds the actual commodity rather than the futures.
The mechanics of trading ETF pairs is the same as trading stock pairs.The
old uptick rule exempted ETFs, but the new alternative uptick rule covers
all securities traded on U.S. stock exchanges. However, the NBBO sizes for
ETFs are certainly much larger than that for stocks. For example, on a typical day, the NBBO sizes for EWC can be around 5,000 shares.
■ Intraday Mean Reversion: Buy-on-Gap Model
Stock prices follow geometric random walks, as many financial scholars
have tirelessly reminded us (Malkiel, 2008). But this is true only if we test
their price series for mean reversion strictly at regular intervals (such as

using their daily closes). Our job as traders is to find special conditions, or
special periods, such that mean reversion occurs with regularity, while at
the same time avoiding data-snooping bias. As the following strategy will
show, there may indeed be seasonal mean reversion occurring at the intraday
time frame even for stocks.
The rules for the strategy are:
1. Select all stocks near the market open whose returns from their
previous day’s lows to today’s opens are lower than one standard
deviation. The standard deviation is computed using the daily closeto-close returns of the last 90 days. These are the stocks that “gapped
down.”
2. Narrow down this list of stocks by requiring their open prices to be
higher than the 20-day moving average of the closing prices.
3. Buy the 10 stocks within this list that have the lowest returns from their
previous day’s lows. If the list has fewer than 10 stocks, then buy the
entire list.
4. Liquidate all positions at the market close.

93
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

The rationale for this strategy is that on days when the stock index futures
are down before the open, certain stocks suffer disproportionately due to
panic selling at the open. But once this panic selling is over, the stock will
gradually appreciate over the course of the day.
Rule 2 is often very useful in mean-reverting strategies: it is basically a
momentum filter superimposed on a mean-reverting strategy, a technique
that we will reprise often. Usually, those stocks that dropped “just a little”
have a better chance of reversal than those that dropped “a lot” because the
latter are often the ones that have negative news such as poor earnings announcements. Drops caused by negative news are less likely to revert. We
can actually develop momentum strategies based on such breaking news
(more on this in Chapter 7). Furthermore, the fact that a stock is higher
than a long-term moving average attracts selling pressure from larger players such as long-only funds, whose trading horizons tend to be longer. This
demand for liquidity at the open may exaggerate the downward pressure
on the price, but price moves due to liquidity demands are more likely to
revert when such demands vanish than price moves due to a shift in the
fundamental economics of the stock. Therefore, this strategy can succeed
in a news-heavy environment where traditional interday stock pairs trading
will likely fail.
The MATLAB code to backtest this strategy is displayed in Example 4.1.

Example 4.1: Buy-on-Gap Model on SPX Stocks
This code, which backtests the Buy-on-Gap model, can be
downloaded as bog.m. It requires as input three T × N arrays, op, lo,
and cl, where T is the number of days, N is the number of stocks in
the universe, and op contains the daily open prices, lo contains the
daily lows, and cl the daily closes. The stock universe we used to
backtest is the S&P 500, but one that has survivorship bias.
topN=10; % Max number of positions
entryZscore=1;
lookback=20; % for MA
stdretC2C90d=backshift(1, smartMovingStd(calculateReturns ...
(cl, 1), 90));
buyPrice=backshift(1, lo).*(1-entryZscore*stdretC2C90d);
retGap=op-backshift(1, lo))./backshift(1, lo);
pnl=zeros(length(tday), 1);

94

ma=backshift(1, smartMovingAvg(cl, lookback));

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

positionTable=zeros(size(cl));

for t=2:size(cl, 1)
hasData=find(isfinite(retGap(t, :)) & op(t, :) ...
< buyPrice(t, :) & op(t, :) > ma(t, :));
[foo idxSort]=sort(retGap(t, hasData), ‘ascend’);
positionTable(t, hasData(idxSort(1:min(topN, ...
length(idxSort)))))=1;
end
retO2C=(cl-op)./op;
pnl=smartsum(positionTable.*(retO2C), 2);
ret=pnl/topN;
ret(isnan(ret))=0;

This strategy has an annual percentage rate (APR) of 8.7 percent and a
Sharpe ratio of 1.5 from May 11, 2006, to April 24, 2012. The cumulative
returns curve is depicted in Figure 4.1.
I have traded a version of it quite profitably in my personal account as well as in a fund that I comanaged. Unfortunately, that version

FIGURE 4.1 Cumulative Returns of Buy-on-Gap Model

95
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

does not include rule 2, and it suffered from diminishing returns from
2009 onward. The long-only nature of the strategy also presents some
risk management challenges. Finally, the number of stocks traded each day
is quite small, which means that the strategy does not have a large capacity.
The astute reader may wonder how we can use open prices to determine
the trading signals for entry at the open and be filled at the official open
prices. The short answer is, of course: We can’t! We can, however, use the
preopen prices (for example, at ARCA) to determine the trading signals.
The signals thus determined will not exactly match the ones determined
by the actual open prices, but the hope is that the difference will not be so
large as to wipe out the returns. We can call this difference signal noise. Also,
note the pitfall of backtesting this strategy using consolidated prices versus
primary exchange prices, as explained in Chapter 1.
What about the mirror image of this strategy? Can we short stocks
that gap up a standard deviation but are still lower than their 20-day moving average? Yes, we can. The APR is 46 percent and the Sharpe ratio is
1.27 over the same period. Despite the seemingly higher return than the
long-only strategy, the short-only one does have steeper drawdown (see
Figure 4.2), and it suffered from the same short-sale constraint pitfall
discussed before.
This strategy is actually quite well known among traders, and there are
many variations on the same theme. For example, you can obviously trade
both the long-only and short-only versions simultaneously. Or you can trade
a hedged version that is long stocks but short stock index futures. You can

FIGURE 4.2

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

96

Cumulative Returns of Short-on-Gap Model

buy a larger number of stocks, but restricting the number of stocks within
the same sector.You can extend the buying period beyond the market open.
You can impose intraday profit caps. But the important message is: Price
series that do not exhibit mean reversion when sampled with daily bars can
exhibit strong mean reversion during specific periods. This is seasonality at
work at a short time scale.
■ Arbitrage between an ETF and Its

Component Stocks
Many readers would be familiar with the strategy of “index arbitrage,”
which trades on the difference in value between a portfolio of stocks
constituting an index and the futures on that index. If the stocks are
weighted in the same way used to construct the index, then the market
value of the portfolio will cointegrate very tightly with the index futures. Maybe too tightly—unfortunately, this is such a well-known strategy that the difference in market values has become extremely small
(Reverre, 2001). All but the most sophisticated traders can profit from
this strategy, and it most certainly needs to be traded intraday, perhaps
at high frequency (see Box 4.1). In order to increase this difference, we
can select only a subset of the stocks in the index to form the portfolio.
The same concept can be applied to the arbitrage between a portfolio

BOX 4.1

High-Frequency Index Arbitrage
High-frequency traders have been able to exploit two deficiencies in the
intraday computations of the indices and arbitrage between the futures
tracking these indices versus the component stocks. The first deficiency is
that many major indices including Dow Jones, S&P, Nasdaq, and Russell
are computed using only the primary exchange trades data (see Chapter 1
on primary versus consolidated stock prices), which represent less than
30 percent of all shares traded on those stocks (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012). The
second deficiency is that the index is updated only once every few seconds.
Both deficiencies lead to a discrepancy between the true, most up-to-date
market value of a basket of component stocks and the index value itself. As a
result, the index future value can be expected to lag the instantaneous market
value of the stocks. If the index future value is higher than the instantaneous
market value, we can simply short the future and vice versa. Where can we
get this true, instantaneous market value of the stocks? We would, of course,
need to subscribe to the direct data feed of every U.S. stock exchange and
ECN (and not the SIAC feed) and monitor the trade prices for all the stocks
in the index with millisecond latency in all these venues. Nobody said highfrequency trading is easy!

97
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

of stocks constituting an ETF and the ETF itself. In this case, we choose
just a proper subset of the constituent stocks to form the portfolio. One
selection method is to just pick all the stocks that cointegrate individually with the ETF. We will demonstrate the method by using the most
famous ETF of all: SPY.
We will pick one year of data (in our example, January 1, 2007, to December 31, 2007) as a training set and look for all the stocks that cointegrate with SPY with at least 90 percent probability using the Johansen test.
Then we form a portfolio of these stocks with equal capital on each stock,
and confirm using the Johansen test again that this long-only portfolio still
cointegrates with SPY. This step is necessary because an arbitrary assignment of equal capital weight to each stock does not necessarily produce a
portfolio price series that cointegrates with that of SPY, even if each of the
constituent stocks is cointegrating with SPY. We are using log price in this
second test because we expect to rebalance this portfolio every day so that
the capital on each stock is constant. (See the discussions in Chapter 3.)
After confirming cointegration, we can then backtest the linear mean reversion strategy described in Chapter 2. The MATLAB source codes are
displayed in Example 4.2.

Example 4.2: Arbitrage between SPY and Its
Component Stocks
This code can be downloaded as indexArb.m. It requires as input a TxN
array cl, where T is the number of days, N is the number of stocks in
the universe, and cl the daily closes. The stock universe we used to
backtest is the same as that used in Example 4.1, and the symbols it
contains are in a cell array stocks. All these arrays are packaged in a
structure stks. In addition, we need a Tx1 array cl for the daily closes
of SPY. These are packaged in a structure etf. Of course, we must
ensure that dates for stks and etf match. The common trading dates are
contained in a Tx1 array tday. We will run the Johansen test on only
the first part of this data: January 1, 2007, to December 31, 2007.
This is designated as the training set.
trainDataIdx=find(tday>=20070101 & tday<=20071231);
testDataIdx=find(tday > 20071231);
isCoint=false(size(stks.stocks));

98

% Combine the two time series into a matrix y2 for
% input into Johansen test

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

for s=1:length(stks.stocks)

y2=[stks.cl(trainDataIdx, s), etf.cl(trainDataIdx)];
badData=any(isnan(y2), 2);
y2(badData, :)=[]; % remove any missing data
if (size(y2, 1) > 250)
results=johansen(y2, 0, 1); % johansen test
% with non-zero offset but zero drift, and with
% the lag k=1.
if (results.lr1(1) > results.cvt(1, 1))
isCoint(s)=true;
end
end
end
length(find(isCoint))

Based on the Johansen test between each stock in SPX with SPY
over the training set, we find that there are 98 stocks that cointegrate
(each separately) with SPY. Now we can form a long-only portfolio
with all stocks that cointegrate with SPY, with equal capital allocation.
We must then test the cointegration of this portfolio with SPY.

Example 4.2 (Continued)
yN=stks.cl(trainDataIdx, isCoint);
logMktVal_long=sum(log(yN), 2); % The net market value of
the long-only portfolio is same as the “spread”
% Confirm that the portfolio cointegrates with SPY
ytest=[logMktVal_long, log(etf.cl(trainDataIdx))];
results=johansen(ytest, 0, 1); % johansen test with non-zero
offset but zero drift, and with the lag k=1.
prt(results);
% Output:
% Johansen MLE estimates
% NULL:
Trace Statistic Crit 90%
% r <= 0 variable 1
15.869
13.429
% r <= 1 variable 2
6.197
2.705
%
% NULL:
Eigen Statistic Crit 90%
% r <= 0 variable 1
9.671
12.297
% r <= 1 variable 2
6.197
2.705

Crit 95% Crit 99%
14.264
18.520
3.841
6.635

99

-0.2799
56.0933

The Johansen test indicates that the long-only portfolio does
cointegrate with SPY with better than 95 percent probability. So
we can form a long-short stationary portfolio comprising both the
stocks and SPY, using the Johansen eigenvector to determine the
weights of SPY versus that of the stock portfolio. (There are, in
fact, two cointegrating relations, but we will pick the one with the
largest eigenvalue—the first column of the eigenmatrix—to form
this stationary portfolio.) As the Johansen test was performed on
the log prices, the hedge ratios (represented by the weights array) on
the stocks or SPY represent dollar capital allocation, not number of
shares, as explained in Chapter 3. (The weight on each individual
stock is, of course, the same, due to our assumption of equal capital
allocation, but it differs from the weight on SPY.)
(Continued )

MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

results.evec
%
% ans =
%
%
1.0939
%
-105.5600

Crit 95% Crit 99%
15.494
19.935
3.841
6.635

Example 4.2 (Continued)
We then apply the linear mean reversion strategy on this portfolio
over the test period January 2, 2008, to April 9, 2012, much in the
same way as Example 2.8, except that in the current program we
have fixed the look-back used for calculating the moving average and
standard deviations of the portfolio market value to be 5, with the
benefit of hindsight.
% Apply linear mean-reversion model on test set
yNplus=[stks.cl(testDataIdx, isCoint), etf.cl(testDataIdx)]; ...
% Array of stock and ETF prices
weights=[repmat(results.evec(1, 1), size(stks.cl(testDataIdx,
isCoint))), ...
repmat(results.evec(2, 1), size(etf.cl(testDataIdx)))]; ...
% capital allocation among the stocks and SPY.
logMktVal=smartsum(weights.*log(yNplus), 2); % Log market
% value of long-short portfolio
lookback=5;

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

100

numUnits=-(logMktVal-movingAvg(logMktVal, lookback)) ...
./movingStd(logMktVal, lookback);
positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(weights, 2)]).*weights;
% positions is the dollar capital in each stock or SPY.
pnl=smartsum(lag(positions, 1).*(log(yNplus)- ...
lag(log(yNplus), 1)), 2);
ret=pnl./smartsum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);
ret(isnan(ret))=0;

The APR of this strategy is 4.5 percent, and the Sharpe ratio is
1.3. As you can see from the cumulative returns chart (Figure 4.3),
the performance decreases as time goes on, partly because we have
not retrained the model periodically to select new constituent stocks
with new hedge ratios. In a more complete backtest, we can add this
dynamic updating of the hedge ratios.
The same methodology can, of course, be applied to any ETFs,
indices, or subindices you like. Furthermore, we can use a future instead
of an ETF if such a future exists that tracks that index or subindex,
although in this case one has to be careful that the prices of the future
used in backtest are contemporaneous with the closing prices for the
stocks. (This was pointed out as a potential pitfall in Chapter 1.)

Example 4.2 (Continued)

FIGURE 4.3 Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage

between SPY and Its Component Stocks

1. The Johansen test implementation that I know of can accept a maximum
of 12 symbols only (LeSage, 1998).
2. The eigenvectors will usually involve both long and short stock positions. This means that we can’t have a long-only portfolio of stocks that
is hedged with a short SPY position or vice versa. This is a problem
because if we have short positions in the stock portfolio and a short SPY
position simultaneously, we would be double short on some stocks even
when we are long the stock portfolio, increasing our specific risks.
There is an alternative method of constructing a long-only portfolio of
stocks.We can still use Johansen test to individually test each stock in SPX for
cointegration with SPY. After this subset of stocks is found, we include them
in a stock portfolio and then use a constrained optimization method (e.g.,
genetic algorithm or simulated annealing) to minimize the average absolute

101
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

You may wonder why we didn’t just directly run a Johansen cointegration
test on all 500 stocks in SPX plus SPY, and let the algorithm automatically
find an eigenvector of cointegrating instruments that include the SPY. (Not
all cointegrating relations from the stocks+SPY universe necessarily include
SPY, but we need only pick one that does.) The problem with this approach
is twofold:

difference between this stock portfolio price series and the SPY price series.
The variables that we want to optimize in this case are the hedge ratios of
the stocks, and the constraints are that all hedge ratios must be positive. The
MATLAB Global Optimization Toolbox provides functions for either genetic
algorithm or simulated annealing for this constrained optimization task.
This strategy suffers from the same short-sale constraint that plagued any
strategies involving short stock positions. However, the problem is not too
serious here because the stock portfolio is quite diversified with about 98
stocks. If a few stocks have to be removed due to the short-sale constraint,
the impact should be limited.
■ Cross-Sectional Mean Reversion: A Linear

Long-Short Model

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

102

In mean reversion trading based on cointegration, we form a portfolio with
a fixed set of instruments and with either a fixed number of shares or a fixed
dollar capital for each instrument. This fixed number may be determined by
fiat (as in Example 4.2), linear regression, the Johansen test, or constrained
optimization. But there is no reason why the portfolio has to consist of the
same fixed set of instruments or the same weightings over this set of instruments every day. For many portfolio stock-trading strategies, the edge
comes precisely from the intelligent daily selection or reweighting of stocks.
In this type of so-called “cross-sectional” mean reversion strategy, the individual stock (and this type of strategy most commonly involves stocks, not
futures or currencies) price does not necessarily revert to its own historical
mean. Rather, the focus is on their short-term relative returns, and we rely
on the serial anti-correlation of these relative returns to generate profits. In
most cases, the relative returns are computed as a stock’s return minus the
average returns of all the stocks in a particular universe. So we expect the
underperformance of a stock to be followed by overperformance, and vice
versa. Since we are measuring only relative return, it is quite possible that
we will short a stock even though its previous (absolute) return is negative,
as long as it is not as negative as the average return across all stocks in the
universe.
One interesting feature of cross-sectional strategies is that, in contrast to
“time series” strategies, we should not expect profits from every individual
stock, as some of them may serve as “hedges” on some days. Rather, profits
can be obtained only in the aggregate across all the stocks.
