
Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

261

find the one with the highest predictive correlation to the S&P 500. It
turned out to be the level of butter production in Bangladesh, with a correlation of about 0.70, an unusually high correlation in the domain of economic forecasting.
Intuition alone would tell us a high correlation between Bangladesh
butter and the S&P 500 is specious, but now imagine if the time series
with the highest correlation had a plausible connection to the S&P 500.
Intuition would not warn us. As Leinweber points out, when the total
number of time series examined is taken into account, the correlation
between Bangladesh butter and the S&P 500 Index is not statistically
significant.
The bottom line: whether one searches sport statistics, the Bible, the
random writings of monkeys, the universe of lottery players, or financial
market history, data mining can lead to false conclusions if the data mining bias is not taken into account.

THE PROBLEM OF ERRONEOUS KNOWLEDGE
IN OBJECTIVE TECHNICAL ANAIXSIS
TA is comprised of two mutually exclusive domains-subjective and objective. To recap, objective TA is confined to methods that are sufficiently
well defined that they can be reduced to a computerized algorithm and
back tested. Everything else is, by default, subjective TA.
Both domains are contaminated with erroneous knowledge, but the
falsehoods are of very different types. The loosely defined propositions
of subjective TA carry no cognitive freight, generate no testable predictions,S and are, therefore, shielded from empirical challenge. Without
this crucial procedure for excising worthless ideas, falsehoods accumulate. As a result, subjective TA is not a legitimate body of knowledge but
a collection of folklore resting on a flimsy foundation of anecdote and
intuition.
Objective TA methods have the potential to be valid knowledge but
only if back-test results are considered in light of randomness (sampling variability) and data-mining bias. Because many objective practitioners are unaware of these effects, falsehoods accumulate in this
domain as well.
Erroneous objective TA manifests as out-of-sample9 performance deterioration-a rule that performs well in the sample used for back testing
but then performs worse in out-of-sample data. This problem is illustrated
in Figure 6.1.

262 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Cumulative
Gains

$

Observed
Performance
50%. ROI

In-Sample

Out-of-sam pie

............................

~

Time

1?IGURE 6.1

Out-of-sample performance deterioration.

Explanations for Out-of-Sample Deterioration:
Old and New

Out-of-sample performance deterioration is a well-\mown problem. 10 Objective technicians have proposed a number of explanations. I propose a
relatively new one, based on data-mining bias.
The least plausible explanation attributes the problem to random variation. Although it is true that a rule's performance will vary from one sample of history to another due to sampling variability, this explanation does
not even fit the evidence. If random variation were responsible, then outof-sample performance would be higher than in-sample performance
about as frequently as it is lower. Anyone experienced with back testing
\mows that out-of-sample performance is inferior far more often.
A second rationale is that the market's dynamics changed when the
out-of-sample period began. It is reasonable to assume that financial
markets are nonstationary systems. ll However, it is not reasonable to
assume that each time a rule fails out of sample it is because market dynamics have changed. It would be odd, almost fiendish, for the market
to always change its ways just when a rule moves from the technician's
laboratory to the real world of trading. It is simply implausible to suggest that a market's dynamics change as frequently as rules fail out of
sample.
An even more elaborate explanation, also based on changing market
dynamics, invokes the additional assumption that the change occurred because the rule has been adopted by too many traders. This story asserts
that the buying and selling of the traders using the rule has destroyed the

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

263

market pattern that accounted for the rule's back-test profitability. This rationale also lacks plausibility. Given that there are an almost infinite number of rules that could be formulated, it would be unlikely that a large
enough number of participants would adopt any particular rule. Even
when numerous traders adopt similar rules, as is the case with futures
trading funds that employ objective trend-following methods, reduced
rule performance seems to be due to changes in market volatility that are
not related to the usage of technical systems. 12
A more plausible explanation 13 of out-of-sample performance breakdown is based on randomness. It asserts that market dynamics are a combination of systematic or patterned behavior and randomness or noise.
Valid rules exploit the market's systematic features. Because the systematic component should continue to manifest in out-of-sample data, it is a
dependable source of rule profits. In contrast, the random component is a
nonrecurring phenomenon that will manifest differently in each sample of
data. It is reasoned that a portion of a rule's in-sample performance was
luck-a coincidental correspondence between the rule's signals and the
market's nonrecurring noise. These lucky profits will not manifest out of
sample, and so future performance will fall below past performance. This
explanation is closer to the mark, but it is incomplete. Randomness is only
one villain.
A more complete account of out-of-sample performance deterioration
is based on the data-mining bias. It names two villains: (1) randomness,
which is a relatively large component of observed performance and (2)
the logic of data mining, in which a best-performing rule is selected after
the back-tested performances of all tested rules are available for the data
miner's examination. When these two effects combine, they cause the observed performance of the best rule to overstate its future (expected) performance. Thus, it is likely that the best rule's future performance will be
worse than the level of performance that caused it to be selected from the
universe of rules tested.
The data-mining bias explanation for out-of-sample performance
deterioration is superior to the one based on changed market dynamics.
Both explanations fit the data in the sense that they are both consistent
with the fact that out-of-sample performance tends to be worse. However, the latter explanation invokes the assumption that market dynamics have changed. The data-mining bias explanation does not. It simply
says that the process of data mining favors the selection of rules that
benefited from good luck during the back test. When choosing among a
set of explanations that are equally adept at accounting for a phenomenon, it is wisest to choose the one making the fewest assumptions. This
is the principle of simplicity known as Occam's Razor, which was discussed in Chapter 3.

264 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
As will be shown, the observed performance of a rule can be decomposed into two independent components: randomness and the rule's inherent predictive power. Of these two, randomness is by far the more
dominant component. Thus, the rule with the best-observed performance
was most likely the beneficiary of good luck. That is to say, randomness
boosted the rule's performance above the level attributable to its true predictive power, if it possessed any. The opposite is the case for the rule
with the worst observed performance. It was most likely negatively impacted by luck. By selecting the rule with the highest observed performance, the data miner winds up picking a rule that experienced a large
component of good luck. Because luck cannot be counted on to repeat,
this rule's out-of-sample performance is likely to settle back toward a level
that is representative of its inherent predictive power. This makes it probable that out-of-sample performance will be lower than the level of performance that allowed the rule to win the performance competition. The
bottom line: out-of-sample performance deterioration of the best rule is
most probably a fall from an unrealistically high expectation rather than
an actual decline in the rule's predictive power.

DATA HI ING
Data mining is the extraction of knowledge, in the form of patterns,
rules, models, functions, and such, from large databases. The limitations and biases of human intelligence make this task nearly impossible
for the unaided mind when the knowledge involves multiple variables,
nonlinear relationships, or high levels of noise. Thus, data mining relies
on computerized algorithms for knowledge extraction. An excellent discussion of the principal methods used in data mining can be found in
Elements of Statistical Learning,J4 Predictive Data Mining: A Practical Guide,15 and Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques. 16

Data Mining as a Multiple Comparison Procedure
Data mining is based on a problem solving approach called a multiple
comparison procedure l7 (MCP). The basic idea behind an MCP is to test
many different solutions to the problem and pick the one that performs
the best according to some criterion. Three elements are required to apply
an MCP: (1) a well-defined problem, (2) a set of candidate solutions, and
(3) a figure of merit or scoring function that quantifies the goodness of
each candidate's performance. After all scores are in, they are compared

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

265

and the candidate with the highest score (best-observed performance) is
selected as the best solution for the problem.
Consider how this problem-solving paradigm applies in the context of
rule data mining:
1. The problem: timing long and short positions in a financial market to
generate profits.
2. A set of candidate solutions (solution universe or solution space):
a set of rules proposed by the objective technician.
3. Figure of merit: a measure of financial performance such as the average rate of return over a historical test period, Sharpe ratio, return
to Ulcer Index. IS
The performances of all rules are determined by back testing, and the
rule achieving the highest performance is selected.
Rule Data Mining as a Specification Search
Data mining can be understood as a specification search. That is to say, it
is a hunt for the specifications of the rule that produces the highest performance. The specifications are a set of mathematical and/or logical operations applied to one or more market data series thus transforming them
into a time series of market positions dictated by the rule.
Suppose the rule defined below turned out to be the best performing rule:

Hold a long position in the S&P 500 if the ratio of Dow Jones Transportation Average close divided by the S&P 500 close is greater than
its 50-day moving average, else hold a short position.
The rule is specified by two mathematical operators: ratio and moving average; two logical operators: the inequality operator greater-than,
the conditional if, then, else; a single numerical constant: 50; and two data
series: Dow Jones Transports and S&P 500. Data mining discovered that
this set of specifications produced better performance than any alternative set of specifications that was tested.

Types of Searches
Data mining searches range from the simple to the sophisticated. One of
the ways in which they differ is how broadly the search universe is defined. This section considers three definitions of the search universe,

266 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
starting with the narrowest search and progressing to the broadest. All approaches to data mining, whether they search simply and narrowly or
broadly using the most advanced methods are subject to data-mining bias.

'-arameter Optimization. The narrowest form of data mining is parameter optimization. Here, the search universe is confined to rules with
the same form differing only in terms of their parameter values. Thus,
the search is restricted to finding the parameter value(s) of the highestperforming rule of a particular form.
An example of a rule form would be the dual-moving-average crossover
rule. It is specified by two parameters; look-back periods for the short-term
and long-term moving average. Signals are given when the short-term moving average crosses above (buy) and below (sell) a longer-term moving average. Parameter optimization searches for the pair of parameter values
that yields the highest performance.
The maximum number of dual-moving-average crossover rules that
can be searched is equal to the product of the number of values tested for
the short-term parameter and number of values tested for the long-term
parameter. A search that considers all these combinations is referred to as
an exhaustive or brute-force search.
There are more intelligent search methods that restrict the search to
combinations that are more likely to yield good results. This is accomplished by using the performances of parameter combinations tested early
in the search to guide the combinations that will be tested at later stages.
One such intelligent search method is the genetic algorithm, a technique
based loosely on the principles of biological evolution. Its demonstrated
ability to find parameter combinations that are close to optimal relatively
quickly makes it especially useful when the number of possible parameter
combinations is high. Genetic algorithms have also proven to be effective
when performance is impacted strongly by randomness, which renders
more conventional guided search methods based on calculus impractical.
Excellent discussions of optimization methods can be found in Pardo, \9
and a review of various advanced methods can be found in Katz and McCormickzo and Kaufman. z1
Rule Searching. A broader version of data mining is rule searching.
Here, the universe of rules differ in their conceptual fonn as well as their
parameter values. The dual-moving-average crossover rule is one formalism for trend-following. Thus, it is simply one form in the broader category of trend-following rules that also include channel breakouts,
moving-average bands, and so forth. The general category of trendfollowing rules is merely one technical analysis category among others
that include counter-trend (mean-reversion) rules,2z extreme value rules,

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

267

divergence rules,23 diffusion rules, and so forth. Each category can be realized with numerous specific rule forms.
Part Two of this book presents a data-mining case study that is based
on rule searching. The study will focus on three rule categories or themes:
trends, extreme-values and transitions, and divergence. Each theme is realized with a specific rule form, which is defined in Chapter 8.
Though rule searching considers a multitude of rule forms, each rule's
complexity remains fixed throughout the course of the search. Complexity refers to the number of parameters required to specify the rule. In
other words rule searching, as defined herein, does not involve combining
simple rules to produce more complex rules

Rule Induction with Variable Complexity. The broadest and
most ambitious form of data mining is rule induction. Here the search
considers rules of undefined complexity. As the search proceeds, rules
of ever-greater complexity are considered. A complex rule might be
thought of as a composition of a simpler rule conjoined by logical operators or combined with a mathematical function as in a multivariate
model. Thus rule-induction data mining is concerned with finding the
rule of optimal complexity.
In contrast to less ambitious forms of data mining in which a rule's
complexity is defined at the outset of the search, rule induction uses machine learning (autonomous induction) to find the degree of complexity
that produces the best performance. One scheme for rule induction
starts by testing individual rules. Next, pairs of rules are considered to
see if their performance is better than the best individual rule. Gradually, progressively more complex rules are tested and evaluated. In effect, rule-induction methods learn how to combine rules to optimize
performance.
Genetic algorithms, neural networks, recursive partitioning, kernel regression, support-vector machines, and boosted trees are some of the
methods used for these most ambitious of data-mining ventures. An excellent discussion of various methods and supporting statistical theory can
be found in The Elements of Statistical Learning by Hastie, Tibshirani,
and Friedman. 24

OBJECTIVE 'fA RESEARCH
The goal of the objective technician is the discovery of a rule(s) that will
be profitable in the future. The research method is back testing, which
produces an observable measure of performance. On the basis of this

268 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
statistic, an inference is made about a population parameter, the rule's
future or expected performance. It can be said, therefore, that the
essence of objective TA is statistical inference.

Why Objective Technicians Must Data Mine
The problem of out-of-sample perfoffilance failure has encouraged some
practitioners of objective TA to reject data mining. This is neither a wise
nor viable position. Today, an objective technician who refuses to data
mine is like the taxi driver who refuses to abandon the horse-drawn carriage-a charming relic but no longer suitable for getting to one's destination efficiently.
Several factors compel the adoption of data mining as the preferred
method of knowledge acquisition. First, it works. Experiments presented
later in this chapter will show that under fairly general conditions, the
greater the number of rules back tested the greater the likelihood of finding a good rule.
Second, technological trends favor data mining. The cost effectiveness of personal computers, the availability of powerful back-testing and
data-mining software, and the availability of historical databases now
make data mining practical for individuals. As recently as a decade ago,
the costs limited data mining to institutional investors.
Third, at its current stage of evolution, TA lacks the theoretical
foundation that would permit a more traditional scientific approach to
knowledge acquisition. In developed sciences, such as physics, a single
hypothesis can be deduced from established theory and its predictions
can be tested against new observations. In the absence of theory, a
data-mining approach is called for, in which a multitude of hypotheses
(rules) are proposed and tested. The risk of this shotgun approach is
fool's gold-rules that fit the data by accident. Steps that can minimize
this risk are discussed later in this chapter.

Single-Rule Back-Testing versus Data Mining
Not all back testing is data mining. When just a single rule is proposed
and back tested, there is no data mining. This mode of research is illustrated in Figure 6.2. If the rule's back test proves to be unsatisfactory, the
research stops and other more practical means of earning a living are
considered.
Data mining involves the back testing of many rules and picking one
based on its superior performance. This process is illustrated in Figure
6.3. Note that as depicted here an initial unsatisfactory performance by

269

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

Satisfactory?
YES

Get
Job
NO- Working
at
McDonalds

I"IGURE; 6.2 Single rule back testing.

Satisfactory 7

NO-----.t

Start
Data
Mining

YES

FIGURE; 6.3 Rule Data mining.

the first rule tested does not stop the research. The rule is refined or a new
rule is defined, and it is tested and its perfonnance is evaluated. The cycle
continues until a rule with good perfonnance is produced. This process
may involve testing tens, hundreds, thousands, or even greater numbers
of rules.

270 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Legitimate Uses of Observed Performance

For this discussion, the assumed performance statistic is the mean rate
of return over the back-test period. The observed performance statistic
can play a legitimate role both in single-rule back testing and in data
mining. However, the roles are different. In single-rule back testing, observed performance serves as an estimator of future performance. In
data mining, observed performance serves as a selection criterion. Problems arise for the data miner when observed performance is asked to
play both roles.
In single-rule back testing, the tested rule's mean return can legitimately be used as an unbiased estimate of the rule's expected return. In
other words, the tested rule's most likely future return is its back tested
return. This is merely a restatement of a something covered in Chapter
4. There, we learned that a sample mean provides an unbiased estimate
of the mean of the parent population that gave birth to the sample. The
sample mean may err due to the random variation of sampling. It may
be greater than the population mean or less than it, but neither error is
more likely. This principle pertains to the case of a single-rule back test.
The rule's mean return in a back test is an unbiased estimate of its expected return in the future. And although its historic mean return is indeed its most likely return in the future, its performance may prove to
be higher or lower, with neither being more likely. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.4.
In data mining, the back-test performance statistic plays a very different role than it does in single-rule back testing. In data mining, back-

Cumulative
Gains

$
Expected
Performance
Observed
Performance
Back-Test

+/Random Variation
~----In-Sample - - - -......I---Future---.

Time

FIGURE 6.4 Expected performance for single rule back test.

271

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

tested performance serves as a selection criterion. That is to say, it is
used to identify the best rule. The mean returns of all back-tested rules
are compared and the one with the highest return is selected. This, too,
is a perfectly legitimate use of the back test (observed) performance
statistic.
It is legitimate in the sense that the rule with the highest back-tested
mean return is in fact the rule that is most likely to perform the best in the
future. This is certainly not guaranteed, but it is the most reasonable inference that can be made. A formal mathematical proof of this statement is
offered by White. 25
The Data Miner's Mistake: Misuse
of Observed Performance
