
Why Trading Tactics?
The key to successful trading requires thorough preparation. Investing the time to identify
Harmonic Trading opportunities is only half of the battle. The other part that can be easily
overlooked is the execution of the trade. Therefore, it is essential to create a set of rules in
advance to resolve potential problems that may arise throughout the trading process.
Trading tactics are basic guidelines and strategies that optimize Harmonic Trading decisions.
Such strategies provide rules for nearly every trading situation, attempting to maximize profits
while limiting losses. Clearly, the Harmonic Trading techniques provide an accurate and
effective means to identify critical turning points. However, each reversal is not the same.
Hence, each monetary result—profit or loss—will differ based upon two critical factors:
1. The market’s reaction to the harmonic area.
2. Your response to the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
In this process, a variety of factors and potential trading decisions must be continually considered to maximize the result of the position. Since the same patterns yield different results, it
can be difficult to try to “outguess the market” and know which setups will work. However, if a
consistent set of rules is applied throughout the decision-making process, fewer mistakes will
be made and more accurate assessments will improve the overall results of trade executions. In
essence, the actions taken in accordance with these guidelines attempt to maximize profit while
reducing risk.

171

172

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

What a Reversal Should Do
The critical factor in determining whether to execute a trade involves an understanding of how
price action should act, after it has reversed from a harmonic area. Since a convergence of
harmonic numbers defines a critical area for potential turning points, price action that begins
to reverse from that area should clearly continue in that direction. In fact, in my research of
harmonic price action, I have found that the stronger and quicker the reversal, the greater
potential for a nice move. This is incredibly important because sharp reversals from a PRZ
provide clear direction for the future price action. However, price action that is unable to reverse
the predominant trend after testing a PRZ frequently is one of the primary signs of a potentially
failed or invalid pattern setup.

“You Can Only Profit…”
My good friend Bill Sourbey has repeated the following phrase to me in our discussions of the
market through the years:
“You can only profit from that which you can anticipate.”

He continually has repeated this principle to me. It has immense relevance to the execution
philosophy of harmonic patterns. First, the anticipation of the completion of a pattern establishes the action to be taken. The PRZ defines the limits of the trade, including the execution point,
the stop loss limit, and profit target. If a price structure possesses the proper Fibonacci ratio
alignment, the anticipation of its completion of the PRZ to validate the pattern creates an
Action-Task Trading Process Model.
The Action involves the preparation and understanding of all of the most pertinent and
effective rules for each pattern to successfully trade the opportunity. The Task involves
executing positions based upon the price action at the completion of the pattern, according
to the system of Harmonic Trading rules that defines every possibility, in advance. Does the
structure possess the required elements to be a valid pattern? If not, find a setup that does. If
so, where does it complete? What happens immediately as the entire completion area is
tested? Does the predominant trend continue or does the price action react to the numbers
defining the zone?
These are all anticipatory events that have known possible outcomes. Hence, trading tactics
within the execution process define a plan that outlines actions for all possible considerations
during the trading process.
The Action of preparing and determining which positions to execute follows a set of
identification rules that quantifies patterns, assesses price action, and defines the parameters
of each trade, including the entry, the stop loss and the profit objective. Such preparation is
critical to prevent execution mistakes and to determine the optimal entry within the PRZ.
Furthermore, thorough preparation is essential when faced with volatile real-time situations,
in particular.

Chapter 9 Trade Execution

173

Although anything can happen in the financial markets, a thorough understanding of a
potential trade’s critical technical levels will reduce confusion. For example, extreme price action
that clearly violates a PRZ will frequently provide signs of the impending violation. A complete
knowledge of the set up and the critical harmonic price levels will reduce losses as pattern
failures are spotted well in advance. These situations develop with experience but the task of
preparation is an essential part of the trading process for every setup.
The Task of execution represents the actualization of the preparation to determine the
validity of the opportunity, as defined by the rules of the Harmonic Trading approach.
Although the decision of whether or not to execute a trade may seem simple, there are many
considerations that may affect the exact entry level or negate the setup altogether. Therefore,
the task of execution presents many challenges.
The completion of a pattern creates a unique “technical window,” as the nature of price
action following the entire test of a Potential Reversal Zone can indicate a great deal about the
future price direction of the predominant trend. The action of defining a setup in advance helps
to outline the numeric limits of the trade and the technical window, as well. The price action
should experience some type of reaction in the PRZ as an early sign of a potential reversal.
After a pattern completes, an execution should attempt to capitalize on these small but significantly indicative signals. The ability to interpret a pattern’s validity within this technical window
will improve with experience, as the same set of circumstances continually manifest traits of a
valid reversal well before the big move begins. Although the assessment of price action within
this technical window is one of the most challenging aspects of the trading process, the
completion of patterns will typically exhibit distinct evidence of whether or not they will fail.
Therefore, it is essential to assess harmonic setups within this technical window to determine
the task of execution.
It is important to emphasize that the rules within the Harmonic Trading plan are designed
to anticipate all possible technical events that have known outcomes. Hence, such trading
tactics within the execution process define a plan that addresses all possible actions for
each consideration throughout the trading process. However, there is a price to pay in this
anticipation. It’s called the price of the next tick.

The Price of Technical Information
The price of technical information essentially comes down to the next tick. Depending upon the
position, the next tick can make the difference between entering or exiting. If an entry is being
prepared, each tick that transpires brings the potential opportunity that much closer (or farther)
from the actual realization of the execution. As price action approaches a PRZ, the validity of
the pattern must be assessed relative to the current trading behavior. Since the validity of a
harmonic pattern depends upon the price action in the PRZ, each price bar that follows the
initial test of the PRZ can provide more information regarding the future potential of the existing
opportunity. However, a delayed execution in waiting for confirmation of the next tick can often
result in missed opportunities.

174

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Every position faces these assessments throughout the entire trading process. It is a type of
opportunity cost for that position. If the next tick goes in my favor, I have risked losing one tick
during the time of the next decision.
The price of the next tick is best related to reversal situations where a profit target has been
attained. For example, let’s say you have a profit in a long position but you are considering selling because your targets have been achieved. Due to the profitable positions, greed or fear may
stall exit strategies to see “how high will it go?.” So, each tick is related in that the next set of
data will confirm or deny the current position.
Although it is common to give back some of the reversal to allow breathing room for the
price action to assert itself and to determine the extent of the move, the price of technical
information must be assessed in comparison with the parameters of the trade. Although
this concept will be covered thoroughly in Chapter 11, it is important to understand the
decision-making process involved with deciphering price action, especially at the completion
of harmonic patterns.

Execution in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
The essence of Harmonic Trading is executing in the PRZ. As it relates to pattern completions,
it is within this “harmonic window” that a great deal of information can be obtained. Remember,
harmonic patterns define specific zones that can act as a signpost of potential future price
action. If a PRZ of a distinct pattern possesses several numbers in a distinct area, the price
range should be considered very harmonic. If the price action reverses from this area, the PRZ
could be considered as an important turning point. If the price action does not reverse, it would
indicate that the predominant trend is quite strong. The ability to interpret and to decipher the
price action within these “harmonic windows” is the determining factor in turning patterns into
profits!

Reversal Possibilities
Effective execution requires the discipline to examine a precise PRZ and understand in
advance all reversal possibilities.
After executing a position at the completion of a pattern, the price action can do one of three
things:
1. Exceed the PRZ into the Stop Loss Zone.
2. Reverse slightly off the PRZ and consolidate.
3. Reverse off the PRZ and provide a nice cushion within a relatively short period
of time.

Chapter 9 Trade Execution

175

Let’s consider the possibilities:
1. The price action moves into the Stop Loss Zone and requires that the loss be taken—
next trade. Although this may not be the desired goal, stop losses are a part of the
business of trading. Therefore, it is important to remember that all setups are not going
to work out. But, if this approach is implemented consistently over the course of many
trades, these setups will define a majority of favorable trades.
2. Harmonic setups typically provide some type of initial reaction at a minimum after
testing a distinct PRZ. However, all setups are not the same. In this case, when the
price action briefly reverses and continues in the predominant trend, it is critical to
secure the quick profit before the trade becomes a loss.
3. Price action that reverses for a brief period after testing a PRZ frequently provides
a “profit cushion” that provides enough time for the extent of the reversal to be
determined. After a small profit is achieved, the trade management techniques are
employed to maximize profits and effectively handle the position.
Although this may seem oversimplified, the execution of a trade can result in a profit, loss, or
scratch (break even). After a valid harmonic pattern has been identified, the final judgment of
whether to pull the trigger can come down to a few price bars. Utilizing the PRZ as the ideal
pivot area, the extent of the pattern’s validity depends upon specific reversal action within this
defined range.
One critical factor in gauging price action in the PRZ can depend upon which numbers are
the most important. A convergence of a pattern’s projections can be peculiar because in a
reversal zone that contains several harmonic calculations, it is difficult to know which point will
end the trend. Although these rules are generalized, I believe that they serve as important
guidelines to accurately ascertain a priority order of importance to the multitude the harmonic
numbers that may comprise a pattern’s PRZ.

Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) Tips
• Look for an area of convergence. History has proven that a convergence of Fibonacci
ratio projections, especially specific harmonic price patterns, can identify critical technical areas of support and resistance. When a distinct pattern possesses a congregation
of ratio projections in a defined price range, it is possible to determine the potential
future direction of the trend.
• Look for where the greatest group of calculations converges. The key to utilizing
these harmonic measures when analyzing a price chart is to determine the area where
the greatest group of patterns complete and important ratio calculations converge.
• The bigger the number the more significant the harmonic area. The Fibonacci
number that is calculated from the largest price leg is usually the most significant at a
pattern’s completion point. This principle applies to both time and price. For example, a
pattern that develops on a weekly chart will be more significant than a setup on a daily
basis. Also, if there is a smaller pattern within a larger pattern, the larger pattern usually
will be more significant.

176

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

• The amount of numbers within the PRZ. The number of ratio projections and pattern
completions within a specific area will dictate the significance of a particular price level.
• The proximity of numbers within the PRZ. If a PRZ possesses several numbers, the
ideal area for a pattern’s completion and ultimate reversal will likely occur where the
majority of the zone’s numbers complete.
The proper identification and interpretation of the price action in the PRZ at the completion
of a pattern is the defining element for success. The preparation and discipline required to
“execute in the zone” is no small task. The determination of a pattern’s completion requires
patience and practice. The ability to capitalize on the reactive first test of the Potential Reversal
Zone is critical in turning patterns into profits. As a pattern completes, the price action can react
sharply, requiring a quick assessment and decision of the execution. The key is to be prepared
as the price action enters the zone on the initial test.

Entering the PRZ: The Initial Test
A well-defined PRZ usually provides some type of initial reaction on the first test of most
harmonic patterns. At a minimum, it has been my experience that distinct PRZs frequently can
provide some nominal yet tradable reaction, regardless of the eventual validity of the pattern.
Although the extent of the reversal can vary, it is important for the initial reaction to clearly
reverse from the entire range of harmonic numbers to validate the pattern.
A common sign of a failed setup is price action that merely consolidates in the PRZ before
resuming in the direction of the predominant trend. Although the determination of valid patterns
requires some experience to consistently differentiate the winners from the losers, the initial
test of the PRZ will always be one of the most critical aspects of the decision-making process.
The price bar(s) that form on the initial test will serve as the projected terminal point for measuring the anticipated reversal. These concepts will be covered in actual chart examples later in
this material. However, the significance of the price action on the initial test of the PRZ must be
emphasized as a vital element of the Harmonic Trading process.
The initial test can occur quickly, and it is not uncommon to miss great pattern completions
on the first test due to the volatility of the price action. The best advice I can offer is to be prepared and track a group of potential patterns as trading candidates. Preparation is essential to
capitalize on the initial test of distinct pattern completions, as these setups typically offer a
reactive yet profitable move.
Many reversal situations experience sharp price action that occurs within a small window of
opportunity. For example, it is common for significant long-term patterns to reverse from a PRZ
within a day or two after initially testing the zone. This can be frustrating, as a slight distraction
could cause the entire trade to be missed. I have encountered many instances where I’ve
missed an anticipated completion of a major intra-day pattern in the index futures like the S&P
500 because I left my screens for 5 minutes to get a cup of coffee. It happens, but the market
waits for no one.

Chapter 9 Trade Execution

177

Remember, the “harmonic window of opportunity,” as defined by the PRZ, is a very precise
area that represents the culmination a several significant price movements. The initial test of
a PRZ represents the completion of these structures and the anticipated change of the
predominant trend. This is significant because, once completed, the potential change in price
action can be dramatic. Therefore, it is essential to be prepared in advance to capitalize on
these situations. However, even the most prepared trader can still be affected by a common
problem of trade execution—hesitation.

The Persimmon Effect
J. M. Hurst, in his profound book The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing, eloquently
discussed the problem of hesitation or what he called the Persimmon Effect:
“The ideal time to buy a stock is exactly when it looks the least
interesting! Similarly: The ideal time to sell a stock short is when it
looks as though it will never stop going up!
You will put a stock in your stable and patiently track it for a buy
signal. The price continues to drop and the amount of daily or
weekly variation dries up along with the volume.
Your cyclic (harmonic) analysis tells you to expect this, but it
certainly looks as though all investor interest has completely
vanished.
At such a time it is very difficult indeed to convince yourself that
you should actually take action when that buy signal comes along.”
(J. M. Hurst, The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing
[Greenville, SC: Traders Press, 1970], 163.)

When it comes to trading harmonic patterns, this frequently can happen, especially in the
early learning stages. Such hesitation is problematic, although thorough preparation helps to
define trading decisions in advance.
Within the Harmonic Trading approach, the problem arises at the completion of patterns,
where the “harmonic signal” generated—that is, the test of the PRZ—does not stimulate the
appropriate trading action.
Jim Kane of KaneTrading.com and I have discussed the Persimmon Effect extensively in
many discussions regarding trade execution. On one particular day, we were looking at a few
intra-day patterns in the index futures in the HarmonicTrader.com Chat Room. We were trying
to determine if we would get an opportunity to see these patterns complete.
I responded by saying:
“WE will always get OUR chance as long as WE give it to
OURSELVES.”

178

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Within the Harmonic Trading approach, the opportunity to execute patterns, especially in the
PRZ, requires patience and a firm belief in these methods. Although such confidence requires
time to maintain the proper perspective, it is essential to realize that we must define our own
trading opportunities.
The market will provide the necessary signals that can identify potential trading situations.
It’s the trader’s responsibility to learn what these signals mean and to utilize this technical
information to define profitable opportunities. Although other considerations can affect an
execution, the degree of success is dependent upon consistently applying the Harmonic
Trading techniques to identify opportunities and to turn patterns into profits. The measurement
strategies and pattern rules quantify potential opportunities quite effectively. The Harmonic
Trading identification techniques consistently pinpoint the optimal price level for a trade
execution. However, the physical task of pulling the trigger can present its own set of problems.
Despite these inherent challenges throughout the decision-making process, the ultimate step of
executing the trade still requires a correct and timely assessment of the price action. Therefore,
issues related with trade executions such as hesitation—a.k.a. the Persimmon Effect—should
be overcome through the realization as traders that our opportunities and ultimate success is
100% self-dependent.
The hesitation issue also fits well within the Action/Task Trading Process Model. As I
mentioned previously, the Action is defined through the identification and preparation required
to define a Harmonic Trading opportunity. The Task involves executing positions based upon
the general trade management rules that define every possibility, in advance. In essence,
hesitation is just the failure to execute the Task.
Although the Persimmon Effect can prevent a trade execution, the solution to the problem
can be overcome through a process of learning and emotional conditioning. First, it is important
to realize that not all trades are to be taken, even if the opportunity is a distinct harmonic pattern. In fact, in the early application of the Harmonic Trading techniques, it is essential to allow
a period of study and preparation to acquire the proper mental perspective. It is important to be
well versed in all aspects of the Harmonic Trading approach, knowing all of the identification
techniques, the trade execution considerations, and trade management strategies before
attempting to integrate these strategies in real-time situations. After a period of study, the basic
Harmonic Trading techniques will be obvious. However, the application of this approach
requires considerable dedication to develop the analytical skills required to consistently profit
from these opportunities.
In my experience, thorough preparation helps to “slow down” the price action in the PRZ.
When all trade parameters are defined in advance, the decision process is clear. The
“anticipated” trade should act in a specific manner if it is going to be a valid opportunity.
Otherwise, the price action is indicating that the pattern is potentially flawed.
This concept of the PRZ as a window of opportunity is incredibly significant. The specific
range is the critical “make-or-break” level that determines the validity of a potential pattern.
Although there are a variety of confirmation signals to be considered, the basic parameters
of the trade as defined by the price points of the pattern elucidate the execution by clearly
defining all numeric limits and outlining the make-or-break range for a reversal.
