
Soviets (and others) are capable of eavesdropping on commercial communication. That is why the
large commodity trading firms sometimes use scramblers when they are making very sensitive
calls.
My point is that there are thousands of difficult-to-understand mechanisms that lead the market,
which come into play before the news reaches some poor trader sitting at his desk. But the one
thing that does hit the market is a huge sale or purchase.
Isn't that the basic rationalization for technical analysis?
Technical analysis, I think, has a great deal that is right and a great deal that is mumbo jumbo.
That's an interesting statement. What's right and what's black magic?
There is a great deal of hype attached to technical analysis by some technicians who claim that it
predicts the future. Technical analysis tracks the past; it does not predict the future. You have to use
your own intelligence to draw conclusions about what the past activity of some traders may say
about the future activity of other traders.
For me, technical analysis is like a thermometer. Fundamentalists who say they are not going to pay
any attention to the charts are like a doctor who says he's not going to take a patient's temperature.
But, of course, that would be sheer folly. If you are a responsible participant in the market, you
always want to know where the market is—whether it is hot and excitable, or cold and stagnant.
You want to know everything you can about the market to give you an edge.
Technical analysis reflects the vote of the entire marketplace and, therefore, does pick up unusual
behavior. By definition, anything that creates a new chart pattern is something unusual. It is very
important for me to study the details of price action to see if I can observe something about how
everybody is voting. Studying the charts is absolutely crucial and alerts me to existing disequilibria
and potential changes.
Do you sometimes put on a trade because you look at a chart and say, "I've seen this pattern
before, and it is often a forerunner of a market advance." That is, even though you may not
have any fundamental reasons?
Yes, I will do that sometimes. I would only add that, as a trader who has seen a great deal and been
in a lot of markets, there is nothing disconcerting to me about a price move out of a trading range
that nobody understands.
Does that imply you usually go with breakouts?
Sure.
But the markets are often prone to false breakouts. There has to be more to it than that.
Tight congestions in which a breakout occurs for reasons that nobody understands are usually good
risk/reward trades.
How about breakouts that occur because there is a story in the Wall Street Journal that day?
That would be much less relevant. The Heisenberg principle in physics provides an analogy for the
markets. If something is closely observed, the odds are it is going to be altered in the process. If
corn is in a tight consolidation and then breaks out the day the Wall Street Journal carries a story
about a potential shortage of corn, the odds of the price move being sustained are much smaller. If
everybody believes there is no reason for corn to break out, and it suddenly does, the chances that
there is an important underlying cause are much greater.
It sounds like you are saying that the less explanation there is for a price move occurring, the
better it looks.
Well, I do think that. The more a price pattern is observed by speculators, the more prone you are to
have false signals. The more a market is the product of nonspeculative activity, the greater the
significance of technical breakouts.
Has the greatly increased use of computerized trend-following systems increased the
frequency of false technical signals?
I think so. The fact that there are billions of dollars out there trading on technical systems that use
moving averages or other simple pattern recognition approaches helps produce many more false
36

signals. I have developed similar systems myself, so that I can tell when the other systems are
going to kick in. If it is clear that prices are moving because these billions are kicking into the
market, it is a lot less interesting than if a breakout occurs because the Russians are buying.
Let's say you do buy a market on an upside breakout from a consolidation phase, and the
price starts to move against you—that is, back into the range. How do you know when to get
out? How do you tell the difference between a small pullback and a bad trade?
Whenever I enter a position, I have a predetermined stop. That is the only way I can sleep. I know
where I'm getting out before I get in. The position size on a trade is determined by the stop, and the
stop is determined on a technical basis. For example, if the market is in the midst of a trading range,
it makes no sense to put your stop within that range, since you are likely to be taken out. I always
place my stop beyond some technical barrier.
Don't you run into the problem that a lot of other people may be using the same stop point,
and the market may be drawn to that stop level?
I never think about that, because the point about a technical barrier—and I've studied the technical
aspects of the market for a long time—is that the market shouldn't go there if you are right. I try to
avoid a point that floor traders can get at easily. Sometimes I may place my stop at an obvious
point, if I believe that it is too far away or too difficult to reach easily.
To take an actual example, on a recent Friday afternoon, the bonds witnessed a high-velocity
breakdown out of an extended trading range. As far as I could tell, this price move came as a
complete surprise. I felt very comfortable selling the bonds on the premise that if I was right about
the trade, the market should not make it back through a certain amount of a previous overhead
consolidation. That was my stop. I slept easily in that position, because I knew that I would be out
of the trade if that happened.
Talking about stops, I assume because of the size that you trade, your stops are always mental
stops, or is that not necessarily true?
Let's put it this way: I've organized my life so that the stops get taken care of. They are never on the
floor, but they are not mental.
What eventually tells you that you are wrong on a major position trade? Your stop point will
limit your initial loss, but if you still believe in the fundamental analysis underlying the trade,
I assume that you will try it again. If you are wrong about the general direction of the market,
won't you take a series of losses? At what point do you throw in the towel on the trade idea?
First of all, a loss of money itself slows me down, so I reduce my positions. Secondly, in the
situation you described, the change in the technical picture will give me second thoughts. For
example, if I am bearish on the dollar and a major intermediate high has been penetrated, I would
have to reevaluate my view.
Earlier you mentioned that you had developed your own trend-following systems to provide
an indicator of where the large amount of money managed under such systems could be
expected to hit the market. Do you use your own trend-following systems to trade any portion
of the money you manage?
Yes, about 5 percent.
Is that the level of your confidence? I guess it is not negative 5 percent, so it could be worse.
Overall, my systems make money, but they have volatility characteristics, and problems related to
risk control that I don't like. But, since they offer diversification from my other trading, I use them
to a small degree.
Do you feel it is possible to ever develop a system that would do as well as a good trader?
I think it is unlikely because the learning features of such a system would have to be very highly
developed. Computers are good at "learning" only when there are clear hierarchies of information
and precedent. For example, expert systems for medical diagnostics are very good because the rules
are very clear. The problem with developing expert systems for trading is that the "rules" of the
trading and investment game keep changing. I have spent some time working with expert system
developers, and we concluded that trading was a poor candidate for this approach, because trading
37

decisions encompass too many types of knowledge, and the rules for interpreting the information
keep changing.
Does the fact that you are trading so much greater size than you did in your early years make
it more difficult?
There are far fewer markets with sufficient liquidity for the optimum size of my trades.
How much money are you currently managing?
Over $650 million.
I assume more than half of that is due to capital appreciation.
Yes, last year's profits alone were about $300 million.
What are some markets that you really have trouble trading because of insufficient liquidity?
An example of a market I like a great deal, but in which the liquidity is often poor, is copper, hi
copper, I am now the elephant.
What kind of size can be moved comfortably in a market like copper before it becomes a
problem?
I would say, in a day, you can comfortably move 500 to 800 contracts; uncomfortably, somewhat
more than that. But the daily volume of copper is currently only 7,000 to 10,000 contracts and a lot
of that is local trading or spreads. In contrast, in the T-bond market, you can move 5,000 contracts
without a problem. You can also move very large size, in the interbank currency market.
Can you trade a market like coffee, which doesn't have deep liquidity, but sometimes can
develop enormous trends?
Yes, I did trade coffee last year and made a few million dollars in it. Now, if I am managing $600
million, and I kick in $2 million in profits on coffee trades, it doesn't really matter that much. In
fact, it could even be counterproductive, since the time and energy I spend concentrating on coffee
diminishes my focus on the currency markets, which I trade far more heavily.
It would appear that you have reached a size level that impedes your trading performance.
Since you have substantial personal funds, did you ever consider just trading your own
money and avoiding all the related headaches in managing money?
Yes, but there are several reasons why I don't. Although I invest a great deal of my own money in
my funds, the portion of my funds that is managed money represents a call. [Analogy to an option
that has unlimited profit potential in the event of a price rise, but risk limited to its cost in the event
of a decline.] I don't say this to be flippant, since my reputation among my investors is extremely
important to me, but a call is a much better position than a symmetrical win/lose position.
Is there a practical limit to the amount of money you can manage?
In most commodity futures markets, there certainly is. However, in currencies, interest rates, and a
few commodities such as crude oil, there are limits, but they are very high. I plan to very carefully
manage the future growth in the size of funds I am managing.
When you put in orders in markets that are not among the most liquid—in other words, not
T-bonds or the major currencies—do you find your orders actually moving the market?
They can, but I never bully a market.
Talking about that, one often hears stories about very large traders trying to push the
markets up or down. Does that work?
I don't think so. It can be done for the short term, but eventually it will lead to serious mistakes. It
usually results in arrogance and a loss of touch with the underlying market structure, both
fundamentally and technically. The traders that I know who thought too highly of their ability and
tried to bully the market, ultimately made the mistake of overtrading and went under.
Without mentioning any names, can you provide an example?
There is a recent example of a British trading organization getting into serious trouble after they
tried to corner the crude oil market. At first they succeeded, but then they lost control and crude oil
prices fell by $4.
38

What was the end result?
They lost about $40 million and the organization is in trouble.
You are probably managing more money than any other futures trader in the world. How do
you handle the emotional strain when you hit a losing period?
The emotional burden of trading is substantial; on any given day, I could lose millions of dollars. If
you personalize these losses, you can't trade.
Do the losses bother you at all anymore?
The only thing that disturbs me is poor money management. Every so often, I take a loss that is
significantly too large. But I never had a lot of difficulty with the process of losing money, as long
as losses were the outcome of sound trading techniques. Lifting the short side of the July/November
soybean spread was an example that scared me. I learned a lot about risk control from that
experience. But as a day-in, day-out process, taking losses does not bother me.
Did you have any losing years?
Yes, in 19811 lost about 16 percent.
Was that due to errors you made, or the nature of the markets?
It was a combination of the two. My main problem was that it was the first major bear market in
commodities I had experienced, and bear markets have different characteristics than bull markets.
Was it a matter of becoming complacent about markets always being in an uptrend?
No, the problem was that the principal characteristic of a bear market is very sharp down
movements followed by quick retracements. I would always sell too late and then get stopped out
in what subsequently proved to be part of a wide-swinging congestion pattern. In a bear market,
you have to use sharp countertrend rallies to enter positions.
What other mistakes did you make that year?
My money management was poor. I had too many correlated trades.
Was your confidence shaken at all that year? Did you go back to the drawing board?
I went back and designed a lot of risk management systems. I paid strict attention to the
correlations of all my positions. From that point on, I measured my total risk in the market every
day.
When you trade currencies, do you use the interbank market or the futures market?
I only use the interbank market, unless I am doing an arbitrage trade against the /MM. [The
International Monetary Market (IMM) is a subsidiary of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the
world's foremost currency futures exchange.] The liquidity is enormously better, the transaction
costs are much lower, and it is a twenty-four-hour market, which is important to us because we
literally trade twenty-four hours a day.
What portion of your trading is in currencies?
On average, about 50 to 60 percent of our profits come from currency trading.
I assume you are also trading currencies beyond the five that are currently actively traded on
the IMM.
We trade any currency that is highly liquid. Virtually all the European currencies (including those
of the Scandinavian countries), all the major Asian currencies and the Mideast currencies. Crosses
are probably the most important trading vehicle that we use that you can't trade on the IMM.
[Crosses are a trade involving two foreign countries. For example, buying British pounds and
selling an equal dollar amount of Deutsche marks is a cross.] You can't trade crosses on the IMM
because they have fixed contract sizes.
But you could do a cross on the IMM by adjusting the ratio of the number of contracts
between the two currencies to equalize the dollar value of each position.
But it is much more exact and direct to use the interbank market. For example, Deutsche
mark/British pound and Deutsche mark/Japanese yen crosses are highly traded and very active.
I assume that when you do a mark/yen cross, you price it in dollars, not in terms of one of the
39

two currencies.
That's right. You simply say: Buy $100 [million] worth of marks and sell $100 [million] worth of
yen. In the interbank market, the dollar is the unit of exchange all over the world.
In situations where a surprise news development or the release of an economic statistic out of
line with expectations causes a sharp price response in currencies, does the interbank market
react less violently than the futures market, or do the arbitrageurs keep the two markets
tightly linked?
The two markets are well arbitraged, but those are the moments when a very swift arbitrageur will
make some money. The markets do get a little bit out of line, but not a lot.
Will the interbank market price response to such events be less extreme?
Yes, because what happens on the futures market is that the locals back away and let the stops run.
The only thing that pulls the markets back is the arbitrageurs who have the bank on the other side.
What percentage of bank market trading represents commercial activity, or hedging, vis-avis speculative trades?
The Fed has done a study on that. I don't have the figures on hand, but it is basically a hedging
market. The banks are the principal speculators, as well as a few players like myself.
Is there a reason why the futures market hasn't been able to capture a larger percentage of
world currency trading?
The currency futures market is not efficient in several of the most important respects. First, hedging
usually has a specific dollar and date requirement. For example, if I need to hedge $3.6 million for
April 12, the bank just takes it. The futures market, however, trades only for specific dates and
fixed contract sizes, so the hedger is not precisely covered.
So actually there is no way the futures market can compete, because the interbank market
can tailor a hedge for any customer.
That's right. In addition, the activity takes place within normal commercial banking relations. That
is, very often, the hedger wants to show his banking interest that he has a locked-in profit so he can
borrow against it.
Can you talk about your fundamental analysis methodology? How do you determine what the
right price for a market should be?
I assume that the price for a market on any given day is the correct price, then I try to figure out
what changes are occurring that will alter that price.
One of the jobs of a good trader is to imagine alternative scenarios. I try to form many different
mental pictures of what the world should be like and wait for one of them to be confirmed. You
keep trying them on one at a time. Inevitably, most of these pictures will turn out to be wrong—that
is, only a few elements of the picture may prove correct. But then, all of a sudden, you will find that
in one picture, nine out of ten elements click. That scenario then becomes your image of the world
reality.
Let me give you an example. The Friday after the October 19 stock market crash, I had trouble
sleeping, which is very unusual for me. But I am sure I wasn't the only trader to lie awake that
night. All week long, I struggled with how the events of that week were going to impact the dollar.
I was trying on different visions of the world. One of these pictures was total panic—the world
coming to an end, financially.
In this scenario, the dollar becomes the safest political haven, and as a result, there could be a
tremendous rise in the dollar. In fact, on Tuesday of that week, the dollar did rise dramatically as
many people withdrew their money from other places. During the next three days, there was
tremendous confusion. By the end of the week, the dollar had started to give ground again.
It was then that it all coalesced in my mind. It became absolutely clear to me that given the
combination of a need for stimulative action, dictated by the tremendous worldwide financial panic,
the reluctance of the Bank of Japan and German Bundesbank to adopt potentially inflationary
measures, and the continuing wide U.S. trade deficits, the only solution was for Treasury Secretary
Baker to let the dollar go. Someone had to play the stimulative role, and that someone would be the
40

United States.
As a result, the dollar would drop and it would not be in the interest of the other central banks to
defend it. I was absolutely convinced that was the only thing that Baker could do.
You realized all this late Friday. Was it too late to take action in the markets?
Yes, and it was a very tense weekend because I realized that the dollar might open sharply lower. I
waited for the Far East markets to open Sunday night.
Do you do a lot of your trading outside of U.S. hours?
Yes. First, I have monitors everywhere I go—in my home, in my country home. Second, I have a
staff on duty twenty-four hours a day.
Is your staff instructed to alert you immediately in case something big happens?
Absolutely. First of all, we have call levels in every currency. If a currency breaks out of a range
that we have previously identified, my staff is under instructions to call.
How often do you get calls in the middle of the night?
I have an assistant trader, and the joke is that he is allowed to wake me up at home twice a year.
But it really isn't necessary very often. Whenever the markets are busy, I know what is going on all
the time. My home is fully equipped with trading monitors and direct lines. Also, my assistant's job
is to be up and get the calls. He probably gets called three or four times a night.
Are you saying that you delegate the nighttime decision making?
We create a scenario for every currency at least once a week. We define the ranges we expect for
each currency and what we will do if it breaks out of these ranges.
So your assistant knows that if currency X gets to 135 He should buy it or sell it?
Those decisions have been made beforehand. But they are under instruction to call me if the Prime
Minister resigns, or if there is a major unexpected currency revaluation, or something else happens
to invalidate the recent scenario.
Are there times you end up trading at night?
Yes, a lot.
You obviously can't trade round the clock. How do you structure your time to balance your
work versus your personal life?
I generally try to keep my trading confined between 8 A.M. and 6 or 7 P.M. The Far East is very
important, and if the currency markets are very active, I will trade the Far East, which opens at 8
P.M. The A.M. session in Tokyo trades until 12 P.M. If the markets are in a period of tremendous
movement, I will go to bed for a couple of hours and get up to catch the next market opening. It is
tremendously interesting and exciting.
To see the wave roll from country to country?
Absolutely. When you are really involved, the screen almost reaches out and grabs you. The way
the quotes are made changes: They get wider; they get wilder. I have contacts all over the world in
each of these markets and I know what is going on. It is a tremendously exciting game. There are
opportunities all the time. Forgetting trading for a minute, one of the reasons I am in this business is
that I find the analysis of worldwide political and economic events extraordinarily fascinating.
The way you describe it, you make the whole process sound like a constant game, rather than
work. Do you really look at it that way?
It doesn't feel like work, except when you lose—then it feels like work [he laughs]. For me, market
analysis is like a tremendous multidimensional chess board. The pleasure of it is purely intellectual.
For example, it is trying to figure out the problems the finance minister of New Zealand faces and
how he may try to solve them. A lot of people will think that sounds ridiculously exotic. But to me,
it isn't exotic at all. Here is a guy running this tiny country and he has a real set of problems. He has
to figure how to cope with Australia, the U.S., and the labor unions that are driving him crazy. My
job is to do the puzzle with him and figure out what he is going to decide, and what the
consequences of his actions will be that he or the market doesn't anticipate. That to me, in itself, is
tremendous fun.
41
