
233

234

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

advantage of pattern failures capitalize on both types of signals that are generated from
the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone. Regardless of the eventual result, the most
important concept is that the completion of distinct harmonic patterns defines critical technical
areas of support and resistance.

Reversing Failed Pattern Tips
• The entire PRZ must be tested with initial reaction complete. A continuation of the
predominant trend usually occurs after the price action has tested the entire range of
harmonic numbers in the PRZ. Although the extent of this nominal reaction varies, the
price action usually does not retrace beyond the limits of the harmonic zone. Essentially,
the initial test yields only a minor consolidation before resuming in the predominant
trend to exceed the PRZ.
• Respect the Terminal Price Bar. The Terminal Price Bar—the initial price bar that tests
the entire PRZ—establishes the defining limit for the violation of the PRZ. Furthermore,
the Terminal Price Bar defines the reversal entry with respect to the failed PRZ.
• Precise Stop Loss Limits. All stop loss limits must be defined well in advance, and
they usually are based upon the range of the prior PRZ and the extreme of the Terminal
Price Bar.
After a pattern violation has been triggered, the reversal trade is usually executed one or
two bars beyond the Terminal Price Bar. Typically, the violation should be a clear signal that
confirms the continuation of the predominant trend. Beyond this point, the price action should
convincingly trade in the direction of that trend. As the price action continues beyond the violated PRZ and the Terminal Price Bar, the stop loss in the trade management of the position is
continually adjusted. In fact, after confirming the violation, the stop loss is usually determined
by the prior price bar(s) beyond the Terminal Price Bar.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

235

Reversing a Failed Bullish Pattern
In a failed bullish setup, the price action typically will experience some initial reaction to the
completion of the pattern but quickly roll over violating the Terminal Price Bar (see Figure 12.1).
It is common for the setup to experience sharp price action on the initial test of the PRZ. The
critical element in a failed bullish pattern is a quick trend line violation of the first reaction. This
is especially evident when a reversal experiences an impulse reaction in one or two price bars,
only to immediately roll over and fail to continue to the upside. Although this requires some
skilled interpretation to ascertain impending failures, such factors as a violation of a prior price
bar low or breakdown of a short-term trend line of the reversal frequently signal trouble.

TERMINAL
PRICE BAR

BREAKDOWN OF
BULLISH PRZ &
TERMINAL PRICE BAR

Figure 12.1

Another important element of a failed bullish pattern is the violation of the Terminal Price
Bar. Ideally, the violation of the Terminal Price Bar and prior PRZ should close below the zone.
Although this may appear as a “textbook” breakdown from a standard Technical Analysis
perspective, such a violation of a prior harmonic zone is particularly important as clear
confirmation of the pattern failure. In these situations, they can be considered a “harmonic
breakdown.”

236

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Dow Jones Industrial Average
($INDU): Weekly
The Dow Jones Industrial Average exemplifies the ideal situation of a failed pattern. The index
formed this Bullish Crab in Figure 12.2 and yielded a brief reversal for a few weeks from the
Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ). Although the price action stabilized, the reversal fizzled. After a
nominal rally that barely exceeded the top range of the PRZ, the index rolled over and declined
sharply under the 10,700 level. Despite a perfect reversal from the 1.618 XA leg of the Crab,
the reversal moved sideways after the initial pop. The lackluster bullish continuation signaled
an impending failure long before the price action rolled over and sank decidedly lower in the
direction of the predominant trend.

Figure 12.2

The first sign of trouble was the failure of the index to continue to the upside following the
second week after the reversal. On the fourth week, the price action topped out and rolled over
to retest the entire PRZ. Although the Terminal Price Bar was not yet violated at this point, the
retest of the entire range of harmonic support should have raised a red flag in this situation.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

237

The real signal of trouble was triggered on the violation of the PRZ of the second retest. Any
long position executed at the initial completion of the Bullish Crab should have moved the stop
loss limit to break even at a minimum. The chart in Figure 12.3 of the price action in the PRZ
clearly shows the brief bounce and rollover that occurred.

Figure 12.3

The violation of this pattern led to a severe downside continuation in the 2009 bear market
and it was a clear sign of the strength of the predominant downtrend. The weekly Bullish Crab
was valid for a brief time, as the index temporarily found support at the initial completion of the
pattern. The following few weeks followed a common scenario of many invalid setups, where a
pattern yields only a short-term reversal, only to roll over shortly thereafter. The violation of the
Terminal Price Bar in the PRZ on the second retest eventually triggered a deeper correction
with a sharp (yet ideal) bearish continuation.
This chart example of the Industrials manifests a common aspect of many harmonic pattern
trades and exemplifies the importance of executing on the initial test of a pattern’s completion.
Price action will frequently provide a short-term tradable reaction from the initial test of the
PRZ. Furthermore, the nature of price action within the first few price bars after the entire range
of harmonic numbers has been tested is the most critical aspect of the validation of a potential

238

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

pattern. Although the index rolled over after a brief bounce, the initial reaction still provided a
nice profit in the short-term. However, the index’s failure to continue to the upside provided the
necessary signals to exit the trade while protecting the small profit.
As I have mentioned previously, it is important to understand that harmonic patterns are not
“end-all-be-all” price structures. I believe a common misconception is that harmonic patterns
signal a monster reversal every time. This is just not the case. In fact, the example of the Dow
Industrial Average is probably more common for most harmonic set-ups than the “home-run
scenario.” That is, distinct harmonic patterns offer a tradable reaction on their initial completion.
For these reasons, Harmonic Trading techniques require an active trade management
approach to fully maximize these common short-term reactive reversals. Although a
longer-term perspective can be applied to utilize Harmonic Trading techniques from a
weekly or monthly timeframe, the concept of specific profit targets and aggressive trade
management is required to capitalize on these opportunities.
Another important consideration of this strategy is the discipline required to effectively
manage these trades. The defined trade management parameters instill greater confidence and
responsibility for every position. In the same manner that specific elements are required to
identify harmonic price patterns, the price action in valid reversals must behave in a particular
fashion, exhibiting the commonalities of a change in trend. In the Dow case, the initial bounce
offered evidence of a reversal at hand. However, the clear failure to continue to the upside
shortly after the reversal signaled the impending rollover.
If the position was going to be flipped, where the long position was covered and a new short
position was entered, the second test of the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) was the critical
area. As the previous scenario demonstrated, the initial long position would have been exited in
the Profit Protection Zone (PPZ), somewhere close to the break down at 11,200 and certainly
before a complete retest of the original entry point. Although this rollover was quite evident
within weeks after the initial PRZ test, the pattern was not considered a failure until the violation
of the Terminal Price Bar at the 10,700 level. Any short position that was seeking to capitalize
on this failure should have been entered on this violation. Again, in these situations, the price
action should clearly continue in the predominant trend, quickly declining below the prior PRZ.
As a failed pattern trade, the short executed following the violation of the harmonic support
should have utilized a tight stop loss limit and be placed just above the prior week’s high. In this
case, the stop loss would be executed above the 11,300 level, which was the top range of the
prior PRZ. As the failed pattern reversal trade continued to work out, the stop loss limit should
have been adjusted accordingly, maintaining an active approach throughout the management of
the position. In the Dow case, a simple 1-bar stop loss would have been more than adequate.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

239

IBM
(IBM): Weekly
This example of IBM shows a distinct Bullish Butterfly that was violated after a brief bounce
from the initial test of the Potential Reversal Zone (see Figure 12.4). It is important to note that
the alignment of Fibonacci numbers in the pattern structure were ideal, as the 1.27 XA and
1.618 BC projections converged in the same area as the AB=CD completion point just under
$80 a share.

Figure 12.4

240

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The chart in Figure 12.5 of the price action on the PRZ clearly shows the brief bounce and
rollover that occurred. In this example as well as the IBM chart, the first sign of trouble was the
failure of the stock to continue to the upside following the second week after the reversal.

Terminal
Price Bar

Violation Of
Potential
Reversal Zone
(Prz) Under 76

Figure 12.5

After a sharp move to the $85 level, IBM stalled. By the fifth week, the stock rolled over,
retesting the entire PRZ. Although the Terminal Price Bar was not yet violated until the following
week, the retest of the entire range of harmonic support should have raised a red flag.
As this example of IBM demonstrates, the lack of continuation following a reversal is
frequently an early indication of a potential pattern failure. Although such failures are not
immediately discernable in every situation, this case of IBM exemplifies the “window of time”
available within the early stages of most reversals that offer a few price bars to signal the
potential direction of the future price action. Ideally, pattern reversals should hit the entire
PRZ on the initial test, reverse close to this range of harmonic numbers, and possess a strong
continuation of the new trend. For IBM, one bullish price bar off the PRZ does not establish a
new trend. Figure 12.5 shows the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone with the Terminal
Price Bar clearly labeled.
Despite this rollover, the initial bounce yielded a nice short-term profit, as the stock bounced
9 points before rolling over. At a minimum, the Bullish Butterfly offered a great short-term

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

241

opportunity. But, this is another example of a clear harmonic pattern yielding only a brief move
that required an aggressive trade management approach to protect the initial profit and handle
the position effectively. If anything, the rollover and violation of the bullish pattern signaled a
continuation of the predominant bearish trend.
If the position was going to be flipped, where the long position was covered and a new
short position was entered, the second test of the PRZ was the critical area. As this situation
illustrates, the initial long position would have been exited in the PPZ, somewhere between
the breakdown at $80 and the entry point under $77. Although this rollover was evident within
weeks after the initial reversal, the pattern was not considered a failure until the violation of
the Terminal Price Bar at the $76 level. Any short position that was seeking to capitalize on
this failure should have been entered on this violation.
The solid downtrend line illustrated on the chart exemplifies the effectiveness of this
constraint in well-defined breakdowns. The price action was clearly sliding in an area that was
supposed to yield a reversal, as defined by the Bullish Butterfly. Despite the ideal alignment of
numbers, the predominant bearish trend line contained the price action, pushing the stock
lower after a brief reversal off the initial completion of the pattern.
This is another example of a sharp downside continuation following the violation of the
Terminal Price Bar serving as an important continuation trigger. These situations are common,
as the violation of distinct harmonic zones frequently encounter sharp continuations of the
predominant trend.
Again, this is another scenario where it is important to understand that harmonic patterns
are not “end-all-be-all” price structures. The IBM example demonstrates the type of short-term
reversals that frequently materialize after the completion of a distinct harmonic setup. Although
not every pattern will yield a “home-run,” most reversals will yield small reactions at a minimum,
offering profitable short-term trading opportunities.
Another important aspect of the IBM example is the ability of distinct patterns like this sharp
Bullish Butterfly in IBM to serve as a “signpost of future action.” I initially discussed this in
The Harmonic Trader, and I have expounded on the concept throughout this book. Patterns
should represent a price structure signal that must be assessed from a pragmatic viewpoint.
Essentially, it comes down to these two rules:
1. All patterns are not the same.
2. All reversals are not the same.
Therefore, it is important to not assume that a distinct pattern will always yield a “home-run”
reversal. Rather, it is critical to be prepared to utilize the signals that are offered by the market’s
price action in these harmonic zones to guide trading decisions.
Harmonic Trading techniques offer excellent opportunities but require an active trade
management approach to fully maximize these common short-term reactive reversals. Although
a longer-term perspective can be applied to utilize Harmonic Trading techniques to analyze
weekly or monthly time frames, the concept of specific profit targets and aggressive trade
management are still required to capitalize on most harmonic opportunities.

242

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Reversing a Failed Bearish Pattern
In a failed bearish setup, illustrated in Figure 12.6, the price action typically will experience
some initial reaction to the completion of the pattern but quickly turn back up to retest the
Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ), eventually violating the Terminal Price Bar. I like to refer to
these situations as “harmonic breakouts,” where price action rallies above distinct harmonic
zones of well-defined patterns.

TERMINAL
PRICE BAR

BREAKDOWN OF
BULLISH PRZ &
TERMINAL PRICE BAR

Figure 12.6

Harmonic breakouts above distinct bearish PRZs typically possess extreme price bars
and convincing bullish continuation. These breakouts are especially significant in retracement
patterns like the Bat and the Gartley, and can serve as excellent entry to signals to follow the
predominant trend.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

243

Intel
(INTC): 60-Minute
This chart of a failed Bullish AB=CD pattern in Intel is an ideal example that yielded a brief
reversal from the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ), only to continue sharply higher in the direction
of the predominant trend (see Figure 12.7).

Figure 12.7

244

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Briefly after the stock stalled at the pattern’s completion, the Terminal Price Bar and the PRZ
were violated convincingly. Illustrated on the chart in Figure 12.8 of the price action in the PRZ,
Intel rallied sharply above the initial test of the AB=CD completion by gapping up on the open
of the following day’s trading.

Violation of Potential
Reversal Zone (PRZ)

Terminal Price
Bar

Figure 12.8

Such breakouts above defined harmonic patterns like this setup frequently can act as a
trigger to reverse the initial trade idea and follow the predominant trend. After Intel broke out
above the Terminal Price Bar, the stock steadily climbed, possessing a nice bullish continuation
with a distinct trend line support that defined the rally.
These situations are common, and this example demonstrates the ability of blown-out patterns to act as signposts of future action. In this case, the violated AB=CD clearly indicated the
strength of the rally in the stock. It is important to note that reversing a bearish setup must
occur after the violation of the Terminal Price Bar, as the sharp continuation anticipated in these
setups usually does not occur until this is exceeded. In this chart of Intel, the stock did not significantly rally until the Terminal Price Bar was violated above $16.65. Again, it is important to
maintain a tight stop loss limit when attempting to play the continuation of the predominant
trend, as the price action should continue decidedly above the prior PRZ.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

Amazon.com
(AMZN): Weekly
Amazon formed a distinct Bearish Butterfly with an ideal alignment of Fibonacci ratios to
validate the structure (see Figure 12.9). The pattern defined a shorting opportunity in an
approximate 1-point range between 25.75–26.95. Despite the clear pattern, the stock rallied
sharply on the week it tested the PRZ. After the action stalled for several weeks, the stock
rocketed above the Terminal Price Bar and the prior bearish PRZ.

Figure 12.9

245

246

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The violation of the bearish pattern signaled a strong continuation of the predominant bullish
trend (see Figure 12.10). If the position was going to be flipped, where the short position was
covered and a new long position was entered, the violation of the Terminal Price Bar above the
$28 level was the determining area.

VIOLATION OF
POTENTIAL REVERSAL ZONE (PRZ)

TERMINAL
PRICE BAR

Figure 12.10

This is another example of a decisive upside continuation following the violation of the
Terminal Price Bar. These situations are common, as the violation of distinct harmonic zones
frequently triggers sharp continuations of the predominant trend. In this case, Amazon rallied
convincingly in the weeks following the Terminal Price Bar breakout, as the stock continued to
rally into higher territory while holding the prior weeks’ lows.

Prior Harmonic Support and Resistance
Static support and resistance levels have been a foundation of Technical Analysis for decades.
Price action tends to trade in zones of support and resistance. When support is violated, that
price level becomes future resistance. When resistance is violated, that price level becomes
future support.

Chapter 12 Pattern Violations

247

Although this is a simple concept to grasp, when applied to the PRZ of harmonic patterns,
this concept can identify critical price levels that otherwise might be overlooked. After clear
harmonic patterns are violated, the price action usually continues in the predominant trend for
some time. However, it is common for price action to retest these harmonic levels, as prior patterns frequently mark critical points within an overall trend.

Prior Harmonic Support as Resistance
When the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) of a bullish pattern is blown out or violated, the prior
harmonic support commonly acts as future resistance when the price action retests this level.

NASDAQ 100 Continuous Mini-Contract (NQ_#F): 15-Minute
This chart of the NASDAQ 100 Continuous Mini-contract illustrates the concept of prior harmonic support acting as resistance. On this 15-minute chart, the NQ clearly violated the intraday Bullish Bat early in the session (see Figure 12.11). The pattern defined the area just in the
area of 1780 as critical short-term harmonic support. However, the contract was sliding in the
pre-market and continued sharply lower after the open. Despite the breakdown, the NQ rallied
back to retest this prior support later in the day.

Prior Harmonic
Support Now
Resistance

Violation Of
Potential
Reversal
Zone (Prz)

Figure 12.11

The structural failure of the prior harmonic support zone clearly was a key intra-day level.
The ability of pattern completion points to define important technical levels is a unique
phenomenon within the Harmonic Trading approach. The ability to interpret these signals
increases with experience, but it is important to respect the information that such pattern
failures provide.

248

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Semiconductor Holder’s Trust (SMH): 10-Minute
The Semiconductor Holder’s Trust (SMH) blew out this Deep Bearish Crab on the 10-minute
chart (see Figure 12.12). After gapping well above the PRZ on the open, the SMH retraced a
good portion of the initial pop. The price action refilled the upside gap and bounced in the area
where prior harmonic resistance acted as clear support. The intra-day Bearish Butterfly was
blown out after gapping past the PRZ on the open of the trading, the day it tested these
numbers.

Figure 12.12

