105 strike put theta  0.06
1-to-2 put backspread theta  (0.04  2)  (0.06  1) or 0.02
This means that the value of the put backspread would decrease by
approximately 0.02 per calendar day (all else being equal). Because a put
backspread generally has negative theta, the value of the spread will fall
as time passes and option values decay. Figure 8.18 illustrates the theta of
a put backspread.

237

238

Chapter 8

Backspreads

Figure 8.18 Put Backspread Theta vs. Underlying Price and Time to Expiration:
XYZ August 40/45 1-to-2 Put Backspread
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
The put backspread generally will have a negative theta because it is
overall long options. When the underlying price is near the strike of the
long puts, the theta will be more negative; when the underlying price is
nearer the strike of the short put, the theta will be less negative. Recall
that the theta of an at-the-money option increases as the time to expiration
decreases, and the theta of an out-of-the-money option decreases as the
time to expiration decreases, so the swings of negative to positive theta
that occur as the underlying price shifts location between the long and
short strikes become more dramatic. The theta of a put backspread with
the underlying near the strike of the short put and expiration approaching could even become positive, as can be seen in the August 2, 2008, data
series in Figure 8.18.

INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
The backspread has an asymmetrical risk-reward profile that is exactly
opposite that of the ratio spread. Backspreads have substantial profit potential on a large move in the direction of the long options strike (to zero
for puts), have risk that is limited to the initial cost of the spread on a large
move through the short option strike, and, in-between the strikes, have risk
that is equal to the strike differential plus or minus the initial spread cost (if
any). This makes the backspread a potentially powerful position for playing
low-probability/high-reward scenarios and breakout scenarios, or for capturing strong directional trends. Because backspreads are net long options,
they generally will have a positive vega, so steady-to-rising implied volatility is desirable. Backspreads also have negative theta, so the forecast move
should take place in a short time frame.

Investment Objectives

When considering a backspread, traders should look for situations that
favor the above scenarios. Some typical market conditions that might lead
to high-magnitude, high-velocity movement in a short time frame with the
possibility of rising implied volatility include the following:
• Breakouts
— Consolidation patterns
— Continuation patterns
— Through resistance or support
• News
— General market-moving news, good or bad
— Company-specific news, good or bad
• Special situations
— “Back door” if-then directional plays

Breakouts
Often the overall market or a specific underlying name will go through
periods of price consolidation. These may be technical in nature (for example, the market is just taking a “breather”) or occur during seasonal
slow periods (for example, after earnings periods or holidays), or there
might just be an overall lack of interest in a particular name or sector.
When this happens, the price usually will consolidate and meander, waiting for some market-moving event to trigger the next phase of movement.
Often these periods are accompanied by falling implied volatility due to
lack of movement and lack of interest. Usually this phase ends and the
underlying price “breaks out” of its pattern and begins moving again. If
one is forecasting a directional breakout from a low volatility situation, a
backspread can be a good way to capture profits. Figures 8.19, 8.20, and
8.21 are examples of breakouts.

Trendless Market

Resistance

Support
Downside Breakout

Figure 8.19 Consolidation Period Followed by Breakout

239

240

Chapter 8

Backspreads

Resistance

Trend Resumes

Support
Uptrend
“Flag” Continuation Pattern

Figure 8.20 Continuation Pattern and Resumption of Trend

Support Broken

Support Holding

Figure 8.21 Breakdown Through Support

News
Economic news (for example, earnings, new products, hirings, and firings), whether affecting certain companies or sectors, or general economic
news (for example, government reports, Federal Reserve Board actions,
political developments, and events in other markets) also can trigger large
directional moves. If the trader can properly interpret the news and forecast the direction in which the market or underlying is going to move, a
backspread may be used to capture profits. One caveat, however, is that
scheduled, highly anticipated releases of reports on the economy, earnings
announcements, and so on, are almost always preceded by rising implied
volatility, making structures that are net long options, such as backspreads,
more expensive. Also, after the news is released, implied volatility usually
sells off. Obviously, this is not good for a backspread, as it is generally long
vega. However, if the magnitude of the directional move is large enough
through the long strike, the gain in intrinsic value of the position will be
greater than the losses due to implied volatility declines. In this situation

Investment Objectives

the decision of whether or not to use a backspread depends on the trader’s
price forecast.

Special Situations
Many times the market or specific underlying issues will move
directionally and sentiment will begin to become overly optimistic or
pessimistic in the direction of the trend—overly bullish in an uptrend,
overly bearish in a downtrend—and traders can begin to sense that
market participants are getting overloaded in one direction or another. Bullish consensus figures, VIX readings, put/call ratios, media
chatter, and so on can be good indicators that market participants are
getting either too optimistic or pessimistic. In cases like this some
“what-if” back door plays using backspreads could be employed. An
example of the thought process behind a “what-if” back door play is
the following:
Everybody and their brother is long this stock, and they keep pushing it
higher. The talking heads babble about it all day long, and of course the
analysts all love it. If this thing ever starts to move lower, the exit door
is going to get awfully small. . . .
This can be a great situation for some back door put backspreads, sprinkled like landmines in price zones that, if reached, would almost certainly
be experiencing volatile conditions. If the market keeps moving in the current direction, no harm, but if it doesn’t. . . .
Figure 8.22 depicts a euphoric, high-volume rally, which, if terminated, could result in some ugly downside price action. The trader anticipates that if the support lines are broken, the price will accelerate
lower, and he places a back door put backspread just below each support
level.

“What If?”

Heavy Volume Uptrend
Put Backspread Locations

Figure 8.22 Back Door Backspreads

241

242

Chapter 8

Backspreads

STRATEGY SELECTION
Once the trader determines that conditions favorable to a backspread
exist, she needs to evaluate the following factors:
• Direction of trend
• Breakout and/or price acceleration levels
• Timing

Direction of Trend
Obviously, direction is important because backspreads have a directional bias. Call backspreads are used to trade a market with a bullish bias,
and put backspreads are used to trade a market with a bearish bias. The
market’s trend bias must be incorporated into strike selection.

Breakout and/or Price Acceleration Levels
Breakout and/or price acceleration levels need to be defined. They identify areas where price movement is likely to accelerate, which is important
to know for strike selection.

Timing
As we have learned, the passage of time and/or declining implied
volatility is harmful to the backspread. One’s forecast of market timing is important for two reasons: It helps in deciding whether to use a
backspread, and if a backspread is to be used, what expiration cycle to
select.
• Strike Selection
Breakout and price acceleration zones (usually below known support
and above known resistance levels) are needed for strike selection. The
backspread needs to be structured so that the long strike is positioned to
capture price movement through the projected knowledge of breakout
or acceleration zone, while the short strike is backstopped by support or
resistance. As we have seen, what the backspreader needs to avoid is the
underlying’s price meandering near the short strike or in between the
strikes. The backspreader would like the underlying price either to accelerate sharply through the long strike of the backspread or to back off. Figure 8.23 illustrates the structuring of a call backspread.
In Figure 8.23, the trader’s forecast is that penetration of resistance at
47.50 is likely to result in a high-velocity, high-magnitude price move toward
60.00. The call backspread is structured with the short call at the resistance
level and long calls in the forecast price acceleration zone. A 47.50/50.00
1-to-2 call backspread or a 47.50/52.50 1-to-4 call backspread might be good
choices in this situation.

Trade Management

55.00
Breakout Zone

52.50

+4

50.00

+2

47.50

–1

Resistance
–1

45.00
42.50
40.00
37.50
35.00

Figure 8.23 Call Backspread Strike Selection Possibilities
• Expiry Selection
The forecast breakout time is needed for selection of the expiration month.
As we have seen, the passage of time is the enemy of the backspread, and being
off in one’s timing can be painful. This can be avoided somewhat by purchasing backspreads of longer-dated expirations, but longer-dated backspreads
are more expensive than shorter-dated backspreads because they carry more
extrinsic value. So if one is confident of one’s timing forecast, the expiration
date that corresponds to that forecast should be used; however, if timing might
be an issue, one should “buy extra time” by purchasing a backspread in a further expiration that will give one a reasonable margin of error in timing.

TRADE MANAGEMENT
Backspreads, being net long options (there are more long options in the
position than short options), are limited risk positions and therefore offer the
trader a certain level of comfort. However, limited risk positions still have risk
(sometimes significant), and it is important not to get sloppy or lazy with a
backspread, because they are best suited for specific situations. As market
conditions change they need to be reevaluated to determine whether a backspread is still the optimal strategy or adjustments may need to be made.
• Is the backspread appropriate?
• What is the most efficient way to take profits?
• How should the trader manage risk or take losses?

Is the Backspread Appropriate?
The forecast of a high-magnitude directional move does not necessarily
indicate a backspread. Buying a backspread involves the overall purchase
of options (one is buying more than selling) and, therefore, the purchase of
volatility. If implied volatility levels are already high, this type of strategy

243

244

Chapter 8

Backspreads

might not be advisable. In addition, as we have seen, accuracy of timing is
an issue. Backspreads have negative time decay. If one’s timing forecast is
a bit hazy or if the timing is unknown, a strategy that is not so sensitive to
the passage of time might be more appropriate.

What Is the Most Efficient Way to Take Profits?
When one correctly forecasts a high-velocity move and has a backspread in place, profits might appear quickly, and they need to be managed
or they might disappear just as quickly. Here are some important tips:
• Take Partial Profits by Rolling
Recall from Chapter 4 the procedures for “rolling” a long call or a long
put position along with market movement and systematically extracting
profit from the position while limiting risk and maintaining market exposure.
As long as one’s forecast continues to call for high-magnitude directional
movement in the underlying, one can use this method. The following are
several examples of “rolling the trade.”

Example 1
An investor has on a 100/105 1-to-2 call backspread and the underlying has exploded up to 110.00. He has substantial profit in the position but
believes the move is far from over. He would like to take some money off
the table but stay in the position for a chance to capture additional upside
movement. He decides to roll his long 105.00 calls up to the 110.00 strike.
Figure 8.24 illustrates this procedure.
Calls

Strike

1

100

2 2

105

2

110

Puts

Figure 8.24 Rolling Long Calls in the 100/105 1-to-2 Call Backspread
The result in the preceding figure is a 100/110 1-to-2 call backspread. The
trader sold the 105/110 call vertical spread, extracted some profit, and rolled
the long call options up to 110.00, which is now the current underlying price,
and has left himself in position for further upside price appreciation.

Example 2
The investor has a 95/100 1-to-2 put backspread and, as forecast, the
underlying has broken down through 95.00, which was an important support level. He has a good profit in the position, and now it looks as though
the stock is really going to accelerate downward. He would like to “gear

Trade Management

up” his position and raise his leverage by expanding the ratio but without
investing additional money. He decides to execute a 87.50/95 1-to-4 put
backspread for a credit, rolling his long puts down to 87.50 and doubling
his exposure, while still extracting money from the trade. Figures 8.25,
8.26, and 8.27 illustrate this procedure.
Calls

Strike

Puts

95

2

100

1

Figure 8.25 Existing 95/100 1-to-2 Put Backspread
Calls

Strike

Puts

87.50

4

90
95

2

100

1

2

Figure 8.26 Rolling Long 95 Puts Down to the 87.50 Strike
and Doubling the Ratio
Calls

Strike

Puts

87.50

4

90
95
100

1

Figure 8.27 Resulting 87.50/100 1-to-4 Put Backspread
The result in Figure 8.27 is a 87.50/100 1-to-4 put backspread. The investor executed the 87.50/95 1-to-4 put backspread for a credit, rolling his long
puts down to the 87.50 strike and doubling the ratio, which positioned him
for a potential explosive move to the downside.
• Watch Market Action
In addition to taking partial profits, don’t stay too long at the party. If the underlying price movement begins to slow or runs into old support or resistance

245

246

Chapter 8

Backspreads

levels, or if implied volatility begins to drop, it may be a sign that the move or
at least the current phase of the move is coming to an end. If the movement type
begins to transition from high-magnitude, high-velocity to something else, one
should get out of the backspread and switch to a different strategy.

How Should the Trader Manage Risk or Take Losses?
As always, the trader needs a game plan for taking profits, and his forecast should include price and timing targets. If the targets are met, he needs
to evaluate the new situation and decide whether to continue with the
trade by rolling, as in the previous examples, or to exit and take profits. The
forecast should also include price and timing levels that will indicate when
the trader is wrong and should exit the trade. With these types of trades, it
is important to have both price and time stop-loss levels. If either is hit, the
trader should exit the trade. For example, suppose his forecast was for an
upside breakout out of a consolidation pattern this week. If by the close of
business Friday the move has not taken place, he should exit the trade.
This type of discipline is necessary for managing backspreads because it
is easy to fall in love with the potentially unlimited profit potential of a backspread and get into the mindset of “tomorrow, definitely tomorrow it’s going
to happen.” Meanwhile, the time decay piles up, and as we have seen, there
is a chance that even if the anticipated directional move were ultimately to
occur it might actually work against the position. The trader must use price
and time stop-losses. If his initial forecast is off in either department, he must
exit the trade.

CHAPTER 8 EXERCISE
1. A call backspread could be employed when one is expecting a major
upward move in the underlying, which is accompanied by a (rising)
(falling) volatility.
2. The delta of the call backspread is dependent on the location of
the underlying relative to the strike, the time to expiration, and the
_____________ .
3. Backspreads have unlimited profit potential on a large move in the
direction of which: the long or the short options strike?
4. Calculate the gamma of the following 90/95 put 1-to-2 backspread:
90 strike put gamma  0.07
95 strike put gamma  0.10
5. Is the vega of the backspread typically positive or negative, and does
it become more so when the underlying price is near the strike of the
long or the short options?
6. If support lines are broken, and one expects the price of the underlying to continue to fall, a (call) (put) backspread could be placed just
(above) (below) each support level.

Chapter 8 Quiz

7. A backspread could be used to take advantage of a directional breakout
from a (low-) (high-)volatility market situation.
8. The vega of the call backspread could become negative in some
situations. True or false?
9. A call backspread can generate negative delta if the underlying is at
or between the two strikes and implied volatility rises. True or false?
10. Is the passage of time helpful or harmful to the backspread?

Chapter 8 Exercise Answer Key
1. Rising
2. Implied volatility
3. Long
4. Put backspread gamma  (0.07  2)  (0.10  1)  0.04
5. Positive, long
6. Put, below
7. Low
8. True, if the underlying price is at or below the lower strike short call.
9. False. Implied volatility levels would need to fall.
10. Harmful

CHAPTER 8 QUIZ
1. As time passes, the delta of the long out-of-the-money call options
will (increase) (decrease) faster than that of the short at-the-money
option.
2. Steady to rising ___________ _____________ is an optimal situation
for a backspread.
3. In the case of a call backspread, if the expectation is that the penetration of resistance is 37 and has a likelihood of reaching 50, a 37/40
call backspread might be a good choice. True or false?
4. You have on the 1-to-2 110/115 call backspread. The underlying
has rallied up to 120 level. You want to lock in some of the profits,
but you think the stock will still experience price movement on
the upside. You sell two of the 115/120 call vertical spreads rolling your long calls to the 120 strike. This will result in giving you
more room on the upside for price appreciation. True or false?
5. Does the gamma quickly become more positive or negative as the
underlying price rises toward the strike of the long options in the
case of the call backspread?
6. Name the reason you need to define breakout and/or price
acceleration levels.

247

248

Chapter 8

Backspreads

7. An investor has on the 100/105 1-to-2 put backspread. The stock has
penetrated 100, and he thinks that the stock is going to continue
downward even further. Therefore, he wants to expand his ratio,
without an outlay of additional capital. He could put on the 95/100
2-to-4 put backspread for even money, rolling the long puts down to
100. True or false?
8. As expiration nears, does the gamma of an at-the-money option
increase or decrease, and does the gamma of an in- or out-of-themoney option increase or decrease?
9. The theta of a call backspread could become positive with the underlying nearing the strike of the short option and the expiration approaching. True or false?
10. If a put backspread had a theta of –0.05, would this mean that the
value of the spread would increase or decrease by approximately
0.05 each calendar day?

Chapter 8 Quiz Answer Key
1. Decrease
2. Implied volatility
3. True
4. True
5. Positive
6. To help determine strike selection
7. True
8. Increase, decrease
9. True
10. Decrease

Option Spread Strategies: Trading Up, Down, and Sideways Markets
by Anthony J. Saliba with Joseph C. Corona and Karen E. Johnson
Copyright © 2009 by International Trading Institute, Ltd.

Appendix
FINAL EXAM PART I
For Questions 1–6 assume the market has sold off sharply over the last few
trading days.
1. Would an investor expect implied volatilities to be lower or higher
than they were before the sell-off?
2. If an investor was expecting a bounce from the current levels, which
of the following might he consider employing?
a. Bull call spread
b. Call ratio spread
c. Butterfly spread
d. Condor spread
e. All of the above
3. An investor was expecting the sell-off to continue, he might consider
employing a long put, a bear spread, a call backspread, or a short call.
True or false?
4. If the market did bounce, one would expect implied volatilities to be
even higher. True or false?
5. Would one expect a twelve-day implied volatility to be higher or
lower than a forty-day implied volatility?
6. If an investor had a bear spread in place before the sell-off, and his
view was that the market was going to go sideways and volatility
decline, he could add a bull spread to create a long butterfly or condor, or sell another put to create a put ratio spread. True or false?
For Questions 7–12, assume the market has rallied slowly into resistance
over the last week and that implied volatilities are now low.
7. An investor has just received a sell signal in XYZ stock, and his
indicators are signaling a large decline within the next twenty-four

250

Appendix

to forty-eight hours. Which of the following strategies could be
employed to take advantage of low volatility?
a. Put backspread
b. Long put
c. Both a and b
d. Call backspread
8. An investor implements a position based on the assumptions in
Question 7. Three days pass and nothing happens, so he should
consider exiting the trade. True or false?
9. DEF has rallied right to a key resistance level. An investor believes
that DEF will either sell off sharply or break out to the upside from
this level. Should he buy or sell a straddle or strangle?
10. XYZ’s implied volatility is near historical lows. An investor believes
it is about to break out sharply to the upside. Should he consider
employing the put backspread or the call backspread to take advantage of the low volatility?
11. Assume an investor’s position prior to a current rally was a call ratio
spread. The market has drifted upward and implied volatilities have
dropped, resulting in a profitable position. He believes the market
will move sideways and implied volatilities will go lower. However,
the unlimited-risk aspect of the ratio spread makes him nervous.
What adjustment could he make to the position to allow him to capture his new market view while limiting his upside risk?
12. The term structure of implied volatility shows a sharp upward slope.
