
T

3

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

4

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

making of all market participants, and believe that a careful analysis of price movements
can sometimes reveal areas of market imbalance that can offer opportunities for superior risk-adjusted profits. Building the tools for that analysis and learning how to apply
them is the purpose of this book.

DEFINING A TRADING EDGE
Most of the time, markets are efficient, meaning that all available information is reflected
in asset prices, and that price is a fair reflection of value. Most of the time, prices fluctuate
in a more or less random fashion. Though a trader may make some profitable trades in
this type of environment purely due to random chance, it is simply not possible to profit
in the long run; nothing the trader can do will have a positive effect on the bottom line as
long as randomness dominates price changes. In theory, in a true zero-expectancy game,
it should be possible to trade in a random environment and to break even, but reality is
different. Trading accounts in the real world suffer under the constant drag of a number
of trading frictions, transaction costs, errors, and other risks. Together, these create a
high hurdle that must be overcome in order to break even. It is even possible for a trader
to work with a positive expectancy system and still lose a significant amount of money
to the vig.
Newer traders especially are often drawn to focus on elements of performance psychology and positive thinking. There is an entire industry that caters to struggling traders,
holding out hope that if they could just get their psychological issues resolved, money
would flow into their trading accounts. However, this fails to address the core problem,
which is that most traders are doing things in the market that do not work. Excellent execution, risk management, discipline, and proper psychology are all important elements
of a good trading plan, but it is all futile if the trading system does not have a positive
expectancy. These are essential tools through which a trading edge can be applied to the
market, and without which a trader is unlikely to succeed in the long run. However, none
of these is a trading edge in itself.
A positive expectancy results when the trader successfully identifies those moments
where markets are slightly less random than usual, and places trades that are aligned
with the slight statistical edges present in those areas. Some traders are drawn to focus on high-probability (high win rate) trading, while others focus on finding trades that
have excellent reward/risk profiles. Neither of these approaches is better than the other;
what matters is how these two factors of probability and reward/risk ratio interact. For
instance, it is possible to be consistently profitable with a strategy that risks many times
more than what is made, as long as the win rate is high enough, or with a much lower
percentage of winning trades if the reward/risk ratio compensates. In all cases, the trading problem reduces to a matter of identifying when a statistical edge is present in the
market, acting accordingly, and avoiding market environments that are more random. To
do this well, it is essential to have a good understanding of how markets move and also
some of the math behind expectancy and probability theory.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

5

The Trader’s Edge

Expected Value
Expected value (or expectancy) is a term from probability theory that every good trader
and gambler understands intuitively. For our purposes, we need to define a number of
scenarios that each have a precisely defined payout (or loss), and we also need to be able
to quantify the probabilities of each scenario occurring. If we are analyzing actual trading records, this can be as simple as calculating summary statistics for historical trades,
but the problem is much more complicated on a look-forward basis because we have to
make assumptions about how closely future conditions are likely to resemble history.
Furthermore, we also need to make sure that our calculations include every possible
outcome so that the probabilities sum to 1.0; this is sometimes difficult in real-world
applications where unforeseeable outlier events may lurk in the future. Leaving these
practical considerations aside for a moment and focusing on the underlying math, multiplying the payout of each scenario by the probability of each scenario occurring creates
a probability-weighted average of the payouts, which is also called the expected value.
The Expected Value Formula
Formally, for k possible scenarios, each with a payoﬀ of x and associated probability p,
the expected value E( ) is deﬁned as:
E(X) = x1 p1 + x2 p2 + · · · + xk pk
or, in alternate notation:
E(X) =

k


xi pi

i=1

Consider a simplified example where a trader can either make or lose 1 point
with 50 percent probability of either outcome. In this example, the relevant math is:
E(X) = .5(1) + .5(−1) = 0. It is important to understand precisely what expectancy tells
us, which, in the case of a simplified trading or game of chance scenario, is the average
amount we should win or lose on each trial. Furthermore, and this is very important,
like many things in the field of probability, expectancy is valid only over a fairly large
sample size. Even though our trader was playing a zero expectancy game, it is entirely
possible that the trader could have had many wins or losses in a row, and could actually
have accumulated a significant gain or loss at some point. In fact, it is very likely this will
happen because random data tends to have many more strings of runs than most people
would expect. Over a larger sample, it is likely that the actual value realized will begin to
converge on the theoretical expected value, but distortions can and do occur.
The bottom line is that you must have an edge. If you are not trading with a statistical advantage over the market, everything else is futile. Nothing will help. Discipline,
money management, execution skills, and positive thinking add great value in support

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

6

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

of an actual edge, but they are not edges in themselves. From a statistical standpoint,
the definition of an edge is simple: can you properly identify entry and exit points in the
market so that, over a large sample size, the sum of the profit and loss (P&L) from your
winning trades is greater than the sum of your losing trades? The question then becomes:
how do you find, develop, refine, and maintain an edge? There are many answers to that
question; this book shows one possible path.

Where Does the Edge Come From?
Many of the buying and selling decisions in the market are made by humans, either as
individuals, in groups (as in an investment committee making a decision), or through
extension (as in the case of execution algorithms or “algos”). One of the assumptions
of academic finance is that people make rational decisions in their own best interests,
after carefully calculating the potential gains and losses associated with all possible scenarios. This may be true at times, but not always. The market does not simply react to
new information flow; it reacts to that information as it is processed through the lens of
human emotion. People make emotional decisions about market situations, and sometimes they make mistakes. Information may be overweighted or underweighted in analysis, and everyone, even large institutions, deals with the emotions of fear, greed, hope,
and regret.
In an idealized, mathematical random walk world, price would have no memory of
where it has been in the past; but in the real world, prices are determined by traders
making buy and sell decisions at specific times and prices. When markets revisit these
specific prices, the market does have a memory, and we frequently see nonrandom action on these retests of important price levels. People remember the hopes, fears, and
pain associated with price extremes. In addition, most large-scale buying follows a more
or less predictable pattern: traders and execution algorithms alike will execute part of
large orders aggressively, and then will wait to allow the market to absorb the action
before resuming their executions. The more aggressive the buyers, the further they will
lift offers and the less they will wait between spurts of buying. This type of action, and
the memory of other traders around previous inflections, creates slight but predictable
tendencies in prices.
There is no mystical, magical process at work here or at any other time in the market. Buying and selling pressure moves prices—only this, and nothing more. If someone
really wants to buy and to buy quickly, the market will respond to the buying and sellers will raise their offers as they realize they can get a better (higher) price. Similarly,
when large sell orders hit the market, buyers who were waiting on the bid will get out of
the way because they realize that extra supply has come into the market. More urgency
to sell means lower prices. More buying pressure means higher prices. The conclusion
is logical and unavoidable: buying and selling pressure must, by necessity, leave patterns in the market. Our challenge is to understand how psychology can shape market
structure and price action, and to find places where this buying and selling pressure creates opportunities in the form of nonrandom price action.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

7

The Holy Grail
This is important. In fact, it is the single most important point in technical analysis—the
holy grail, if you will. Every edge we have, as technical traders, comes from an imbalance of buying and selling pressure. That’s it, pure and simple. If we realize this and
if we limit our involvement in the market to those points where there is an actual imbalance, then there is the possibility of making profits. We can sometimes identify these
imbalances through the patterns they create in prices, and these patterns can provide
actual points around which to structure and execute trades. Be clear on this point: we do
not trade patterns in markets—we trade the underlying imbalances that create those patterns. There is no holy grail in trading, but this knowledge comes close. To understand
why this is so important, it is necessary to first understand what would happen if we tried
to trade in a world where price action was purely random.

FINDING AND DEVELOPING YOUR EDGE
The process of developing and refining your edge in the market is exactly that: an ongoing process. This is not something you do one time; it is an iterative process that begins
with ideas, progressing to distilling those ideas to actionable trading systems, and then
monitoring the results. Midcourse corrections are to be expected, and dramatic retooling, especially at the beginning, is common. It is necessary to monitor ongoing performance as markets evolve, and some edges will decay over time. To be successful as an
individual discretionary trader means committing to this process. Trading success, for
the discretionary trader, is a dynamic state that will fluctuate in response to a multitude
of factors.

Why Small Traders Can Make Money
This is an obvious issue, but one that is often ignored. The argument of many academics
is that you can’t make money trading; your best bet is to put your money in a diversified
fund and reap the baseline drift compounded over many years. (For most investors, this
is not a bad plan for at least a portion of their portfolios.) Even large, professionally managed funds have a very difficult time beating the market, so why should you be able to do
so, sitting at home or in your office without any competitive or informational advantage?
You are certainly not the best-capitalized player in the arena, and, in a field that attracts
some of the best and brightest minds in the world, you are unlikely to be the smartest.
You also will not win by sheer force of will and determination. Even if you work harder
than nearly anyone else, a well-capitalized firm could hire 20 of you and that is what you
are competing against. What room is there for the small, individual trader to make profits
in the market?
The answer, I think, is simple but profound: you can make money because you are
not playing the same game as these other players. One reason the very large funds have

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

8

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

trouble beating the market is that they are so large that they are the market. Many
of these firms are happy to scrape out a few incremental basis points on a relative basis, and they do so through a number of specialized strategies. This is probably not how
you intend to trade. You probably cannot compete with large institutions on fundamental work. You probably cannot compete with HFTs and automated trading programs on
speed, nor can you compete with the quant firms that hire armies of PhDs to scour every
conceivable relationship between markets.
This is all true, but you also do not have the same restrictions that many of these
firms do: you are not mandated to have any specific exposures. In most markets, you
will likely experience few, if any, liquidity or size issues; your orders will have a minimal
(but still very real) impact on prices. Most small traders can be opportunistic. If you
have the skills, you can move freely among currencies, equities, futures, and options,
using outright or spread strategies as appropriate. Few institutional investors enjoy these
freedoms. Last, and perhaps most significantly, you are free to target a time frame that is
not interesting to many institutions and not accessible to some.
One solution is to focus on the three-day to two-week swings, as many swing traders
do. First, this steps up out of the noise created by the HFTs and algos. Many large firms,
particularly those that make decisions on fundamental criteria, avoid short time frames
altogether. They may enter and exit positions over multiple days or weeks; your profits
and losses over a few days are inconsequential to them. Rather than compete directly,
play a different game and target a different time frame. As Sun Tzu wrote in the Art
of War: “Tactics are like unto water; for water in its natural state runs away from high
places and hastens downward . . . avoid what is strong and strike at what is weak.”

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHART READING
Charts are powerful tools for traders, but it is important to think deeply about what a
chart is and what it represents. Though it is possible to trade by focusing on simple chart
patterns, this approach also misses much of the richness and depth of analysis that are
available to a skilled chart reader. Top-level trading combines traditional left brain skills
of logic, math, and analytical thinking with the intuitive, inductive skills of right brain
thinking. Charts speak directly to the right brain, whose native language is pictures and
images. Part of your edge as a discretionary trader comes from integrating these two
halves of your being; charts are a powerful tool that can facilitate this integration and
foster the growth of intuition.
Modern software packages are a mixed blessing for traders. On one hand, they have
greatly increased the scope and breadth of our vision. It is not unusual for a modern
trader to examine 400 or 500 charts in the course of a trading day, sometimes more
than once, quickly assessing the character of a market or a set of related markets. This
would not have been possible in the precomputer era, when charts had to be laboriously drawn and updated by hand. However, charting software also encourages some
potentially harmful habits. It is so easy to add various plots and indicators to charts and

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

9

The Trader’s Edge

to tweak and change settings and time frames that some traders are forever experimenting and searching for the holy grail of technical indicators. Other traders bury price bars
behind a barrage of moving averages and other indicators, thinking that complexity will
lead to better trading results. Simplicity is often better than complexity. A chart is nothing more than a tool to display market data in a structured format. Once traders learn
to read the message of the market, they can understand the psychological tone and the
balance of buying and selling pressure at any point.
When it comes to chart setup, there is no one right way, but I will share my approach.
Everything I do comes from an emphasis on clarity and consistency. Clean charts put the
focus where it belongs: on the price bars and the developing market structure. Tools that
highlight and emphasize the underlying market’s structure are good; anything that detracts from that focus is bad. When you see a chart, you want the price bars (or candles)
to be the first and most important thing your eye is drawn to; any calculated measure is
only a supplement or an enhancement. Consistency is also very important, for two separate reasons. First, consistency reduces the time required to orient between charts. It is
not unusual for me to scan 500 charts in a single sitting, and I can effectively do this by
spending a little over a second on each chart. This is possible only because every one of
my charts has the same layout and I can instantly orient and drill down to the relevant
information. Consistency is also especially important for the developing trader because
part of the learning process is training your eye to process data a certain way. If you are
forever switching formats, this learning curve becomes much longer and steeper, and the
development of intuition will be stymied. Keep the same format between all markets and
time frames, and keep the setup of all of your charts as consistent as possible.
Chart Scaling: Linear versus Log
The one exception to the principle of keeping charts consistent might be in the case of
very long-term charts spanning multiple years, or shorter-term charts in which an asset
has greatly increased in value (by over 100 percent). In these cases, the vertical axis of
the chart should be scaled logarithmically (called “semi-log” in some charting packages)
to better reﬂect the growth rate of the market. The idea behind a log scale chart is that
the same vertical distance always represents the same percentage growth regardless of
location on the axis.
On a very long-term chart, linearly scaled charts will often make price changes at
lower price levels so small that they disappear and they are completely dwarfed by price
changes that happened at higher levels. The linear scale also magniﬁes the importance
of those higher-level price changes, making them seem more violent and signiﬁcant than
they actually were. Compare Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.2, two charts of the long-term history
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), especially noticing the diﬀerences between the
two charts at the beginning and end of the series. They seem to tell completely diﬀerent
stories. The ﬁrst chart shows a ﬂat and uninteresting beginning followed by violent swings

(Continued )

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

10

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.1 Nothing Seems to Matter Before 1985: DJIA on a Linear Scale

FIGURE 1.2 Investors’ Actual Experiences: DJIA on a Log Scale

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Trader’s Edge

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

11

near the right edge of the chart, while the second, the log scale chart, shows more consistent swings throughout. Over this long history, the log scale chart is a much more accurate
representation of what market participants would have experienced at any point on the
chart. Remember, as a rule of thumb, there are two times when log scale charts should
be used: any time you have greater than a 100 percent price increase on a chart, and for
any chart showing more than two years of data, whether on daily, weekly, or monthly time
frames.

Choosing Time Frames
Discretionary traders must clearly choose and define the time frame within which they
will trade, and this choice of time frames is tied into deeper questions of personality
and trading style. Most of the trading ideas and principles we examine in this book can
be applied to all markets and all time frames, with some adjustments, but most traders
will probably find themselves best suited to a specific set of markets and time frames.
Traders switching time frames or asset classes will usually undergo a painful adjustment
period while they figure out how to apply their tools in the new context. For now, let’s
leave these important considerations behind and focus on only the mechanical issues of
setting up charts to cover multiple time frames. In the end, your charts must be a tool
that serves your trading style, not the other way around.
Many authors have written about the advantages of combining multiple time frames.
Multiple time frames can provide context for and inform patterns on a single time frame;
skilled use of multiple time frames allows traders to better manage risk and to increase
the expectancy of their trading plans. Nearly all technical traders consider action and
structure in other time frames, though they do this in a variety of ways. Some traders are
able to infer this information from a single chart, while many others prefer to actually
look at multiple charts of the same market with each chart showing a different time
frame. In a scheme like this, the primary time frame of focus is called the trading time
frame (TTF). A higher time frame (HTF) chart provides a bigger-picture perspective,
while a lower time frame (LTF) chart is usually used to find precise entry points. Other
variations, with up to five or six charts, are possible, and there are many traders who
use only a pair of charts. Last, though the term time frame seems to imply that the xaxis of the chart will be a time scale (minutes, hours, days, etc.), the same proportional
relationships can be applied to tick, volume, or any other activity-based axis scale on
the x-axis.
In general, time frames should be related to each other by a factor of 3 to 5. There
is no magic in these ratios, but the idea is that each time frame should provide new information without loss of resolution or unnecessary repetition. For instance, if a trader
is watching a 30-minute chart, a 5- or 10-minute chart probably provides new information about what is going on inside each 30-minute bar, whereas a 1-minute chart would
omit significant information. Using a 20-minute chart in conjunction with a 30-minute
chart probably adds no new information, as the two charts will be very similar. One
lesser-known relationship is that all vertical distances on charts scale with the square
