The second possibility with your open position occurs
when the trade moves in your favor. Here you are left with
the more pleasurable but admittedly very difﬁcult decision
of choosing when to exit the trade with the greatest amount
of proﬁt. Many traders struggle more with selling too early
than with cutting losses.
I teach my students four different methods for taking proﬁts on their trades. Again, the method that works
best for you depends on the kind of trader you are, your
trading experience, your chart-reading experience, your

ENTRIES AND EXITS

Figure 11.1

235

MRVL showing parabolic SAR stop points.

tolerance for risk, and so on. I recommend experimenting with these four types of proﬁt exits and see which
works best for you. Remember, no one goes broke taking proﬁts. The four proﬁt exit methods we will cover
here are:
• A percentage proﬁt exit
• A price support or resistance proﬁt exit
• An average true range proﬁt exit
• The trailing stop proﬁt exit

Percentage Proﬁt Exit
The simplest exit strategy is to use a percentage proﬁt exit.
Here you should place a proﬁt target limit order to close
the trade at a percentage removed from your entry price
that is 1.5 to 2.0 times that of your stop-loss. For example,
if you have set a −5.0 percent stop-loss, then you would set

236

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

your proﬁt limit order somewhere between ⫹7.5 and ⫹10.0
percent. Your stop-loss order may change as the stock
moves in your favor, but you must keep your proﬁt limit
order in place at all times. The trade is considered closed
when either one or the other is hit and executes. With the
kind of volatile, high-beta stocks we screen for, this usually happens within a few days.

Price Resistance or Price Support Exit
A more sophisticated way of setting a proﬁt limit order is
to look for an area of nearby price resistance (if long) or price
support (if short) such that if price were to reach that area
it would likely attract the wrong kind of crowd (sellers
pouncing at resistance or buyers gathering shares at support). Price support or resistance can come in the form of
a major moving average, an area of previous price reversal,
or a trendline. Traders familiar with Bollinger Bands or
other forms of standard deviation envelopes can also use
those tools to set price pattern stops. This is a more reasonable way to approach proﬁt limits, and it takes advantage of your chart-reading skills.

Average True Range Proﬁt Exit
A third way to calculate your exit target is to use an average true range proﬁt exit. To calculate this, simply multiply
your ATR by 3, assuming you set your stop at 2*ATR. So
say, for example, you are trading RIMM long, which is currently being offered at 96.82 with an ATR of 3.25. If your
entry price was 96.00, say, you would then set your stoploss at 96.00 ⫺ (2 ⫻ 3.25), or 89.50, and your target limit
order at 96.00 ⫹ (3 ⫻ 3.25), or 105.75.

ENTRIES AND EXITS

237

Trailing Stop Proﬁt Exit
The fourth and ﬁnal way to bank your proﬁts, and the way
I normally use, is simply to take your stop-loss and move it
in response to any positive movement in your position (up
for longs, down for shorts) on a closing basis. This is called
a trailing stop exit, and studies show it is by far the most
proﬁtable. Why is this? Because it follows the age-old
trader’s dictum: “Let your winners run.” Setting speciﬁc
proﬁt targets is often the favored choice for trend trading
because it keeps your turnover of trades ﬂowing smoothly.
It is the right choice if you need your trading account to
produce a steady cash ﬂow in order to pay your bills. The
problem with using proﬁt targets, however, is that you then
miss out on those few big runs that, in themselves, can be
all the fuel you need to get your account into the big
leagues. In fact, you can take losses in the majority of your
trades, but if you cut them short and let your winners run,
those two or three huge winners you are bound to get each
year can keep you at the trading game a long, long time.
Read the Market Wizards stories: nearly every trader
there looks back on one or two huge winners that propelled
them from amateur wannabes into the professional trading
arena. So if you are not sure where to place a proﬁt target,
or you think your position could be the next Google, hold
on to it for a while with a trailing stop-loss and let the market take you out of the trade.

REAL-TIME TRADING
In this chapter you have an account of everything you need
to know to execute proﬁtable trend trades. What is not

238

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

here, and indeed cannot be here, is perhaps the most
important part of trend trading: real-time experience.
There is no substitute for the countless hours it will take
to put this knowledge into practice in a way that will lead
you to ﬁnd technically sound trading setups, make consistently proﬁtable trades, take reasonably small losses, and
ultimately ramp up your trading account to new highs. To
put into practice what you have learned in this chapter, I
suggest you take the following action steps:
1. Read this chapter at least twice. We all read through
our prejudices, and these may cause you to overlook
important bits of information. Go back over this
material to be sure to catch items you may have
missed on the ﬁrst reading.
2. Spend several trading days just eyeballing your watch
lists. There is no substitute for putting in hours of
chart reading for the setups we teach in this book.
You will need to so internalize these setups that
they become second nature to you. You need to
gain that intuitive sense for stocks that look
somewhat like a particular setup but have other
issues going on that likely would weigh against the
setup, and that intuitive sense for a setup that is just
so outrageously perfect that you can hardly wait to
enter your position the next day.
3. Give serious thought to position sizing. This could
constitute an entire chapter by itself, but instead of
boring you with my theories let me suggest that you
read Chapter 12 of Van Tharp’s book Trade Your

ENTRIES AND EXITS

239

Way to Financial Freedom. Short of that, I always
recommend that my students divide their accounts
into equal monetary amounts and put no more than
that amount into each trade. When you are ﬁrst
starting out as a trend trader, you should go very
lightly into your trades (dividing by 10 ought to
work). You can increase your size as you gain
more experience. It is also not a bad idea to scale
back on size during a losing streak and increase
in size during a winning streak. That may seem
counterintuitive, but in the game of trading, losing
tends to beget more losing and winning tends to
beget more winning.

This page intentionally left blank

PA R T
FOUR

trend trading
with options

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

options basics

CHAPTER
12

L

ET’S look at another form of trend trading using a dif-

ferent asset class: stock options. Options will add a great
deal of ﬂexibility to your trend trading. Don’t like the risk
in a certain setup, but you really like the chart? Trade the
options instead. Don’t have much cash on hand, but you
want to get in on a predicted move in Google (currently
trading well over $500 per share)? Buy the options for a lot
less. Do you have a large amount of proﬁt in your open
positions, and you fear the markets are about to reverse?
Add some price insurance—with options. Want to proﬁt
from the huge moves that take place during earnings season but don’t want to risk being on the wrong side? You can
do that too—with (you guessed it!) options. So, you may
be asking, what the heck are options?

WHAT ARE OPTIONS?
Options are traded just like stocks. You can either buy them
in the hope that they will rise in price or sell them short
(this is also called writing an option) in the hope that they

243

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

244

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

will fall in price. There are only two kinds of stock options:
calls and puts. Call options tend to rise in price as the stock
price rises. Put options tend to rise in price as the stock
price falls. So both the buyer of a call option and the writer
of a put option, generally, are bullish on the stock. And
both the writer of a call option and the buyer of a put
option, generally, are bearish on the stock.
Option buyers have rights, and option writers have
obligations. Option buyers have the right, but not the obligation, to buy (if a call is bought) or sell (if a put is bought)
the underlying stock at a speciﬁed price. This right remains
in place until the option expires. Each option contract you
purchase will have a speciﬁed expiration month associated
with it. Options expire on the third Friday of their expiration month. Option writers have the obligation to sell (if a
call is sold short) or buy (if a put is sold short) the underlying stock at a speciﬁed price. This obligation remains in
place until the option expires.
There are no margin requirements if you want to purchase an option because your risk is limited to the price of
the option. An option purchase requires the account to be
debited in the amount of the option’s purchase price, or premium. Option writers, on the other hand, receive a credit
to their account in the amount of the option’s premium for
selling that option. They get to keep this amount if the
option expires worthless on its expiration date. However,
since option sellers also have an obligation to buy (put) or
sell (call) the underlying stock if their option is exercised
by the person they sold their option to (the assigned option
holder), they assume a risk greater than the amount of the

OPTIONS BASICS

245

price of the option. Therefore, writing an option always
requires the use of a margin account. Not all brokers allow
for the writing or selling of options unless the writer or
seller also owns shares of the underlying stock.

STOCK OPTIONS TERMINOLOGY
To trade options, you must be acquainted with the terminology of the options market. I’ve provided here a list of
the most commonly used terms associated with buying and
selling stock options.
At-the-Money
An option is at-the-money if the market price of the under-

lying interest is at or near the underlying stock price.
Generally, at-the-money options cost more than outof-the-money options.
Buy to Close
Buying to close is when you buy a contract that you are

currently short.
Buy to Open
Buying to open a position is when you buy a contract that

you don’t already own.
Call Option
A call option is a contract that gives the holder the right to

buy the underlying for the strike price anytime until expiry.

246

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Delta
There are several Greek letter symbols used in options ter-

minology that refer to changes in an option’s premium.
The most important of these for our purposes is delta.
Delta refers to a ratio between option premium and
stock price. This relationship is not normally a 1:1 ratio.
Most often it is around 0.5:1 (and often less than that). In
other words, if the delta for an option is 0.5, then for every
$1 move in the stock, there is a corresponding $0.50 move
in the option premium. That may make it seem like options
are not as good a deal as stocks, but the fact that options
are leveraged by price—it takes a lot less money to control
100 shares buying the options rather than the shares—
makes them very attractive despite the delta ratio.
There is some good news regarding delta: it changes
as the stock price moves more and more in-the-money.
Usually, at the strike price delta is around 0.5. Deep in-themoney options, however, can move at closer to a 1:1 ratio.
The opposite is true as well: if the stock moves away from
the strike price and out of the money, delta tends to decrease. This factor alone—the delta factor—makes options
very attractive for trend trading: as a position moves in our
favor, our options increase in value at a faster and faster
rate, but as a position moves against us, they decrease in
value at a slower and slower rate.
Exercise Style
• American Style: American-style options can be

exercised anytime until expiry.
• European Style: European-style options can be
exercised only on expiry (not before).

OPTIONS BASICS

247

Exercise and Assignment
Exercise is when the option holder decides to use the option

to buy or sell the underlying stock at the strike price.
Assignment is when an option seller (called the writer of an
option) is required to buy or sell the underlying stock due
to the obligation from writing the option. An option holder
exercising an option will cause an option writer to be
assigned.
Expiration Date
A stock option expires by the market’s close on the third

Friday of the expiration month. All listed options have
options available for the current month and the next
month as well as speciﬁc future months. Each stock has a
corresponding cycle of months that they offer options in.
There are three ﬁxed expiration cycles available. They are
as follows:
1. January, April, July, and October
2. February, May, August, and November
3. March, June, September, and December
The date the option expires is referred to as the expiration
date.
Holder
The holder is the person who bought an option contract.

People who buy an option they previously wrote are not
holders, they are just closing an existing position. Option
holders are said to be long the option they bought.

248

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

In-the-Money
• Call options: The underlying stock price is above

the option strike price.
• Put options: The underlying stock price is below
the option strike price.
• Note: All options with intrinsic value are in-themoney.
Generally, in-the-money options cost more to purchase than at-the-money options.
Intrinsic Value
Intrinsic value is the portion of an options premium that is

attributed to the value that could currently be realized by
exercising and simultaneously closing out the position in
the open market.
Long
If you own a security or stock option, you are said to be

long that security or option.
Out-of-the-Money
• Call options: The underlying stock price is below

the option strike price.
• Put options: The underlying stock price is above
the option strike price.
Premium
A premium is the price that is paid for an option contract.

An option’s premium is determined by a number of
factors including, but not limited to, the current price of

OPTIONS BASICS

249

the underlying asset, the strike price of the option, the time
remaining until expiration (time value), and the volatility
of the stock. An option premium is priced on a per-share
basis. Each option on a stock corresponds to 100 shares.
Therefore, if the premium of an option is priced at 2.50,
the total cost for that option would be $250 per contract
(2.50 premium ⫻ 100 shares per contract). Buying an
option creates a debit in the amount of the option’s total
cost to the buyer’s trading account. Writing or selling short
an option creates a credit in the amount of the option’s total
cost to the seller’s trading account.
Put Option
A put option is a contract that gives the holder the right to

sell the underlying for the strike price anytime until expiry.
Sell to Close
Selling to close is selling a contract you currently own.
Short
If you sell a security or stock option you didn’t already

own, you are said to be short that security or option.
Time Value
The time remaining until expiration of a purchased option

has a monetary value in options trading. This value is called
the option’s time value. Time value increases the further
away from expiration the option is, and it decreases as the
option moves closer to expiration. The rate of this decrease
changes exponentially over time, so as an option moves
closer and closer to expiration, the option’s time value

250

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

decreases at a faster and faster rate. On the day of expiration, options possess no time value whatsoever.
Strike Price (Exercise Price)
The strike price is the price that the underlying asset will

be bought or sold at if an option contract is exercised.
Options are available in several strike prices above and
below the current price of the underlying asset. Stocks
priced below $25 per share usually have strike prices at
intervals of $2.50. Stocks priced over $25 usually have
strike prices at $5 intervals.
Underlying
The underlying is something that an option contract is

based on. This could be a stock, an index, a foreign currency, an interest rate, or a futures contract. The underlying is commonly referred to as the underlying interest,
underlying asset, underlying security, or underlying stock.
Writer
A writer is someone who sold an option contract to open a

position. The writer is the person who is taking on the risk
(underwriting the risk). People who sell an options contract they already own are not writers, they are just closing an existing position. Option writers are said to be short
the option they wrote.
Write (Sell to Open)
Selling to open is selling short an options contract that you

don’t already own. The writer is the person taking on the
risk (underwriting the risk). People who sell an options

OPTIONS BASICS

251

contract they already own are not writers, they are just
closing an existing position. Option writers are said to be
short the option they wrote.

SUMMARY OF
HOW OPTIONS WORK
• Stock options give you the right to buy or sell an

underlying stock.
• If you buy an option, you are not obligated to buy
or sell the underlying stock; you simply have the
right to do so.
• If you sell an option and the option is exercised,
you are obligated to deliver the underlying
stock (if you bought a call) or take delivery
of the underlying stock (if you bought a put)
at the strike price of the option, regardless of
the current price of the underlying stock.
• Options are good for a speciﬁed period of time,
after which they expire and you lose your right to
buy or sell the underlying instrument at the
speciﬁed price.
• Options when bought are done so at a debit to the
buyer.
• Options when sold are done so by giving a credit
to the seller.
• Options are available in several strike prices
representing the price of the underlying
instrument.
• The cost of an option is referred to as the option
premium. The price reﬂects a variety of factors

252

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

including the current price of the underlying
stock, the strike price of the option, the time
remaining until expiration, and volatility.
• Options are not available on every stock. There
are approximately 2,200 stocks with tradable
options. Each stock option represents 100 shares
of a company’s stock.

ADVANTAGES OF OPTIONS
Options are the most versatile trading instruments available. They can, for example, be traded on a wide variety of
instruments, including stocks, stock indexes, exchangetraded funds (like the QQQQ), commodities, currencies,
and bonds. Options on all these instruments function in
exactly the same way as described previously. Our focus
here, however, will be on stock options.
Options are also versatile because they can be used for
a larger variety of reasons than simple stocks.
• Options are used to hedge against risk.

If you have 1,000 shares of IBM, for example, and suspect
that the stock might be in for a drawdown, you can buy 10
put options (or sell 10 calls), which would increase in value
in that event. Once the sell-off was over, you could then
sell the puts for a proﬁt against the loss suffered in the
stock. The effect is twofold: you are partially protected
against a loss in the stock, and the proﬁt from the option
sale serves to lower the entry cost of the IBM stock.

OPTIONS BASICS

253

• Options can also be used to proﬁt from periods when

the markets are volatile and unpredictable.
There are certain market-neutral strategies using options
that take advantage of the fact that options tend to gain in
value at an increasing rate as a stock moves favorably, but
decrease in value at a decreasing rate as a stock moves unfavorably. This is the aforementioned delta factor of an
option, and it can yield incredibly consistent gains if played
wisely. If, for example, one expects RIMM to move wildly
on its earnings announcement, but you are not sure
whether that move will be up or down, you can purchase
both a call and a put on RIMM. If on the day of the
announcement RIMM trades up strongly, you can sell the
put for a loss and hold the call for the gain. Because of
the delta factor, the put should decrease in value at a rate
slower than the increase in value of the call option. This is
a proﬁtable variance that can be exploited again and again,
particularly during earnings season. We will teach you how
to implement this strategy later.
• Options give the smaller account trader an incredible

amount of leverage with which to play higher-priced
stocks.
By buying a call or put instead of the actual stock, a trader
with only a couple thousand dollars to trade can still control round lots of the stock instead of having to purchase
odd lots (less than 100 shares). He or she can take full positions in some of the higher-priced stocks, the big movers,

254

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

when normally the smaller trading capital would have prohibited it. With options, a smaller account trader can take
multiple positions without tying up all his or her cash.
But the primary advantage of stock options versus
simple stocks is leverage. Leverage is here deﬁned as the
advantage gained by the investor who can make a small
amount of money do the work of a much larger amount. In
stock options, you can frequently put yourself in a situation where every $1 invested in options is doing work
equivalent to $10 or more invested in stocks.
Let’s give a real-world example. Let’s say I wanted to
buy 500 shares of EBAY because I think it is going to go
up over the next few weeks. Currently EBAY is trading at
about $40 per share. So those 500 shares of EBAY are
going to cost me $20,000. Let’s also say that I am right:
over the next month, EBAY goes to $50. My 500 shares are
now worth $25,000. I have made a proﬁt of: $5,000, or ⫹25
percent on my original investment, less commissions. Here
is a summary of my stock trade:
• Buy 500 shares EBAY @ $40: cost $20,000
• Stock goes to $50: proﬁt $5,000, or ⫹25 percent

Anytime you can bank a 25 percent gain in a month, you’ve
made a nice trade.
But now let’s say, instead of buying the stock outright,
I purchased call options on the stock instead. If EBAY is
trading at $40, and I think it is going to go up, I would
want to buy calls at the 40 strike at least two months out
(to give my trade time to mature). Currently the premium
