
Appendixes

567

These data illustrate, as well as any can, the persistence of the
old-time investment viewpoint until the culminating years of the
bull market of the 1920s. What has happened since then can be
summarized by using ten-year intervals in the history of IBM. In
1936 net expanded to twice the 1926 figures, and the average multiplier rose from 7 to 171⁄2. From 1936 to 1946 the gain was 21⁄2 times,
but the average multiplier in 1946 remained at 171⁄2. Then the pace
accelerated. The 1956 net was nearly 4 times that of 1946, and the
average multiplier rose to 321⁄2. Last year, with a further gain in net,
the multiplier rose again to an average of 42, if we do not count the
unconsolidated equity in the foreign subsidiary.
When we examine these recent price figures with care we see
some interesting analogies and contrasts with those of forty years
earlier. The one-time scandalous water, so prevalent in the balance
sheets of industrial companies, has all been squeezed out—first by
disclosure and then by writeoffs. But a different kind of water has
been put back into the valuation by the stock market—by investors
and speculators themselves. When IBM now sells at 7 times its
book value, instead of 7 times earnings, the effect is practically the
same as if it had no book value at all. Or the small book-value portion can be considered as a sort of minor preferred-stock component of the price, the rest representing exactly the same sort of
commitment as the old-time speculator made when he bought
Woolworth or U.S. Steel common entirely for their earning power
and future prospects.
It is worth remarking, in passing, that in the thirty years which
saw IBM transformed from a 7-times earnings to a 40-times earnings enterprise, many of what I have called the endogenous speculative aspects of our large industrial companies have tended to
disappear, or at least to diminish greatly. Their financial positions
are firm, their capital structures conservative: they are managed far
more expertly, and even more honestly, than before. Furthermore,
the requirements of complete disclosure have removed one of the
important speculative elements of years ago—that derived from
ignorance and mystery.
Another personal digression here. In my early years in the Street
one of the favorite mystery stocks was Consolidated Gas of New
York, now Consolidated Edison. It owned as a subsidiary the profitable New York Edison Company, but it reported only dividends
received from this source, not its full earnings. The unreported Edi-

568

Appendixes

son earnings supplied the mystery and the “hidden value.” To my
surprise I discovered that these hush-hush figures were actually on
file each year with the Public Service Commission of the state. It
was a simple matter to consult the records and to present the true
earnings of Consolidated Gas in a magazine article. (Incidentally,
the addition to profits was not spectacular.) One of my older
friends said to me then: “Ben, you may think you are a great guy to
supply those missing figures, but Wall Street is going to thank you
for nothing. Consolidated Gas with the mystery is both more interesting and more valuable than ex-mystery. You youngsters who
want to stick your noses into everything are going to ruin Wall
Street.”
It is true that the three M’s which then supplied so much fuel to
the speculative fires have now all but disappeared. These were
Mystery, Manipulation, and (thin) Margins. But we security analysts have ourselves been creating valuation approaches which are
so speculative in themselves as to pretty well take the place of
those older speculative factors. Do we not have our own “3M’s”
now—none other than Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
Company—and does not this common stock illustrate perfectly the
new speculation as contrasted with the old? Consider a few figures. When M. M. & M. common sold at 101 last year the market
was valuing it at 44 times 1956 earnings, which happened to show
no increase to speak of in 1957. The enterprise itself was valued at
$1.7 billion, of which $200 million was covered by net assets, and a
cool $11⁄2 billion represented the market’s appraisal of “good will.”
We do not know the process of calculation by which that valuation
of good will was arrived at; we do know that a few months later
the market revised this appraisal downward by some $450 million,
or about 30 per cent. Obviously it is impossible to calculate accurately the intangible component of a splendid company such as
this. It follows as a kind of mathematical law that the more important the good will or future earning-power factor the more uncertain becomes the true value of the enterprise, and therefore the
more speculative inherently the common stock.
It may be well to recognize a vital difference that has developed
in the valuation of these intangible factors, when we compare earlier times with today. A generation or more ago it was the standard
rule, recognized both in average stock prices and in formal or legal

Appendixes

569

valuations, that intangibles were to be appraised on a more conservative basis than tangibles. A good industrial company might be
required to earn between 6 per cent and 8 per cent on its tangible
assets, represented typically by bonds and preferred stock; but its
excess earnings, or the intangible assets they gave rise to, would be
valued on, say, a 15 per cent basis. (You will find approximately
these ratios in the initial offering of Woolworth preferred and common stock in 1911, and in numerous others.) But what has happened since the 1920s? Essentially the exact reverse of these
relationships may now be seen. A company must now typically
earn about 10 per cent on its common equity to have it sell in the
average market at full book value. But its excess earnings, above 10
per cent on capital, are usually valued more liberally, or at a higher
multiplier, than the base earnings required to support the book
value in the market. Thus a company earning 15 per cent on the
equity may well sell at 131⁄2 times earnings, or twice its net assets.
This would mean that the first 10 per cent earned on capital is valued at only 10 times, but the next 5 per cent—what used to be
called the “excess”—is actually valued at 20 times.
Now there is a logical reason for this reversal in valuation procedure, which is related to the newer emphasis on growth expectations. Companies that earn a high return on capital are given these
liberal appraisals not only because of the good profitability itself,
and the relative stability associated with it, but perhaps even more
cogently because high earnings on capital generally go hand in
hand with a good growth record and prospects. Thus what is really
paid for nowadays in the case of highly profitable companies is not
the good will in the old and restricted sense of an established name
and a profitable business, but rather their assumed superior expectations of increased profits in the future.
This brings me to one or two additional mathematical aspects of
the new attitude toward common-stock valuations, which I shall
touch on merely in the form of brief suggestions. If, as many tests
show, the earnings multiplier tends to increase with profitability—
i.e., as the rate of return on book value increases—then the arithmetical consequence of this feature is that value tends to increase
directly as the square of the earnings, but inversely the book value.
Thus in an important and very real sense tangible assets have
become a drag on average market value rather than a source

570

Appendixes

thereof. Take a far from extreme illustration. If Company A earns $4
a share on a $20 book value, and Company B also $4 a share on
$100 book value, Company A is almost certain to sell at a higher
multiplier, and hence at higher price than Company B—say $60 for
Company A shares and $35 for Company B shares. Thus it would
not be inexact to declare that the $80 per share of greater assets for
Company B are responsible for the $25 per share lower market
price, since the earnings per share are assumed to be equal.
But more important than the foregoing is the general relationship between mathematics and the new approach to stock values.
Given the three ingredients of (a) optimistic assumptions as to the
rate of earnings growth, (b) a sufficiently long projection of this
growth into the future, and (c) the miraculous workings of compound interest—lo! the security analyst is supplied with a new
kind of philosopher’s stone which can produce or justify any
desired valuation for a really “good stock.” I have commented in a
recent article in the Analysts’ Journal on the vogue of higher mathematics in bull markets, and quoted David Durand’s exposition of
the striking analogy between value calculations of growth stocks
and the famous Petersburg Paradox, which has challenged and
confused mathematicians for more than two hundred years. The
point I want to make here is that there is a special paradox in the
relationship between mathematics and investment attitudes on
common stocks, which is this: Mathematics is ordinarily considered as producing precise and dependable results; but in the stock
market the more elaborate and abstruse the mathematics the more
uncertain and speculative are the conclusions we draw therefrom.
In forty-four years of Wall Street experience and study I have never
seen dependable calculations made about common-stock values, or
related investment policies, that went beyond simple arithmetic or
the most elementary algebra. Whenever calculus is brought in,
or higher algebra, you could take it as a warning signal that the
operator was trying to substitute theory for experience, and usually also to give to speculation the deceptive guise of investment.
The older ideas of common-stock investment may seem quite
naïve to the sophisticated security analyst of today. The great
emphasis was always on what we now call the defensive aspects of
the company or issue—mainly the assurance that it would continue its dividend unreduced in bad times. Thus the strong rail-

Appendixes

571

roads, which constituted the standard investment commons of fifty
years ago, were actually regarded in very much the same way as
the public-utility commons in recent years. If the past record indicated stability, the chief requirement was met; not too much effort
was made to anticipate adverse changes of an underlying character
in the future. But, conversely, especially favorable future prospects
were regarded by shrewd investors as something to look for but
not to pay for.
In effect this meant that the investor did not have to pay anything substantial for superior long-term prospects. He got these,
virtually without extra cost, as a reward for his own superior intelligence and judgment in picking the best rather than the merely
good companies. For common stocks with the same financial
strength, past earnings record, and dividend stability all sold at
about the same dividend yield.
This was indeed a shortsighted point of view, but it had the
great advantage of making common-stock investment in the old
days not only simple but also basically sound and highly profitable. Let me return for the last time to a personal note. Somewhere around 1920 our firm distributed a series of little pamphlets
entitled Lessons for Investors. Of course it took a brash analyst in his
middle twenties like myself to hit on so smug and presumptuous a
title. But in one of the papers I made the casual statement that “if a
common stock is a good investment it is also a good speculation.”
For, reasoned I, if a common stock was so sound that it carried very
little risk of loss it must ordinarily be so good as to possess excellent chances for future gains. Now this was a perfectly true and
even valuable discovery, but it was true only because nobody paid
any attention to it. Some years later, when the public woke up to
the historical merits of common stocks as long-term investments,
they soon ceased to have any such merit, because the public’s
enthusiasm created price levels which deprived them of their builtin margin of safety, and thus drove them out of the investment
class. Then, of course, the pendulum swung to the other extreme,
and we soon saw one of the most respected authorities declaring
(in 1931) that no common stock could ever be an investment.
When we view this long-range experience in perspective we
find another set of paradoxes in the investor’s changing attitude
toward capital gains as contrasted with income. It seems a truism

572

Appendixes

to say that the old-time common-stock investor was not much
interested in capital gains. He bought almost entirely for safety and
income, and let the speculator concern himself with price appreciation. Today we are likely to say that the more experienced and
shrewd the investor, the less attention he pays to dividend returns,
and the more heavily his interest centers on long-term appreciation. Yet one might argue, perversely, that precisely because the
old-time investor did not concentrate on future capital appreciation he was virtually guaranteeing to himself that he would have it,
at least in the field of industrial stocks. And, conversely, today’s
investor is so concerned with anticipating the future that he is
already paying handsomely for it in advance. Thus what he has
projected with so much study and care may actually happen and
still not bring him any profit. If it should fail to materialize to the
degree expected he may in fact be faced with a serious temporary
and perhaps even permanent loss.
What lessons—again using the pretentious title of my 1920 pamphlet—can the analyst of 1958 learn from this linking of past with
current attitudes? Not much of value, one is inclined to say. We can
look back nostalgically to the good old days when we paid only for
the present and could get the future for nothing—an “all this and
Heaven too” combination. Shaking our heads sadly we mutter,
“Those days are gone forever.” Have not investors and security
analysts eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil prospects?
By so doing have they not permanently expelled themselves from
that Eden where promising common stocks at reasonable prices
could be plucked off the bushes? Are we doomed always to run the
risk either of paying unreasonably high prices for good quality and
prospects, or of getting poor quality and prospects when we pay
what seems a reasonable price?
It certainly looks that way. Yet one cannot be sure even of that
pessimistic dilemma. Recently, I did a little research in the longterm history of that towering enterprise, General Electric—stimulated by the arresting chart of fifty-nine years of earnings and
dividends appearing in their recently published 1957 Report. These
figures are not without their surprises for the knowledgeable analyst. For one thing they show that prior to 1947 the growth of G. E.
was fairly modest and quite irregular. The 1946 earnings, per share
adjusted, were only 30 per cent higher than in 1902—52 cents ver-

Appendixes

573

sus 40 cents—and in no year of this period were the 1902 earnings
as much as doubled. Yet the price-earnings ratio rose from 9 times
in 1910 and 1916 to 29 times in 1936 and again in 1946. One might
say, of course, that the 1946 multiplier at least showed the wellknown prescience of shrewd investors. We analysts were able to
foresee then the really brilliant period of growth that was looming
ahead in the next decade. Maybe so. But some of you remember
that the next year, 1947, which established an impressive new high
for G.E.’s per-share earnings, was marked also by an extraordinary
fall in the price-earnings ratio. At its low of 32 (before the 3-for-1
split) G.E. actually sold again at only 9 times its current earnings
and its average price for the year was only about 10 times earnings.
Our crystal ball certainly clouded over in the short space of twelve
months.
This striking reversal took place only eleven years ago. It casts
some little doubt in my mind as to the complete dependability of
the popular belief among analysts that prominent and promising
companies will now always sell at high price-earnings ratios—that
this is a fundamental fact of life for investors and they may as well
accept and like it. I have no desire at all to be dogmatic on this
point. All I can say is that it is not settled in my mind, and each of
you must seek to settle it for yourself.
But in my concluding remarks I can say something definite
about the structure of the market for various types of common
stocks, in terms of their investment and speculative characteristics.
In the old days the investment character of a common stock was
more or less the same as, or proportionate with, that of the enterprise itself, as measured quite well by its credit rating. The lower
the yield on its bonds or preferred, the more likely was the common to meet all the criteria for a satisfactory investment, and the
smaller the element of speculation involved in its purchase. This
relationship, between the speculative ranking of the common and
the investment rating of the company, could be graphically
expressed pretty much as a straight line descending from left to
right. But nowadays I would describe the graph as U-shaped. At
the left, where the company itself is speculative and its credit low,
the common stock is of course highly speculative, just as it has
always been in the past. At the right extremity, however, where the
company has the highest credit rating because both its past record

574

Appendixes

and future prospects are most impressive, we find that the stock
market tends more or less continuously to introduce a highly speculative element into the common shares through the simple means
of a price so high as to carry a fair degree of risk.
At this point I cannot forbear introducing a surprisingly relevant, if quite exaggerated, quotation on the subject which I found
recently in one of Shakespeare’s sonnets. It reads:
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor
Lose all and more by paying too much rent?
Returning to my imaginary graph, it would be the center area
where the speculative element in common-stock purchases would
tend to reach its minimum. In this area we could find many wellestablished and strong companies, with a record of past growth
corresponding to that of the national economy and with future
prospects apparently of the same character. Such common stocks
could be bought at most times, except in the upper ranges of a bull
market, at moderate prices in relation to their indicated intrinsic
values. As a matter of fact, because of the present tendency of
investors and speculators alike to concentrate on more glamorous
issues, I should hazard the statement that these middle-ground
stocks tend to sell on the whole rather below their independently
determinable values. They thus have a margin-of-safety factor supplied by the same market preferences and prejudices which tend to
destroy the margin of safety in the more promising issues. Furthermore, in this wide array of companies there is plenty of room for
penetrating analysis of the past record and for discriminating
choice in the area of future prospects, to which can be added the
higher assurance of safety conferred by diversification.
When Phaëthon insisted on driving the chariot of the Sun, his
father, the experienced operator, gave the neophyte some advice
which the latter failed to follow—to his cost. Ovid summed up
Phoebus Apollo’s counsel in three words:
Medius tutissimus ibis
You will go safest in the middle course
I think this principle holds good for investors and their security
analyst advisers.

Appendixes

575

5. A Case History: Aetna Maintenance Co.
The first part of this history is reproduced from our 1965 edition,
where it appeared under the title “A Horrible Example.” The second part summarizes the later metamorphosis of the enterprise.
We think it might have a salutary effect on our readers’ future
attitude toward new common-stock offerings if we cited one “horrible example” here in some detail. It is taken from the first page of
Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide, and illustrates in extreme fashion
the glaring weaknesses of the 1960–1962 flotations, the extraordinary overvaluations given them in the market, and the subsequent
collapse.
In November 1961, 154,000 shares of Aetna Maintenance Co.
common were sold to public at $9 and the price promptly
advanced to $15. Before the financing the net assets per share were
about $1.20, but they were increased to slightly over $3 per share
by the money received for the new shares.
The sales and earnings prior to the financing were:
Year Ended

Sales

Net for
Common

Earned
Per Share

June 1961
(June 1960)*
December 1959
December 1958
December 1957
December 1956

$3,615,000
(1,527,000)
2,215,000
1,389,000
1,083,000
1,003,000

$187,000
(25,000)
48,000
16,000
21,000
2,000

$0.69
(0.09)
0.17
0.06
0.07
0.01

* For six months.

The corresponding figures after the financing were:
June 1963
June 1962

$4,681,000
4,234,000

$ 42,000 (def.)
149,000

$0.11 (def.)
0.36

In 1962 the price fell to 22⁄3, and in 1964 it sold as low as 7⁄8. No dividends were paid during this period.
COMMENT: This was much too small a business for public participation. The stock was sold—and bought—on the basis of one good
year; the results previously had been derisory. There was nothing in

576

Appendixes

the nature of this highly competitive business to insure future stability. At the high price soon after issuance the heedless public was
paying much more per dollar of earnings and assets than for most
of our large and strong companies. This example is admittedly
extreme, but it is far from unique; the instances of lesser, but inexcusable, overvaluations run into the hundreds.
Sequel 1965–1970

In 1965 new interests came into the company. The unprofitable
building-maintenance business was sold out, and the company embarked in an entirely different venture: making electronic devices.
The name was changed to Haydon Switch and Instrument Co. The
earnings results have not been impressive. In the five years
1965–1969 the enterprise showed average earnings of only 8 cents
per share of “old stock,” with 34 cents earned in the best year, 1967.
However, in true modern style, the company split the stock 2 for 1 in
1968. The market price also ran true to Wall Street form. It advanced
from 7⁄8 in 1964 to the equivalent of 161⁄2 in 1968 (after the split). The
price now exceeded the record set in the enthusiastic days of 1961.
This time the overvaluation was much worse than before. The stock
was now selling at 52 times the earnings of its only good year, and
some 200 times its average earnings. Also, the company was again to
report a deficit in the very year that the new high price was established. The next year, 1969, the bid price fell to $1.
QUESTIONS: Did the idiots who paid $8+ for this stock in 1968
know anything at all about the company’s previous history, its
five-year earnings record, its asset value (very small)? Did they
have any idea of how much—or rather how little—they were getting for their money? Did they care? Has anyone on Wall Street any
responsibility at all for the regular recurrence of completely brainless, shockingly widespread, and inevitable catastrophic speculation in this kind of vehicle?
