
Unfortunately, the historical track record for acquisitions is mixed.
Most acquisitions fail to produce positive gains for shareholders of the ac-
quiring firm, and one study showed that even acquisitions of small, related
businesses—which you'd think would have a good chance of working out
well—succeeded only about half the time.t

There are a host of reasons for this. For one, acquisitive firms have to
keep buying bigger and bigger firms to keep growing at the same rate—and
the bigger a target firm is, the harder it is to check out thoroughly, which in-
creases the risk of buying a pig in a poke. Even Warren Buffett found this out
when Berkshire Hathaway bought GenRe, a huge reinsurance firm, in 1998.
Buffett knows more about insurance than almost anyone alive, but the
GenRe purchase turned out to be less than stellar. Buffett himself said some
time after the deal that GenRe was in worse shape than he'd thought when he
bought it. Not even the savviest of CEOs can know all the skeletons that may
be lurking in a huge target firm.

Another reason to be skeptical of acquisitive firms is simply that buying
other companies takes time and money. Targets have to be investigated, in-
vestment bankers have to be paid, and acquired firms have to be integrated
into the new owner, all of which steals resources away from running the core

business. If executives are spending all of their energy looking for ways to

"Mark L. Sirower, The Synergy Trap (New York: Free Press, 1997).


GROWTH

make the firm bigger, rather than better, the wheels are sure to come off the
cart eventually.

From the investor's perspective, however, the biggest reason to be leery of
a growth-by-acquisition strategy is even simpler: It makes the company more
difficult to understand. Acquisitive firms usually post many merger-related
charges and often wind up restating their financial results, which means the
results of the acquiring company can be obscured in all the merger-related

confusion. Asa result, two things can happen:

1. An unscrupulous management team can use the fog created by constant
acquisitions to artificially juice results, and this financial tinkering can
take a long time to come to light because it’s buried in the necessary fi-
nancial rejiggering that comes with any sizeable acquisition.

2. The true growth rate of the underlying business may be impossible to fig-
ure out, especially if management is evasive about giving out information
on the firm’s organic growth rate.

Bottom line: If you don’t know how fast the company would have grown
without acquisitions, don’t buy the shares—because you never know when
the acquisitions will stop. Remember, the goal of a successful investor is to
buy great businesses, not successful merger and acquisition machines.

Questioning Quality
As you might have guessed, I generally view acquisitions as a very low-quality
way of generating growth. Unfortunately, there are plenty of other ways of
making growth look better than it really is, especially when we turn our at-
tention to earnings growth rather than sales growth. (Sales growth is much
more difficult to fake.) Although the list of tricks that companies can use to
boost earnings growth even as sales growth falters is a long one, there are a
few basic areas to watch out for: Changing tax rates, changing share counts,
pension gains, one-time gains (often from selling off businesses), and ram-
pant cost cutting are among the most common. (I'll show you the full spec-
trum of earnings-management tricks in Chapter 8.)

In general, any time that earnings growth outstrips sales growth over a

long period—for example, 5 tol1o years— you need to dig into the numbers to

83


84

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

IBM Growth Rates 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Revenue % 12.3 56 3.4 40 72 10 2.9 55
Operating incame % 51.7 13.2 5.8 07 30.2 25 -20.1 -26.9

Earnings per share % 43.7 AVA 176 g3 252 718 -2.0 -28.0

Figure 6.1 Annual growth rates for IBM.

see how the company keeps squeezing out more profits from stagnant sales. A
big difference between the growth rate of net income and operating income or
cash flow from operations can also hint at something unsustainable.

IBM is a classic example of what I call “manufactured growth,” because it
used almost all of the previously mentioned techniques to pump up its bot-
tom line during the 1990s. As shown in Figure 6.1, Big Blue’s earnings per
share growth looks pretty good since the Lou Gerstner-led turnaround began
in the early 1990s—close to double digits most years, which is not bad for a
company of this size.

But when we look at operating income, it looks as though the company
was growing much slower, while sales growth was stuck around 5 percent on
average. As a double-check, take a quick look at cash flow from operations—
unfortunately, this also looks pretty stagnant from 1995 through the end of
the decade (see Figure 6.2).

So what was driving those great earnings-per-share results that Gerst-
ner’s IBM kept turning like clockwork? A whole host of items: For one, the
firm’s tax rate plunged from 46 percent in 1995 to around 30 percent by the
end of the decade. For another, the firm cut overhead spending substan-
tially during the 1990s—a laudable accomplishment, given the bureaucratic
nature of the firm.

Finally, IBM bought back about a quarter of its shares during the latter
half of the 1990s—fewer shares outstanding meant more earnings per share—
and benefited from an overfunded pension plan that boosted earnings. As

you can see, a simple comparison of IBM’s earnings per share relative to its

IBM 95 96 97 98 99 00 o1 02

Cash flow ($bil} 10.7 10.3 89 9.3 10.1 93 14.3 13.8

Figure 6.2 Annual cash flow fram operations for IBM.


PROFITABILITY

operating income and cash flow raised many red flags—enough that any in-
vestor looking at the company in the late 1990s could have been skeptical
about the quality of the firm’s earnings growth. (Note: Low-quality growth
doesn’t imply that a company is cooking the books, merely that the growth
rate isn’t likely to be sustained over the long haul.)

You should also keep an eye out for one-time gains and losses that can
distort a historical growth rate. A big gain from the sale of a division, for ex-
ample, can make growth look better than it really was. Large losses can also
affect growth rates—if a company’s earnings were depressed in the first year
of a three- or five-year period, the firm’s growth rate will be overstated be-
cause growth will be calculated from a depressed base. So don’t take the trail-
ing three-year and five-year growth rates that you see as gospel—always check
to see what’s behind the numbers.

In general, any time you can't pinpoint the sources of a company’s growth
rate—or the reasons for a sharp divergence between the top and bottom
lines, as was the case with Big Blue—you should be wary of the quality of
that growth rate. Paying less taxes and buying back shares are good things for
shareholders, no question, but they're short-term fixes rather than long-term
sources of earnings growth.

A word on cost cutting: All things equal, 'd rather own a more efficient
firm—one with lower overhead costs—than a less efficient firm. However,
cost cuts are not a sustainable long-term source of earnings growth, and if
youre looking at a firm that’s been slashing costs, you should be aware that at
some point there won't be any more costs to cut. Earnings growth will even-
tually slow unless sales growth speeds up.

At some point, a cost-cutting firm is going to find that it has become as
efficient as possible, and sales and earnings growth will converge unless the
firm manages to boost revenue growth. So when you see a firm with earnings
gains being driven by cost cutting, make sure you think about the sustain-

ability of those cost cuts because they won't be around forever.

Now we come to the second—and, in many ways, most crucial—part of the
analysis process: How much profit is the company generating relative to the

amount of money invested in the business? This is the real key to separating

85


86

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

great companies from average ones, because the job of any company is to take
money from outside investors and invest it to generate a return. The higher
that return, the more attractive the business.

I've already briefly discussed profit margins and the importance of under-
standing whether cost cuts or price hikes are driving an increase in profit mar-
gins. Comparing cash flow from operations to reported earnings per share is
another good way to get a rough idea of a firm’s profitability because cash flow
from operations represents real profits.

But neither net margin nor cash flow from operations accounts for the
amount of capital that’s tied up in the business, and that’s something we can’t
ignore. We need to know how much economic profit a firm is able to gener-
ate per dollar of capital employed because it will have more excess profits to
reinvest, which will give it an advantage over less-efficient competitors.

Think about it this way—a company’s management is similar to the
manager of a mutual fund. A mutual fund manager takes investors’ money
and earns a return on it by investing in stocks and bonds. Wouldn't you
rather put your money with an equity manager who has consistently gener-
ated returns of 12 percent per year than one who has returned an average of
only 9 percent per year?

Companies aren't much different. They take shareholders’ money and in-
vest it in their own businesses to create wealth. By measuring the return that
a company’s management has achieved through this investment process, we
know how good they are at efficiently transforming capital into profits. Just
like a mutual fund, a company whose management is investing well enough
to generate returns on capital of 12 percent is usually a more attractive invest-
ment than a company that returns only 9 percent on its capital.

Our two tools for assessing corporate profitability are return on capital
and free cash flow. I start with return on assets (ROA) and return on equity
(ROE), which we first saw in Chapter 3 when we evaluated economic moats.
Then PII show you how to compare free cash flow to ROE and I'll finish up
with a quick discussion of a sophisticated measure of profitability called re-
turn on invested capital (ROIC).

Return on Assets (ROA)
You already know the first component of ROA. It’s simply net margin, or

net income divided by sales, and it tells us how much of each dollar of sales


PROFITABILITY

a company keeps as earnings after paying all the costs of doing business.
The second component is asset turnover, or sales divided by assets, which
tells us roughly how efficient a firm is at generating revenue from each dol-
lar of assets. Multiply these two together, and you have return on assets,
which is simply the amount of profits that a company is able to generate per

dollar of assets.

Net income

= Net margin
Sales
Sales
= Asset turnover
Assets

Net margin x Asset turnover = Return on assets

Think of ROA as a measure of efficiency. Companies with high ROAs
are better at translating assets into profits. We can see this easily when we
compare a top-notch retailer such as Best Buy with a firm like Circuit City,
which was struggling in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Since 1998, Circuit
City’s returns on assets have been around 4 percent to 5 percent, whereas
Best Buy’s improved from § percent to almost 10 percent (see Figures 6.3
and 6.4.)

Higher profit margins—almost 3 percent for Best Buy and below 2 per-
cent for Circuit City—are part of the picture, but higher asset turnover is a
bigger differentiator between the two. In 2002, for example, each dollar that
Circuit City had invested in property and inventory (the two biggest assets
for most retailers) generated about $2.50 in sales, while the same dollar in-
vested by Best Buy generated $3.20 in sales. Clearly, Best Buy was running a
more efficient shop than Circuit City and was much better at transforming

its assets into profits.

Circuit City Profitability 1998 4999 2000 2001 2002
Net margin (%) 14 16 19 1.4 2.0
Asset turnover (average) 26 3.0 3.2 3.0 25
Return an assets (%)} 36 48 6.1 42 5.0

Figure 6.3 Annual profitability figures for Circuit City.

87


88 ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

Best Buy Profitability 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Net margin (%) 1 22 28 26 29
Asset turnover (average) 44 44 45 3.9 3.2
Return an assets (%) 48 Qi} 12.6 10.1 93

Figure 6.4 Annual profitability figures for Best Buy.

ROA helps us understand that there are two routes to excellent opera-
tional profitability: You can charge high prices for your products (high mar-
gins), or you can turn over your assets quickly. Often, you'll see companies
with lower profit margins, such as grocery stores and discount retailers, em-
phasize high asset turnover as a way to achieve solid ROAs. For any business
that can't charge a big premium for its goods, tight inventory management is
critical because it keeps down the amount of capital tied up in assets, which
helps pump up return on assets. On the flip side, companies that can mark
up their goods in a big way—a luxury retailer such as Tiffany, for example—
can afford to have more capital tied up in their assets because they make up
for low asset turnover with high profit margins.

Just using ROA would be fine if all companies were big piles of assets, but
many firms are at least partially financed with debt, which gives their returns
a leverage component that we need to take into account. Our next measure

of returns on capital, return on equity, lets us do this.

Return on Equity (ROE)
Return on equity is a great overall measure of a company’s profitability
because it measures the efficiency with which a company uses shareholders’
equity—in other words, it measures how good the company is at earning a
decent return on the shareholder’s money. Think of it as measuring profits
per dollar of shareholders’ capital.

To calculate ROE, multiply ROA by a firm’s financial leverage ratio:

: ' Assets
Financial leverage =

Shareholders’ equity

Return on equity = Return on assets x Financial leverage


PROFITABILITY

Because Return on assets = Net margin X Asset turnover, ROE in all its

glory equals:
Net margin x Asset turnover X Financial leverage

You'll notice that we've introduced a new metric—financial leverage,
which is essentially a measure of how much debt a company carries, relative
to shareholders’ equity. Unlike net margin and asset turnover—for which
higher ratios are almost unequivocally better—financial leverage is some-
thing you need to watch carefully. As with any kind of debt, a judicious
amount can boost returns, but too much can lead to disaster.

Look at the kind of business the firm is in. If it’s fairly steady, a company
can probably take on large amounts of debt without too much risk because
there’s only a small chance of the business falling off a cliff and the company
being caught short when bondholders demand their interest payments. On
the flip side, be very wary of a high financial leverage ratio if a company’s
business is cyclical or volatile. Because interest payments are fixed, the com-
pany has to pay them whether business is good or bad.

Therefore, we have three levers that can boost ROE—net margins, asset
turnover, and financial leverage. For example, a firm could have only so-so
margins and modest levels of financial leverage, but it could do a great job
with asset turnover (e.g., a well-run discount retailer such as Wal-Mart).
Companies with high asset turnover are extremely efficient at extracting
more dollars of revenue for each dollar they have invested in hard assets. A
firm could also excel at convincing customers to pay up for its products—
asset turns might be just middling, and the firm might not have much lever-
age, but it would have great profit margins (¢.g., a luxury goods company
such as Coach). Finally, a firm can boost its ROE to respectable territory by
taking on good-size amounts of leverage (e.g,, mature firms such as utilities).

Although it’s tough to generalize, let me offer some rough benchmarks
for evaluating firms’ ROEs. In general, any nonfinancial firm that can gener-
ate consistent ROEs above 10 percent without excessive leverage is at least
worth investigating. As of mid-2003, only about one-tenth of the nonfinan-
cial firms in Morningstar's database were able to post an ROE above 10 per-

cent for each of the past five years, So you Can sce how tough it is to post this

89


90

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

kind of performance. And if you can find a company with the potential for
consistent ROEs over 20 percent, there's a good chance youre really on to
something.

‘Two caveats when you're using ROE to evaluate firms: First, banks always
have enormous financial leverage ratios, so don’t be scared off by a leverage
ratio that looks high relative to a nonbank. (We go over how to evaluate
banks’ financial health in Chapter 17.) In addition, because banks’ leverage is
always so high, you want to raise the bar for financial firms—look for consis-
tent ROEs above 12 percent or so.

The second caveat concerns firms with ROEs that look too good to be
true because they're usually just that. ROEs above 40 percent or so are often
meaningless because they've probably been distorted by the firm’s financial
structure. Firms that have been recently spun off from parent firms, com-
panies that have bought back many of their shares, and companies that have
taken massive charges often have very skewed ROEs because their equity base
is depressed. If you see an ROE over 40 percent, check to see if the company

has any of these characteristics.

Free Cash Flow

In the previous chapter, I introduced you to cash flow from operations
(CFO), which measures how much cash a company generates. As useful as
CFO is, it doesn’t take into account the money that a firm has to spend on
maintaining and expanding its business. ‘To do this, we need to subtract cap-
ital expenditures, which is money used to buy fixed assets. The result is free

cash flow:
Free cash flow = Cash flow from operations — Capital spending

Thinking back to our hot dog stand example, suppose Mike was so suc-
cessful that he decided to use the cash he'd generated to build a second hot
dog stand. The cost of building that stand would be posted to “capital spend-
ing,” and subtracted from free cash flow.

Why? We need to be able to separate out businesses that are net users of
capital—ones that spend more than they take in—from businesses that are
net producers of capital because it’s only that excess cash that really belongs

to us as shareholders. You may sometimes see free cash flow referred to as


PROFITABILITY

“owner earnings,” because that’s exactly what it is: the amount of money the
owner of a company could withdraw from the treasury without harming the
company’s ongoing business.

A firm that generates a great deal of free cash flow can do all sorts of
things with the money—save it for future investment opportunities, use it
for acquisitions, buy back shares, and so forth. Free cash flow gives financial
flexibility because the firm isn’t relying on the capital markets to fund its ex-
pansion. Firms that have negative free cash flow have to take out loans or sell
additional shares to keep things going, and that can become a risky proposi-
tion if the market becomes unsettled at a critical time for the company.

As with ROE, it’s tough to generalize about how much free cash flow is
enough. However, I think it’s reasonable to say that any firm that’s able to con-
vert more than 5 percent of sales to free cash flow—just divide free cash flow by

sales to get this percentage—is doing a solid job at generating excess cash.

Putting Return on Equity and Free Cash Flow Together

One good way to think about the returns a company is generating is to use the
profitability matrix, which looks at a company’s ROE relative to the amount
of free cash flow it’s generating. Figure 6.5 shows free cash flow along one side
and ROE on the other side, and this matrix can tell you a great deal about the
kind of company you're analyzing.

Companies such as Microsoft, Pfizer, and First Data all have very high
ROEs. People write books about how to manage a business as well as these
companies do, and it’s easy to see why—they’re all money machines. In-
yestors pour new money into them, and large amounts of extra money get
spit out. Their managements are very, very good at earning a high return on
shareholders’ money.

If you follow any of these companies at all, you'll notice they have an-
other thing in common besides high ROEs—their stocks all had valuations
that were high during the bull market of the 1990s. Again, it’s easy to see why:
A company that can earn a high return on its shareholders’ money is worth
more to those same shareholders.

Looking at the other axis, we see that these companies are also very good
at generating free cash flow. Pfizer, for example, generated more than $8 bil-
lion in free cash flow in 2002. That’s $8 billion Pfizer made after spending

whatever it needed to invest in its business. Pfizer could have chosen to pay

91


92

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

High

Less Risky Companies

Qualcamm Microsoft
Yahoo! Pfizer
Novellus Paychex
Electronic Arts McGraw-Hill
MGM Mirage First Data
Genentech Home Depot

z

| More Risky Companies

§
Jet Blue Airways Lowe's
Ciena Cheesecake Factory
Foot Locker Southwest Airlines
Amazon.com Walgreen
Nextel Costco

Comeast
z
&
Low Return on Equity (ROE) High

Figure 6.5 The Profitability Matrix: High ROEs and strong free cash flows are warth paying up for.
Source: Morningstar, Inc.

that $8 billion—which worked out to about $1.31 per share—out to share-
holders. In fact, that’s exactly what older, more mature companies often do
with their free cash flow. Their businesses aren't growing very fast, and they
figure that shareholders can earn a better return on the free cash flow than
they can. So, they return it to shareholders in the form of dividends. (This is
why slow-growth firms often have such high yields.)
