
Using seasonality and calendar effects
Paying attention to calendar effects can help improve your market timing.
When you’re sitting down to make a trading or investment decision, you can
avoid a costly mistake by consulting the calendar not only for the specific
security, but also for the index to which it belongs.
Calendar effects are more than a curiosity, although a security on a wild rally
isn’t going to stop solely because it’s May 1. But because so many traders
and money managers know about calendar effects, they are to some degree a
self-fulfilling prophecy.
Be aware that statisticians don’t all agree on exactly how to measure seasonality effects. Seasonality statisticians quarrel with one another about matters
big and small. If you have a talent for statistics and for judging among the
available techniques, you can easily benefit by consulting seasonality studies
or conducting your own.

Blindsiding the Crowd
You may find it comforting to think that you can find regularity and orderliness in charts, using the technical methods that take up most of this book,
or the sentiment statistics pertaining to the market at large described in this
chapter. But don’t get too comfortable.
A big black hole in orderliness appears when markets puff up into manias
and when they crash in panics. The art of technical analysis is to identify
the crowd psychology underneath price moves. To the technical trader, just

www.pdfdummies.com

51

52

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
about any price move can be seen as a mini-mania or a mini-panic, which
you can discover in Chapter 2. When the move is small, the mini-mania or
mini-panic is forecastable and tradeable. But sometimes the market delivers
a mania and an ensuing panic that are huge and all but define an era. Think of
the Roaring 1920s and the crash of 1929, which took over 20 years to recover.
This section gives you some comfort and guidance if you are unlucky enough
to be fully invested when a panic arises.

Considering historic key reversals
An enduring mystery of market history is that big, key reversal points seem
to come out of the blue. Seldom can you find a specific event that triggers
a rally taking off or that can be named as the cause of a bubble bursting.
Think back to the collapse of the United States equity markets in March 2000.
Exactly what caused that fall? Experts can name a dozen contributing factors,
but no one can put a finger on a single, defining factor. Technical indicators
were very useful to exit not long after the bubble burst, but to be honest,
this was a function of the risk management principles embedded in technical
analysis far more than forecasting capability.
Many people give up on technical analysis at this point, but don’t make the
same mistake! You can trust your indicators up to a certain extent, but your
overall survival as a trader depends on risk management, which I talk about
in Chapter 5, and not on indicators themselves. Risk management is the only
solution to giant random market effects. In the meanwhile, I have a useful way
to think about randomness so that it won’t overwhelm you. Check out the section “Enduring randomness” in this chapter for useful tips.
Take note that opinion is divided on whether historic key reversals or even
all key reversals occur randomly. One camp says that news causes prices
to change, and nobody can forecast the news. News is random. Therefore,
prices must be random, too. But the other side notes that if prices were
random, you wouldn’t be able to see trends on a chart — and you clearly can.
No amount of fancy theorizing can overcome the evidence of your eyes. If
prices were random, prices wouldn’t trend. But unmistakably, they do.
Any particular price may be random, but not every price can be random, or
traders wouldn’t be able to make a bid and an offer on the next price. The
market would collapse — no trading would occur. Instead, traders remember
preceding prices and put the current price into the context of those past
prices. From past prices, you form an expectation of the future price. You
will, of course, see inexplicable prices and it’s fair to call them random.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
So how can one or two random prices turn into a key reversal when other
prices, whether random or on trend, don’t? Nobody knows. But as a practical matter, if you follow your risk management principles, you don’t need an
answer to this question.

Enduring randomness
Technical traders acknowledge that random events can and do cause the
occasional wild price departure from the norm, but the acknowledgement
doesn’t alter the expectation that prices will behave normally. For example,
you sometimes see a price spike so big that you don’t know how to interpret
it (as you can see in Chapter 7). Often you never find out why such a bizarre
price occurred.
A price spike is the equivalent of a tornado in weather forecasting. You know
the conditions that cause tornadoes — you just don’t know exactly when an
actual tornado will develop.
Although nature may not be able to deliver a tornado in Alaska in January,
the equivalent does happen in markets. Sudden cataclysmic events aren’t as
rare as you may imagine. Who would have thought that the S&P 500 could
fall more than 20 percent in a single day? Most market observers used to say
it was impossible. But that’s exactly what happened on Black Monday, 1987.
Most market tornadoes, like Black Monday, give plenty of technical warnings
ahead of time. The problem is that traders often have those same warnings
and don’t get a Black Monday. This is an inconvenient fact of life that you
have to accept.
Spikes are both a problem and an opportunity. If you know why a spike is
occurring because you are well informed about world events and market
chatter in response to the world events, you may chose to ride it out. But to
exit on fear of randomness is okay, too. You take no risk when you are out of
the market. Nowhere is it written that you must have a position in the market
at all times.

Remembering the last price
Market panics and crashes on the scale of 1929, 1987, and 2000 are historic
events outside the purview of the crowd’s normal trading process. In normal
trading, you can assume that a wildly erratic price has a low probability of
occurring. But you can’t attach a specific probability statistic to an event of
historic proportions — partly because those events are so rare.

www.pdfdummies.com

53

54

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
In weather forecasting, a low-probability event (like a tornado) that happens
today doesn’t change the probabilities of the usual high-probability events
happening next week or next year. But in markets, a low-probability event
does change the odds for the next period analysis because traders remember.
When you are performing technical analysis on your securities, you count on
traders to remember the last prices and to form their trading plans on those
prices. The next price is normally dependent on preceding prices, and most
technical analysis programs allow you to project out a trendline (like a linear
regression line, for example).
But one or two really big abnormal prices can sometimes upset the apple
cart and determining which way the crowd will jump is sometimes just a
coin toss. This analogy raises the issue of the reliability of indicators, which
I describe in Chapter 4. They’re essentially forecasting tools that depend on
past behaviors to predict future behaviors, but they often fail near really big
key reversals. Technical analysis is not science, as its inability to capture
historic key reversals ahead of time demonstrates. In other words, having the
best technical tools on the planet will not save you from a market tornado.

Thinking Scientifically
Even the best indicator fails to work all the time. In fact, some of the best
indicators work less than 50 percent of the time, and that’s when conditions
are normal! Critics use this awful statistic to say that technical analysis is a
waste of time. This harsh opinion results from a failure to appreciate the benefits of risk management embedded in the technical trading style.
You may think that it’s overkill to discuss scientific method, but I can practically guarantee that this section will have a big payoff for you. That’s because
you’re sure to see enticing advertisements for software or trading programs
that are “scientific” and “objective.” Well, all math is “scientific” and “objective” — but that doesn’t mean you can use it to make money, and it certainly
doesn’t mean that using it will help you escape the next market tornado.

Conditions and contingencies
When you hear someone say, “Blue Widget has a 75 percent chance of rising,”
you can assume that three out of the last four times the technical method was
applied, the security rose. The unspoken assumption is that conditions didn’t
change. But the market is not a laboratory. Of course conditions changed!
Your forecast needs to be qualified because of the thousands of factors that
may come along and influence the price. Contingencies are things that are

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
possible but not expected, or not expected in any great number at the same
time. You know what a contingency is — like hitting every streetlight red on
the way to the train station to catch the 6:09. If you hit the average number
of red lights, you can make it on time to catch the train. If they’re all red and
you also have to slow down for construction, you miss your train.
When you hear a market maven predicting a price change with a 75 percent
probability, chances are he’s talking through his hat. He may have failed to
incorporate all the reasonable contingencies, or he may have attributed too
small a probability to any of them (or to all of them). Read financial history,
and you find the ground littered with the corpses of traders who failed to
include a key contingency in their calculations.
Most technical traders hate to attach a probability to a particular outcome,
like “Blue Widget has a 75 percent change of rising.” Reluctance to apply the
term probability is due to a realistic assessment of the contingencies. In statistics, when you want to calculate the probability of two events happening
simultaneously (called joint probability), you multiply their probabilities. If
you have two remotely possible contingencies, each with a probability of 10
percent, the chances of both happening simultaneously is 10 percent times
10 percent, or 1 percent.
To calculate the effect of a 10 percent probability contingency on your trade,
you take the reciprocal of the probability, or 90 percent, as the amount to
modify the 75 percent. In arithmetic notation, it looks like this:
75 percent times 90 percent = 67.50 percent
Good grief — introducing one contingency reduced the probability of your outcome from 75 percent to 67.5 percent. It gets worse. If you have four contingencies and you attribute a 10 percent chance to each of them, the same process
reduces your 75 percent odds to a mere 49.21 percent, which is less than 50-50.
Joint probabilities really stink, don’t they? No wonder technical traders hate
to declare a forecast! The more contingencies you admit, the lower the probability of the outcome.

Sample size
Statisticians say you need a minimum of 30 cases before you can say anything
valid about the probability of history repeating itself. Scientists who do really
serious science, like missiles and moon shots, demand a minimum of 200
cases. In setting up the Blue Widget example in the preceding section, I attributed a 75 percent chance of the price rising because three out of the last four
times that conditions looked the same, that’s what happened. But a sample
size of four instances is hardly sufficient.

www.pdfdummies.com

55

56

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
Your price data seldom presents you with 30 cases, let alone 200. Why
should you accept less? The answer is that you’re using a technical analysis
method that works across a wide range of securities and time frames, even if
you don’t have enough cases in this specific security.
For example, when you have a support line (which I describe in Chapter 10)
and your price breaks it to the downside, that’s a sell signal. Over the past
100 years, technical analysts have used the break of a support line hundreds
of thousands of times, maybe millions, and it worked. Using this method was
the correct trading decision in the majority of a very large number of cases.
Still, choosing to use the break of a support line as a signal doesn’t work
every time. A support line break is an example of a technical forecast that has
a high probability in the context of many different contingencies and over
many sets of conditions.
Other techniques are less reliable. You may think it would be wonderful to
have a list of techniques with their reliability quotient, which is a ranking of
how often they’re right. Some writers and software vendors claim that their
techniques are “over 75 percent correct.” This lofty proclamation is hardly
ever true. For one thing, the vendors aren’t considering new contingencies
and conditions. Markets are dynamic. Something that worked 75 percent of
the time in the past may work only 65 percent of the time in the future, or
some other percentage of the time, including zero — which is precisely what
happens during manias and panics.

www.pdfdummies.com

Part II

Preparing Your
Mind for Technical
Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

T

In this part . . .

rading has two components: The security’s price and
you. Start getting used to thinking about risk, because
your own personal level of risk appetite or risk aversion
affects how you analyze price movements. In this part, I
show that none of the techniques for identifying and measuring market sentiment is 100 percent accurate, and so
your choice of which technical methods to use is heavily
colored by your perception of risk. Two people can agree
entirely on what a technical indicator means and still
make different — and equally valid — trading decisions.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4

Using Indicators to Trade
Systematically
In This Chapter
▶ Moving beyond emotion with indicators
▶ Selecting indicators
▶ Optimizing and backtesting indicators

I

ndicators are a shorthand way to identify and measure market sentiment.
They give you a platform for making rational trading decisions, bypassing
greed, fear, and the other emotions that accompany trading.
In this chapter, I discuss using indicators to help you trade systematically.
Technical traders believe that systematic trading has a sporting chance of
making significant profits. But indicators don’t always work, and I explain
why in this chapter. To overcome the unreliability of indicators, a money
management plan is necessary, which I cover in Chapter 5.

Trading is about money, and money arouses hot emotions. To speak of trading as involving only greed and fear, though, as most commentators do, is to
shortchange the range of emotion in trading. Trading is also about personal
success and failure. Traders feel remorse, shame, and despair as well as hope,
joy, and satisfaction. Technical traders go to great lengths to remove emotion
from trading decisions. The chief tool to squelch emotion is the indicator.

Introducing Indicators
An indicator is a calculation that you put on a chart to identify chart events,
chiefly whether the price is trending, the degree of trendedness, and whether
a trend turning point is being reached. The purpose of indicators is to clarify
and enhance your perception of the price move.

www.pdfdummies.com

60

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis

Classifying indicators
Indicators aren’t like ice cream with a million different flavors. You can classify your indicators easily, because they come in two varieties:
✓ Judgment-based indicators: This group includes visual patternrecognition methods such as bar, line, and pattern analysis, as well as
candlesticks (see Chapters 6 through 10). These indicators can be time
consuming to master and to use. They’re also hard to translate into
software formulations so that you can backtest them to see how they
would’ve worked over the price history of your security.
✓ Math-based indicators: The math group includes moving averages,
regression, momentum, and other types of calculations (see Chapters 10
through 15). Expressing chart events in mathematical terms allows you
to backtest the event over historical data to discover how well it predicts the next price action.
You may prefer to jump straight to math-based indicators because they’re
faster, cleaner, and “scientific.” But math-based indicators do the same job as
judgment indicators — they display price data in a specific format to assist
you in making a trading decision. Just because they’re based on math doesn’t
mean that they aren’t subjective. You determine the specifications of mathbased indicators in the first place (such as how many days are in a moving
average). Visual recognition and math-based techniques are equally valid and
useful. Some traders use only visual-recognition techniques, some use only
math-based indicators, and some use both.
If math isn’t your cup of tea, don’t worry. The math involved in most technical
analysis isn’t all that difficult (except up in the stratosphere of advanced technical analysis). You can apply math-based techniques without understanding
the math behind them as long as you understand the crowd behavior the indicator is identifying and how to apply the indicator. Think of it as knowing how
to drive a car without being able to build a carburetor.

Understanding what indicators identify
In Chapters 1 and 2, I point out that securities prices are sometimes trending — they have a strong directional bias — and that trends are punctuated
by retracements, or small moves in the opposite direction before the trend
resumes. At other times, prices go sideways, called range-trading, which can
be considered a trend in its own right. Finally, trends end, and after they end,
they may reverse to the opposite direction. So indicators identify five conditions; note that in this list, I put some suggestions next to each condition, but
someone else could name other, equally valid, indicators:

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically
✓ A trend is beginning (moving average crossover or pattern breakout).
✓ A trend is strong or weak (slope of linear regression or moving average).
✓ A trend is retracing but will likely resume (relative strength index).
✓ A trend is ending and may reverse (momentum, moving average crossover, or pattern breakout).
✓ A price is range-trading (slope of linear regression or moving average).
Each indicator works best in one situation and less well in others. Technical
traders argue the merits and drawbacks of indicators in each situation, and
if you ask ten technical traders to list their top indicator for each task, you’ll
get ten entirely different lists. To a certain extent, the indicator you choose
for each task depends on the security and also on the analytical time frame.

Choosing your trading style
Unless you’re trading setups, which I describe in Chapter 16, the trend is
always the focus. In a perfect world, you first determine whether your security is trending or range-trading sideways, and then you apply the appropriate indicator. In practice, you can’t always classify price moves as trending or
not trending in a neat and tidy way. Besides, prices usually have an identifiable range, whether they’re trending or not. In addition, retracements always
create doubt — you find yourself wondering, “Is it a momentary correction or
a reversal?”
Generally, traders tend to have one of the following two personal trading
styles and the style dictates the holding period:
✓ Trend-followers: Traders who like to identify trends may wait out
retracements and sideways range-trading situations until they resolve
back into a trend. Other trend followers use information from momentum indicators to modify their positions, for instance by taking some
profit when the security becomes overbought or oversold even though
the trend is just pausing. They expect it to continue. (See Chapter 2 for
a definition of overbought and oversold and Chapter 13 for overbought
and oversold indicators.) Figure 4-1 illustrates a trend, complete with
minor retracements, and shows how a trend-following trader makes
decisions.
✓ Swing traders: These folks operate whether a trend is present or not.
Swing trading is buying at relative lows and selling at relative highs,
regardless of whether the price is trending. Swing trading is more flexible than trend-following, because you can apply the techniques under
different market conditions. However, the drawback to swing trading is
that it requires more frequent trading and the profit on each leg of the
trade tends to be smaller than in a single trend-following trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

61

62

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis

TREND-FOLLOWER
BUYS HERE
TREND-FOLLOWER
SELLS HERE

Figure 4-1:
Trendfollowing.

A swing trader may know that a price is downtrending, for example,
but he’s still willing to buy it for a short-term profit opportunity when a
momentum indicator says it’s temporarily oversold and likely to enjoy
a bounce upward. Figure 4-2 shows how the swing trader tries to capture every move, including the retracements. (I use the same chart as in
Figure 4-1.)

SWING TRADER BUYS
AT CIRCLES,
SELLS AT TRIANGLES

Figure 4-2:
Swing
trading.

If you mix trend-following and swing-trading indicators, you may get confused.
One may tell you to stay long when the other one says sell. One example of
this is when a downtrending price becomes temporarily oversold and then
bounces upward. You may engage in a little wishful thinking that you see a
trend reversal, and you become a buyer of what you think is a new uptrend.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically

Fading the trend
Prices move two steps forward and one step
back. Sometimes you see a pause in an uptrend
arriving, and you know that early buyers are
about to take profit, setting off a domino effect
of falling prices. You know that the uptrend is
well established, but instead of waiting for the
trend to end, you sell your position and also go
short today with the intention of exploiting just
this one small retracement down move. Selling
into an uptrend sounds counterintuitive. But
in practice, retracements are fairly reliable.
Trading the retracement is called fading the
trend, and it has become very popular in recent
years, especially in futures. Fading the trend
works best if the countertrend trade is very
short term (such as hours or days).
