
First, let’s see what a cycle looks like and discuss its three
main characteristics. Figure 14.4 shows two repetitions of a price
cycle. The cycle bottoms are called troughs and the tops referred to
as crests. Notice that the two waves shown here are measured from
trough to trough. Cyclic analysts prefer to measure cycle lengths from
low to low. Measurements can be taken between crests, but they are
not considered to be as stable or reliable as those taken between the
troughs. Therefore, common practice is to measure the beginning
and end of a cyclic wave at a low point, as shown in this example.

The three qualities of a cycle are amplitude, period, and phase.
Amplitude measures the height of the wave as shown in Figure
14.5, and is expressed in dollars, cents, or points. The period of a
wave, as shown in Figure 14.6, is the time between troughs. In this
example, the period is 20 days. The phase is a measure of the time
location of a wave trough. In Figure 14.7, the phase difference
between two waves is shown. Because there are several different


B (Wave Crest)

Time Cycles 349
4
5
-6
-7
8
-9
-10
[First Cycle +» ___——Second cycle-—__——>]

A (Wave Trough) C (Wave Trough)

_
oF NwW RURAL SO

ME —

price—>
sorog
au

Figure 14.4 Two cycles of a price wave. A simple, single price wave of
the kind that combines to form stock and commodity price action. Only two
cycles of this wave are shown, but the wave itself extends infinitely far to the
left and to the right. Such waves repeat: themselves cycle after cycle. As a
result, once the wave is identified, its value can be determined at any past or
future time. It is this characteristic of waves that provides a degree of pre-
dictability for equity price action.

cycles occurring at the same time, phasing allows the cyclic analyst
to study the relationships between the different cycle lengths.
Phasing is also used to identify the date of the last cycle low. If, for
example, a 20 day cycle bottomed 10 days earlier, the date of the
next cycle low can be determined. Once the amplitude, period, and
phase of a cycle are known, the cycle can theoretically be extrapo-
lated into the future. Assuming the cycle remains fairly constant, it
can then be used to estimate future peaks and troughs. That is the
basis of the cyclic approach in its simplest form.


350 Chapter 14

~—-=——~—- Amp litude
1

t

1

<

Time >

Figure 14.5 The amplitude of a wave. In this figure, the wave has an
amplitude of ten dollars (from minus five dollars to plus five dollars).
Amplitude is always measured from wave trough to wave crest.

Dollars ——=—

10 20 30 40
Days
—-

—<£— Period ———a

Figure 14.6 The period of a wave. In this figure, the wave has a period
of 20 days, which is shown measured between two consecutive wave troughs.
The period could just as well have been measured between wave crests. But
in the case of price waves, the wave troughs are usually more clearly defined
than the wave crests for reasons that will be discussed later. Consequently,
price wave periods are most often measured from trough to trough.



Time Cycles 351

Dollars ——>—-

Figure 14.7 The phase difference between two waves. The phase differ-
ence between the two waves shown is 6 days. This phase difference is mea-
sured between the troughs of the two waves because, again, wave troughs are
the most convenient points to identify in the case of price waves.

Cyclic Principles

Let’s take a look now at some of the principles that underlie the
cyclic philosophy. The four most important ones are the
Principles of Summation, Harmonicity, Synchronicity, and
Proportionality.

The Principle of Summation holds that all price movement
is the simple addition of all active cycles. Figure 14.8 demonstrates
how the price pattern on the top is formed by simply adding
together the two different cycles at the bottom of the chart.
Notice, in particular, the appearance of the double top in compos-
ite wave C. Cycle theory holds that all price patterns are formed by
the interaction of two or more different cycles. We'll come back to
this point again. The Principle of Summation gives us an impor-
tant insight into the rationale of cyclic forecasting. Let’s assume
that all price action is just the sum of different cycle lengths.
Assume further that each of those individual cycles could be iso-
lated and measured. Assume also that each of those cycles will con-
tinue to fluctuate into the future. Then by simply continuing each
cycle into the future and summing them back together again, the
future price trend should be the result. Or, so the theory goes.


352 Chapter 14

+10

Tine ———

1
my
i

Dollars ——_ja-
o &
4----

1
a

+10

4H —- ee

Tin—

D
s
&

Wave A

-10 ~10

Figure 14.8 The summation of two waves. The dotted lines show how,
at each point in time, the value of wave A is added to the value of wave B to
produce the value of composite wave C.

The Principle of Harmonicity simply means that neighbor-
ing waves are usually related by a small, whole number. That
number is usually two. For example, if a 20 day cycle exists, the
next shorter cycle will usually be half its length, or 10 days. The
next longer cycle would then be 40 days. If you’ll remember back
to the discussion on the 4 week rule (Chapter 9), the principle of
harmonics was invoked to explain the validity of using a shorter
2 week rule and a longer 8 weeks.


Time Cycles 353

The Principle of Synchronicity refers to the strong tenden-
cy for waves of differing lengths to bottom at about the same
time. Figure 14.9 is meant to show both harmonicity and syn-
chronicity. Wave B at the bottom of the chart is half the length of
wave A. Wave A includes two repetitions of the smaller wave B,
showing harmonicity between the two waves. Notice also that
when wave A bottoms, wave B tends to do the same, demonstrat-
ing synchronicity between the two. Synchronicity also means
that similar cycle lengths of different markets will tend to turn
together.

The Principle of Proportionality describes the relationship
between cycle period and amplitude. Cycles with longer periods
(lengths) should have proportionally wider amplitudes. The
amplitude, or height, of a 40 day cycle, for example, should be
about double that of a 20 day cycle.

The Principles of Variation and Nominality

There are two other cyclic principles that describe cycle behavior
in a more general sense—The Principles of Variation and Nominality.
The Principle of Variation, as the name implies, is a recog-
nition of the fact that all of the other cyclic principles already
mentioned—summation, harmonicity, synchronicity, and propor-
tionality—are just strong tendencies and not hard and fast rules.
Some “variation” can and usually does occur in the real world.
The Principle of Nominality is based on the premise that,
despite the differences that exist in the various markets and allow-
ing for some variation in the implementing of cyclic principles,
there seems to be a nominal set of harmonically related cycles that
affect all markets. And that nominal model of cycle lengths can be
used as a starting point in the analysis of any market. Figure 14.10
shows a simplified version of that nominal model. The model
begins with an 18 year cycle and proceeds to each successively
lower cycle half its length. The only exception is the relationship
between 54 and 18 months which is a third instead of a half.
When we discuss the various cycle lengths in the individ-
ual markets, we’ll see that this nominal model does account for
most cyclic activity. For now, look at the “Days” column. Notice


354 Chapter 14

a. Displaying Both Harmonicity and Synchronicity

Figure 14.9 Harmonicity and synchronicity.


Time Cycles 355

Years Months Weeks Days
18
9
54
18
40
20
80
40
20
10
5

Figure 14.10 The simplified nominal model.

40, 20, 10, and 5 days. You’ll recognize immediately that these
numbers account for most of the popular moving average lengths.
Even the well known 4, 9, and 18 day moving average technique
is a variation of the 5, 10, and 20 day numbers. Many oscillators
use 5, 10, and 20 days. Weekly rule breakouts use the same num-
bers translated into 2, 4, and 8 weeks.

HOW CYCLIC CONCEPTS HELP
EXPLAIN CHARTING TECHNIQUES

Chapter 3 in Hurst’s book explains in great detail how the stan-
dard charting techniques—trendlines and channels, chart pat-
terns, and moving averages—can be better understood and used
to greater advantage when coordinated with cyclic, principles.
Figure 14,11 helps explain the existence of trendlines and chan-
nels. The flat cycle wave along the bottom becomes a rising price
channel when it is summed with a rising line representing the
long term uptrend. Notice how much the horizontal cycle along
the bottom of the chart resembles an oscillator.

Figure 14.12 from the same chapter shows how a head and
shoulders topping pattern is formed by combining two cycle


356 Chapter 14

FIGURE II-t “

CONSTANT WIDTH CHANNEL

C-RESULTANT SIMULATED
PRICE MO”

(DEALIZED SUM OF ALL LONGER
DURATION COMPONENTS,

Aq IDEALIZED CYCLIC COMPONENT

TIME

Figure 14.11 = Channel formation. (Source: Hurst, J.M., The Profit Magic
of Stock Transaction Timing [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1970].)


8- IDEALIZED SUM OF ALL LONGER
DURATION COMPONENTS:

TIME ——>

Figure 14.12a Adding another component. (Source: Hurst, ].M., The
Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing [Englewood Cliffs, N_].:
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1970].)

Figure 14.12b = The Summation principle applied. (Source: Hurst, J.M.,
The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall. Inc., 19701].)


358 Chapter 14

lengths with a rising line representing the sum of all longer dura-
tion components. Hurst goes on to explain double tops, triangles,
flags, and pennants through the application of cycles. The “V”
top or bottom, for example, occurs when an intermediate cycle
turns at the exact same time as its next longer and next shorter
duration cycles.

Hurst also addresses how moving averages can be made
more useful if their lengths are synchronized with dominant cycle
lengths. Students of tradition-
al charting techniques should
gain additional insight into
how these popular chart pic-
tures form and maybe even
why they work by reading PRIMARY
Hurst’s chapter, entitled CYCLE
“Verify Your Chart Patterns.”

1/2 PC
V2pc —sraat
crest

% PRIMARY

DOMINANT CYCLES |) *€

There are many different
cycles affecting the financial
markets. The only ones of real
value for forecasting purposes
are the dominant cycles.
Dominant cycles are those
that consistently affect prices
and that can be clearly identi-
fied. Most futures markets
have at least five dominant
cycles. In an earlier chapter on

the use of long term charts, it | price activity i ay i
was stressed that all technical : Me +

analysis should begin with the |}. %

long term picture, gradually rie WEEKS

working toward the shorter Pop pd ep
term. That principle holds Figure 14.13 (Source: The Power
true in the study of cycles. The of Oscillator/Cycle Combinations by
proper procedure is to begin Walt Bressert.)

tT i crest TC

TRADING
CYCLE

ALPHA/BETA 86, AC



Time Cycles 359

the analysis with a study of long term dominant cycles, which can
span several years; then work toward the intermediate, which can
be several weeks to several months; finally, the very short term
cycles, from several hours to several days, can be used for timing
of entry and exit points and to help confirm the turning points of
the longer cycles.

Classification of Cycles

The general categories are: long term cycles (2 or more years in
length), the seasonal cycle (1 year), the primary or intermediate cycle
(9 to 26 weeks), and the trading cycle (4 weeks). The trading cycle
breaks down into two shorter alpha and beta cycles, which aver-
age 2 weeks each. (The labels Primary, Trading, Alpha, and Beta
are used by Walt Bressert to describe the various cycle lengths.)
(See Figure 14.13.)

The Kondratieff Wave

There are even longer range cycles at work. Perhaps the best
known is the approximate 54 year Kondratieff cycle. This contro-
versial long cycle of economic activity, first discovered by a
Russian economist in the 1920s by the name of Nikolai D.
Kondratieff, appears to exert a major influence on virtually all
stock and commodity prices. In particular, a 54 year cycle has
been identified in interest rates, copper, cotton, wheat, stocks,
and wholesale commodity prices. Kondratieff tracked his “long
wave” from 1789 using such factors as commodity prices, pig iron
production, and wages of agricultural workers in England. (See
Figure 14.14.) The Kondratieff cycle has become a popular subject
of discussion in recent years, primarily owing to the fact that its
last top occurred in the 1920s, and its next top is long overdue.
Kondratieff himself paid a heavy price for his cyclic view of capi-
talistic economies. He is believed to have died in a Siberian labor
camp. For more information, see The Long Wave Cycle
(Kondratieff), translated by Guy Daniels. (Two other books on the
subject are The K Wave by David Knox Barker and The Great Cycle
by Dick Stoken.)


Chapter 14

360

(tla 4 F861 ‘Zz Avy] uors
~stuuad dq payuudey ‘undo sau yox man ay. dq ¢861@ IYSuddod) “7xa} uvIssny jpurSuo ayq wou) saaa

qsayf ay] SI UOHLISUBA YL ‘(PRET ‘Wapdus puv UospabYyoty :y10X MIN) sjajungq And Aq pajvjsuvy ‘Yayoipuoy
IIOYIN Aq aPAD dae BuO] au aas ‘uorHuuojuy asoui 40g ‘aavM Sug Sfaywipuoy PLP aan31q

“Hen sspUOY [NONI Aq SeIpNys UO pesed ‘AWCUOTE sHEYdED

POM 017} Uj BUOA/PUOS SeeujENd jo eyjeodw0d & ‘eas Bud] ey) (2961 =00 1) xepuy eopd syesejoym ‘S'f)

4 | 1 i ‘ 1 1 i 1 ! n {

L J 1 1 | 1 | L
91908 OB ‘seBeleAR jenuUy SABM 3u0} S,jJOReIpUuCy



Time Cycles 361

COMBINING CYCLE LENGTHS

As a general rule, long term and seasonal cycles determine the
major trend of a market. Obviously, if a two year cycle has bot-
tomed, it can be expected to advance for at least a year, measured
from its trough to its crest. Therefore, the long term cycle exerts
major influence on market direction. Markets also have annual
seasonal patterns, meaning that they tend to peak or trough at
certain times of the year. Grain markets, for example, usually hit
their low point around harvest time and rally from there. Seasonal
moves usually last for several months.

For trading purposes, the weekly primary cycle is the most
useful. The 3 to 6 month primary cycle is the equivalent of the
intermediate trend, and generally determines which side of a
market to trade. The next shorter cycle, the 4 week trading
cycle, is used to establish entry and exit points in the direction
of the primary trend. If the primary trend is up, troughs in the
trading cycle are used for purchases. If the primary trend is
down, crests in the trading cycles should be sold short. The 10
day alpha and beta cycles can be used for further fine tuning.
(See Figure 14.13.)

THE IMPORTANCE OF TREND

The concept of trading in the direction of the trend is stressed
throughout the body of technical analysis. In an earlier chapter,
it was suggested that short term dips should be used for pur-
chases if the intermediate trend was up, and that short term
bulges be sold in downtrends. In the chapter on Elliott Wave
Theory, it was pointed out that five wave moves only take place
in the direction of the next larger trend. Therefore, it is neces-
sary when using any short term trend for timing purposes to
first determine the direction of the next longer trend and then
trade in the direction of that longer trend. That concept holds
true in cycles. The trend of each cycle is determined by the direction
of its next longer cycle. Or stated the other way, once the trend of
a longer cycle is established, the trend of the next shorter cycle
is known.


362 Chapter 14

The 28 Day Trading Cycle in Commodities

There is one important short term cycle that tends to influence
most commodity markets—the 28 day trading cycle. In other words,
most markets have a tendency to form a trading cycle low every 4
weeks. One possible explanation for this strong cyclic tendency
throughout all commodity markets is the Junar cycle. Burton Pugh
studied the 28 day cycle in the wheat market in the 1930s (Science
and Secrets of Wheat Trading, Lambert-Gann, Pomeroy, WA, 1978,
orig., 1933) and concluded that the moon had some influence on
market turning points. His theory was that wheat should be
bought on a full moon and sold on a new moon. Pugh acknowl-
edged, however, that the lunar effects were mild and could be over-
ridden by the effects of longer cycles or important news events.

Whether or not the moon has anything to do with it, the
average 28 day cycle does exist and explains many of the numbers
used in the development of shorter term indicators and trading
systems. First of all, the 28 day cycle is based on calendar days.
Translated into actual trading days, the number becomes 20.
We've already commented on how many popular moving aver-
ages, oscillators, and weekly rules are based on the number 20 and
its harmonically related shorter cycles, 10 and 5. The 5, 10, and
20 day moving averages are widely used along with their deriva-
tives, 4, 9, and 18. Many traders use 10 and 40 day moving aver-
ages, with the number 40 being the next harmonically related
longer cycle at twice the length of 20.

In Chapter 9, we discussed the profitability of the 4 week
tule developed by Richard Donchian. Buy signals were generated
when a market set new 4 week highs and a sell signal when a 4
week low was established. Knowledge of the existence of a 4 week
trading cycle gives a better insight into the significance of that
number and helps us to understand why the 4 week rule has
worked so well over the years. When a market exceeds the high of
the previous 4 weeks, cycle logic tells us that, at the very least, the
next longer cycle (the 8 week cycle) has bottomed and turned up.

LEFT AND RIGHT TRANSLATION

The concept of translation may very well be the most useful
aspect of cycle analysis. Left and right translation refers to the


Time Cycles 363

shifting of the cycle peaks either to the left or the right of the
ideal cycle midpoint. For example, a 20 day trading cycle is
measured from low to low. The ideal peak should occur 10 days
into the cycle, or at the halfway point. That would allow for a
10 day advance followed by a 10 day decline. Ideal cycle peaks,
however, rarely occur. Most variations in cycles occur at the
peaks (or crests) and not at the troughs. That’s why cycle
troughs are considered more reliable and are used to measure
cycle lengths.

The cycle crests act differently depending on the trend of
the next longer cycle. If the trend is up, the cycle crest shifts to
the right of the ideal midpoint, causing right translation. If the
longer trend is down, the cycle crest shifts to the left of the mid-
point, causing left translation. Therefore, right translation is bull-
ish and left translation is bearish. Stop to think about it. All we’re
saying here is that in a bull trend, prices will spend more time
going up than down. In a bear trend, prices spend more time
going down than up. Isn’t that the basic definition of a trend?
Only, in this case, we're talking about time instead of price. (See
Figure 14.15.)

HOW TO ISOLATE CYCLES

In order to study the various cycles affecting any given market, it
is necessary to first isolate each dominant cycle. There are various
ways of accomplishing this task. The simplest is by visual inspec-
tion. By studying daily bar charts, for example, it is possible to
identify obvious tops and bottoms in a market. By taking the aver-
age time periods between those cyclic tops and bottoms, certain
average lengths can be found.

There are tools available to make that task a bit easier. One
such tool is the Ehrlich Cycle Finder, named after its inventor, Stan
Ehrlich (ECE, 112 Vida Court, Novato, CA 94947 [415] 892-1183).
The Cycle Finder is an accordion-like device that can be placed on
the price chart for visual inspection. The distance between the
points is always equidistant and can be expanded or contracted to
fit any cycle length. By plotting a distance between any two obvi-
ous cycle lows, it can be quickly determined if other cycle lows of


364 Chapter 14

NINN NAAN

A SIMPLE CYCLE
FIGURE A
va ; L , - me . x
~~” THE TREND OF THE LARGER CYCLE ~
e FIGURE B

SIMPLE CYCLE

SMALLER CYCLE
COMBINED WIT
TREND :

ve

tole
a
°

“2

- RIGHT TRANSLATION LEFT TRANSLATION
As the Trend of the Larger As the Trend of the Larger
Cycle Moves UP Cycle Moves DOWN
(BULL MARKET) {BEAR MARKET)

FIGURE C

Figure 14.15 Example of left and right translation. Figure A shows a
simple cycle. Figure B shows the trend of the larger cycle. Figure C shows the
combined effect. When the longer trend is up, the midpeak shifts to the right.
When the longer trend is down, the midpeak shifts to the left. Right transla-
tion is bullish, left translation is bearish. (Source: The Power of
Oscillator/Cycle Combination by Walt Bressert.)


Time Cycles 365

the same length exist. An electronic version of that device, called
the Ehrlich Cycle Forecaster, is now available as an analysis tech-
nique on Omega Research’s Trade Station and Super Charts
(#Omega Research, 8700 West Flagler Street, Suite 250, Miami, FL
33174, [305] 551-9991, www.omegaresearch.com). (See Figures
14.16-14.18.)

Computers can help you find cycles by visual inspection.
The user first puts a price chart on the screen. The next step is to
pick a prominent bottom on the chart as a starting point. Once
that is done, vertical lines (or arcs) appear every 10 days (the
default value). The cycle periods can be lengthened, shortened, or
moved left or right to find the right cycle fit on the chart. (See
Figures 14.19 and 14.20.)

[E&P 600 INDEX 1ao-Monthiy COMTE C=100680 47.02 He T00540 L=100087 ECF controller ECF.cycle Lows

Next Cycle Rotem = 04/09/98, in 7 bare
i 1000)

CF.Cycle Lows indicator:
date of the Anchor bar Is: 1031/62. The time
js: 04:16pm. The CycleSpacing Is 48.

‘you click on & bar to the right of the Anchor Bar,
spacing between the Cycle Lines will Increase.
1, Htyou click on a barto the left of the Anchor

! HESURRH ERI EDD ETP EEMen nebo eh We

Figure 14.16 The 4 year presidential cycle is clearly identified with the
Ehrlich Cycle Forecaster (see vertical lines). If the cycle is still working, the
next major low would be expected to occur during 1998.

