
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

38

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

Traders need to weigh the risk more carefully when trading through
the more important economic releases. In most cases the risk and reward
is the same or similar, but the magnitude of risk is often larger than what is
customary during normal market conditions. That is, instead of 25 pips of
risk, the risk could be two, three, or even more times the market exposure.
What tends to happen is the ego of having a position through the
more important economic numbers is too overwhelming for a lot of retail
traders, and large trading mistakes can be made.
In general, what I like to tell retail traders is that trading should not be
based on luck, but on risk management. In all my years of trading I had no
sound reason to deviate from what the survey of economists’ forecasts had
projected, and I can tell you that 99.9 percent of retail traders will not have
an empirically sound reason to doubt any forecast either.
Therefore, any retail trader who has the ego to go long the U.S. dollar versus the Japanese yen (USDJPY) just prior to U.S. Nonfarm Payroll
because he thinks it will show a strong +250,000 jobs when the survey
of economists says it will be +75,000 is just betting black on the roulette
wheel.
Economic statistics help move markets, and traders look for those
movements especially when trading trends. However, it is important to
weigh the relative risks from the data before trading.
Too many retail currency traders consider the risk in normal times
equal to risk through an important economic release. It is not.
My suggestion is to change. Do the smart trades. Don’t gamble needlessly unless there are a number of winning chips in front of you, and it
makes sense from a technical and fundamental perspective. But whatever
you do, don’t let your ego get in the way of sound trading decisions and
cloud your judgment.

Political Influences
Politics is also a fundamental influence that traders should have some
knowledge of. The balance of power via the election process and fiscal
policy decisions enacted by governments are both potential political influences on the value of a currency pair.
The U.K. general election in 2010 is one example, as the shifts in power
had an influence on the currency rates before and after the election. There
were several instances where surprise weekend polls sent the GBPUSD to
a gapped Sunday opening. Be aware of the political risks during elections,
especially over weekends. It will help you avoid the big surprises on the
new week’s opening.
The Greek debt crisis of 2010 is another recent politically initiated influence that had a major impact on the value of the EURUSD as the crisis

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

39

unfolded. In the short term, the fluidity of the news kept a negative bias
on the euro. However, it also increased volatility risk for the currency as
political comments from Greek, German, ECB, EU, and IMF officials kept
traders guessing.
There are many instances where market sentiment can focus on the
political influences on currency rates. Generally speaking, the bias from
politics on a currency rate tends to be more negative than positive for the
currency in focus. Perhaps it is the cynicism that the market has toward
politics in general. After all, politicians tend to be political.
However, when politics are the fundamental focus, there also tends to
be room for increased volatility because people who are in charge of the
crisis are there to solve the problems. As a result, their efforts can lead to
sharp reversals of the seemingly obvious trend. For example, while Greece
was in crisis and the euro was being sold, it ultimately was an injection of
aid from the European Central Bank (ECB) and the International Monetary
Fund that quickly turned the market around. Retail traders should be aware
of these politically motivated moments to anticipate the increased risk and
volatility from the solutions. Don’t be too married to the position; be aware
and be prepared for quick changes.
Another temptation for retail traders is to make a directional currency
play on a fundamental political idea that is not a major focus now. Betting
that the dollar will be fundamentally weak because Social Security will go
broke is not what a retail currency trader should focus trading decisions on
today. Betting that the EU will fall apart and the EURUSD will go to parity
is also not what a retail trader should be concerned about. It may be the
case in the long run, but as John Maynard Keynes once said, “In the long run
we are all dead.” Therefore, the retail traders should keep focusing on the
short run first, and if the bias is so overwhelmingly bearish or bullish, they
can be sure that the charts and the political fundamentals will be saying
the same thing for a long time and they will ride that trend.

Central Bank Influences
Central bank influences include interest rate changes, comments from
key central bank figures like the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben
Bernanke, or the president of the ECB, Jean-Claude Trichet, and direct currency intervention.
In the 2008−2010 period, the central banks of the world also became
more entrenched in other nontraditional stimulative measures, including
the use of quantitative easing whereby purchases of financial instruments
were done as a way to add liquidity into the economy. The reserve requirement rate is also a new rate that will likely become more important, especially in the United States, when monetary policy starts to be reversed

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

40

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

from easing to tightening. In fact, it is likely to be the new “change in interest rates” for the Federal Reserve Bank, when they do look to be less
accommodative.
These fundamental influences from the central banks have effects on
currency rates in the short term and as a result, being aware of when they
occur and the potential impact is an important requirement for retail currency traders.
Changes of Interest Rate Policy Global central banks control interest rate policy by lowering or raising a short-term interest rate, which is
the rate that money is targeted to be borrowed and lent in the interbank
market for one day, or what is called overnight. The raising or lowering
of this rate is thought to control other interest rates along the yield curve.
As such, changes in interest rate policy are thought to stimulate or restrict
economic activity, which in turn influences currency rates.
The central bank interest rate decisions are generally made after
scheduled central bank meetings. This, however, is not always the case
because sometimes the immediacy of a change demands action before a
scheduled meeting in order to allay market fears. Usually, however, these
changes are well anticipated by the market and often spoken about by
economists and market analysts. That is, they are not a surprise.
Generally speaking, a rise in interest rates should lead to a higher currency value, while lowering interest rates should lead to a lower currency
value.
Rising interest rates imply a strong economy. A strong economy is often synonymous with a strong currency. One way to slow a strong economy
is to make exports more expensive abroad in an attempt to slow sales overseas. The rising domestic currency does this because foreign importers
have to pay more for the exporter’s currency in order to buy the exports.
They will look for cheaper alternative—perhaps within their own countries.
Rising interest rates also imply an elevation of inflation risk. If inflation
is expected to rise, a higher currency should lower the cost of imports and
in turn lower import inflation down the road.
Finally, rising interest rates are thought to be an attraction to capital
as global investors look to benefit from carry profits. Carry profits involve
buying, or being long the higher yielding currency and short the lower yielding currency. The carry trade has been influential in recent years.
The opposite dynamics should occur if a central bank lowers interest
rates due to a slowing economy. That is, the currency should fall. A falling
currency makes exports more competitive abroad, which should stimulate
economic activity. The United States used a weaker dollar in 2008 and 2009
to keep the economy on life support while domestic consumption declined.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

41

With inflation likely on the decline, a lower currency should increase
the cost of imports, and this should keep deflationary forces from taking
hold. Finally, a declining currency should dissuade capital investment because investors earn less from the carry trade by being long a lower yielding currency.
When rates are first changed, retail traders often neglect to anticipate
the potential for future changes. When rates are changed from declining to
rising, or vice versa, that trend will likely remain for an extended period
of time. This should lead to a trend-type move for the currency. Traders
should be biased for a trend move, especially if the change is one of the
earlier changes and if the market has not fully discounted the move already.
However, as each successive change is made in interest rates, the impact from the changes can lose its directional momentum for the currency.
This is simply because the impact of the currency and interest rate change
starts to be felt in the economy. That is, if rates are being raised, the currency should increase. Eventually, the higher currency will slow exports.
The higher rate should also slow economic growth. Eventually, the central bank will need to look toward steady policy and perhaps reversing
rates.
Finally, retail traders should be aware that a raising or lowering of interest rates loses its currency significance if the change is done in conjunction with other countries doing the same thing. That is, if interest rates are
being lowered in the United States while they are being lowered in the Eurozone, as happened during the global market meltdown in the 2008−2009
period, the market will likely focus on other fundamentals because there
is no interest rate advantage as a result of the interest rate differential
changing.
Changing interest rates is like changing a ship’s course on the open
seas. It takes a while to do, but once it is done, it tends to continue in the
direction for a while. Retail traders should not be surprised by this and get
caught trading against the trend—especially when the ship has just turned
around.
Comments from Central Bank Officials Central bankers will often speak publicly, and when they speak the market listens. They might be
required by law to speak in front of government officials to explain their
policy actions. They might give speeches at economic forums or roundtables. They might make public comments after interest rate decisions, either
in the form of a press release or, with some banks like the ECB, during a
full press conference. Obviously, central bankers’ comments can have an
impact on currency rates.
Like with government statistics, there is a schedule of speaking engagements published for key central bankers. Retail traders should all know the

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

42

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

schedule. The significance of the comments can generally be tied to where
the economy is in the business cycle and the topic of the comments. If the
market perceives the economy is at a turning point, the risk from the comments increases in significance. If, however, comments are made during
the normal midcycle period, they often tend to sound like comments made
previously and are less important.
As mentioned, most interest rate decisions from central banks usually come with published comments. In recent times, the comments
have come under microscopic scrutiny from financial wordsmiths who
dissect—sometimes word for word—what is released and what it implies
about future monetary policy action.
The U.S. Federal Reserve purposely worded comments that rates
would remain low for an “extended period of time” during 2009 and 2010
(and likely into 2011 too). This was done to assure the market that a tightening was not imminent even if the economy improved.
The Bank of Canada used a more direct approach. In its comments
starting after its April 2009 meeting, bankers said the overnight rate “can
be expected to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter
of 2010.” Rates stayed the same until the second quarter of 2010.
One problem retail traders experience with comments from central
bank officials is they often do not have access to the comments—especially
those from interviews. The cost of real-time headline news is often prohibitive for retail traders. This is a risk traders face and quite frankly nothing can be done. However, like economic releases, moves may be anticipated by knowing the schedule and taking into consideration any risk. A
surprise comment with no warning obviously cannot be anticipated but it
will be reflected in the market move, often within seconds.
I find it beneficial to get a feel for what the central bankers are thinking
by reading their speech transcripts. Below are the names and websites of
the major global central banks where speeches from central bankers typically can be found.

r Federal Reserve Bank (Fed): www.federalreserve.gov/
r ECB: www.ecb.int/home/html/index.en.html
r Bank of England (BOE): www.bankofengland.co.uk/
r Swiss National Bank (SNB): www.snb.ch/
r Bank of Canada (BOC): www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/index.html
r Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ): www.rbnz.govt.nz/
r Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA): www.rba.gov.au/
r Bank of Japan (BOJ): www.boj.or.jp/en/
Central Bank Intervention
Central banks generally try not to interfere with market forces. However,
there are instances where they feel compelled to reverse the trend of their

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

43

currency so as to prevent adverse economic impact from the move. To do
this, the central banks will intervene directly in the interbank market by
buying or selling in order to influence the direction of their currency.
The most notable intervention in recent history was the periodic intervention from the Swiss National Bank to lower the value of its currency
in 2009−2010. The reason for the intervention was that the higher currency
was thought to be slowing export growth at a time when the domestic economy was sputtering. In addition, the higher currency was also dampening
the cost of imports at a time when inflation was slowing. A similar move
by the Bank of Japan was also taken in 2010 as it too worried about the
impact of inflation (or deflation) and growth.
On March 12, 2009, the SNB tested the market’s desire to sell in the face
of warnings and intervened in the market, buying EURCHF at the 1.4765
level. The action led to a whopping 565-pip move higher in one day, with
little relief.
The Bank of Japan intervened on September 15, 2010 for the first time
in six years and the USDJPY soared from 82.87 to 85.90. Moves like this can
be dangerous for unsuspecting currency traders.
The good news about central bank intervention is that it does not happen very often, and at times the central bank may give verbal warnings. The
bad news is that it is hard to time intervention, and if you are on the wrong
side of the trade, the losses can be significant.
Common sense says to heed central bank intervention warnings and
consider the risks too great to even trade the currency, no matter the profit
potential. The reason is that you never know when the intervention will
take place and the central bank may watch the currency drift down (or up)
and intervene when the market is least expecting it, maximizing the impact.
Currency traders always have options to trade high-risk currency pairs
or more stable currency pairs. If risks are elevated from potential intervention, I strongly suggest either don’t trade the pair or lower the trading
amounts, but never trade against the central banks’ warnings when intervention is possible. Also, after intervention be aware that there can be large
corrections as traders on the right side take profits. Intervention risk is often not a good time to trade. Use common sense and let the allure pass
until more normal markets with less risk prevail.

Intermarket Influences
Intermarket influences such as stock markets and prices of commodities
such as gold, copper, silver, and oil can affect the value of currencies.
Generally speaking, the commodity prices of gold, copper, silver, and oil
will have an influence on the commodity currencies. These include the
Australian and Canadian dollars and to a lesser extent the New Zealand
dollar. Needless to say, these countries are reliant on the exporting of

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

44

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

commodities and therefore their currency value becomes tied to them. If
prices trend up, the commodity currencies tend to go up. If prices of commodities are going down, the commodity currencies tend to go down.
The stock market is another intermarket influence on currencies, but
it can vary. At times a robust stock market can mean a stronger currency
and a weaker stock market a lower currency. In recent times, however, a
stronger stock market, often led by the U.S. stock market, led to a flight into
what became considered risky currencies. Risky pairs included anything
with yen, such as USDJPY, GBPJPY, EURJPY, CHFJPY, and AUDJPY. The
British pound; euro; and commodity currencies like the Australian, Canadian and New Zealand dollars also tended to benefit from the move into
risky currencies.
Conversely, a decline in the stock market led to a flight into quality,
with quality defined as anything with the Japanese yen, Swiss franc, and
U.S. dollar, in that order. The other currencies all declined, including the
euro, pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, and New Zealand
dollar.
Although it is nice to know the relationship—especially in a trend-type
market in commodities—retail currency traders should remember they are
trading currencies and not commodities or stocks. The stock, commodity,
and currency markets can have their own quirks and corrections, and there
may be other influences that may diverge from the expected relationship.
For example, oil prices can decline and should lead to a higher USDCAD
(lower Canadian dollar). However, it does not always happen.
I think it may help retail traders’ results if they are more aware of intermarket relationships, but should this be the main focus for trading currencies? No. Don’t make the intermarket relationships your focus.

Traditional Foreign Exchange Influences
There are natural foreign exchange uses that affect the value of currency
rates. For example, Coca-Cola is a multinational corporation that may
look to remit foreign currency back to the United States periodically.
Japanese exporters to the United States are known to sell the USDJPY pair
periodically to remit funds back to Japan. Other natural foreign exchange
uses occur from mergers and acquisitions. A Canadian company may purchase a U.S. company (or vice versa) and affect the value of the USDCAD
exchange rate when the payments are made to complete the purchase and
sale. Options expirations where the value of a currency is near a strike
price can cause a currency pair to move as traders defend the levels. These
are some examples of the traditional influences on currency rates. Can a
retail trader anticipate these fundamental influences? No. There is little the
trader can do with respect to anticipating them without insider knowledge.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

Printer: Yet to come

45

In summary, fundamental influences are many (I just reviewed a small
list), and combined they are thought to influence the direction of a currency
pair’s value. For retail traders, knowing the key things that can move rates
is a comfort or can influence a bias (in conjunction with technical analysis),
but this knowledge can also steer traders in the wrong direction.
Be aware of the key fundamental influences, understand how they affect risk, and then trade accordingly. If the risk is too high because of the
threat of intervention, then don’t trade. If the risk from an economic statistic is too great, don’t trade.
Understand that your assessment of fundamentals may not be what is
driving the market. For example, you may have all the reasons in the world
to expect that the USDCAD should go up, but because of a big merger, it
goes down. The only protection is the technicals in this instance; this is
why I favor them over fundamentals.
However, if you can get an edge and the edge comes from a deeper
understanding of fundamentals, make that extra effort, learn, and reap the
rewards.

THEY FAIL TO ANTICIPATE TRENDS
The final thing that most retails traders don’t do is anticipate trends. Anticipating a trend is not all that revolutionary. It does not necessarily mean you
need a magical crystal ball. After all, most successful businesses, whether
they are large or small, anticipate trends.
Google anticipated the need for an efficient search engine and also anticipated that businesses would pay to have sponsored links to their sites.
Facebook anticipated the need for a social networking site. Amazon anticipated a need to download books online and manufactured the Kindle to
satisfy that demand. Apple seems to magically anticipate trends with all its
product offerings.
Trading with the trends is the most important thing a retail trader can
do. There are two big reasons for this.
One, trends are generally fast and directional, and follow along a fairly
consistent path of higher highs and higher lows for an uptrend and lower
lows and lower highs for a downtrend. If a trader catches a trend and is
able to stay on it, profits can be a multiple of the risk taken at the outset of
the trade.
The second reason that trading with the trend is so important is that
doing so prevents oversized losses in the account from trading against the
trend. It goes to reason that if the profit-to-loss ratio of trading with the
trend is potentially high, then the reverse would be true if a trader positioned against the trend.
