
T H E I N S T I T U T I O N A L I M P E R AT I V E
If management stands to gain wisdom and credibility by facing mistakes,
why do so many annual reports trumpet only successes? If allocation of
capital is so simple and logical, why is capital so poorly allocated? The

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

97

answer, Buffett has learned, is an unseen force he calls “the institutional
imperative”—the lemminglike tendency of corporate management to
imitate the behavior of other managers, no matter how silly or irrational
that behavior may be.
He says it was the most surprising discovery of his business career.
At school, he was taught that experienced managers were honest, intelligent, and automatically made rational business decisions. Once out in
the business world, he learned instead that “rationality frequently wilts
when the institutional imperative comes into play.”16
Buffett believes that the institutional imperative is responsible for
several serious, but distressingly common, conditions: “(1) [The organization] resists any change in its current direction; (2) just as work expands to fill available time, corporate projects or acquisitions will
materialize to soak up available funds; (3) any business craving of the
leader, however foolish, will quickly be supported by detailed rate-ofreturn and strategic studies prepared by his troops; and (4) the behavior
of peer companies, whether they are expanding, acquiring, setting executive compensation or whatever, will be mindlessly imitated.”17
Buffett learned this lesson early. Jack Ringwalt, head of National
Indemnity, which Berkshire acquired in 1967, helped Buffett discover
the destructive power of the imperative. While the majority of insurance companies were writing insurance policies on terms guaranteed to
produce inadequate returns or worse, a loss, Ringwalt stepped away
from the market and refused to write new policies. (For the full story,
refer to Chapter 3.) Buffett recognized the wisdom of Ringwalt’s decisions and followed suit. Today, Berkshire’s insurance companies still
operate on this principle.
What is behind the institutional imperative that drives so many
businesses? Human nature. Most managers are unwilling to look foolish and expose their company to an embarrassing quarterly loss when
other “lemming” companies are still able to produce quarterly gains,
even though they assuredly are heading into the sea. Shifting direction
is never easy. It is often easier to follow other companies down the same
path toward failure than to alter the direction of the company.
Admittedly, Buffett and Munger enjoy the same protected position
here as in their freedom to be candid about bad news: They don’t have to
worry about getting fired, and this frees them to make unconventional
decisions. Still, a manager with strong communication skills should be

98

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

able to convince owners to accept a short-term loss in earnings and a
change in the direction of their company if it means superior results over
time. Inability to resist the institutional imperative, Buffett has learned,
often has less to do with the owners of the company than the willingness
of its managers to accept fundamental change.
Even when managers accept the notion that their company must
radically change or face the possibility of shutting down, carrying out
this plan is too difficult for most managers. Many succumb to the
temptation to buy a new company instead of facing the financial facts of
the current problem.
Why would they do this? Buffett isolates three factors he feels most
inf luence management’s behavior. First, most managers cannot control
their lust for activity. Such hyperactivity often finds its outlet in business takeovers. Second, most managers are constantly comparing the
sales, earnings, and executive compensation of their business with other
companies in and beyond their industry. These comparisons invariably
invite corporate hyperactivity. Lastly, Buffett believes that most managers have an exaggerated sense of their own management capabilities.
Another common problem is poor allocation skills. As Buffett points
out, CEOs often rise to their position by excelling in other areas of
the company, including administration, engineering, marketing, or production. Because they have little experience in allocating capital, most
CEOs instead turn to their staff members, consultants, or investment
bankers. Here the institutional imperative begins to enter the decisionmaking process. Buffett points out that if the CEO craves a potential acquisition requiring a 15 percent return on investment to justify the
purchase, it is amazing how smoothly his troops report back to him that
the business can actually achieve 15.1 percent.
The final justification for the institutional imperative is mindless
imitation. If companies A, B, and C are all doing the same thing, well
then, reasons the CEO of company D, it must be all right for our company to behave the same way.
It is not venality or stupidity, Buffett believes, that positions these
companies to fail. Rather, it is the institutional dynamics of the imperative that make it difficult to resist doomed behavior. Speaking before a
group of Notre Dame students, Buffett displayed a list of thirty-seven
failed investment banking firms. All of them, he explained, failed even
though the volume of the New York Stock Exchange had multiplied

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

99

fifteenfold. These firms were headed by hard-working individuals with
very high IQs, all of whom had an intense desire to succeed. Buffett
paused; his eyes scanned the room. “You think about that,” he said
sternly. “How could they get a result like that? I’ll tell you how,” he
said, “mindless imitation of their peers.”18

Coca-Cola
When Goizueta took over Coca-Cola, one of his first moves was to
jettison the unrelated businesses that the previous CEO had developed
and return the company to its core business, selling syrup. It was a
clear demonstration of Coca-Cola’s ability to resist the institutional
imperative.
Reducing the company to a single-product business was undeniably a
bold move. What made Goizueta’s strategy even more remarkable was
his willingness to take this action at a time when others in the industry
were doing the exact opposite. Several leading beverage companies were
investing their profits in other unrelated businesses. Anheuser-Busch
used the profits from its beer business to invest in theme parks. BrownForman, a producer and distributor of wine and spirits, invested its profits in china, crystal, silver, and luggage businesses, all of them with much
lower returns. Seagram Company, Ltd., a global spirits and wine business, bought Universal Studios. Pepsi, Coca-Cola’s chief beverage rival,
bought snack businesses (Frito-Lay) and restaurants including Taco Bell,
Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Pizza Hut.
Not only did Goizueta’s action focus the company’s attention on its
largest and most important product, but it worked to reallocate the
company’s resources into its most profitable business. Since the economic returns of selling syrup far outweighed the economic returns of
the other businesses, the company was now reinvesting its profits in its
highest-returning business.

Clayton Homes
In an industry that is strangled by problems of its own making, Clayton
stands out for its strong management and smart business model.
Manufactured homes now constitute 15 percent of the total housing
units in the United States. In many respects, their historically negative

100

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

image is disappearing. The homes are becoming more like site-built
homes in size and scope; construction quality has consistently improved;
they are competitive with rentals; they have tax advantages in that owners do not have to own the underlying property; and mortgages are now
supported by other large mortgage companies and government agencies,
such as Fannie Mae.
Still, since they are considerably less expensive than site-built
homes (2002 average prices: $48,800 compared with $164,217), the
primary market remains consumers toward the lower end of the economic range. In 2002, over 22 million Americans lived in manufactured homes, with a median family income of $26,900.19
Many manufacturers were caught in a self-inf licted double bind in
the 1990s, and many of them failed. One arm of this double bind was
the increasing acceptance and popularity of these homes, which rushed
many in the industry toward overexpansion. The other squeeze factor
was simple greed.
The homes are sold through retailers that are either independent
dealers representing several manufacturers or company-owned outlets.
Right there, on the same lot, shoppers usually find a financing operation, often a subsidiary of the manufacturer/retailer. In and of itself,
there is nothing wrong with this; it sounds like, and in fact operates
like, a car dealership. The problem is that it has become endemic in the
industry to push sales to anybody who can sign their name to a sales
agreement, regardless of credit history, based on loans that are destined
to default.
Selling scads of units creates immediate profits for the retailers and
huge commissions for the salespeople. It also creates enormous economic
problems longer range. It is an unfortunate reality that many homes are
sold to people with fragile economic circumstances, and repossession
rates are high, which reduces the demand for new homes. As unemployment rates rose in the past few years, so did loan delinquencies. Factor in
the oversupply of inventory from the 1990s, and the tight economic
times that diminished spending across the board, and it adds up to a
sorry state of affairs for the industry as a whole.
Much of the problem can be traced to the very weak loans that are
so common in the manufactured home business. Why do they all do it?
Because they all do it, and each company fears losing market share if it
does otherwise. That, in a nutshell, is the curse of the institutional

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

101

imperative. Clayton has not been completely immune, but it has
avoided the most egregious faults.
Most importantly, Clayton compensates its salespeople in a different
way. The commissions of sellers and managers are based not only on the
number of homes sold but also on the quality and performance of the
loans made. Sales staff share the financial burden when loan payments are
missed, and share the revenue when the loan performs well. Take, for example, a sales manager who handles the sale and financing of a $24,000
mobile home. If the customer cannot make the payments, Clayton would
typically lose $2,500, and the manager is responsible for up to half the
loss.20 But if the loan performs, the manager shares up to half of that, too.
That puts the burden to avoid weak loans on the sales personnel.
The methodology paid off: In 2002, “only 2.3 percent of the homeowners with a Clayton mortgage are 30 days delinquent.”21 That is
roughly half the industry delinquency rate. In the late 1990s, when more
than 80 factories and 4,000 retailers went out of business, Clayton closed
only 31 retailers and did not shut any factories. By 2003, when Buffett
entered the picture, Clayton had emerged from the downturn in the
economy in general and the mobile home industry in particular stronger
and better positioned than any of its competitors.
Warren Buffett bought Clayton Homes because he saw in Jim
Clayton a hardworking self-starter with strong management skills and a
lot of smarts. Clayton showed not once but twice that he could weather
a downturn in the industry by structuring his business model in a way
that avoided an especially damaging institutional imperative.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett has told us that even third-rate newspapers can earn substantial
profits. Since the market does not require high standards of a paper,
it is up to management to impose its own. And it is management’s high
standards and abilities that can differentiate the business’s returns
when compared with its peer group. In 1973, if Buffett had invested in
Gannett, Knight-Ridder, the New York Times, or Times Mirror the
same $10 million he did in the Post, his investment returns would have
been above average, ref lecting the exceptional economics of the newspaper business during this period. But the extra $200-$300 million
in market value that the Washington Post gained over its peer group,

102

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett says, “came, in very large part, from the superior nature of the
managerial decisions made by Kay [Katherine Graham] as compared to
those made by managers of most other media companies.”22
Katherine Graham had the brains to purchase large quantities of the
Post’s stock at bargain prices. She also had the courage, he said, to confront the labor unions, reduce expenses, and increase the business value
of the paper. Washington Post shareholders are fortunate that Katherine
Graham positioned the company so favorably.

In evaluating people, you look for three qualities: integrity,
intelligence, and energy. If you don’t have the first, the other
two will kill you.23
WARREN BUFFETT, 1993

WA R R E N B U F F E T T O N M A N A G E M E N T, E T H I C S ,
A N D R AT I O N A L I T Y
In all his communications with Berkshire shareholders, and indeed with
the world at large, Buffett has consistently emphasized his search for
honest and straightforward managers. He believes that not only are
these binding corporate values in today’s world, they are also pivotal issues that determine a company’s ultimate success and profitability in
the long term. Executive compensation, stock options, director independence, accounting trickery—these issues strike a very personal chord
with Buffett, and he does not hesitate to let us know how he feels.

CEO Avarice and the Institutional Imperative
In his 2001 letter to shareholders, Buffett wrote, “Charlie and I are disgusted by the situation, so common in the last few years, in which shareholders have suffered billions in losses while the CEOs, promoters and
other higher-ups who fathered these disasters have walked away with
extraordinary wealth. Indeed, many of these people were urging investors to buy shares while concurrently dumping their own, sometimes

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

103

using methods that hid their actions. To their shame, these business leaders view shareholders as patsies, not partners. . . . There is no shortage of
egregious conduct in corporate America.”24
The accounting scandals set off alarm bells across the United States,
especially for anyone who held stock in a company 401(k) plan. Shareholders started asking questions and wondering if their companies were
managing their affairs honestly and transparently. We all became increasingly aware that there were major problems in the system: CEOs
were getting huge paychecks while using company money for private
jets and ostentatious parties, and directors were often rubber-stamping
whatever decisions management decided to take. It seemed as if not one
CEO could resist the temptation to get in on the enormous salaries and
extravagant lifestyles enjoyed by others. That is the institutional imperative at its most destructive.
Things have not improved much, according to Buffett. In his 2003
letter to shareholders, he lambasted the seemingly unabated “epidemic of
greed.” He wrote, “Overreaching by CEOs greatly accelerated in the
1990s as compensation packages gained by the most avaricious—a title
for which there was vigorous competition—were promptly replicated
elsewhere. In judging whether Corporate America is serious about reforming itself, CEO pay remains the acid test. To date, the results aren’t
encouraging.”25 This from a man who has no stock options and still pays
himself $100,000 a year.

Stock Options
In addition to these lofty salaries, executives of publicly traded companies are customarily rewarded with fixed-price stock options, often
tied to corporate earnings but very seldom tied to the executive’s actual
job performance.
This goes against the grain for Buffett. When stock options are
passed out indiscriminately, he says, managers with below-average performance are rewarded just as generously as the managers who have had
excellent performance. In Buffett’s mind, even if your team wins the
pennant, you don’t pay a .350 hitter the same as a .150 hitter.
At Berkshire, Buffett uses a compensation system that rewards managers for performance. The reward is not tied to the size of the enterprise, the individual’s age, or Berkshire’s overall profits. Buffett believes

104

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that good unit performance should be rewarded whether Berkshire’s
stock price rises or falls. Instead, executives are compensated based on
their success at meeting performance goals keyed to their area of responsibility. Some managers are rewarded for increasing sales, others for reducing expenses or curtailing capital expenditures. At the end of the
year, Buffett does not hand out stock options—he writes checks. Some
are quite large. Managers can use the cash as they please. Many use it to
purchase Berkshire stock.
Even when stock options are treated as a legitimate aspect of executive compensation, Buffett cautions us to watch how they are accounted for on a company’s balance sheet. He believes they should be
considered an expense so that their effect on reported earnings is clear.
This seems so obvious as to be unarguable; sadly, not all companies see
it this way.
In Buffett’s mind, this is another facet of the ready acceptance of excessive pay. In his 2003 letter to shareholders, he wrote, “When CEOs
or their representatives meet with compensation committees, too often
one side—the CEO’s—has cared far more than the other about what
bargain is struck. A CEO, for example, will always regard the difference
between receiving options for 100,000 shares or for 500,000 as monumental. To a comp committee, however, the difference may seem unimportant—particularly if, as has been the case at most companies, neither
grant will have any effect on reported earnings. Under these conditions,
the negotiation often has a ‘play money’ quality.”26
Buffett’s strong feelings about this subject can be seen in his response to Amazon’s announcement in April 2003 that it would start expensing stock options. Buffett wrote to CEO Jeff Bezos that it took
“particular courage” and his decision would be “recognized and remembered.”27 A week later, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’s
high-yield bonds.

Malfeasant Accounting and Shady Financing Issues
Anyone who was reading a daily newspaper in the second half of 2001
could not help but be aware of the growing tide of corporate wrongdoing. For months, we all watched with something amounting to horror
as one scandal followed another, involving some of the best-known
names in American industry. All came to be lumped under the umbrella

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

105

term “accounting scandal” because the misdeeds centered on accounting
trickery and because the outside auditors who were supposed to verify
the accounting reports were themselves named as parties to the actions.

In the long run, of course, trouble awaits managements that
paper over operating problems with accounting maneuvers.28
WARREN BUFFETT, 1991 [NOTE THE DATE OF THIS REMARK.]

It’s far broader than accounting, of course; it’s about greed, lies, and
criminal acts. But accounting reports are a good place to look for signs of
trouble. In his 2002 letter to shareholders, Buffett warned investors to be
careful in reading annual reports. “If you’ve been a reader of financial reports in recent years,” he wrote, “you’ve seen a f lood of ‘pro-forma’
earnings statements—tabulations in which managers invariably show
‘earnings’ far in excess of those allowed by their auditors. In these presentations, the CEO tells his owners ‘don’t count this, don’t count that—
just count what makes earnings fat.’ Often, a forget-all-this-bad-stuff
message is delivered year after year without management so much as
blushing.”29
Buffett is plainly disgusted by the scandals. “The blatant wrongdoing
that has occurred has betrayed the trust of so many millions of shareholders.” He blames the heady days of the 1990s, the get-rich-quick period
he calls the Great Bubble, for the deterioration of corporate ethics. “As
stock prices went up,” he says, “the behavioral norms of managers went
down. By the late 90s, CEOs who traveled the high road did not
encounter heavy traffic. Too many have behaved badly, fudging numbers
and drawing obscene pay for mediocre business achievements.”30 And
in too many cases, their companies’ directors, charged with upholding
shareholder interests, failed miserably.

Director Negligence and Corporate Governance
Part of the problem, Buffett suggests, is the shameful tendency of
boards of directors to blithely rubber-stamp whatever senior management asks for. It is a question of independence and guts—the degree to

106

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

which directors are willing to honor their fiduciary responsibility at the
risk of displeasing the senior executives. That willingness, or lack of it,
is on display in boardrooms across the country.
“True independence—meaning the willingness to challenge a
forceful CEO when something is wrong or foolish—is an enormously
valuable trait in a director,” Buffett writes. “It is also rare. The place to
look for it is among high-grade people whose interests are in line with
those of rank and file shareholders.” Buffett illuminates his position by
describing what he looks for in members of the Berkshire Hathaway
board—“very high integrity, business savvy, shareholder orientation
and a genuine interest in the company.”31

C A N W E R E A L LY P U T A VA L U E O N M A N A G E M E N T ?
Buffett would be the first to admit that evaluating managers along his
three dimensions—rationality, candor, and independent thinking—is
more difficult than measuring financial performance, for the simple
reason that human beings are more complex than numbers.
Indeed, many analysts believe that because measuring human activity
is vague and imprecise, we simply cannot value management with any
degree of confidence, and therefore the exercise is futile. Without a decimal point, they seem to suggest, there is nothing to measure. Others
hold the view that the value of management is fully ref lected in the company’s performance statistics, including sales, profit margins, and return
on equity, and no other measuring stick is necessary.
Both opinions have some validity, but neither is strong enough to
outweigh the original premise. The reason for taking the time to evaluate management is that it gives you early warning signs of eventual financial performance. If you look closely at the words and actions of a
management team, you will find clues that can help you measure the
value of their work long before it shows up in the company’s financial
reports or in the stock pages of your daily newspaper. Doing so will
take some digging on your part, and that may be enough to discourage
the weak of heart or the lazy. That is their loss, and your gain.
How to go about gathering the necessary information? Buffett offers
a few tips. He suggests reviewing annual reports from a few years back,
paying special attention to what management said then about strategies
for the future. Then compare those plans to today’s results: How fully
