
Europe were outnumbered by the prudent. As a last resource, Dandolo offered to convey
them to Palestine at the expense of the Republic, if they would previously aid in the
recapture of the city of Zara, which had been seized from the Venetians a short time
previously by the King of Hungary. The crusaders consented, much to the displeasure of
the Pope, who threatened excommunication upon all who should be turned aside from the
voyage to Jerusalem. But notwithstanding the fulminations of the church, the expedition
never reached Palestine. The siege of Zara was speedily undertaken. After a long and
brave defence, the city surrendered at discretion, and the crusaders were free, if they had
so chosen it, to use their swords against the Saracens. But the ambition of the chiefs had
been directed, by unforeseen circumstances, elsewhere.
After the death of Manuel Comnenus, the Greek empire had fallen a prey to intestine
divisions. His son Alexius II. had succeeded him, but was murdered after a very short
reign by his uncle Andronicus, who seized upon the throne. His reign also was but of
short duration. Isaac Angelus, a member of the same family, took up arms against the
usurper, and having defeated and captured him in a pitched battle, had him put to death.
He also mounted the throne only to be cast down from it. His brother Alexius deposed
him, and to incapacitate him from reigning, put out his eyes, and shut him up in a
dungeon. Neither was Alexius III. allowed to remain in peaceable possession of the
throne; the son of the unhappy Isaac, whose name also was Alexius, fled from
Constantinople, and hearing that the crusaders had undertaken the siege of Zara, made
them the most magnificent offers if they would afterwards aid him in deposing his uncle.
His offers were, that if by their means he was re-established in his father's dominions, he
would place the Greek church under the authority of the Pope of Rome, lend the whole
force of the Greek Empire to the conquest of Palestine, and distribute two hundred
thousand marks of silver among the crusading army. The offer was accepted, with a
proviso on the part of some of the leaders, that they should be free to abandon the design,
if it met with the disapproval of the Pope. But this was not to be feared. The submission
of the schismatic Greeks to the See of Rome was a greater bribe to the Pontiff, than the
utter annihilation of the Saracen power in Palestine would have been.
The crusaders were soon in movement for the imperial city. Their operations were
skilfully and courageously directed, and spread such dismay as to paralyse the efforts of
the usurper to retain possession of his throne. After a vain resistance, he abandoned the
city to its fate, and fled no one knew whither. The aged and blind Isaac was taken from
his dungeon by his subjects, and placed upon the throne ere the crusaders were apprized
of the flight of his rival. His son Alexius IV. was afterwards associated with him in the
sovereignty.
But the conditions of the treaty gave offence to the Grecian people, whose prelates
refused to place themselves under the dominion of the See of Rome. Alexius at first
endeavoured to persuade his subjects to submission, and prayed the crusaders to remain
in Constantinople until they had fortified him in the possession of a throne which was yet
far from secure. He soon became unpopular with his subjects; and breaking faith with
regard to the subsidies, he offended the crusaders. War was at length declared upon him
by both parties; by his people for his tyranny, and by his former friends for his treachery.

He was seized in his palace by his own guards and thrown into prison, while the
crusaders were making ready to besiege his capital. The Greeks immediately proceeded
to the election of a new Monarch; and looking about for a man with courage, energy, and
perseverance, they fixed upon Alexius Ducas, who, with almost every bad quality, was
possessed of the virtues they needed. He ascended the throne under the name of
Murzuphlis. One of his first acts was to rid himself of his youngest predecessor -- a
broken heart had already removed the blind old Isaac -- no longer a stumbling block in
his way -- and the young Alexius was soon after put to death in his prison.
War to the knife was now declared between the Greeks and the Franks, and early in the
spring of the year 1204, preparations were commenced for an assault upon
Constantinople. The French and Venetians entered into a treaty for the division of the
spoils among their soldiery, for so confident were they of success, that failure never once
entered into their calculations. This confidence led them on to victory, while the Greeks,
cowardly as treacherous people always are, were paralysed by a foreboding of evil. It has
been a matter of astonishment to all historians, that Murzuphlis, with the reputation for
courage which he had acquired, and the immense resources at his disposal, took no better
measures to repel the onset of the crusaders. Their numbers were as a mere handful in
comparison with those which he could have brought against them; and if they had the
hopes of plunder to lead them on, the Greeks had their homes to fight for, and their very
existence as a nation to protect. After an impetuous assault, repulsed for one day, but
renewed with double impetuosity on another, the crusaders lashed their vessels against
the walls, slew every man who opposed them, and, with little loss to themselves, entered
the city. Murzuphlis fled, and Constantinople was given over to be pillaged by the
victors. The wealth they found was enormous. In money alone there was sufficient to
distribute twenty marks of silver to each knight, ten to each squire or servant at arms, and
five to each archer. Jewels, velvets, silks, and every luxury of attire, with rare wines and
fruits, and valuable merchandise of every description, also fell into their hands, and were
bought by the trading Venetians, and the proceeds distributed among the army. Two
thousand persons were put to the sword; but had there been less plunder to take up the
attention of the victors, the slaughter would in all probability have been much greater.
In many of the bloody wars which defile the page of history, we find that soldiers, utterly
reckless of the works of God, will destroy his masterpiece, man, with unsparing brutality,
but linger with respect around the beautiful works of art. They will slaughter women and
children, but spare a picture; will hew down the sick, the helpless, and the hoary-headed,
but refrain from injuring a fine piece of sculpture. The Latins, on their entrance into
Constantinople, respected neither the works of God nor man, but vented their brutal
ferocity upon the one and satisfied their avarice upon the other. Many beautiful bronze
statues, above all price as works of art, were broken into pieces to be sold as old metal.
The finely-chiselled marble, which could be put to no such vile uses, was also destroyed,
with a recklessness; if possible, still more atrocious. [The following is a list of some of
the works of art thus destroyed, from Nicetas, a contemporary Greek author: -- 1st. A
colossal Juno, from the forum of Constantine, the head of which was so large that four
horses could scarcely draw it from the place where it stood to the palace. 2d. The statue
of Paris presenting the apple to Venus. 3d. An immense bronze pyramid, crowned by a

female figure, which turned with the wind. 4th. The colossal statue of Bellerophon, in
bronze, which was broken down and cast into the furnace. Under the inner nail of the
horse's hind foot on the left side, was found a seal wrapped in a woollen cloth. 5th. A
figure of Hercules, by Lysimachus, of such vast dimensions that the thumb was equal in
circumference to the waist of a man. 6th. The Ass and his driver, cast by order of
Augustus after the battle of Actium, in commemoration of his having discovered the
position of Antony through the means of an ass-driver. 7th. The Wolf suckling the twins
of Rome. 8th. The Gladiator in combat with a lion. 9th. The Hippopotamus. 10th. The
Sphinxes. 11th. An eagle fighting with a serpent. 12th. A beautiful statue of Helen. 13th.
A group, with a monster somewhat resembling a bull, engaged in deadly conflict with a
serpent; and many other works of art, too numerous to mention.]
The carnage being over, and the spoil distributed, six persons were chosen from among
the Franks and six from among the Venetians, who were to meet and elect an Emperor,
previously binding themselves by oath to select the individual best qualified among the
candidates. The choice wavered between Baldwin, Count of Flanders, and Boniface,
Marquis of Montferrat, but fell eventually upon the former. He was straightway robed in
the imperial purple, and became the founder of a new dynasty. He did not live long to
enjoy his power, or to consolidate it for his successors, who, in their turn, were soon
swept away. In less than sixty years the rule of the Franks at Constantinople was brought
to as sudden and disastrous a termination as the reign of Murzuphlis: and this was the
grand result of the fifth Crusade.
Pope Innocent III, although he had looked with no very unfavourable eye upon these
proceedings, regretted that nothing had been done for the relief of the Holy Land; still,
upon every convenient occasion, he enforced the necessity of a new Crusade. Until the
year 1213, his exhortations had no other effect than to keep the subject in the mind of
Europe. Every spring and summer, detachments of pilgrims continued to set out for
Palestine to the aid of their brethren, but not in sufficient numbers to be of much service.
These periodical passages were called the passagiuum Martii, or the passage of March,
and the passagium Johannis, or the passage of the festival of St. John. These did not
consist entirely of soldiers, armed against the Saracen, but of pilgrims led by devotion,
and in performance of their vows, bearing nothing with them but their staff and their
wallet. Early in the spring of 1213 a more extraordinary body of crusaders was raised in
France and Germany. An immense number of boys and girls, amounting, according to
some accounts, to thirty thousand, were incited by the persuasion of two monks to
undertake the journey to Palestine. They were, no doubt, composed of the idle and
deserted children who generally swarm in great cities, nurtured in vice and daring, and
ready for anything. The object of the monks seems to have been the atrocious one of
inveigling them into slave ships, on pretence of sending them to Syria, and selling them
for slaves on the coast of Africa. [See Jacob de Voragine and Albericus.] Great numbers
of these poor victims were shipped at Marseilles; but the vessels, with the exception of
two or three, were wrecked on the shores of Italy, and every soul perished. The remainder
arrived safely in Africa, and were bought up as slaves, and sent off into the interior of the
country. Another detachment arrived at Genoa; but the accomplices in this horrid plot

having taken no measures at that port, expecting them all at Marseilles, they were
induced to return to their homes by the Genoese.
Fuller, in his quaint history of the "Holy Warre," says that this Crusade was done by the
instinct of the devil; and he adds a reason, which may provoke mirth now, but which was
put forth by the worthy historian in all soberness and sincerity. He says, "the devil, being
cloyed with the murdering of men, desired a cordial of children's blood to comfort his
weak stomach;" as epicures, when tired of mutton, resort to lamb for a change.
It appears from other authors that the preaching of the vile monks had such an effect upon
these deluded children that they ran about the country, exclaiming, "O, Lord Jesus,
restore thy cross to us!" and that neither bolts nor bars, the fear of fathers, nor the love of
mothers, was sufficient to restrain them from journeying to Jerusalem.
The details of these strange proceedings are exceedingly meagre and confused, and none
of the contemporary writers who mention the subject have thought it worth while to state
the names of the monks who originated the scheme, or the fate they met for their
wickedness. Two merchants of Marseilles, who were to have shared in the profits, were,
it is said, brought to justice for some other crime, and suffered death; but we are not
informed whether they divulged any circumstances relating to this matter.
Pope Innocent III does not seem to have been aware that the causes of this juvenile
Crusade were such as have been stated, for, upon being informed that numbers of them
had taken the Cross, and were marching to the Holy Land, he exclaimed, "These children
are awake, while we sleep!" He imagined, apparently, that the mind of Europe was still
bent on the recovery of Palestine, and that the zeal of these children implied a sort of
reproach upon his own lukewarmness. Very soon afterwards, he bestirred himself with
more activity, and sent an encyclical letter to the clergy of Christendom, urging them to
preach a new Crusade. As usual, a number of adventurous nobles, who had nothing else
to do, enrolled themselves with their retainers. At a council of Lateran, which was held
while these bands were collecting, Innocent announced that he himself would take the
Cross, and lead the armies of Christ to the defence of his sepulchre. In all probability he
would have done so, for he was zealous enough; but death stepped in, and destroyed his
project ere it was ripe. His successor encouraged the Crusade, though he refused to
accompany it; and the armament continued in France, England, and Germany. No leaders
of any importance joined it from the former countries. Andrew, King of Hungary, was the
only monarch who had leisure or inclination to leave his dominions. The Dukes of
Austria and Bavaria joined him with a considerable army of Germans, and marching to
Spalatro, took ship for Cyprus, and from thence to Acre.
The whole conduct of the King of Hungary was marked by pusillanimity and irresolution.
He found himself in the Holy Land at the head of a very efficient army; the Saracens
were taken by surprise, and were for some weeks unprepared to offer any resistance to his
arms. He defeated the first body sent to oppose him, and marched towards Mount Tabor,
with the intention of seizing upon an important fortress which the Saracens had recently
constructed. He arrived without impediment at the Mount, and might have easily taken it;

but a sudden fit of cowardice came over him, and he returned to Acre without striking a
blow. He very soon afterwards abandoned the enterprise altogether, and returned to his
own country.
Tardy reinforcements arrived at intervals from Europe; and the Duke of Austria, now the
chief leader of the expedition, had still sufficient forces at his command to trouble the
Saracens very seriously. It was resolved by him, in council with the other chiefs, that the
whole energy of the Crusade should be directed upon Egypt, the seat of the Saracen
power in its relationship to Palestine, and from whence were drawn the continual levies
that were brought against them by the Sultan. Damietta, which commanded the river Nile,
and was one of the most important cities of Egypt, was chosen as the first point of attack.
The siege was forthwith commenced, and carried on with considerable energy, until the
crusaders gained possession of a tower, which projected into the middle of the stream,
and was looked upon as the very key of the city.
While congratulating themselves upon this success, and wasting in revelry the time which
should have been employed in pushing the advantage, they received the news of the death
of the wise Sultan Saphaddin. His two sons, Camhel and Cohreddin, divided his empire
between them. Syria and Palestine fell to the share of Cohreddin, while Egypt was
consigned to the other brother, who had for some time exercised the functions of
Lieutenant of that country. Being unpopular among the Egyptians, they revolted against
him, giving the crusaders a finer opportunity for making a conquest than they had ever
enjoyed before. But, quarrelsome and licentious as they had been from time immemorial,
they did not see that the favourable moment had come; or, seeing, could not profit by it.
While they were revelling or fighting among themselves, under the walls of Damietta, the
revolt was put down, and Camhel firmly established on the throne of Egypt. In
conjunction with his brother, Cohreddin, his next care was to drive the Christians from
Damietta, and, for upwards of three months, they bent all their efforts to throw in supplies
to the besieged, or draw on the besiegers to a general engagement. In neither were they
successful; and the famine in Damietta became so dreadful, that vermin of every
description were thought luxuries, and sold for exorbitant prices. A dead dog became
more valuable than a live ox in time of prosperity. Unwholesome food brought on
disease, and the city could hold out no longer, for absolute want of men to defend the
walls.
Cohreddin and Camhel were alike interested in the preservation of so important a
position, and, convinced of the certain fate of the city, they opened a conference with the
crusading chiefs, offering to yield the whole of Palestine to the Christians, upon the sole
condition of the evacuation of Egypt. With a blindness and wrong-headedness almost
incredible, these advantageous terms were refused, chiefly through the persuasion of
Cardinal Pelagius, an ignorant and obstinate fanatic, who urged upon the Duke of Austria
and the French and English leaders, that infidels never kept their word; that their offers
were deceptive, and merely intended to betray. The conferences were brought to an
abrupt termination by the crusaders, and a last attack made upon the walls of Damietta.
The besieged made but slight resistance, for they had no hope, and the Christians entered

the city, and found, out of seventy thousand people, but three thousand remaining: so
fearful had been the ravages of the twin fiends, plague and famine.
Several months were spent in Damietta. The climate either weakened the frames or
obscured the understandings of the Christians; for, after their conquest, they lost all
energy, and abandoned themselves more unscrupulously than ever to riot and
debauchery. John of Brienne, who, by right of his wife, was the nominal sovereign of
Jerusalem, was so disgusted with the pusillanimity, arrogance, and dissensions of the
chiefs, that he withdrew entirely from them, and retired to Acre. Large bodies also
returned to Europe, and Cardinal Pelagius was left at liberty to blast the whole enterprise
whenever it pleased him. He managed to conciliate John of Brienne, and marched
forward with these combined forces to attack Cairo. It was only when he had approached
within a few hours' march of that city, that he discovered the inadequacy of his army. He
turned back immediately, but the Nile had risen since his departure; the sluices were
opened, and there was no means of reaching Damietta. In this strait, he sued for the peace
he had formerly spurned, and, happily for himself, found the generous brothers, Camhel
and Cohreddin, still willing to grant it. Damietta was soon afterwards given up, and the
Cardinal returned to Europe. John of Brienne retired to Acre, to mourn the loss of his
kingdom, embittered against the folly of his pretended friends, who had ruined where
they should have aided him. And thus ended the sixth Crusade.
The seventh was more successful. Frederic II, Emperor of Germany, had often vowed to
lead his armies to the defence of Palestine, but was as often deterred from the journey by
matters of more pressing importance. Cohreddin was a mild and enlightened monarch,
and the Christians of Syria enjoyed repose and toleration under his rule: but John of
Brienne was not willing to lose his kingdom without an effort; and the Popes in Europe
were ever willing to embroil the nations for the sake of extending their own power. No
monarch of that age was capable of rendering more effective assistance than Frederic of
Germany. To inspire him with more zeal, it was proposed that he should wed the young
Princess, Violante, daughter of John of Brienne, and heiress of the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Frederic consented with joy and eagerness. The Princess was brought from Acre to Rome
without delay, and her marriage celebrated on a scale of great magnificence. Her father,
John of Brienne, abdicated all his rights in favour of his son-in-law, and Jerusalem had
once more a king, who had not only the will, but the power, to enforce his claims.
Preparations for the new crusade were immediately commenced, and in the course of six
months the Emperor was at the head of a well-disciplined army of sixty thousand men.
Matthew Paris informs us, that an army of the same amount was gathered in England; and
most of the writers upon the Crusades adopt his statement. When John of Brienne was in
England, before his daughter's marriage with the Emperor was thought of, praying for the
aid of Henry III. and his nobles to recover his lost kingdom, he did not meet with much
encouragement. Grafton, in his Chronicle, says, "he departed again without any great
comfort." But when a man of more influence in European politics appeared upon the
scene, the English nobles were as ready to sacrifice themselves in the cause as they had
been in the time of Coeur de Lion.

The army of Frederic encamped at Brundusium; but a pestilential disease having made its
appearance among them, their departure was delayed for several months. In the mean
time the Empress Violante died in child-bed. John of Brienne, who had already repented
of his abdication, and was besides incensed against Frederic for many acts of neglect and
insult, no sooner saw the only tie which bound them, severed by the death of his
daughter, than he began to bestir himself, and make interest with the Pope to undo what
he had done, and regain the honorary crown he had renounced. Pope Gregory the Ninth, a
man of a proud, unconciliating, and revengeful character, owed the Emperor a grudge for
many an act of disobedience to his authority, and encouraged the overtures of John of
Brienne more than he should have done. Frederic, however, despised them both, and, as
soon as his army was convalescent, set sail for Acre. He had not been many days at sea,
when he was himself attacked with the malady, and obliged to return to Otranto, the
nearest port. Gregory, who had by this time decided in the interest of John of Brienne,
excommunicated the Emperor for returning from so holy an expedition on any pretext
whatever. Frederic at first treated the excommunication with supreme contempt; but
when he got well, he gave his Holiness to understand that he was not to be outraged with
impunity, and sent some of his troops to ravage the Papal territories. This, however, only
made the matter worse, and Gregory despatched messengers to Palestine, forbidding the
faithful, under severe pains and penalties, to hold any intercourse with the
excommunicated Emperor. Thus between them both, the scheme which they had so much
at heart bade fair to be as effectually ruined as even the Saracens could have wished.
Frederic still continued his zeal in the Crusade, for he was now King of Jerusalem, and
fought for himself, and not for Christendom, or its representative, Pope Gregory. Hearing
that John of Brienne was preparing to leave Europe, he lost no time in taking his own
departure, and arrived safely at Acre. It was here that he first experienced the evil effects
of excommunication. The Christians of Palestine refused to aid him in any way, and
looked with distrust, if not with abhorrence, upon him. The Templars, Hospitallers, and
other knights, shared at first the general feeling; but they were not men to yield a blind
obedience to a distant potentate, especially when it compromised their own interests.
When, therefore, Frederic prepared to march upon Jerusalem without them, they joined
his banners to a man.
It is said, that previous to quitting Europe, the German Emperor had commenced a
negotiation with the Sultan Camhel for the restoration of the Holy Land, and that Camhel,
who was jealous of the ambition of his brother Cohreddin, was willing to stipulate to that
effect, on condition of being secured by Frederic in the possession of the more important
territory of Egypt. But before the crusaders reached Palestine, Camhel was relieved from
all fears by the death of his brother. He nevertheless did not think it worth while to
contest with the crusaders the barren corner of the earth which had already been dyed
with so much Christian and Saracen blood, and proposed a truce of three years, only
stipulating, in addition, that the Moslems should be allowed to worship freely in the
Temple of Jerusalem. This happy termination did not satisfy the bigoted Christians of
Palestine. The tolerance they fought for themselves, they were not willing to extend to
others, and they complained bitterly of the privilege of free worship allowed to their
opponents. Unmerited good fortune had made them insolent, and they contested the right
of the Emperor to become a party to any treaty, as long as he remained under the
