Figure 8-28:
The two
variations of
the bearish
neck lines
pattern.

Using the bearish neck lines for profitable trading
Figure 8-29 shows a chart of the futures contract that trades based on the
prices of 30-year bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury. The bearish neck lines
on this chart are in neck because the setup day overlaps with the signal day.
The bulls try to rebound the futures price, but they’re met with bearish resistance at the previous opening price. Then you see a brief battle between the
bulls and bears followed by a continuation of the downtrend.
This pattern is valid even though prices don’t immediately continue down on
the following day. The trend doesn’t really break, and the price levels of the
long black day aren’t violated. The next couple of days may be nerve-wracking
for bears, but those that hold their ground on a short are rewarded with
lower prices.

181

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 182

182 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 8-29:
The bearish
neck lines
working on
a chart of
the U.S.
Treasury
bond
futures.

Noticing an unsuccessful bearish neck line
Just like the rest of the two-stick patterns in this chapter, the bearish neck
lines can fail. Refer to Figure 8-30.
Figure 8-30 is a chart of the stock representing ownership in U.S. Steel (symbol
X). Because U.S. Steel is such a large producer of an eminently vital material,
the company is very economically sensitive, and its stock is volatile for trading both long and short.
The bearish neck lines appear during a downtrend, and the other criteria are
in place; the setup day is represented by a long black candle, which is followed by a gap down. Prices then rebound, but the bears hold the price
steady. All appears to be well, but then a couple of days after the pattern
appears, the bulls get rolling on a more successful run and the trend changes.
I point to two days as failure days in Figure 8-30. Choose whichever resistance level you want, but when a long black candle day is involved, picking
the midpoint may be prudent if you hope to get out of a short or buy before
the trend is in full swing and the prices you’re facing aren’t too steep. The
first failure day trades through the midpoint, the second trades over the high,
and then the uptrend is in place.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 184

184 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

14_178089 pp03.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 185

Part III

Making the Most
of Complex
Patterns

14_178089 pp03.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

R

Page 186

In this part . . .

ome wasn’t built in a day, or even two, and many
candlestick patterns share that construction schedule. Some of the most useful and interesting candlestick
patterns take three days to form. I call these complex patterns, and I cover them throughout Part III with explanations of how you can spot the patterns and use them to
inform your buying and selling decisions. To close the
part, check out the explanations of a few technical indicators, which can complement your candlestick charts and
enhance your results.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 187

Chapter 9

Getting the Hang of Bullish
Three-Stick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Three-day patterns that signal the end of a downtrend
 Predicting an uptrend continuation using three-day patterns

T

he addition of three-stick candlestick patterns to your trading arsenal
makes your trading strategies more complicated, more interesting, and
hopefully, more profitable. In this chapter, I cover some of the bullish threestick patterns that you can use to make effective and efficient trades.
The three-stick patterns are a little more of a challenge than their one- and
two-stick counterparts because there are several rules that each must follow
in order to emerge as a valid signal. Three-stick patterns can also be a bit
frustrating. You may watch the first two days of your favorite (and most reliable) pattern begin to emerge only to see it fizzle out on the third day. But if
you’re up to the challenge and willing to deal with the occasional annoyance,
these patterns can be valuable tools when trying to predict trend reversals or
confirm that a current trend is going to stay in place.

Understanding Bullish Three-Stick
Trend Reversal Patterns
The three-stick patterns in this section offer you a heads-up when a downtrend is about to switch gears and turn into an uptrend. Many of these threestick patterns exist, and in the pages that follow I cover many of the most
common ones. With three days needed to complete each pattern, you have
time to watch as the patterns shape up, and you should be focused in when
the third day rolls around, and you’ve noticed some interesting developments
during the two preceding days.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 188

188 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
When working with three-day patterns, be prepared by closely monitoring
days that follow two days of promising price action. If a pattern is completed
as you’d hoped, you need to be ready to put on the appropriate trade and
stop order near the close of the day on which the pattern is completed.

The three inside up pattern
The three inside up pattern is a good place to begin my discussion of the
bullish three-stick patterns that can let you know when a downtrend is about
to be reversed. This pattern is a straightforward pattern that you can recognize with just a little practice.

Identifying the three inside up pattern
The three inside up pattern has a peculiar name, but a quick look at Figure 9-1
should give you a good idea of where the name originated. The three part
comes from there being three days involved in creating the pattern. There
are three sticks, and the second day is an inside day relative to the first day,
which is a long down day. The final day is an up day that closes higher than
the open of the first day.

Figure 9-1:
The three
inside up
pattern.

The trading activity that results in a three inside up pattern involves a gradual shift of power from the bears to the bulls. I like this pattern and the way it
develops because it usually gives a trader time to put on a trade before too
much of the reversal has occurred. Traders can always buy high with the
intention of selling higher, but it’s nice when buying high doesn’t mean
they’re buying too high.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 189

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
Making effective trades using the three inside up pattern
The chart in Figure 9-2 gives you a very good idea of how the three inside up
pattern can tip you off as to when to buy in advance of a forthcoming uptrend.
It’s a chart of the futures contracts that trade based on the ten-year Treasury
bonds issued by the U.S. government. It’s one of the most actively traded
futures contracts, and it’s a very economically sensitive security.
This chart shows an extended downtrend in the price of the ten-year futures.
There have been a couple of attempts to change the course of the trend, and
before the pattern arrives, it appears that the downtrend has been moderating. I include a couple of trendlines on the chart as an illustration.
If you’re looking for trend reversal patterns, a good sign is when you see that
the prevailing trend is starting to moderate. When you spot a moderating
trend, be sure to keep your eyes peeled for a candlestick pattern indicating
that a trend reversal is on the way.
The first day of the three inside up pattern in Figure 9-2 is a long black candle,
which is followed by a slight up day that’s an inside day relative to the first
day. The third and final day is a strong up day that closes above the open
of the first day of the pattern and completes the bullish signal. Then it’s off
to the races, and the trend starts shooting upward.
Are you wondering where you may place a wise sell stop order when you’re
working with the three inside up pattern? If so, good question. You have several choices. In most cases, I use the open or low of the second day. If those
levels are violated, I regard the pattern as invalid. You can also use the open
or low of the third day; both are viable alternatives.

Figure 9-2:
The three
inside up
pattern
offers a
useful buy
signal on a
chart of tenyear U.S.
Treasury
bond
futures.

189

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 190

190 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
Avoid using the first day, because if the security breaks through the lows of
the first two days, then there’s a good chance that the first day levels are
going to be tested if not violated. Wouldn’t you rather be out of the long trade
before this occurs?

The three inside up pattern not working out too well
This section gives you an example of what can happen when a three inside
up pattern fails. Take a look at Figure 9-3, where you can see a three inside up
pattern that appears in a downtrend but doesn’t signal a trend reversal. It’s a
chart of the futures contracts that trade based on the level of the Australian
dollar versus the U.S. dollar. This isn’t the most liquid of currency futures pairs,
but it’s still active enough to make money on both the long and short side.
The first day of the pattern in Figure 9-3 is a down day, and the second day
shows a gap up but doesn’t have a low that violates the low of the first
day. The second day’s close is also higher than its open, but the second day’s
close stays between the open and close of the first day. And if you’re thinking
that the second day is an inside day, you’re absolutely right! Finally, the third
day is also an up day — a long white bar — with an open that’s higher than
the open of the second day. So where does the pattern go wrong?
The day after the pattern is the culprit. On that day, a long black candle violates anything a savvy trader considers a support level, and that’s all she
wrote. Even though the pattern fails, the failure day can be a blessing for
buyers who have solid stops in place, because that little bit of failure (and
the subsequent stop-induced end of the trade) would save them from the
effects of a downtrend that continues for several days.

Figure 9-3:
The three
inside up
pattern
fails on the
Australian
dollar future
contracts.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 191

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

The three outside up pattern
The three outside up pattern is another relatively simple three-stick reversal
pattern that you can pick up on with a little patience and a basic understanding of the necessary components. This section gives you the full scoop.

Spotting the three outside up pattern
Like all bullish reversal patterns, the three outside up should occur in the
midst of a downtrend. Here is how the days play out:
1. Day one: The pattern’s first day is actually a down day, but just a
slight down day.
2. Day two: The second day opens with a gap down from the first day,
but prices don’t stay down for long.
This day creates an “outside day” relative to the first day with the high
being higher, the low being lower than the first day. Also, the open of the
day is lower than the previous close, and the close of this second day is
higher than the open of the first day.
The bulls take over at some point during the second day and push prices
higher until the close is near the day’s high. The second day is a long
white bar, and it’s an outside day relative to the first day. Outside means
that the price action for the second day traded outside of the high and
low of the first day.
3. Day three: The third day completes the pattern with another up day.
On the third day it’s clear that the bulls aren’t done, and the day closes
higher than the high of the second day. The trend has definitely turned,
and it’s headed up, up and away.
For a straightforward example of the three outside up pattern, see Figure 9-4.

Figure 9-4:
The three
outside up
pattern.

191

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 192

192 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
Trading on the three outside up pattern
For a real-world example of the three outside up pattern, I use a chart of the
stock for a company that helps its customers escape the real world. The
chart is in Figure 9-5, and the company is Electronic Arts (ERTS), which produces some of the world’s top video games. Its Madden Football games comprise its flagship series, and the company’s stock is great on both the short
and long side because it has many volatile moves based on the popularity of
individual games and the platforms on which the games are played.
On the chart in Figure 9-5, ERTS stock appears to have found a bottom, and it
looks like an uptrend is on the horizon. When you’re working with three-day
reversal patterns, try to buy at the beginning of a trend when prices are relatively low compared to recent history. The pattern plays out fairly well: The
trend is down, and a down day — albeit not a very convincing one — occurs
on the first day. It’s followed by an outside up day, and then the third day is
an up day that outpaces the bullishness of the second day.

The three outside up pattern comes before
more bearishness instead of bullishness
The three outside up pattern is a thing of beauty, but Figure 9-6 shows you
the pattern’s potential for ugliness when it goes bad. The chart is for Hewlett
Packard (HPQ). The pattern shows up in a downtrend, and the first day is
indeed a down day. The second day is an up day, and it’s an outside day relative to the first day. Very promising! Then, to top it all off, the pattern is completed with an up day on the third day that exhibits some bullish behavior.

Figure 9-5:
The three
outside up
pattern
makes for
a winning
trading
scenario
on a chart
of ERTS.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 193

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-6:
The three
outside up
pattern fails
on a chart
of HPQ.

But the bullishness isn’t meant to last. On the very next trading day after the
pattern appears, the stock never even gets over the previous day’s closing
price. The gap is quickly filled, and then in a few days anything that may be
considered a support level is compromised. Easy come, easy go.

The three white soldiers pattern
The three white soldiers pattern includes three bullish candles in a row. If the
pattern occurs with a downtrend in front of it, you can consider it a possible
signal that the bulls have had enough and are buying in force.
Although it’s a nice indication to buy, a small drawback to the three white soldiers is the amount of ground that’s already been covered at the completion
of the pattern.

Recognizing the three white soldiers
To locate the three white soldiers on a chart, look for three consecutive up
days that occur in a prevailing downtrend. Then look closer. If the open, high,
low, and close of the second day are higher than those of the first day, and
those four points are also higher on the third day than the second, then
you’re looking at the three white soldiers pattern. Make sense? Have a look
at Figure 9-7 for a visual.
The price action behind these days is dramatic, and it normally indicates a
quick shift from a downtrend to an uptrend. The three white soldiers mean
that the bulls are in control for three straight days beginning with the open
of the first day.

193

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 194

194 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-7:
The three
white
soldiers
pattern.

Using the three white soldiers to make a profitable trade
The example I use to show you how to make trades based on the three white
soldiers pattern is near and dear to my heart. It’s a chart of the futures contracts that trade on the level of the Euro, and I executed a successful trade
based on this very pattern. Prior to spotting the pattern, I’d been looking for
an indication that the downtrend was coming to an end, and so I was
delighted to see the three white soldiers shown in Figure 9-8.

Figure 9-8:
A
successful
example of
the three
white
soldiers
pattern
on a Euro
futures
chart.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 195

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
After such a dramatic move, there’s sometimes an opportunity for a pullback
(a small trend down from a higher level), but I bought the Euro futures very
close to the closing price of the third day of the pattern. I had a plan in place
to buy the Euro when it appeared the downtrend was coming to an end, so
I was a little more aggressive than I needed to be. With a little patience I
could’ve gotten a better price the next day, but I didn’t want to risk missing
the trade altogether — something that can sometimes feel worse to me than
losing money.
I also highlight on the chart in Figure 9-8 where I chose to exit the position.
The trend had been in place for a few weeks, and the long black candle broke
the low of the two previous days. I’d been using a sell stop order and continued to move the stop higher as the futures contract price increased. My stop
was in place at the low of the day that came two days before the long black
candle because I felt this level would indicate the trend was starting to fade. I
also kept an eye out for any problematic reversal formations, which you
should also do if you find yourself in a similar situation.
Although I exited the trade before the trend reversed again, I was still very
happy with this trade. I had a plan, executed it, and profited from it. Why
can’t all trades be as easy as this one?

The three white soldiers fail to signal bullishness
The three white soldiers is a pretty strong bullish trend reversal pattern, but
like all other patterns, it does have the potential for failure. Figure 9-9 shows
you what can happen when the three white soldiers doesn’t fare so well in
battle. It’s a chart for the stock that represents ownership in Disney (DIS). I’m
assuming that most people have some familiarity with Disney. With a threeyear-old in the house, I’m more familiar with the company these days than I
want to be.

Figure 9-9:
The three
white
soldiers
pattern fails
on a chart
of DIS.

195

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 196

196 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
The three white soldiers pattern actually fails twice on the chart in Figure 9-9,
and both failures are highlighted. If you see this situation developing and
make the decision to trade on it, you’d be smart to place your initial sell stop
at the low of the pattern’s second day. Most traders cover a lot of ground
before they put on a trade, so some retracing of the new uptrend should be
expected. Placing a liberal sell stop allows for that.

The morning star and bullish
doji star patterns
The morning star and bullish doji star are recognized as separate patterns,
but because they have very similar characteristics, I’ve grouped them
together in this section.

Identifying the morning star and bullish doji star
You can see basic examples of both the morning star and bullish doji star patterns in Figure 9-10. The only real difference between the two patterns is the
second day. The second day of the bullish doji star is a true doji, while the
second day of the morning star pattern is almost a doji.
The price action behind these two patterns is very similar. The first day for
both patterns is a down day, which is to be expected in a bullish reversal pattern. The second day for both patterns starts with a gap opening, indicating
that the bears are continuing to push down the price. Then the rest of the
second day is made up of very tight price action between the open and close.
The third day is very bullish, with prices rising to cover some or all the
ground from the down day. When you spot one of these patterns in a downtrend, it usually means that the trend is ready to reverse.

Figure 9-10:
The morning
star and
bullish
doji star
patterns.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 197

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
Trading on the morning star and bullish doji star patterns
Figure 9-11 is a chart of the Euro futures, and it’s a good example because the
bullish doji star pattern in the chart indicates that the trend has reached the
bottom. Keep in mind that the bullish doji star here could just as easily be a
morning star pattern, and the result would be the same.
The days play out in the following pattern:
1. The first day of the pattern is actually the third of three bearish days.
Leading up to this pattern, the bears are ruling the price action.
2. The second day features a gap opening that’s a little lower than the
low of the first day, and the day ends up forming a doji after some
back and forth between the bulls and bears.
The doji has pretty long legs, indicating an intense battle for price action
during the day.
3. The third and final day of the pattern is a white candle, indicating
that the bulls ruled the day.
It closes high and into some of the range covered by the first day. The
two days after the pattern see a bit of bearish price action, but no significant support levels are violated, and then three days later the bulls
really get rolling, and it’s clear that an uptrend is in place. And what
an uptrend it is!
To take advantage of this type of bullish doji star pattern (or a morning star
pattern in the same situation), you should either try to buy near the end of
the pattern, or possibly attempt to put on a long position on any sort of nearterm price weakness that doesn’t violate a stop level.

Figure 9-11:
The bullish
doji star
pattern
performs
favorably
on the Euro
futures
chart.

197

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 198

198 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
As you can see, raking in a profit on a trade based on the bullish doji star or
morning star is a definite possibility if you keep your eyes open and place
your trades wisely. But the pattern can also fizzle out and cause losses.

The bullish doji star not working too well
Figure 9-12 is a chart with a morning star pattern that has the potential to
cause some heartbreak. It’s a chart of the stock for Janus Capital Group
(JNS), which is an asset manager of over $150 billion in investments. Yes,
that’s billion, with a b. Keep in mind that this could also be a bullish doji star
because the patterns are extremely similar and basically interchangeable for
your trading purposes.
The morning star arrives after a downtrend has been in place for a few weeks.
The trend appears to be moderating a bit — an encouraging sign if you’re
looking to buy a stock. The pattern is completed in textbook fashion, with
just one exception. The stock doesn’t change trend very quickly. The price
levels established by the pattern that you may use as stops are violated a few
weeks after the pattern appears; you may want to bail out on this trade long
before that.
Another factor that may be used when you’re determining when to exit a
trade is time. A violated price level isn’t the only way a pattern can fail. You
can also consider a pattern a failure due to the passage of time. If you see a
promising pattern that doesn’t fail but the hoped for price action doesn’t
occur, feel free to call it a failure and get out. How long you wait before bagging it is up to you, but using a time stop is a very useful trading tool.
