
- 120 -

John Grisham

The Broker

plaques next to intercoms, but the one at 112 Via Fondazza did not. It was
unmarked and had been for the three years it had been leased to a mysterious
businessman in Milan who paid the rent but seldom used it. Whitaker had
not seen it in more than a year; not that it was much of an attraction. It was a
simple apartment of about six hundred square feet; four rooms with basic
furnishings that cost 1,200 euros a month. It was a safe house, nothing more
or less; one of three currently under his control in northern Italy.
There were two bedrooms, a tiny kitchen, and a living area with a sofa, a
desk, two leather chairs, no television. Luigi pointed to the phone and they
discussed, in near coded language, the bugging device that had been
installed and could never be detected. There were two hidden mikes in each
room, powerful little collectors that missed no human sound. There were
also two microscopic cameras-one hidden in a crack of an old tile high
above the den, and from there it offered a view of the front door. The other
was hidden in a cheap light fixture hanging from a kitchen wall, with a clear
view of the rear door.
They would not be watching his bedroom, and Luigi said he was relieved by
that. If Marco managed to find a woman willing to visit him, they could
catch her coming and going with the camera in the den, and that was
certainly enough for Luigi. If he got really bored, he could hit a switch and
listen for fun.
The safe house was bordered to the south by another apartment, with a thick
stone wall separating the two. Luigi was staying there, hiding next door in a
five-room flat slightly larger than Marcos. His rear door opened into a small
garden that could not be seen from the safe house, thus concealing his
movements. His kitchen had been converted into a high-tech snooping room
where he could switch on a camera anytime he wanted and take a look at
what was happening next door.
"Will they study here?" Whitaker asked.
"Yes. I think it's secure enough. Plus I can monitor things."
Whitaker walked through each room again. When he'd seen enough he said,
"Everything's set up next door?"
"Everything. I've spent the last two nights there. We're ready."
"How soon can you move him?"
"This afternoon."
"Very well. Let's go see the boy."

- 121 -

John Grisham

The Broker

They walked north along Via Fondazza until it came to an end, then
northwest along a wider avenue, Strada Maggiore. The rendezvous point
was a small cafe called Lestre's. Luigi found a newspaper and sat alone at a
table. Whitaker found another newspaper and sat nearby, each man ignoring
the other. At precisely four-thirty, Ermanno and his student stopped by for a
quick espresso with Luigi.
When the greetings were exchanged and the coats removed, Luigi asked,
"Are you tired of Italian, Marco?"
"I'm sick of it," Marco replied with a smile.
"Good. Let's talk English."
"God bless you," Marco said.
Whitaker sat five feet away, partially hidden behind a newspaper, smoking a
cigarette as if he had no interest in anyone around him. He of course knew of
Ermanno, but had never actually seen him. Marco was another story.
Whitaker had been in Washington for a stint at Langley a dozen or so years
earlier, back when everyone knew the broker. He remembered Joel Backman
as a political force who spent almost as much time cultivating his oversized
image as he did representing his important clients. He'd been the epitome of
money and power, the perfect fat cat who could bully and cajole and throw
around enough money to get whatever he wanted.
Amazing what six years in prison could do. He was very thin now, and
looking quite European behind the arm ani eyewear. He had the beginnings
of a salt-and-pepper goatee. Whitaker was certain that virtually no one from
back home could walk into Lestre's at that moment and identify Joel
Backman.
Marco caught the man five feet away glancing over one time too often but
thought nothing of it. They were chatting in English, and perhaps few people
did so, at Lestre's anyway. Nearer the university, one could hear several
languages in every coffee shop.
Ermanno excused himself after one espresso. A few minutes later Whitaker
left too. He walked a few blocks and found an Internet cafe, one he'd used
before. He plugged in his laptop, got online, and typed a message to Julia
Javier at Langley:
Fondazza flat is ready to go, should move in tonight. Laid eyes on our man,
having a coffee with our friends. Would not have known him

- 122 -

John Grisham

The Broker

otherwise. Adjusting nicely to a new life. All is in order here; no problems
whatsoever.
After dark, the Fiat stopped in the middle of Via Fondazza, and its contents
were quickly unloaded. Marco packed light because he owned practically
nothing. Two bags of clothes and some Italian study books, and he was
completely mobile. When he stepped into his new apartment, the first thing
he noticed was that it was sufficiently heated. "This is more like it," he said
to Luigi.
"I'll move the car. Have a look around."
He looked around, counted four rooms with nice furnishings, nothing
extravagant but a huge step up from the last place. Life was improving-ten
days ago he'd been in prison.
Luigi returned in a rush. "What do you think?"
"I'll keep it. Thank you."
"Don't mention it."
"And thank the folks in Washington too."
"Did you see the kitchen?" Luigi asked, flipping on a light switch.
"Yes, it's perfect. How long do I stay here, Luigi?"
"I don't make those decisions. You know that."
"I know."
They were back in the den. "A couple of things," Luigi said. "First, Ermanno
will come here each day to study. Eight until eleven, then two until five or
whenever you wish to stop."
"Wonderful. Please get the boy a new flat, would you? His dump is an
embarrassment to the American taxpayers."
"Second, this is a very quiet street, mainly apartments. Come and go quickly,
don't chat with your neighbors, don't make any friends. Remember, Marco,
you are leaving a trail. Make it wide enough and someone will find you."
"I heard you the first ten times."
"Then hear me again."
"Relax, Luigi. My neighbors will never see me, I promise. I like it here. It's
much nicer than my prison cell."

- 123 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The memorial service for Robert Critz was held in a country
club-like mausoleum in a ritzy suburb of Philadelphia, the city of his birth
but a place he'd avoided for at least the past thirty years. He died without a
will and without a thought as to his final arrangements, leaving poor Mrs.
Critz with the burden of not only getting him home from London but then
deciding how to properly dispose of him. A son pressed the idea of
cremation and a rather neat interment in a marble vault, one shielded from
the weather. By that point Mrs. Critz would have agreed to almost any plan.
Flying seven hours across the Atlantic (in coach) with her husband's remains
somewhere below her, in a rather stark air-transport box made especially for
dead humans, had nearly pushed her over the edge. And then there had been
the chaos at the airport when no one was there to greet her and take charge.
What a mess!
The service was by invitation only, a condition laid down by former
president Arthur Morgan, who, after only two weeks on Barbados, was quite
unwilling to return and be seen by anyone. If he was truly saddened by the
death of his lifelong friend, he didn't show it. He'd haggled over the details
of the service with the Critz family until he was almost asked to stay away.
The date had been moved because

- 124 -

John Grisham

The Broker

of Morgan. The order of service didn't suit him. He reluctantly agreed to
deliver a eulogy, but only if it could be very brief. Truth was, he'd never
liked Mrs. Critz and she'd never liked him.
To the small circle of friends and family, it seemed implausible that Robert
Critz would get so drunk in a London pub that he would stagger into a busy
street and fall in front of a car. When the autopsy revealed a significant level
of heroin, Mrs. Critz had become so distraught that she insisted that the
report be sealed and buried. She had refused to tell even her children about
the narcotic. She was absolutely certain her husband had never touched an
illicit drug-he drank too much but few people knew it-but she nonetheless
was determined to protect his good name.
The London police had readily agreed to lock away the autopsy findings and
close the case. They had their questions all right, but they had many other
cases to keep them busy, and they also had a widow who couldn't wait to get
home and put it all behind her.
The service began at two on a Thursday afternoon-the time also dictated by
Morgan so that the private jet could fly nonstop from Barbados to Philly
International-and lasted for an hour. Eighty-two people had been invited,
and fifty-one showed up, a fair majority of them more curious to see
President Morgan than to say goodbye to ol' Critz. A semi-Protestant
minister of some variety presided. Critz had not seen the inside of a church
in forty years, except for weddings and funerals. The minister was faced
with the difficult task of bringing to life the memory of a man he'd never
met, and though he tried gamely he failed completely. He read from the
book of Psalms. He offered a generic prayer that would've fit a deacon or a
serial killer. He offered soothing words to the family, but, again, they were
total strangers to him.
Rather than a heart-warming send-off, the service was as cold as the gray
marble walls of the faux chapel. Morgan, with a bronze tan too ridiculous for
February, attempted to humor the small crowd with some anecdotes about
his old pal, but he came off as a man going through the motions and wanting
desperately to get back on the jet.
Hours in the Caribbean sun had convinced Morgan that the blame for his
disastrous reelection campaign could be placed squarely at the feet of Robert
Critz. He'd told no one of this conclusion; there really was no one to confide
in since the beach mansion was deserted

- 125 -

John Grisham

The Broker

except for him and the staff of natives. But he'd already begun to carry a
grudge, to question the friendship.
He didn't linger when the service finally ran out of gas and came to an end.
He offered obligatory hugs to Mrs. Critz and her children, spoke briefly with
some old friends, promised to see them in a few weeks, then rushed away
with his mandatory Secret Service escort. News cameras had been stationed
along a fence outside the grounds, but they caught no glimpse of the former
president. He was ducking in the rear of one of two black vans. Five hours
later he was by the pool watching another Caribbean sunset.
Though the memorial drew a small crowd, it nonetheless was being keenly
observed by others. While it was actually in progress, Teddy Maynard had a
list of all fifty-one people in attendance. There was no one suspicious. No
name raised an eyebrow.
The killing was clean. The autopsy was buried, thanks in part to Mrs. Critz,
and thanks also in part to strings pulled at levels much higher than the
London police. The body was now ashes and the world would quickly forget
about Robert Critz. His idiotic foray into the Backman disappearance had
ended with no damage to the plan.
The FBI had tried, and failed, to mount a hidden camera inside the chapel.
The owner had balked, then refused to bend despite enormous pressure. He
did allow hidden cameras outside, and these provided close shots of all the
mourners as they entered and left. The live feeds were edited, the list of
fifty-one quickly compiled, and an hour after the service ended the director
was given a briefing.
The day before the death of Robert Critz, the FBI received some startling
information. It was completely unexpected, unsolicited, and delivered by a
desperate corporate crook staring at forty years in a federal prison. He'd been
the manager of a large mutual fund who had been caught slamming fees; just
another Wall Street scandal involving only a few billion bucks. But his
mutual fund was owned by an international banking cabal, and over the
years the crook had worked his way into the inner core of the organization.
The fund was so profitable, thanks in no small measure to his talent for
skimming, that the profits could not be ignored. He was voted onto the board
of directors and

- 126 -

John Grisham

The Broker

given a luxury condo in Bermuda, the corporate headquarters for his very
secretive company.
In his desperation to avoid spending the rest of his life in prison, he became
willing to share secrets. Banking secrets. Offshore dirt. He claimed he could
prove that former president Morgan, during his last day in office, had sold at
least one pardon for $3 million. The money had been wired from a bank on
Grand Cayman to a bank in Singapore, both banks being secretly controlled
by the cabal he'd just left. The money was still hiding in Singapore, in an
account opened by a shell corporation that was really owned by an old crony
of Morgan's. The money, according to the snitch, was intended for Morgan's
use.
When the wire transfers and the accounts were confirmed by the FBI, a deal
was suddenly put on the table. The crook was now facing only two years of
light house arrest. Cash for a presidential pardon was such a sensational
crime that it became a high priority at the Hoover Building.
The informant was unable to identify whose money had left Grand Cayman,
but it seemed quite obvious to the FBI that only two of the people pardoned
by Morgan had the potential of paying such a bribe. The first and likeliest
was Duke Mongo, the geriatric billionaire who held the record for the most
dollars illegally hidden from the IRS, at least by an individual. The corporate
category was still open for debate. However, the informant felt strongly that
Mongo was not involved because he had a long, ugly history with the banks
in question. He preferred the Swiss, and this was verified by the FBI.
The second suspect was, of course, Joel Backman. Such a bribe would not
be unexpected from an operator like Backman. And while the FBI had
believed for many years that he had not hidden a fortune, there had always
been doubt. When he was the broker he had relationships with banks in both
Switzerland and the Caribbean. He had a web of shadow}' friends, contacts
in important places. Bribes, payoffs, campaign contributions, lobbying feesit was all familiar turf for the broker.
The director of the FBI was an embattled soul named Anthony Price. Three
years earlier he had been appointed by President Morgan, who then tried to
fire him six months later. Price begged for more time and got it, but the two
fought constantly. For some reason he could never quite remember, Price
had also decided to prove his manhood by

- 127 -

John Grisham

The Broker

crossing swords with Teddy Maynard. Teddy hadn't lost many battles in the
CIA's secret war with the FBI, and he certainly wasn't frightened by
Anthony Price, the latest in a long line of lame ducks.
But Teddy didn't know about the cash-for-pardon conspiracy that now
consumed the director of the FBI. The new President had vowed to get rid of
Anthony Price and revamp his agency. He'd also promised to finally put
Maynard out to pasture, but such threats had been heard many times in
Washington.
Price suddenly had a beautiful opportunity to secure his job, and possibly
eliminate Maynard at the same time. He went to the White House and
briefed the national security advisor, who'd been confirmed the day before,
on the suspicious account in Singapore. He strongly implicated former
president Morgan in the scheme. He argued that Joel Backman should be
located and hauled back to the United States for questioning and possible
indictment. If proven to be true, it would be an earthshaking scandal, unique
and truly historic.
The national security advisor listened intently. After the briefing, he walked
directly to the office of the vice president, cleared out the staffers, locked the
door, and unloaded everything he'd just heard. Together, they told the
President.
As usual, there was no love lost between the new man in the Oval Office and
his predecessor. Their campaign had been loaded with the same meanspiritedness and dirty tricks that have become standard behavior in
American politics. Even after a landslide of historic proportions and the
thrill of reaching the White House, the new President was unwilling to rise
above the mud. He adored the idea of once again humiliating Arthur
Morgan. He could see himself, after a sensational trial and conviction,
stepping in at the last minute with a pardon of his own to salvage the image
of the presidency.
What a moment!
At six the following morning, the vice president was driven in his usual
armed caravan to the CIA headquarters at Langley. Director Maynard had
been summoned to the White House, but, suspecting some ploy, had begged
off, claiming he was suffering from vertigo and confined to his office by his
doctors. He often slept and ate there, especially when his vertigo was in high
gear and kept him dizzy. Vertigo was one of his many handy ailments.
The meeting was brief. Teddy was sitting at the end of his long

- 128 -

John Grisham

The Broker

conference table, in his wheelchair, wrapped tightly in blankets, with Hoby
at his side. The vice president entered with only one aide, and after some
awkward chitchat about the new administration and such, he said, "Mr.
Maynard, I'm here on behalf of the President."
"Of course you are," Teddy said with a very tight smile. He was expecting to
be fired; finally, after eighteen years and numerous threats, this was it.
Finally, a president with the stones to replace Teddy Maynard. He had
prepped Hoby for the moment. As they waited for the vice president, Teddy
had laid out his fears.
Hoby was scribbling on his customary legal pad, waiting to write the words
he'd been dreading for many years: Mr. Maynard, the President requests
your resignation.
Instead, the vice president said something completely unexpected. "Mr.
Maynard, the President wants to know about Joel Back- man."
Nothing made Teddy Maynard flinch. "What about him?" he said without
hesitation.
"He wants to know where he is and how long it will take to bring him
home."
"Why?"
"I can't say."
"Then neither can I."
"Its very important to the President."
"I appreciate that. But Mr. Backman is very important to our operations right
now."
The vice president blinked first. He glanced at his aide, who was consumed
with his own note-taking and completely useless. They would not under any
circumstances tell the CIA about the wire transfers and the bribes for
pardons. Teddy would figure out a way to use that information to his
advantage. He would steal their little nugget and survive yet another day. No
sir, Teddy would either play ball with them or finally get himself fired.
The vice president inched forward on his elbows and said, "The President is
not going to compromise on this, Mr. Maynard. He will have this
information, and he'll have it very soon. Otherwise, he will ask for your
resignation."
"He won't get it."
"Need I remind you that you serve at his pleasure?"

- 129 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"You need not."
"Very well. The lines are clear. You come to the White House with the
Backman file and discuss it with us at length, or the CIA will soon have a
new director."
"Such bluntness is rare among your breed, sir, with all due respect."
"I'll take that as a compliment."
The meeting was over.
Leaking like an old dike, the Hoover Building practically sprayed gossip
onto the streets of Washington. And there to collect it was, among man}'
others, Dan Sandberg of The Washington Post. His sources, though, were far
better than those of the average investigative journalist, and it wasn't long
before he picked up the scent of the pardon scandal. He worked an old mole
in the new White House and got a partial confirmation. The outline of the
story began to take shape, but Sandberg knew the hard details would be
virtually impossible to confirm. He stood no chance of seeing the wiretransfer records.
But if it happened to be true-a sitting president selling pardons for some
serious retirement cash-Sandberg could not imagine a bigger story. A former
president indicted, put on trial, maybe convicted and sent to jail. It was
unthinkable.
He was at his landfill of a desk when the call came from London. It was an
old friend, another hard-charging reporter who wrote for The Guardian.
They talked a few minutes about the new administration, which was the
official topic in Washington. It was, after all, early February with heavy
snow on the ground and Congress mired in its annual committee work. Life
was relatively slow and there was little else to talk about.
"Anything on the death of Bob Critz?" his friend asked.
"No, just a funeral yesterday," Sandberg replied. "Why?"
"A few questions about how the poor chap went down, you know. That, and
we can't get near the autopsy."
"What kind of questions? I thought it was open-and-shut."
"Maybe, but it got shut really fast. Nothing concrete, mind you, just fishing
to see if there's anything amiss over there."
"I'll make some calls," Sandberg said, already very suspicious.

- 130 -

John Grisham

The Broker

''Do that. Let's talk in a day or so."
Sandberg hung up and stared at his blank computer monitor. Critz would
certainly have been present when the last-minute pardons were granted by
Morgan. Given their paranoia, there was a good chance that only Critz was
in the Oval Office with Morgan when the decisions were made and the
paperwork signed.
Perhaps Critz knew too much.
Three hours later, Sandberg left Dulles for London.

- 131 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Long before dawn, Marco once again awoke in a strange bed in
a strange place, and for a long time worked hard gathering his thoughtsrecalling his movements, analyzing his bizarre situation, planning the day
ahead, trying to forget his past while trying to predict what might happen in
the next twelve hours. Sleep was fitful at best. He had dozed for a few hours;
it felt like four or five but he couldn't be sure because his rather warm little
room was completely dark. He removed the earphones; as usual, he'd fallen
asleep sometime after midnight with happy Italian dialogue ringing in his
ears.
He was thankful for the heat. They'd frozen him at Rudley and his last hotel
stop had been just as cold. The new apartment had thick walls and windows
and a heating system that worked overtime. When he decided the day was
properly organized, he slowly placed his feet on the very warm tile floor and
again thanked Luigi for the change of residence.
How long he might stay here was uncertain, like most of the future they'd
planned for him. He switched on the light and checked his watch-almost
five. In the bathroom he switched on another light and studied himself in the
mirror. The growth under his nose and along the sides of his mouth and
covering his chin was coming in quite a bit
