
 Fundamental Index Average Annual Return (since 12/19/2005): 8.77% 
 Russell 1000 Average Annual Return (since 12/19/2005): 7.71% 
 Equal Weight Average Annual Return (since 12/03/2010): 16.44% 
 Russell 1000 Average Annual Return (since 12/03/2010): 16.23% 
 The chart shows the return of the “smart beta” strategy divided by the return of the benchmark index. A number above (below) 1 indicates that the “smart beta” fund is outperforming (underperforming) the benchmark index. 
 Source: Morningstar. 
 The RAFI portfolio substantially overweighted large-bank stocks in 2009, coming out of the financial crisis, since these stocks sold at unusually large discounts from their book (asset) “values.” As mentioned above, the RAFI Fundamental Index TM portfolio had about 15 percent of its portfolio in two stocks (Citigroup and Bank of America) at that time. It turned out that such an overweighting helped produce excellent returns. But it was far from clear at the time that the troubled banks would avoid nationalization. In any event, the strategy involved considerable risk. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that whatever success RAFI has had in generating excess returns resulted from the assumption of greater risk rather than from the mispricing of growth stocks. 
 A statistical analysis of the RAFI results also supports the risk explanation. If one performs a statistical analysis of the PRF’s returns, explaining them via the Fama-French three-factor risk model (where “value” and “size” are considered risk factors), the RAFI excess performance (its “alpha”) is estimated to be zero. The performance chart also indicates long periods of underperformance during the history of the ETF. 
 Equally Weighted Portfolio Strategies 
 As was shown for the RAFI ETF, equally weighted portfolios have delivered somewhat similar returns. We can illustrate the performance of these portfolios with the Guggenheim Equal Weight 1000 ETF (ticker symbol EWRI) compared with its benchmark, the Russell 1000 capitalization-weighted ETF (ticker IWB). A short, three-year history is shown in the chart on page 279. Again, we see alternating periods of overperformance and underperformance, with equal weighting producing a slightly larger average annual return. Of course, the two portfolios do not have the same characteristics. Equally weighted portfolios give far greater weight to the smallest companies and hence have diversification and risk characteristics quite different from those of capitalization-weighted portfolios. They are also tax inefficient, as indicated earlier. 
 OTHER FACTOR TILTS 
 Other “smart beta” portfolios have attempted to exploit the tendency for low-volatility strategies to provide attractive returns and for stock returns to exhibit momentum over time. A variety of ETFs are now trading that give investors the opportunity to put real money to work in these strategies, so we can analyze their performance as well. Here the results are not as good. 
 Low-Beta (Low-Volatility) Strategies 
 Several ETFs are marketed that attempt to provide investors with practical instruments designed to take advantage of the attractive returns from low-volatility stocks. The ETFs differ somewhat in the specific strategies employed and in the benchmarks against which they should be measured. The SPDR Russell 1000 Low Volatility ETF (ticker LGLV) has been available only since early 2013. But the Power Shares S&P 500 Low Volatility ETF (ticker SPLV) and the iShares MSCI USA Minimum Volatility ETF (ticker USMV) have been available since 2011. None of the three ETFs have produced returns that have exceeded their capitalization-weighted benchmarks through the first quarter of 2014. 
 Momentum Strategies 
 The AQR Momentum Fund Class L ETF (ticker symbol AMOMX) has a longer history, having been available since 2009. Over its life through the first half of 2014, the ETF has failed to produce excess returns over either the Russell 1000 capitalization-weighted ETF or the Russell 1000 Growth ETF. While the time period for the low-beta and momentum ETFs is too short for definitive conclusions to be drawn, it is fair to say that thus far neither strategy has demonstrated superiority when the portfolios have been run with real money. Real money portfolios do not in general demonstrate the kind of effectiveness shown in academic simulations. 

 Low-Volatility Average Annual Return (since 05/05/2011): 14.59% 
 Russell 1000 Average Annual Return (since 05/05/2011): 15.29% 
 Momentum Average Annual Return (since 07/09/2009): 19.54% 
 Russell 1000 Average Annual Return (since 07/09/2009): 19.99% 
 The chart shows the return of the “smart beta” strategy divided by the return of the benchmark index. A number above (below) 1 indicates that the “smart beta” fund is outperforming (underperforming) the benchmark index. 
 Source: Morningstar. 
 IMPLICATIONS FOR INVESTORS 
 “Smart beta” strategies rely on a type of active management. They do not try to select individual stocks but rather tilt the portfolio toward various characteristics that have historically appeared to generate larger-than-market returns. In their favor, the “smart beta” portfolios provide these factor tilts at expense ratios that are lower than those charged by traditional active managers. 
 In general, the records of “smart beta” funds and ETFs have been spotty. Many “smart beta” ETFs have failed to produce reliable excess returns, although a few have “beaten the market” over the lifetime of the funds. These funds are, however, less tax efficient than capitalization-weighted funds that do not require rebalancing. 
 To the extent that some “smart beta” strategies have generated greater-than-market returns, those excess returns should be interpreted as a reward for assuming extra risk. In departing from the market portfolio, investors are taking on a different set of risks. “Smart beta” portfolios do not represent a sophisticated better mousetrap for investors. Investors should be wary of getting caught in the riskier mousetrap themselves. 
 “Smart beta” portfolios have been the object of considerable marketing hype. They are a testament more to smart marketing than to smart investing. Whether “smart beta” strategies will perform well in the future depends crucially on the market valuations existing at the time the strategy is implemented. As noted above, “value” strategies performed extraordinarily well coming out of the Internet bubble when technology “growth” stocks were priced richly relative to most “value” stocks. Similarly, small stocks did particularly well when they were inexpensively priced relative to large caps. Investors should be aware that if “value” and “small size” become richly priced, as “smart beta” funds become increasingly popular, the results are likely to be disappointing. No strategy is likely to be effective irrespective of valuation relationships. 
 There is no reason to adjust the long-standing advice of the earlier editions of this book: The core of every portfolio should consist of low-cost, tax-efficient, broad-based index funds. If you do want to take a chance that some risk factor will generate excess returns in the future, you can do so most prudently if the core of your portfolio consists of capitalization-weighted broad-based index funds. And if you do wish to add an additional risk factor to your portfolio, such as some extra exposure to small-company stocks, you can do so most efficiently and effectively by purchasing a low-cost, capitalizationweighted fund that follows an index of small-cap stocks. 
 IMPLICATIONS FOR BELIEVERS IN EFFICIENT MARKETS 
 From March 2008 through March 2009, the stock market declined by almost 50 percent. Did the stock market reflect all available information in March 2008, and could anyone reasonably argue that stocks were efficiently priced? For many observers, the collapse of 2008–09 and the subsequent world financial crisis sounded the death knell for the efficient-market hypothesis. 
 In 2009, George Soros wrote that “the Efficient Market Hypothesis has been truly discredited by the crash of 2008.” The EMH was blamed as the villain in the financial crisis and was written off for dead by countless financial commentators. For example, the respected market strategist Jeremy Grantham opined that the EMH “is more or less directly responsible for the financial crisis.” James Montier, global strategist at Société Générale, writing in the Financial Times , declared that the theory suggesting that markets are efficient was “utter garbage” and should be consigned to the dust bin. 
 Some supporters of “smart beta” portfolios believe that markets are inefficient and see their portfolio construction methods as a way of protecting investors from bubble-priced stocks. Moreover, they argue that smarter portfolios can be formed by a reliance on academic findings that there are many statistically significant predictable patterns in the stock market. We have seen, however, that these patterns are not dependable in every period, and that some of the patterns based on fundamental valuation measures of individual stocks may simply reflect a better proxy for measuring risk. In addition, many of these patterns could self-destruct in the future, as many of them have already done. Indeed, this is the logical reason why one should be cautious not to overemphasize these anomalies and predictable patterns or to put too much reliance on “smart beta” portfolios to enhance investment performance. 
 “Smart beta” portfolios will not protect you from market bubbles. I realize that some critics of the EMH and some managers of “smart beta” portfolios argue that the dot-com bubble was easy to identify as it was inflating. Robert Shiller published his book Irrational Exuberance in early 2000, just at the peak of the market. True, but the same models that identified a bubble in early 2000 also identified a vastly “overpriced” stock market in 1992, when low dividend yields and high price-earnings multiples suggested that long-run equity returns would be close to zero in the United States. In fact, from 1992 through 2013, annual stock-market returns were over 9 percent, approximately their historical average. In December of 1996, when the former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan gave his “Irrational Exuberance” speech, those same models predicted negative long-run equity returns. From the date of the chairman’s speech through December 2013, the broad stock-market indexes returned about 7.5 percent per year, even after withstanding two sharp bear markets. It is only in retrospect that we know that it was during 1999 and early 2000 when stock prices were “too high.” No one can help you time the market so that you avoid being invested when the market reaches a temporary top. 
 An exchange at an academic symposium between Robert Shiller, an economist who is sympathetic to the argument that stock prices are partially predictable and skeptical about market efficiency, and Richard Roll, an academic financial economist who was also a businessman managing billions of dollars of investment funds, is quite revealing. After Shiller stressed the importance of inefficiencies in the pricing of stocks, Roll responded as follows: 
 I have personally tried to invest money, my client’s money and my own, in every single anomaly and predictive device that academics have dreamed up. . . . I have attempted to exploit the so-called year-end anomalies and a whole variety of strategies supposedly documented by academic research. And I have yet to make a nickel on any of these supposed market inefficiencies. . . . [A] true market inefficiency ought to be an exploitable opportunity. If there’s nothing investors can exploit in a systematic way, time in and time out, then it’s very hard to say that information is not being properly incorporated into stock prices. 
 This lack of opportunities for extraordinary profits is often explained by a joke popular with professors of finance. A professor who espouses the EMH is walking along the street with a graduate student. The student spots a $100 bill lying on the ground and stoops to pick it up. “Don’t bother to try to pick it up,” says the professor. “If it was really a $100 bill, it wouldn’t be there.” Perhaps a better version of the story would be to remember that if any $100 bills are lying around, they will not be there for long. 
 As long as there are stock markets, mistakes will be made by the collective judgment of investors. And undoubtedly, some market participants are demonstrably less than rational. But even if price setting was always determined by rational profit-maximizing investors, prices can never be “correct.” Suppose that stock prices are rationally determined as the discounted present value of all future cash flows. Future cash flows can only be estimated and are never known with certainty. There will always be errors in the forecasts of future sales and earnings. Moreover, equity risk premiums are unlikely to be stable over time. Prices are, therefore, likely to be “wrong” all the time. What the EMH implies is that we never can be sure whether they are too high or too low at any given time. Some portfolio managers may correctly determine when some prices are too high and others too low. But at other times such judgments will be in error. And, in any event, the profits that will be attributable to correct judgments will not represent unexploited extraordinary returns that were obviously apparent. 
 Pricing irregularities and predictable patterns in stock returns can appear over time and even persist for short periods. Andrew Lo † has argued that no engineer would ever devise a test to determine whether a particular motor was perfectly efficient. But engineers would attempt to measure the efficiency of that engine relative to a frictionless ideal. Similarly, it is unrealistic to require our financial markets to be perfectly efficient in order to accept the basic tenets of the EMH. Indeed, as Sanford Grossman and Joseph Stiglitz have argued, the perfect efficiency of our financial markets is an unrealizable ideal. Those traders who ensure that information is quickly reflected in market prices must be able, at least, to cover their costs. But it is reasonable to ask whether our financial markets are relatively efficient, and I believe that the evidence is very powerful that our markets come very close to the EMH ideal. Information does get reflected rapidly in security prices. The EMH’s basic underlying notion—that if there are obvious opportunities to earn excess risk-adjusted returns, people will flock to exploit them until they disappear— is as reasonable and commonsense as anything put forward by the EMH’s critics. If any $100 bills are lying around, they will not be there for long. 
 CAPITALIZATION-WEIGHTED INDEXING REMAINS AT THE TOP OF THE CLASS 
 In conclusion, capitalization-weighted indexing is unlikely to be deposed as the overwhelming favorite in the battle for index supremacy. Even if markets were inefficient, departing from the weightings given by the market as a whole would have to be a zero-sum game. All the stocks in the market must be held by someone. If some investors hold portfolios that do better than the market, it must follow that some other investors hold portfolios that do worse. Because of their greater costs, however, active management or “smart” indexing must be a negative-sum game. On average, these higher-cost portfolios must underperform capitalization-weighted index funds that can be purchased at close to zero cost. 
 There is a remarkably large body of evidence suggesting that professional investment managers are not able to outperform index funds that simply buy and hold the broad stock-market portfolio. Two-thirds of professionally managed funds are regularly outperformed by a broad capitalization-weighted index fund with equivalent risk, and those that do appear to produce excess returns in one period are not likely to do so in the next. The record of professionals does not suggest that sufficient predictability exists in the stock market to produce exploitable arbitrage opportunities. 
 The core of every portfolio should consist of low-cost, tax-efficient, broad-based index funds. If you do want to take a chance that some risk factor will generate excess returns in the future, you can do so most prudently if the core of your portfolio consists of capitalization-weighted broad-based index funds. 

 * “Smart beta” strategies are related to the multifactor models discussed in Chapter 9 . If one assumes that the beta of the capital-asset pricing model is an incomplete measure of risk, the tilts or flavors listed above can be considered additional risk factors. By tilting the portfolio toward smaller companies, for example, the investor is making a bet that the risk premium that is available from smaller companies can enhance returns. Here, of course, “smart beta” is interpreted as a technique to enhance returns by assuming additional risk. 
 † Lo has also argued that the existence of predictable stock-market patterns is not an all-or-nothing condition, but rather one that can vary over time, depending on the characteristics of existing limits to arbitrage, market imperfections, and psychological biases. These factors can give rise to periods when stock returns appear to be predictable and departures from the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) appear to exist.

A Random Walk Down Wall Street 

 12 

 A FITNESS MANUAL FOR RANDOM WALKERS AND OTHER INVESTORS 
 In investing money, the amount of interest you want should depend on whether you want to eat well or sleep well. —J. Kenfield Morley, Some Things I Believe 
 P ART FOUR IS a how-to-do-it guide for your random walk down Wall Street. In this chapter, I offer general investment advice that should be useful to all investors, even if they don’t believe that securities markets are highly efficient. In chapter 13 , I try to explain the recent fluctuations that have occurred in stock and bond returns and to show how you might estimate what the future holds. I also indicate how you can at least roughly gauge the long-run returns you are likely to achieve from different investment programs. In chapter 14 , I present a life-cycle investment guide indicating how the stage of your life plays an important role in determining the mix of investments that is most likely to enable you to meet your financial goals. 
 In the final chapter, I outline specific strategies for equity investors who believe at least partially in the efficient-market theory or who are convinced that even if real expertise does exist, they are unlikely to find it. But if you are sensible, you will take your random walk only after you have made detailed and careful preparations. Even if stock prices move randomly, you shouldn’t. Think of the advice that follows as a set of warm-up exercises that will enable you to make sensible financial decisions and increase your after-tax investment returns. 
 EXERCISE 1: GATHER THE NECESSARY SUPPLIES 
 A widely held belief is that the ticket to a comfortable retirement and a fat investment portfolio are instructions on what extraordinary individual stocks or mutual funds you should buy. Unfortunately, these tickets are not even worth the paper they are printed on. The harsh truth is that the most important driver in the growth of your assets is how much you save, and saving requires discipline. Without a regular savings program, it doesn’t matter if you make 5 percent, 10 percent, or even 15 percent on your investment funds. The single most important thing you can do to achieve financial security is to begin a regular savings program and to start it as early as possible. The only reliable route to a comfortable retirement is to build up a nest egg slowly and steadily. Yet few people follow this basic rule, and the savings of the typical American family are woefully inadequate. 
 It is critically important to start saving now. Every year you put off investing makes your ultimate retirement goals more difficult to achieve. Trust in time rather than in timing. As a sign in the window of a bank put it, little by little you can safely stock up a strong reserve here, but not until you start. 
 The secret of getting rich slowly (but surely) is the miracle of compound interest. Albert Einstein described compound interest as the “greatest mathematical discovery of all time.” It may sound complicated, but it simply involves earning a return not only on your original investment but also on the accumulated interest that you reinvest. 
 Jeremy Siegel, author of the excellent investing book Stocks for the Long Run , has calculated the returns from a variety of financial assets from 1800 to 2014. His work shows the incredible power of compounding. One dollar invested in stocks in 1802 would have grown to almost $18 million by the end of 2013. This amount far outdistanced the rate of inflation as measured by the consumer price index (CPI). The figure below also shows the much more modest returns that have been achieved by U.S. Treasury bills and gold. 

 Source: Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run , 5th ed. 
 If you want a get-rich-quick investment strategy, this is not the book for you. I’ll leave that for the snake oil salesmen. You can only get poor quickly. To get rich, you will have to do it slowly, and you have to start now. 
 What if you did not save when you were younger and find yourself in your fifties with no savings, no retirement plan, and burdensome credit card debt? It’s going to be a lot harder to plan for a comfortable retirement. But it’s never too late to make a plan. There is no other way to make up for lost time than to downsize your lifestyle and start a rigorous program of savings now. You may also have no other choice but to remain in the workforce and to push back retirement a few years. Fortunately, it is easier to play catch-up with tax-advantaged retirement plans that will be described below. 
 So put time on your side. Start saving early and save regularly. Live modestly and don’t touch the money that’s been set aside. If you need further discipline, remember that the only thing worse than being dead is to outlive the money you have put aside for retirement. And if projections are to be believed, about one million of today’s baby boomers will live to be at least one hundred. 
 EXERCISE 2: DON’T BE CAUGHT EMPTY-HANDED: COVER YOURSELF WITH CASH RESERVES AND INSURANCE 
 Remember Murphy’s Law: What can go wrong will go wrong. And don’t forget O’Toole’s commentary: Murphy was an optimist. Bad things do happen to good people. Life is a risky proposition, and unexpected financial needs occur in everyone’s lifetime. The boiler tends to blow up just at the time that your family incurs whopping medical expenses. A job layoff happens just after your son has totaled the family car. That’s why every family needs a cash reserve as well as adequate insurance to cope with the catastrophes of life. 
 Cash Reserves 
 I know that many brokers will tell you not to miss investing opportunities by sitting on your cash. “Cash is trash” is the mantra of the brokerage community. But everyone needs to keep some reserves in safe and liquid investments to pay for an unexpected medical bill or to provide a cushion during a time of unemployment. Assuming that you are protected by medical and disability insurance at work, this reserve might be established to cover three months of living expenses. The cash reserve fund should be larger, the older you are, but could be smaller if you work in an in-demand profession and/or if you have large investable assets. Moreover, any large future expenditures (such as your daughter’s college tuition bill) should be funded with short-term investments (such as a bank certificate of deposit) whose maturity matches the date on which the funds will be needed. 
 Insurance 
 Most people need insurance. Those with family obligations are downright negligent if they don’t purchase insurance. We risk death every time we get into our automobile or cross a busy street. A hurricane or fire could destroy our home and possessions. People need to protect themselves against the unpredictable. 
 For individuals, home and auto insurance are a must. So is health and disability insurance. Life insurance to protect one’s family from the death of the breadwinner(s) is also a necessity. You don’t need life insurance if you are single with no dependents. But if you have a family with young children who count on your income, you do need life insurance and lots of it. 
 Two broad categories of life insurance products are available: high-premium policies that combine insurance with an investment account, and low-premium term insurance that provides death benefits only, with no buildup of cash value. 
 The high-premium policies do have some advantages and are often touted for their tax-saving benefits. Earnings on the part of the insurance premiums that go into the savings plan accumulate tax-free, and this can be advantageous for some individuals who have maxed out on their tax-deferred retirement savings plans. Moreover, individuals who will not save regularly may find that the periodic premium bills provide the discipline necessary for them to make sure that a certain amount will be available for their families if they die and that a cash value builds up on the investment part of the program. But policies of this kind provide the most advantages for the insurance agent who sells them and who collects high sales charges. Early premiums go mainly for sales commissions and other overhead rather than for buildup of cash value. Thus, not all your money goes to work. For most people, I therefore favor the do-it-yourself approach. Buy term insurance for protection and invest the difference yourself in a tax-deferred retirement plan. The recommendations that follow will provide an investment plan that is far superior to that available from “whole life” or “variable life” insurance policies. 
 My advice is to buy renewable term insurance; you can keep renewing your policy without the need for a physical examination. So-called decreasing term insurance, renewable for progressively lower amounts, should suit many families best, because as time passes (and the children and family resources grow), the need for protection usually diminishes. You should understand, however, that term-insurance premiums escalate sharply when you reach the age of sixty or seventy or higher. If you still need insurance at that point, you will find that term insurance has become prohibitively expensive. But the major risk at that point is not premature death; it is that you will live too long and outlive your assets. You can increase those assets more effectively by buying term insurance and investing the money you save yourself. 
 Shop around for the best deal. There is considerable variation in insurance company rates. Use quote services or the Internet to ensure that you are getting the best deal. For example, you can go to www.term4sale.com and see a number of alternative policies at varying prices. You do not need an insurance agent. Policies available from agents will be more expensive since they need to include extra premiums to pay the agent’s sales commission. You can get a much better deal by doing it yourself. 
 Do not buy insurance from any company with an A.M. Best rating of less than A. A lower premium will not compensate you for taking any risk that your insurance company will get into financial difficulty and be unable to pay its claims. Don’t bet your life on a poorly capitalized insurance carrier. 
 You can obtain A.M. Best’s ratings of insurance companies by calling 908-439-2200. Insurance companies pay Best for the ratings. The A.M. Best Website is at http://www.ambest.com/. A somewhat more objective and critical rating is offered by Weiss Research, a consumer-supported company, which can be contacted at 800-291-8545. The Weiss website is at http://www.weissinc.com/. 
 Deferred Variable Annuities 
 I would avoid buying variable-annuity products, especially the high-cost products offered by insurance salespeople. A deferred variable annuity is essentially an investment product (typically a mutual fund) with an insurance feature. The insurance feature stipulates that if you die and the value of the investment fund has fallen below the amount you put in, the insurance company will pay back your full investment. These policies are very expensive because you typically pay high sales commissions and a premium for the insurance feature. Unless your mutual fund declines sharply with a fall in the stock market and you drop dead soon after purchasing a variable annuity, the value of this insurance is likely to be small. Remember the overarching rule for achieving financial security: keep it simple. Avoid any complex financial products as well as the hungry agents who try to sell them to you. The only reason you should even consider a variable annuity is if you are super wealthy and have maxed out on all the other tax-deferred savings alternatives. And even then you should purchase such an annuity directly from one of the low-cost providers such as the Vanguard Group. 
 EXERCISE 3: BE COMPETITIVE—LET THE YIELD ON YOUR CASH RESERVE KEEP PACE WITH INFLATION 
 As I’ve already pointed out, some ready assets are necessary for pending expenses, such as college tuition, possible emergencies, or even psychological support. Thus, you have a real dilemma. You know that if you keep your money in a savings bank and get, say, 2 percent interest in a year in which the inflation rate exceeds 2 percent, you will lose real purchasing power. In fact, the situation is even worse because the interest you get is subject to regular income taxes. Moreover, short-term interest rates were abnormally low during the mid-2010s. So what’s a small saver to do? There are several short-term investments that are likely to help provide the best rate of return, although no very good alternatives existed at the end of 2014. 
 Money-Market Mutual Funds (Money Funds) 
 Money-market mutual funds often provide investors the best instrument for parking their cash reserves. They combine safety and the ability to write large checks against your fund balance, generally in amounts of at least $250. Interest earnings continue until the checks clear. Interest rates on these funds generally ranged from 1 to 5 percent during the first decade of the 2000s. In 2014, however, interest rates were very low and money-fund yields were near zero. Not all money-market funds are created equal; some have significantly higher expense ratios (the costs of running and managing the funds) than others. In general, lower expenses mean higher returns. A sample of relatively low-expense funds is presented in the Random Walker’s Address Book and Reference Guide at the end of this book. 
 Bank Certificates of Deposit (CDs) 
 A reserve for any known future expenditure should be invested in a safe instrument whose maturity matches the date on which the funds will be needed. Suppose you have set aside money for junior’s tuition bills that will need to be paid at the end of one, two, and three years. One appropriate investment plan in this case would be to buy three bank CDs with maturities of one, two, and three years. Bank CDs are even safer than money funds, typically offer higher yields, and are an excellent medium for investors who can tie up their liquid funds for at least six months. 
 Bank CDs do have some disadvantages. They are not easily converted into cash, and penalties are usually imposed for early withdrawal. Also, the yield on CDs is subject to state and local income taxes. Treasury bills (short-term U.S. government IOUs), which are discussed below, are exempt from state and local taxes. 
