
Double Bollinger Band Retrace Opportunity
EUR/USD: Uptrend
GBP/USD: Uptrend
USD/JPY: Downtrend

Double Bollinger Band New Trend Opportunity
AUD/USD: Uptrend

Double Bollinger Band Reversal Opportunity
None
Then, applying the techniques discussed in Chapter 10, I look for the highest probability trades. Those are the ones that are supported by
fundamentals, technicals, and market sentiment. To be more specific, if USD/JPY is in an uptrend and has retraced to the first standard deviation
Bollinger Band, I will only buy the currency pair hoping for a continuation if the U.S. stock market ended the day marginally lower, flat, or higher,

which means sentiment does not hurt my trade and if there is a piece of U.S. economic data tomorrow that I think will either be positive or neutral for
the trade. If stocks fell significantly or if I have a strong reason to believe the next day’s U.S. economic data will be dollar negative, I will most likely
pass on the trade.
The Bollinger Band trades are usually held overnight so I will put in my stop along with a first target on half of the position. I will also put a second
target for the remainder of the position that is much further away from the first target but still achievable in case there are big moves overnight when
I am sleeping. Remember, be smart by considering the exit for the trade early on; it’s just as important as finding a good point of entry.
When this is done, I list the economic data due for release tomorrow so I am prepared for the new trading day.
However, there is still one more trade to take on this particular day, which is a short-term trade on the heels of the Australian employment report.
There is tradable Australian or New Zealand economic data only once or twice a week so normally I can still go the gym and get a good night’s rest
before the whole process begins again.
Trading plans are different and evolve with time but are useful to develop a consistent regimen. In fact, all traders should strive to have a militarylike discipline with the acumen to know when to take a trade and when to pass on it.

Know Your Loss Limit
In addition to a trading plan, it is also important to have a contingency plan. All good business owners are passively aware of their loss limit, which
is the maximum amount that they are able and willing to lose if their business goes sour. For traders, this means knowing when to stop trading.
Sometimes we will have a streak of bad luck that leads to a string a losers, and after a certain point, it may be better to just turn off the screen, walk
away from the computer, and take a break from trading for a few days before starting again. A series of losers can lead to irrational trading
behaviors that will inevitably lead to greater losses. As John Paulson once said, one of the key investments rules that he lives by is to “watch the
downside, the upside will take care of itself.”
To become a professional trader, it is important to develop a consistent regimen and to have a trading plan. Not only does it save time and get
you into the mind-set of trading but it also reduces the potential impact of emotions. When you question your trade—and you inevitably will—the
trading plan is there to remind you why you took the trade in the first place. If those reasons have changed, then closing the trade may be a good
idea, but if they have not, then stick with it! In my case, I know exactly what I could potentially trade when I step into the office. This saves me time
and allows me to focus on other potential trading setups that require watching the price action more closely.

Get It? Got It? Good!
To be a pro, you have to approach trading as a business, not a hobby!
Don’t rely on luck; preparation is the key to good trading.
Emotions can kill profits. Write out your trading plan to give your trades a fighting chance.
Always know your loss limits. In the words of John Paulson, “Watch the downside, the upside will take care of itself.”
Make the exits just as sharp as entries.

Chapter Fourteen

Crash, Burn, and Learn
Becoming a Better Trader
When most people think of basketball, they think of Michael Jordan, one of the best basketball players of all time. In 1999, he was named the
greatest North American athlete of the twentieth century by the sports network ESPN. Ask almost anyone who follows sports and they will say that
when it comes to playing basketball, Jordan is a raging success.
Yet the following quote is one of the most memorable things that Michael Jordan has ever said and hands down one of the best sports quotes I’ve
heard.

I’ve missed more than 9,000 shots in my career. I’ve lost almost 300 games. Twenty-six times, I’ve been trusted to take the gamewinning shot and missed. I’ve failed over and over and over again in my life. And that is why I succeed.
Every good trader has crashed and burned and wiped out a number of trading accounts before turning a consistent profit, and even then there
will be losing streaks, but as Michael Jordan suggested, failure is a critical part of success. No matter how much thought we have put into our
trading plan and no matter how well we have analyzed the data and charts, markets can trip us up and stop us out at any given time. The important
thing is to learn from our mistakes because as Carl Jung, the father of analytical psychology once said, “Knowledge rests not upon truth alone, but
upon error also.”
How can we learn from our mistakes? In the last chapter, we learned how to create a trading plan, but the other piece of the puzzle is to keep a
trading log. Start a simple Excel spreadsheet with a running tally of your trades, noting the currency pair that you traded, the strategy that you used
(if there is one), the time that you entered the trade, the price that you entered at, the stop, your profit or loss, and a column for special notes such as
“That was a bad trade! Should have avoided Fed meeting” or “Should have stayed in the trade longer!” These notes to yourself will become
extremely useful when you review your trades and find room for improvement.
Albert Einstein once said, “We can’t solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when we created them.” Regardless of whether I
am on a winning or losing streak, every Sunday morning, after I have taken a break from the market and can look at it from a fresh perspective, I will
bring up my Excel spreadsheet and look at the trades and my notes to see if there is any pattern worth noting. I don’t forcibly look for patterns but
have found that they are all the more obvious after a day of not looking at the charts.
Tracking your trades on an Excel spreadsheet is exceptionally useful because it allows you to sort the data by currency pair, time of day, and
everything else to see if there are patterns in your success and failures. Hypothetically, for example, I may find that 80 percent of my long trades hit
their profit targets while 70 percent of short trades were stopped out. This does not mean that I should immediately stop selling currency pairs and
trade only to the long side. Instead, I would dig deeper into those trades to try to understand why this is happening. Perhaps I am ignoring the overall
trend in the market because all of the currency pairs have been in strong uptrends or there is simply no logical explanation for the losses. Either way
it is worth a try because you never know what you will discover!
Like every other trader, I, too, have crashed, burned, and learned. Here are three of the major lessons that I have taken away and the changes
that I made after reviewing my trades:

Lesson 1: Stick to Currencies with Smaller Spreads
In Chapter 8, we learned about many different ways to use the Double Bollinger Bands, and if you recall, one of those ways was to get into a new
trend. With this specific strategy, positions are normally held for 1 to 12 hours and entered at the close of the New York trading session. Since this
strategy looks for a continuation that can be large or small, I normally risk no more than 60 pips on the trade. In the early years when I first started to
trade this setup, I would focus exclusively on the strategy. I would patiently wait for the setup to form across various currency pairs and when it
occurred, I would apply the same stop and first target to all the positions.
However, I quickly realized that some trades were being stopped more often than others. When I initially noticed this pattern, I continued to trade
because I wanted to gather a larger sample before making any changes to my trading strategy. One or two bad trades is not enough to change the
entire trading plan. After taking 50 some-odd trades across different currency pairs, I sorted the transactions in an Excel spreadsheet and realized
that I was stopped out in 5 out of 5 AUD/NZD trades and 3 out of 4 EUR/CAD trades. After some additional investigation, I realized that the spread
in the currency pairs was killing my trades. The spread, which is the difference between the buy and sell price for AUD/NZD and EUR/CAD, could
reach as much as 12 pips during the early Asian trading session, which was basically right after I put on my trade. This means that realistically my
stop is only 48 and not 60 pips. Considering that the average daily trading range for both currency pairs is fairly wide, 48 pips is not that significant.
Therefore, I found that those trades were frequently being stopped out on nothing more than market noise. Also spreads have a tendency of
widening during the early Asian trading session when many U.S. traders have gone home for the day and Asian traders have yet to arrive at their
offices.
In retrospect, I consider this an amateur mistake, but even professionals were amateurs at one point and had to learn how to be pros the hard
way. From that time forward, I did not use the Double Bollinger Bands to get into a new trend in currency pairs with spreads wider than 6 pips. If my

stop was larger, like 100 pips or so, I may have considered trading the wider spread pairs, but for this particular trading strategy, I will not.

Lesson 2: Use the Right Stop
In Lesson 1, I mentioned that I use a 60-pip stop when I use the Double Bollinger Bands to get into a new trend. However, I did not always use a 60pip stop. In the past, I had a stop of 70 pips, which you may not consider to be all that different from a 60-pip stop, but every pip counts! Even when I
am on a hot streak, hitting back-to-back winners, I still went back and reviewed my trades every week. On one rainy Sunday in 2005 when I had
nothing better to do, I decided to look through my losing trades one by one on the charts to see if there was room for improvement. It was through
this process that I realized when a trade went against me by more than 60 pips, it would be stopped 97 percent of the time.
Let’s take a moment and think about what this means in more detail. With the Double Bollinger Band new trend strategy, we usually enter into the
position when the currency pair has closed into the zone between the one and two standard deviation Double Bollinger Bands after trading within
the range-trading zone, with the hope of joining a new trend. Therefore, if the currency pair moves 60 pips against us, then most likely it has moved
out of the uptrend or downtrend zones and is back inside the range-trading zone, which means that it failed to form a new trend. Therefore, it really
doesn’t matter if it moved 60 or 70 pips because, either way, the reason for getting into the trade no longer holds. From that time forward, a stop of
60 pips has been the sweet spot for this strategy.
It was also through some serious review of my trades that I found my sweet spot for trailing stops. When it comes to using trailing stops, I always
encourage traders to be creative and use a stop that fits their goals. Some people enter for a technical reason such as a break above a moving
average and want to exit for the same reason. Other people cannot monitor their trades all the time and instead will use an automated trailing stop.
With most of my trading strategies, after I hit the first target I like to use a stop of 30 pips and move it every 20 pips. The reason is that 30 pips
gives the trade enough breathing room, so even if there is a retrace, it would need to be a fairly large one that is probably triggered by a news event
or a change in short-term sentiment to stop me out. Moving it every 20 pips lets me keep a close lock on my profits, trailing it regularly as the
momentum of the currency pair pushes it further in my favor. Just imagine that you are a marathon runner: There is only so far that you can fall
behind before you know that you have lost the race.

Lesson 3: Pick the Right Time to Trade News
In Chapter 9, we learned how to trade news. One of the cardinal rules of this trading tactic is to wait five minutes before getting into the trade to
avoid the initial volatility and to make sure that the market actually cares about the data. This too was another lesson that I learned through my years
of trading and watching the market because if the data is significant enough, there will be continuation.
Another interesting observation has to do with the Canadian dollar’s reaction to economic data. Unlike other currency pairs that will usually react
the millisecond that the number is released, Canadian data tends to have a delayed reaction. For example, on August 11, 2010, Canada reported
a trade deficit that was much wider than economists had anticipated. If it were any other currency pair, we would expect it to sell off immediately at
8:30 a.m. Eastern Time; however, the CAD did not. The Canadian dollar waited a full 10 minutes before suddenly breaking sharply lower against
the U.S. dollar. Within four minutes, USD/CAD jumped from 1.0383 to a high of 1.0430, which is a fairly significant short-term move for the currency
pair. Over the next three hours, USD/CAD climbed another 40 pips to a high of 1.0474. This type of delayed reaction is fairly typical for USD/CAD,
but only traders who have stared at the currency for hours and hours would have discovered this behavior! Part of the reason this happens is
Canadian data tends to be released at the same time as U.S. data and so forex traders want to see how the market responds to the U.S. data
before they take a position in the Canadian dollar.
Occasionally, if I have a strong reason to believe that a piece of data will be good or bad, I will take a trade before the number is released.
Usually I enter into the trade 20 minutes before the data is scheduled to be out. After thorough analysis of both winning and losing trades, I have
found that 20 minutes is the sweet spot because it is generally short enough that the market is focusing almost exclusively on the economic release
but long enough that spreads have not started to widen, which can happen 5 to 10 minutes before the data is released. This is important because
we do not want to pay up for a currency pair simply because the spreads between the buy and sell price have increased.
The addition of the 50-period SMA has also come out of this review process. In the past I found that when the sentiment in the market runs
counter to the surprise in the data, the chance that the trade will hit the profit target is smaller unless it is a major surprise in a very important
economic release. The addition of the SMA has helped to filter out the weaker trades that are not supported by the general market sentiment.

A Warning about Fitting to Perfection
There are many things that you can learn from conducting your own review process and making enhancements to your trading. The trick is to not fit
to perfection by making changes in reaction to bad trades. Only make changes that make sense after a statistically significant number of trades
(which means a lot of them)!
Pick a quiet day when you are not trading to sit back and think about things rationally and see if there is room for improvement. If you can’t do it
every week, do it at least once a month. Some of the things that you may want to consider when reviewing your trades include the time of day that
you are trading, the impact of holding positions overnight and over the weekend, and the currency pairs that you have chosen to trade. Also
consider whether you are cutting your winning trades too quickly or holding onto your losing trades for too long. We can all benefit from selfreflection and self-improvement. As Oliver Cromwell, the English military and political leader, once said, “He who stops being better stops being
good.”

Get It? Got It? Good!
Keep a log of all your trades so you can see what you are doing right and wrong.
Set aside a regular time to review your trading log and look for patterns. You’ll be surprised how the log will shine a spotlight on your successes or mistakes!
Write notes to yourself as reminders about things to avoid, such as trading non-farm payrolls or holding positions when there is a G20 meeting over the weekend.

Don’t change your trading strategy just because you had one bad trade; make sure you have a good number of samples before making a change.
Finally, only make enhancements to your trading that make logical sense!

Chapter Fifteen

Start Smart
Begin Your Currency Adventure the Right Way
The next time you visit Disney World and meander through the World Showcase, think about how wonderful it is to experience different cultures. In
this global day and age, it’s common to have coworkers and clients in other countries. One of the great things about the Internet is that we can email, chat, or call anyone in the world with the click of a button.
The world is really a very small place that is closely linked together. So goes the theory behind six degrees of separation. The idea is that every
person is no more than six steps away from another person. For example, I know that I am no more than five and possibly only four degrees of
separation from President Obama, and from him I am six degrees apart from every other major head of state. Isn’t that exciting?
Unless you work for a brick-and-mortar company, there’s a good chance that you have clients or vendors outside of your own country; if that’s the
case, then currencies are part of your life already. If this is not applicable, then it should only be a matter of time before you end up ordering or
selling something to someone in another country. People around the world have done and will continue to do business with each other. In places
such as Germany and Singapore, investors are even more aware of currency movements because they rely heavily on imports and exports to other
countries. Many Singaporeans have children studying abroad in the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States and so they are extremely
sensitive to the ups and downs of exchange rates. The United States, on the other hand, is a very self-sufficient country with only approximately 30
percent of Americans owning a passport compared to approximately 70 percent in the United Kingdom. This trend has changed and will continue
to change as more Americans open their eyes to the opportunities beyond U.S. borders. As a result, many investors in the United States have
already incorporated currencies as part of their trading and investment strategies. They realize that currencies and exchange rates will be part of
our lives forever.
The times are changing and you have a choice to either ignore it and be left behind or adapt to it. Remember the statistic provided by the Bank
of International Settlements that shows foreign exchange volume doubling between 2003 and 2010? A good part of this increase in volume can be
credited to the participation of individual investors. Although investment institutions and other professional investors have been trading currencies
for decades, it is still a relatively new market for individuals.
As you have learned from this book, there are many ways to access the foreign exchange market; between now and the next 10 years, the
number of instruments will probably increase even further. Regulators around the world have taken steps to make the market safer for investors
and, as a result, we will probably see more people trade forex.
What the bursting of the technology bubble, the global financial crisis, and the European debt crisis should have taught all of us is that financial
disasters repeat themselves—their shapes and sizes may be different but the consequences for most investors are always the same. When
disaster strikes again, you have the option of watching portfolio values evaporate or getting in control. One of the secrets of success in life is to be
ready to grab opportunities when they arise. Get ahead of the curve by learning how the market works, how to manage its unique risks, and how to
trade it today.
It doesn’t take a disaster to create opportunities in the forex market. If the global economy starts to recover and enters a phase of growth, there
could be a string of positive surprises in economic data. This could also offer opportunities for traders—just as currencies can reflect to pessimism,
they will also reflect their optimism.
Thankfully, there is a tremendous amount of free forex education and research provided by independent companies and forex brokers. Take
advantage of them! Take your time; there is no need to rush into forex trading. The forex market has been around for a very long time and will
continue to remain active for decades to come, so take your time to really learn about how the market works before you place your first trade.
As Benjamin Franklin once said, “Energy and persistence conquers all things”; as long as you are willing to approach forex trading with the
seriousness and the discipline of a business, you are ready to tread ahead confidently. Knowledge of the market, a good strategy, solid money
management, and a little bit of luck will go a long way.

Author’s Disclaimer
Forex (and futures) trading involves high risks, with the potential for substantial losses and is not suitable for all people. Past performance is not
indicative of future results. Any opinions, news, research, analyses, prices, or other information contained in this book is provided as general
market commentary, and does not constitute investment advice. Kathy Lien is not liable for any loss or damage, including, without limitation, any
loss of profit that may arise directly or indirectly from use of or reliance on such information. As the markets evolve, the content of this book is
subject to change at any time without notice and is provided for the sole purpose of assisting traders to make independent investment decisions.
Kathy Lien has taken reasonable measures to ensure the accuracy of the information in the book. At the time of publication, Lien was employed as
co-head of global research for Global Forex Trading, a division of Global Futures & Forex, Ltd. (GFT). However, this book was written separately
and independently from her employment with GFT. GFT does not control the content of the book, and opinions expressed by Lien are not
necessarily those of GFT.

