
The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 2

Getting the
Most Out of
This Method
D

o not delude yourself. You will not instantly become successful the minute
you finish reading this manual. You run the possibility of making your money
over a long series of trades.You need to have realistic expectations of yourself and my
trend following methodology. Once you internalize the fact that you will make your
money over a series of trades, it makes it a lot easier to handle the inherent losses when
trading. You will come to grips with the fact that any trade in any month or any year
does not really matter as long as you have kept your losses small.
Too often, people start trading with dreams of becoming rich overnight. I am of the
belief of trying to compound your money over time. I do not like taking big risks when I
trade. It’s much safer to maintain a trading strategy that will allow your account to grow at
a slower pace over time, which can ultimately be used for retirement or a child’s education.
Compounding your way to wealth is not a get rich quick endeavor.
There will be no surprises when you trend follow as I outline in the book.You will
have losses. You will have long periods when you might not make money, but if you
stick with the strategy and stay in the marathon, you stand the potential to compound
money over time.
My goal is to give you the realistic picture that I have personally encountered over
the last 18 years of my trend following career. Trend following is not retirement in a
box! You will have to do the work.You will have to work on yourself.You will have to
build your discipline and patience muscles. There will be times when it will be very
hard. In order to succeed over time you need to believe in the concepts. You’ll learn
key concepts that you can apply to your trading right away.
I am giving you my exact plan. There is nothing held back.

25

■ There Are No Secrets!

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

26

My plan is not perfect but it is robust and can be traded on any time frame and any
market.Without a well‐thought‐out plan, trend following is very risky. However, with
the right risk measures and the knowledge to use these in an efficient and effective
manner, you put the odds of success on your side. Your trading plan requires a great
deal of work. You need to develop the plan to match your personality, and it is even
harder to follow the plan. You will have to follow through on difficult decisions and
choices. Your plan must cover all the key elements of trading with risk, money management, and having the proper discipline and patience.
Developing a trading plan with all the time, energy, and effort devoted toward your
future success still does not guarantee you your trading success. The markets need to
move. With this movement the best you can try to do is not lose too much money. The
market has a way of throwing you curveballs and unexpected twists. You need your
strategy or your plan to get you through all of the unexpected outcomes prevalent in
the market. Too many traders only consider the context of a plan after they have lost
money. The plan consists of all potential precarious events before they happen. The
plan should answer all the potential outcomes.
An example of this, as you will learn further on, I trail my stops with a trailing
average true range stop indicator version that I wrote about in Stocks & Commodities
magazine in 1998. The question as part of my trading plan is, if I touch my average true range stop, do I exit or do I have to close below it? The trading plan must
answer this because in the heat of trading you do not want to be surprised. There
is no free lunch when we trade. There will be times that the stop is touched and
reverses. Frustration can easily be had.
Conversely, if one were to wait for a close below the average true range stop, the
loss can be greatly enhanced. The only solution is to accept the risk and accept the
outcome as part of your plan. You must not change your plan or rules in midstream.
You strive for consistency. This consistency lowers the pressure as well as gives you
the ability to repeat the trade process over and over again. Trading patterns repeat
themselves over and over again. There are always an endless stream of potential trades
on all time frames and all markets.You just have to be available.

■ Do You Want to Be Right or Make Money?
I have this question posed to me all throughout my journey. I prefer to make money
and compound it over long periods of time. The funny thing is that many traders and
investors don’t like trend following. It is not intuitive, too long term at times, or simply not exciting enough. I am not in need of excitement.

■ Basic Tenets of Trend Following
The single biggest mistake traders make is thinking that investing and trading is easy.

27
GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS METHOD

Clearly there is nothing perfect in life or trading.You will have losses but these losses,
as long as they are kept small, will be manageable.You will have ups and downs in your
trading account.You will go through drawdowns. Losses are as natural as breathing.
Many cannot take losses. That is why they flocked to Madoff. They did not want to
take small losses only to take total losses.
You decide; nothing is perfect! There is no free lunch.
In my opinion there is no other strategy out there that offers liquidity, transparency, and profit potential as much as trend following. Trend following strategies
work on all markets, forex, stocks, and commodities. Trend following works on all
time frames. If you want to day trade, the same rules apply as they do to trading daily
charts. Trend following is not something new; it goes back decades!
Even with the success of trend following there are periods when profits are elusive.
Many people consider trend following dead during these periods. In all honesty, my wife
has asked me over and over again during my drawdowns if maybe trend following is over.
People, including my wife, ignore the tremendous track record that trend followers have built over the decades. They argue it is outdated; it has too many participants;
or it simply just does not work anymore. Again and again they are proven wrong. At
the darkest point comes the light.
Actually these are the best times to invest in trend following.
Trend following entails having a defined plan and strategy to put money into trades
to achieve one and only one goal: profit.
Trend followers do not care what they own or what they sell or buy as long as
they end up with more money than they started with. Trend followers will go short as
often as they will go long, thus giving them the potential to make money in both up
and down markets.
The fears associated with a potential market crash do not exist; the greed associated with a runaway bull market does not exist.
Trend followers do not worry about what the markets are going to do tomorrow.
They have an exact plan with all contingencies thought out ahead of time. Trend followers are like surfers and look to ride the waves.
Trend followers have an exact plan. This plan is based on an objective and automated set of rules.
Trend followers follow their plan without second guessing it. They believe in it! A
trading plan makes life easier by eliminating emotions from the trading decisions. A
trading plan forces discipline. If you do not follow the trading plan, you will not succeed. Do not even start if you cannot follow the plan.

They allow themselves to fall for advertisements promising, “You can get rich by
trading” or “Earn all the income you’ve ever dreamed of ” or “Leave your day job forever and live off your day‐trading profits.” Trend following is not retirement in a box.

You Have to Work
The actual tenets of successful trend following are basically simple and intuitive in
nature. However, in practicality trend following is very difficult due to our greed and
fears.
In order to succeed over time with trend following you will need to internalize
these tenets and make them part of your trading.
It is imperative for your long‐term success to always cut losses short and take
low‐risk trades. You will realize when you start trend following, if you haven’t already, that many trades simply do not work. Taking low‐risk bets and keeping losses
manageable are the cornerstone of successful trend following.
Don’t trade to get rich quick. At best it takes a long time to compound money and
there are no guarantees for the future. The only certainty is uncertainty!
Have realistic expectations. Losses are part of our business. There will be
many. A trading system that doesn’t have losses is “too good to be true.” The only truth
about that trading system is that it will not make money in the real world.
THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

28

Start Small
Remember to start small—walk before you run. When you are trend following
successfully you trade only in the direction of the trend. There is no second‐
guessing or debating.You do not let your opinions get in the way.You have an exact
plan to follow trades that are working as well as an exact plan to exit quickly
trades that are not working.
I use only a few rules and they are very easy to understand. Do not confuse easy‐to‐
understand with easy‐to‐do. The more rules you have, the more likely that you’ve
“curve‐fitted” your trading strategy to past data, and such an overoptimized system is
very unlikely to produce profits in real markets.
At the same time, it takes time to develop a successful strategy. This is why you
should start small. Test potential rules before deciding to include them in your trading.
It’s important that your rules are easy to understand and execute. This ensures that
your strategy is robust, adaptable, and easy to manage.

Compound Your Money over Time
Patience is also important when it comes to finding trading success. Every trader—no
matter how experienced—has losing trades. I recommend keeping a long‐term view.

This can help you keep your emotions in check so you can quickly recover from losses,
behave rationally, and follow your trading plan instead of getting distracted.

■ Compounding Your Way to Wealth

Compounding Money Is the Key
to Building Our Net Worth
Albert Einstein called compound interest “the greatest mathematical discovery of all time.”
Richard Russell, known from his work, The Dow Letters, has stated, “Compounding
is the royal road to riches.” He also said, “Compounding is the safe road, the sure road,
and fortunately anybody can do it.

29
GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS METHOD

Repeatedly I have stressed that trend following is not easy nor the only way to compound your way to wealth.
There is a drawdown out there that can make one stop trend following.
As they have not followed their plan, even had a plan, or took on too much risk.
Regardless of the strictest risk and money management filters, there will
be numerous losses. In order to compound money we must try to keep them small and
manageable, otherwise we will not be compounding money.You will experience gaps that
go against you as well days that are limit up or down.You cannot avoid or control these.
There will always be drawdowns and extended periods of elusive profits. In all
honesty, trend following is the easiest yet the hardest thing to do. You will have deep
and extended drawdowns that seem never to end. However, eventually there is light
at the end of the tunnel. Out of nowhere trends appear, and accounts regain their lost
values and hit new equity peaks.
Everyone has his or her belief system of how to try to compound money or simply
invest. There are those who do real estate, invest in hedge funds, as well those that invest in their own personal business. As I stated, trend following is not the only solution
to compound money over time, but it is the strategy I adhere to and I have personally
been able to compound money over time.
There are no guarantees, however, that trend following will be right for
you.Trend following is liquid and transparent where other strategies are not.
As much as nothing is for sure except uncertainty, I am confident that trend following will continue to work over time regardless of bull markets, bear markets, inflation,
and deflation.
We all have heard of the Rule of 72 and the magic of compounding at some point
in our education. However, for me, compounding money was elusive for a period of
time. The reality is that for most traders it is also elusive. It took me many years until
I was able to take money out of the markets.

This means possibly you.
Table 2.1 details what would happen to a $100,000 investment if one were able to
compound that initial investment at an annual rate of between 10 percent and 20 percent.
TABLE 2.1 Compound Interest on $100,000 over Time
Initial Investment

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

30

Annual Interest Rate

Time

Total

$100,000.00

10%

5 yrs

$ 161,051.00

$100,000.00

10%

10 yrs

$ 259,374.25

$100,000.00

10%

15 yrs

$ 417,724.82

$100,000.00

10%

20 yrs

$ 672,749.99

$100,000.00

15%

5 yrs

$ 201,135.72

$100,000.00

15%

10 yrs

$ 404,555.77

$100,000.00

15%

15 yrs

$ 813,706.16

$100,000.00

15%

20 yrs

$1,636,653.74

$100,000.00

20%

5 yrs

$ 248,832.00

$100,000.00

20%

10 yrs

$ 619,173.64

$100,000.00

20%

15 yrs

$1,540,702.16

$100,000.00

20%

20 yrs

$6,814,608.25

The chart tells us that a $100,000 investment compounding at 15 percent would grow
in excess of $400,000 over a 10‐year period. If that investment continued to compound
at 15 percent per year, it would grow to over $800,000 five years later. Simple terms: in
10 years @ 15 percent you have 4 times your money and in 15 years you have 8 times.
In the manual I present real‐time and real‐money audited returns of some money
managers. Now that you see Table 2.1 you can understand how these money managers
were able to compound money to such extremes.
One of the key points that I will keep on reminding you is about keeping losses
small. If losses grow to extremes, it negatively impacts our compounding or even may
lead you to quit trend following.
Table 2.2 reflects the mathematics of recovering from losses.
TABLE 2.2 Recovering from Losses
If Your Portfolio
Drops

New Value of Portfolio

% Gain Needed
to Recover

$100,000

10%

$90,000

11%

$100,000

20%

$80,000

25%

$100,000

30%

$70,000

43%

$100,000

40%

$60,000

67%

$100,000

50%

$50,000

100%

Starting Portfolio Value

This table actually shows us the importance of trying to mitigate losses. The bottom line is that it is very difficult to recover from large losses.
Figure 2.1 is a chart from American Century Investment that shows an equity
curve of a portfolio that suffered a 50 percent decline. This chart indicates just how
difficult it is to recover from large losses. A positive 8 percent compounded return
for eight years will only bring your account back to even after initially suffering such
a large loss. It is simply not easy to recover from large losses, and yet all markets will
likely suffer 50 percent declines at some point. The power of compounding can work
for you only if you do not suffer large losses.

31

All we can control is our risk. This is why it is so important to adhere to strict risk
and money management rules. There always exists a draw down that can stop you
from trend following. If you want to make trend following a lifetime strategy you must
include strict risk & money management.

Keep It Simple and Stupid
Many people (including myself when I first began) think that the fancy Ivy schools or
reams of research reports will bring trading profits. My proprietary robust ideas
are more successful than complicated analysis. When I first began my journey
of learning I sought out the holy grail. I thought there was some secret method, Fibonacci, Elliott wave, or Gann idea that would enable to me to make money. I personally
have not been able to figure out or predict when a market will move. I reached the
point where I realized that I could not nor can anyone else accurately predict over time
when a market will move.

GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS METHOD

FIGURE 2.1 Recovery after a 50 Percent Decline

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

32

I started to doubt that gurus really existed. Prechter was still a perma bear years
after his great call of the stock market in 1987. Once I really internalized this, my anxiety level fell and I was okay not even thinking about or trying to predict or know why a
market moved. I learned that anything can happen and will happen. I realized
all information was in the price. I did not need to predict anything to be successful.
More so, I realized that no one knows anything more than me. I have invested with
many commodity‐trading advisors over the years. In the beginning I thought they were
smarter or simply just better than my own trend following. I realized this is not the case.
Some years I have had better returns in my trend following than some of the managers I invest with and some years I have worse. It does not matter, though, as I am looking to compound my money over long periods of time and want to try to smooth it out as best I can.
Eventually I learned that trying to predict anything was a waste of time and not possible. That is I why decided to follow trends. That is why I have been successful over the
years since 1994 even though it has been some journey. I never know when a trend starts
or stops. I just take small bets, ask myself how much it is going to cost me to see if the
trade will work, and try to follow trends. A small position is like a tugboat. Sometimes
these small positions can pull a great deal of weight and show tremendous returns. As an
example, I was lucky to have a cotton trade in 2010 and just on one contract $20,000 of
profit was attributed. This is a rare case; most trades actually do not work.
I cannot guess how far a trend will go. It is impossible! No one knows how high or
how low a market can go. No one knows when a market will move or a trend will begin.

■ Requirements for Successful Trend

Following

Successful trend followers strive for the goal of consistency. In order to achieve consistency you need a solid, robust plan that gives the potential to produce consistent
trading profits over time. As I stated earlier, if you want to succeed in trend following
you must do your work.You MUST invest both time and money to acquire the knowledge that you need as well as the discipline to follow the plan and the patience to let
the plan work over time.
You are accountable for your trading decisions and actions, and you must take
responsibility for your trading.
You are responsible for your trading results, nobody else.

Perseverance and Commitment
With these attributes, over time, success can possibly be achieved.
Trend following is not for everyone.Yes, there are many advantages, but there are also
realities that many do not want to face. One of these realities is that you will encounter
many losing trades. If you do not want to lose on a trade, do not start trend following.

Successful trend followers, regardless of whether they are managing money for
others or simply for themselves, have robust trend following strategies and the discipline to stick to their trading plan even through the inevitable drawdowns.
Unfortunately, even with a tested, proven trading strategy, you are not guaranteed
trading success. It takes something else. It takes discipline and patience. A proven strategy is useless without discipline. Successful trend followers must have the discipline to
follow their system rigorously. Simply purchasing a trend following book (even mine)
does not guarantee your success as a trader.

A Positive Attitude and Realistic Expectations
As I have already stated and want to reiterate, trading can be simple, but it is not easy.
Along the line, you will face losses, but you need to get up every single morning believing
in yourself, the robust methodology, and the potential of compounding money over time.

Give Yourself a Time for Introspection
Evaluate yourself. Be honest with yourself. Maintain a trade journal and evaluate yourself. I strongly suggest using it for every trade and then reviewing it. Here are some
sample questions and reminders to address in your journal.
Did you follow the exact plan?

33

Did you overtrade this week?

GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS METHOD

Did you put on too large a position because you thought the trade would work?
Did you put on too small a position due to fear?
Did you let your emotions get the better of you?
Did you let fear or greed overcome you?
What about ego? Did you have to be right on a trade?
If you made mistakes—do not beat yourself up.
Look out the front window, not the back window!
I have yet to meet a perfect person!
Take responsibility for your actions and your decisions.
Admit a mistake, learn from it, and move on.
Be Committed!
Trading success will not happen overnight. It requires commitment, time, and effort on your part.

There are already too many “traders” in the market who think they know everything they need to, who think they don’t have to learn anything; they believe there are
trading robots out there that will place their trades for them and make them rich.You
and I know that this is a sure path to failure.

Keep Your Cool
The markets can behave very wildly and move very fast, and you won’t have time to
calculate complicated formulas in order to make trading decisions. Think about successful floor traders: The only tools they use are a calculator and pivot points, and
some make thousands of dollars every day.
You follow the trend! Let profits run without any fear or greed. Simply detach
yourself, see what is happening, and follow the exact plan.
You will have an exact plan in which at every point you know exactly what you
should be doing. When you are letting your profits run you will be exposed to profitable opportunities due to trending markets. You will not be in areas that are illiquid
such as the housing bubble or on the wrong side of major trends such as the dot.com
bubble or the October 2008 stock market meltdown.
I will teach you how successful trend followers both approach the markets and how
they think.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE
