
ACCOUNT SIZE AND AFFORDABLE LOSS PER
TRADE
One of the core money management rules of professional traders is not to risk more than 1 to 3 percent
of their capital on any one trade.
They understand the mathematics of losses, and how a given percent loss requires an even larger
percent gain to recoup that loss. See Appendix E for illustration. This 1 to 3 percent refers to the
amount risked by your stop loss, not position size. In other words, account size determines how far
you can set your stop loss from your entry point without risking more than 1 to 3 percent of your
account.
For example, those with a $10,000 account would not set their stop losses so far from their entry
point that they risk more than $100–$300 per trade. Those with $100,000 accounts could accept
$1,000–$3,000 loss per trade and so could set their stop loss orders further from their entry point.
The reason for keeping loss/trade to within these 1 to 3 percent limits is that you can then afford a
string of 5 to 15 losses and still have about 85 percent of your capital left.

SETTING STOP LOSSES: BASIC TECHNIQUE AND
PSYCHOLOGY
For a given position size and leverage, you limit your maximum loss per trade through your stop loss
settings. The following rules on stop loss setting assume you're entering near strong support, because
if you aren't, you shouldn't even consider entering the trade. If the trade moves against you, that nearby
support is quickly breached and you have a signal to exit before a small loss becomes a large one.

Where to Set Stop Losses: Two Criteria
When setting your stop loss order, you're always striking a balance between two conflicting criteria:
1. The stop loss price is close enough to your entry point so if it's hit, the loss doesn't exceed 1 to
3 percent of your account value, as noted previously.
2. It's far enough away from your entry point and the likely support level so it doesn't get hit by
normal random price movements and close your position before price has had time to move in
your favor. Rather, it's triggered only by price moves that are big enough to suggest that you were
wrong and overestimated the strength of a given support zone, and now a loss is more likely than
you thought. It's time to close the position before a small affordable loss becomes a large one.
There are different ways to determine normal or average price movement to expect during a given
period. Some manually determine average or typical candle length over a given period. Some
will use a certain percentage of the range as determined by the Average True Range (ATR)
indicator (more on this soon). Price volatility varies with market conditions and time frame as
must the distance from entry point to stop loss.
Viewed from another perspective, setting stop losses means striking a balance between:
Less frequent but larger losses from wider (or looser) stop loss settings: The farther your stop

loss from your entry point, the larger the losses on losing trades relative to your gains from
winning trades. However, you have less chance of having your stop loss hit before price starts to
move in your favor (being “stopped out”). The main advantage of this approach is a higher
percentage of winning trades (which you may need for encouragement), at least when you're right
about the ultimate price direction. The main disadvantage is that you risk too many large losses
and lower profits compared to the following approach to setting stop losses.
More frequent but smaller losses from tighter (or narrower) stop loss settings: The closer your
stop losses to your entry point, the smaller the losses on losing trades relative to your gains from
winning trades. However, you'll have more losses from being “stopped out” on trades that would
have ultimately worked, because your stop loss will be hit more often, before price has had time
to move in your favor.

More Capital Allows Wider Stop Losses and a Wider Choice of LowRisk Trade Opportunities
A larger account means:
You can afford to set stop loss settings that are wide enough to avoid getting prematurely
“stopped out,” yet still only risk 1 to 3 percent of your capital, because you have more capital to
risk. That means there are more trades available to take that have entry points that are both close
enough to strong support and only risk 1 to 3 percent of your capital.
You can afford the wider stop losses needed to ride the more stable longer-term trends via
longer-term positions. As noted previously, forex markets produce many stable long-term trends.
However, the longer you hold a position, the larger the normal price swings and the farther the
stop loss must be from your entry point. For example, a pair may have average daily price swings
of 50 points, but weekly or monthly average price swings could be many times larger. A bigger
account allows you to set those stop losses far enough from your entry point (near strong support,
of course) to ride the wider short-term fluctuations within the more predictable long-term trends.
In sum, a larger account allows you a wider choice of trades in any time frame, and also offers
more chances to ride the most stable, predictable, and safer trends that are the basis of lower risk
trading.
Not surprisingly, studies suggest certain minimum account sizes increase your chances of being
profitable.7

Balancing Risk versus the Need to Win
While a larger account allows for wider stop losses, you need to accept the added risk that comes
with them. Wider stop losses can increase your percentage of winning trades, but risks lower profits
because losing trades cost more.
The right balance between winning percentage and loss sizes varies for each trader.
Some need a higher percentage of winning trades that comes from wider stop losses in order to
avoid getting too discouraged, even if it comes at a cost of higher losses and lower overall profits.
Others are less emotional. As long as they achieve realistic profits at the end of the week, month, or
quarter, they can accept taking more (but smaller) losses as long as the gains from the winners

outweigh those losses enough to keep profits healthy. Few, however, are cool enough to accept very
high losing percentages, such as 70 percent of their trades, no matter how profitable the trading style.
So, as you experiment with trading styles, be sensitive to what you need most to keep going. For
some traders, particularly when starting out, the priority will be a higher winning percentage to build
confidence. Others will need lower losses per trade and can accept the tradeoff of more “stopped
out” trades and less frequent wins as part of the learning process.
When in doubt, err on the side of tighter stops and smaller but more frequent losses. Deal with the
discouragement that may come from those by:
Reminding yourself that it takes time to be successful, especially given the profit potential and
competition it attracts. You need to learn and practice a lot to know enough and know what kind
of trading suits you (e.g., your risk tolerance, time available, patience).
Taking a break from trading to review your losing trades in your trading journal and identifying
and correcting your mistakes.
Taking a break from trading, period. I'm amazed at how much clarity can come after a good
night's sleep or a few days off from a given dilemma.
Do not underestimate the importance of managing your mood and attitude, and of finding trading
styles that give you enough of a winning percentage to keep going even if they are perhaps less
profitable.
So how far (in pips) from strong support do you want to set your stop loss? First, it must be close
enough to your entry point so that if hit your loss is less than 3%. Second, want it beyond the range of
random price movements. So we need a way to define the range of “normal random price
movements.” There are many ways to do this; here are a few simple ones.

Method 1: Recent Range
The simplest, perhaps most intuitive way to set stop loss orders is to look at recent highs and lows for
the period in question. In other words, the stop loss should be at least as far away from support as
suggested by the recent price volatility, which of course varies dramatically depending on the
circumstances and time frame. See our trade examples in Chapter 7.

Method 2: Average True Range (ATR)
Rather than using your own judgment, some statistical measures of price volatility are available. One
of the most popular is the Average True Range (ATR) indicator, which measures the average
movement for a given currency pair (or stock, commodity, etc.) for a given time period. Typically, the
default setting is 14 periods, that is, 14 days on a daily chart, 14 hours on an hourly chart, and so
forth, but over time you may want to experiment with that setting.
Knowing the ATR for a given period, traders can chose to place stops a given percentage of that
range away from the entry point. For example, traders with great confidence in the direction of the
trend who want to avoid having their stop loss hit would place their stop loss 80 to 100 percent of the
ATR beyond their entry point near strong support. They'll accept the larger loss if that stop is hit
because they believe the likelihood of that happening is low. Those with less confidence and more
risk aversion who want smaller losses (even if there are more of them because the stop gets hit) might

place their stop closer, perhaps 50 percent or less of the ATR away from the entry point.
Once you know the average volatility for a given period via the ATR, you have a better idea of how
far away your fixed or trailing stop loss order needs to be to avoid getting hit by random price
movements.
Later in this chapter and in Chapter 7, we'll see examples of how to use ATR.

So How Much Capital Is Enough?
By the time you've graduated from practice accounts, you should have a an initial idea about what
kinds of trading you like to do, and your trading journal (more on that later) should provide a record
of the amount you need to allow for realistically wide stop loss settings per trade and still be able to
absorb a string of 5 to 15 losses. That amount will vary with trading styles and methods. For example,
positions held for weeks or months need wider stop loss settings to absorb wider price swings than
positions held for a few days.
We offer 5 to 15 losses only as a rough guide. We're not suggesting you rack up 10 straight losses
before stopping. After you see five losing trades out of the past six to seven, you should consider
stopping to identify the problem by studying your trade journal (discussed later on in this chapter).
You may well repeat this process a few times before you've fixed the problem, suffering periodic
losing streaks of about 15 losses as part of your tuition for your trading education.
Again, you should have about six profitable months of trading with practice accounts (and very
small positions with real money) before doing any serious trading with live money. Thus you should
have some experience with the process of fixing losing streaks before you “go live” with larger
position sizes. Furthermore, you'll have extensive records of your past trading to guide you. Again,
we'll cover trade plans and journals later.
If the account size you need and can afford is unclear, and it may well be, don't worry. You're
allowed to make mistakes with your account size in the early stages. Start with an amount that meets
the following criteria:
You can afford to lose it as an investment in your education.
Based on your limited experience with the size of your positions, leverage, and stop losses, you
can absorb a string of 5 to 15 losses and still have about 85 percent of your capital left.
Practically speaking, most people will have limited control over what they can afford to lose.
Instead, most people will adapt their trading style, position size, and leverage to their account size.
So, let's move on to those aspects of RAMM.

LEVERAGE AND MARGIN
We covered this second pillar of RAMM earlier in Chapter 2 and provide additional details in
Appendix D. However, no discussion of RAMM would be complete without a reminder that the
higher your leverage, the higher your risk. Until you're an accomplished trader, or at least good at
RAMM, you want to keep it as low as your broker will allow and add more as your success warrants.
Many brokers have fixed leverage levels, so you have to adjust your account size or position size.

POSITION SIZING
Of the three pillars of RAMM, position size is usually the easiest one to adjust, at times the only one.
As you may recall from Chapter 2, you typically have three choices of lot sizes you can trade.
1. Standard Accounts: 100,000 units of the base currency (the one on the left).
2. Mini Accounts: 10,000 units of base currency.
3. Micro or super mini accounts: 1,000 units of base currency.
Just to give you an idea of what that means, if:
The account is denominated in Euros.
The Euro is the base currency (the one on the right), which is common with the major currency
pairs.
Then the cost per pip is €10.00 for a standard lot, €1.00 for a mini lot, and €0.10 for a micro lot.
See Appendix B for details.
In practice, you may not have much control over your account size because that's largely fixed by
how much you're able to afford. Many brokers don't offer much choice on leverage used. So, lot size
is the one thing everyone can use to keep risk down.
When you first graduate from practice to real accounts, no matter how successful you were with
demo accounts, stick to trading one or a few lots of the smallest lot size offered. The one big
weakness of practice accounts is that they can't simulate the pressure of having money at risk, so many
traders struggle to attain the same success they had with demo accounts when they start trading real
money.
Expect your performance to suffer when you transition to trading and risking real money. That's
normal.
So when you start trading with real money, use small positions that keep your losses to around 1%
or less of your total account. You can increase your position size after you see a number of months of
profitable trading. Because you'll be working with small lots, evaluate your performance based on
percentage rather than nominal gains. Don't view this period as a delay. View it like you would a paid
internship. You accept less money for the sake of gaining better experience. After you see that you've
maintained or improved on your performance with practice accounts, then you can consider moving
up to larger position sizes. If you hit a losing streak, strongly consider cutting down your position
sizes until your performance recovers.

AVOID HAVING TOO MANY OPEN POSITIONS
Closely related to position sizing is the common mistake of overtrading with too many full-sized
(versus partial) open positions. This can be distracting, and it defeats the purpose of keeping position
sizes small by increasing the percentage of your account at risk at any one time. How many open
positions are too many? This is a judgment call and depends on your skill level and time frame.
Trades that occur over days or weeks require less active monitoring than those that complete in a
matter of minutes or hours.

ENTRIES NEAR STRONG SUPPORT, EXITS NEAR
STRONG RESISTANCE
Regardless of whether you enter or exit all at once or in stages, a key part of good risk management is
to base your entries and exits on the location of strong s/r.

