
Any move without the banks (BKX), brokers (XBD), and semiconductors (SOX) is suspect and most likely will not last.
On April 1, 2005, the only sectors up on the day, for the most part, were energy, housing, and gold. (See Figure 6.12.) One of the worst sectors of the day was the
semiconductors, and not far behind it were brokers and banks. I like knowing where these sectors are in the mix for three reasons: First, the giant money-center banks
represent the biggest (or almost biggest, depending on current prices) market capitalization sector in the market. The markets need participation from this index if they
hope to make any headway. Second, brokers are a great market proxy. As go the brokers, so go the markets. Third, everyone participates in the semiconductor stocks.
They have a strong following among retail and institutional investors alike. If I see a decline with these three sectors leading the way lower, I am confident that the
decline is going to last. The reverse is also true.

110

111

Figure 6.12
The other way I like to use this list is when the markets are quiet and choppy. Often there are stealth moves in the markets. This happens when the overall indexes
are restricted in a tight range, but underneath the surface, a couple of key sectors are deteriorating or firming. This often is not picked up in the index itself. This brings
me to my next rule:

During these quiet periods in the market, the more sectors that go red, the greater the odds are that, when the market finally does break, it will be to the downside.
Conversely, the more sectors that go green, the greater the odds are that, when the market finally does break, it will be to the upside.
Like a doctor’s relationship to a patient’s medical chart, the sector sorter list helps a trader gauge the overall health of the current market environment. ETFs can also
be utilized for this. The nine I like to follow are XLY (Consumer Discretionary), XLF (Financial), XLB (M aterials), XLP (Consumer Staples), XLV (Health Care),
XLK (Technology), XLE (Energy), XKI (Industrial), and XLU (Utilities).

How Do You Know When It’s Going to Be a Choppy Day?
One of the most frustrating things for traders is dealing with a tight-range, choppy day in the stock indexes. Choppy days occur when the stock indexes spend most of
the day trading in a slow, narrow range, providing minimal volatility. M ost traders don’t realize that the trading is choppy until about halfway through the day. They
can tell by looking at the chart, and they can tell by the amount of losing trades that they have taken. In addition, there are specific trade setups that work great in
choppy markets. If a trader relentlessly pursues a setup that works best in trending markets, she is going to get killed. Two of my favorite choppy market strategies
are described in Chapters 8 and 9 (pivots and tick fades).
M y goal is to identify what type of market it is going to be as early as possible in the trading day. To do this, I set up a five-minute chart of the E-mini S&P 500
futures, and the only indicator I place on this chart is volume. Once this is done, I place a horizontal line at the 25,000 level on the volume chart (or as close to 25,000
as I can place it).
In Figure 6.13, we can see that the trading during the first hour on September 27, 2011, had the vast majority of the volume bars going over 25,000. This is typical,
as the first hour of trading is typically hectic. This means that more than 25,000 contracts were traded every five minutes. The markets traded quietly higher for most
of the day, and then started to ease back into the final hour. Once volume spiked above 25,000 contracts and then stayed above that level, it indicated that bears were
swooping in for the kill. And kill they did, sending the S&Ps 30 points lower into the close. Volume is extremely helpful in measuring the conviction of the move. Had
the market started to sell off on light volume, I would have known that there wasn’t much conviction in the move. It was just a probe that would most likely fail, and it
would indicate a buying opportunity for a continuation rally into the close. However, once the volume backs the move, it’s continuation at its best, and there is no
reason to fight it, just go with it. In Figure 6.14, we can see the $TICK from that same day. For much of the day, the $TICK spent quality time above zero, frequently
hitting the +1,000 level. During this time, any pullbacks to the zero lines were buying opportunities, with moves back up to +1,000 an opportunity to sell that
position. However, once volume spiked higher and the $TICK hit its first –1,000 reading into the close, the nature of the market changed. As you can see, all rallies
back to the zero line were rejected (offering shorting opportunities) as the bears kept pounding the bulls into submission. In fact, the $TICK got as low as –1,200,
which indicates extreme selling taking shape. Watching both the volume and the $TICK together offers a great map of what’s going on underneath the surface on any
given day. This brings me to my rule for watching this volume chart:

112

Figure 6.13

113

Figure 6.14
If the first six bars on a five-minute ES chart have most of the volume at or well under 25,000 contracts, expect a choppy, tight-range session. If the first six bars
on a five-minute ES chart have most of the volume at or well above 25,000 contracts, expect a more volatile session with better trends.

This is a simple way to determine early on if the markets are going to be choppy or more volatile on the day. This allows traders to choose the setups that are more
appropriate for these types of markets early in the day. To put it simply, on choppy days, it’s best to fade extreme $TICK readings. On trending days, it’s better to
go with extreme $TICK readings by fading moves back to the 0.00 line. (See Chapter 9 for more information on $TICK plays.)

Listening In on the Floor—What Is the True Value of Pit Noise?
There are feeds available from people who are standing just outside of the S&P futures pit at the Chicago M ercantile Exchange. They will stand there and call out the
current bid/ask prices and make comments on the market action. I like to have this playing quietly in the background on those crazy days when the stock market is
moving hard. One of my trading partners, Hubert Senters, likes to play it loud every day, as he pays attention to all the nuances coming out of the pit. Hubert
introduced me to pit noise, and the first few months I listened to it, the noise nearly drove me to drink, so I turned it off. After three days, I realized that I missed it
just enough. These days I like to day-trade the stock index futures on the “crazy days” with the pit noise playing in the background. If it’s a quiet or “normal” day,
then I’m fine without it. Here is how it works and how I use it.
First off, it’s important to understand what the people in the pits are talking about. All day long, a trader is going to hear the bid/ask being quoted, and it typically
goes like this: “six twenty by a half, six twenty by a half,” and so on. This is a quote for the big S&P contract, which is quoted in tenths instead of quarters like the Eminis. This means that the current bid/ask is 1,136.20 by 1,136.50. The quotes just focus on the last few numbers instead of the entire price.
The person doing the talking will frequently refer to “paper versus local.” Paper coming into the market means that it is a retail order and was placed by a broker
such as Goldman Sachs or M errill Lynch. “Local market” means that the locals are trading among themselves; this happens when the action is slow and the volume is
light. I have listened to many pit broadcasters, and by far the best one is Ben Lichtenstein with www.tradersaudio.com. He absolutely loves what he does, and this
comes across each day in his broadcasts. Every summer, we hold a four-day seminar in Chicago. We have Ben come in for an hour and talk about how he reads the tape
and what listeners should key in on. Then, the next day, we take the group down to the CM E floor so that they can watch Ben in action calling out the pit noise live.
They see exactly what he is looking at, what he is calling out, and why he is doing it. It’s a great experience. We did manage to get one of these sessions filmed, and it is
fun to watch on DVD.
Here’s some terminology. A “thin top” means that there are not a lot of bids at these levels—look for the market rally to fail. If Ben mentions a scale buyer or a
scale seller, I pay attention to what that seller is doing and at what levels.
When Ben mentions a “top tenner,” this means that one of the 10 biggest guys in the pit is doing something. Once in a while, you will hear that a “top tenner” is
114

stuck short, and this provides great opportunities to jump in on a trade as the top tenner is forced to cover hundreds of the big S&P contracts to get out of his position.
This is information that you can’t learn from watching a chart.
I also like to listen to the overall noise level. Is it quiet and slow, or is it loud and fast? If the noise explodes, it is almost like the ticks reaching the +1,000 level. This
level of activity is unsustainable, and the markets will reverse. If the sound is quiet and then it gradually gets louder, I will go in the direction of the market until the
noise “explodes,” and then I’ll get out.
M y favorite way to use the noise from the pit is to listen and figure out whether the noise is louder on the up moves or the down moves. If a market is rallying and
the pit noise is loud, and then the market pulls back and the pit noise is quiet, this is a crystal-clear signal that the momentum is higher, and I will aggressively buy all
pullbacks on these days. The reverse is also true. Once I got used to this, I found it very hard to look at a chart without having this “pit noise indicator” in the
background.
There are many other ways to use pit noise. If someone is above or below the market with size and the locals fill it, go in the direction of that move. This means the
locals are pushing the markets instead of fading the markets.
If the pit moderator tells you what the low is, and that low is below the lows of the day you see on your charts, the market is going lower and is about to make new
lows on the day. If the pit moderator says look for a stop run at 1,136, pay attention to that number if you are below it.
The most important thing with pit noise is not to get caught up in the excitement. It is easy to think that this is the Holy Grail when you first get it. But it’s not.
It’s just another tool. Traders who get caught up in the excitement of the pit buy the highs and sell the lows, just like any other amateur.

Putting It All Together—How Can You Size Up the Trading Day from the Opening Bell?
It is easy to get overwhelmed by too much data, and the key for reading all of these data is to do it in such a way that your brain can take in the information as quickly
and as efficiently as possible. I do this by looking at these data in a certain order, in two columns, top to bottom, left to right.
Figure 6.15 shows how I tie all this information into a single screen. The trin and the trinq are in the upper left, and these are what I look at first. Then my eyes go
below this to the PC ratio, which is what I look at second (note that the symbol for this is now $PCVA instead of $WPCVA). After this, I look at the ticks, which are
at the bottom left of the screen. From here my eyes jump to the upper right and to the sector sorter list. Finally, I look at the tiki. I don’t even have to look at a chart
to know that the market has been selling off steadily all day.

115

116

Figure 6.15

Figure 6.16 shows these key indicators against the backdrop of a strong market. At a glance, I can see that the trin and trinq are trending lower, and that the PC ratio
started off well at over 1.0 on the day. I can see that the ticks are spending a lot of quality time above zero, and that most of the sectors are in positive territory. I can
also see, with the tiki, that there have been a lot more buy programs than sell programs. On this type of day, I want to focus on long setups and ignore short setups.
In addition to being able to get a solid feeling for whether the market has upside or downside pressure, this will also help a trader understand when the markets are in
“chop mode.” This will happen when these different indicators conflict with one another. For example, the trin is making new highs (bearish), but the ticks are
spending all their time above zero (bullish). One of my favorite ways to see whether or not we have a choppy market is also the simplest. I look at the sector sorter
list, and if about half the sectors are green and half the sectors are red, well, it can’t get more neutral than that.
I don’t include the ES five-minute volume chart on this layout simply because there is not enough room. I watch this on another screen.
I created this layout in TradeStation. You can recreate it by looking at Figures 6.15 and 6.16, or by going to www.tradethemarkets.com and downloading a copy
complete with all the audio alerts.

What Are the Other Main Things to Keep Track Of?
Not a whole lot has changed since I wrote this chapter back in 2005. In fact, my updates to this chapter have been minimal, with the exception of the volume numbers
on the ES from Figure 6.13, which have grown to 25,000 from 10,000. I’ve also been using the $TICK a little differently, utilizing the 0.00 line as an entry opportunity
on those strong days, of which we’ve had so many in August and September of 2011. The $TRIN is still good, although its impact has been muted a bit with all of the
reverse ETFs that are on the market now, which are trading good volume and skewing the $TRIN numbers—not a lot, but they are skewed a touch. To make up for
this, there are two “new” internals that I also watch these days. I say “new” only because they aren’t really new—I just watch them a lot more intently now than I did
a few years ago. These indicators are the $VOLSPD (S&P 500 Up-Down Volume Difference) and the $VIX, which is of course the CBOE Volatility Index.

117

118

Figure 6.16

The $VOLSPD is worthless at the beginning of the day, but it’s priceless into the last hour of trading. When I look at this indicator, I think of selling pressure and
buying pressure. If selling pressure is sustained into the final hour, then look for a sell-off into the close. If buying pressure is sustained, then look for a rally. This may
seem overly simplistic, but there are a lot of fake-outs during the last half-hour of trading. If the stock market sells off seemingly hard, but the $VOLSPD continues to
grind higher, guess what? The stock market is going to reverse and rally into the close. The opposite is also true.
In Figure 6.17, we see a chart of both the $VOLSPD and the SPY on a five-minute chart. Around 1:45 p.m. central at point 1, the stock market begins to rally, and
the rally is persistent for nearly half an hour. Is this real buying, or is it a fake-out? By looking at the $VOLSPD, we can tell not only that it is a fake-out, but that the
market has a high probability of selling off into the close. Not only does the $VOLSPD not confirm the rally, but it actually starts to make new lows on the day, which
in this case is the death knell for bulls. The markets crater into the close.

Figure 6.17

The $VIX has, of course, been around forever, and it’s importance increases as market volatility increases. This is also known as the “fear indicator,” as it does a
good job of measuring panic. Panic, of course, can get overdone, and too much panic is a buy signal.
In Figure 6.18, we see a daily chart of the $VIX on the upper half with a set of standard Bollinger Bands with the settings at 20 and 2. The bottom half of the chart
is the SPY. Note that anytime the $VIX rallies up to the top of the Bollinger Bands, and especially when it closes above the Bollinger Bands, not only is a market
bottom in the making, but a potentially violent rally as well.
At point 3, see what happened on the day of the infamous “flash crash,” where the market went nuts to the downside for part of the day. The $VIX spiked higher.
People were freaking out. And what happened? The market had a violent multiday rally that exceeded the highs just prior to the flash crash. Going along the chart, you
can clearly see that any extremes in the $VIX reading, indicating extreme fear in the markets, indicated that the selling had exhausted itself. The lesson? Don’t get too
excited on the downside if the $VIX is extended.

119

Figure 6.18
I’ll also watch the $VIX on a five-minute chart intraday, as seen in Figure 6.19. With this, I’m just looking for the $VIX to make any breakout or breakdown moves.
The $VIX is fast and will typically break before the market. At point 1, the $VIX popped higher, and shortly thereafter the markets broke down. As long as the $VIX
is trending higher in this case, the market will continue to sell off.

120

Figure 6.19

For the $VIX, I utilize the five-minute chart to measure the “immediate fear” in the market. For the daily chart, I utilize the daily chart to see when the fear has
gotten out of hand and it’s time for a relief rally.

And, Oh Yes, Did You Know That If You Ignore This One Thing, You Don’t Stand a Chance?
There has been a lot in the press over the past few years about the “carry trade,” but most traders and investors don’t give it much thought. “That’s some weird thing
the hedge funds are doing,” they think. “It doesn’t apply to me.” And that is where the traders are wrong. Dead wrong.
The carry trade affects the markets today more than nearly anything else. Stripping it down to its simplest measure, it works like this: hedge funds borrow a lowinterest currency like the yen or U.S. dollars, and then put those funds into higher-yielding currencies like the Australian dollar. Then they borrow against these
Australian dollars and go out and buy appreciating assets such as stocks, gold, silver, grains, oil … you name it. Why do they go to all of this trouble? Simple: to make
big returns so that they can collect big fees.
Why is this important? Because when funds are putting on the carry trade, also known as “putting risk on,” then most asset classes rise in value—the funds are
buying them hand over fist. M ore important, however, is when funds are “taking risk off.” When they do this, it means that they are winding down portions of their
carry trade. To do this, they have to (1) sell off the assets they bought, (2) dump the high-yielding currency they own, and (3) pay back the cheap currency they
borrowed. These three steps all happen very close to simultaneously.
Why is this important to know? Because when hedge funds are taking risk off, nearly all asset classes will sell off, regardless of what’s going on in the news.
That’s great, but how does a trader know when hedge funds are putting risk on or when they are taking risk off? By watching CNBC? No. They aren’t really sure
what happened until way after the fact. If hedge funds could hide their footsteps and their actions, believe me, they would. Surprisingly, this information on whether
hedge funds are putting risk on or taking it off is very easy to obtain. All you need is a data feed.
Figure 6.20 is a chart of the AUDJPY cross, where the current price is 73.739. This just means that 1 Australian dollar is equal to 73.74 Japanese yen. Believe it or
not, this chart represents what hedge funds are doing in real time. The price of AUDJPY isn’t critical. What is critical is whether the chart is moving higher or lower.

121

Figure 6.20

It’s not that AUDJPY represents all carry trade activity. However, it does represent one very common carry trade, which is to borrow Japanese yen and then put
that money into Australian dollars. The more yen that are being borrowed, the more the Australian dollar is being bought, and thus the higher AUDJPY goes (that is, as
risk is being put on, 1 Australian dollar can buy more and more yen). Thus, when the carry trade is “on,” AUDJPY will rise. And when the carry trade is being taken
off, AUDJPY will fall as Australian dollars are sold to pay back the yen loans. If that seems a little complicated, this is all you have to remember:

Figure 6.20 shows a chart of AUDJPY with the stock market (SPY) plotted below it. The dates represented are from October 2010 through October 5, 2011. Points
1 and 2 show both a rising AUDJPY and a rising stock market. Points 3 and 4 show both a falling AUDJPY and a falling stock market. That’s easy enough. Where this
gets interesting is when AUDJPY acts as a leading indicator, which it did at point 5. On this date, M arch 29, 2011, AUDJPY broke out and made new highs. What did
the stock market do? Nothing. It was in turmoil over yet another European country being on the brink of insolvency. And yet AUDJPY kept moving higher and higher,
indicating that funds were aggressively putting risk on. Lo and behold, about a month later, on April 26, 2011, the stock market broke out and made new highs. A
trader who was listening to every word of the financial press got short stocks because of the continuing coverage and worry over the European debt crisis. Traders who
understood the importance of the carry trade bought stocks, or call options on stocks, to await the inevitable catching up of the stock market to the actual risk being

122

put on by hedge funds. Long story short, the money that the funds are borrowing has to be put to work.
In Figure 6.21, we have an intraday five-minute chart of AUDJPY and the E-mini S&Ps. I like watching this during the day and gauging the intensity of a sell-off in
the ES. Point 1 shows a big sell-off in the ES midday on October 5, 2011. If, during this sell-off, AUDJPY has a mere “mild pullback” (as it does at point 2), then the
chances of the ES turning around and rallying are very strong (as it does here). If the ES sells off and the AUDJPY also takes a nosedive, then you know that the selling
in the stock market is for real.
Finally, the last reason it is important to understand the carry trade is because it explains what many people find unexplainable. For example, during the 2008
financial crisis, everyone and his mother was talking about how the U.S. dollar was dead, and how it was critical to put all available funds into gold and gold stocks.
What happened during the heat of the financial crisis in October 2008? Gold got annihilated, selling off from $1,080 an ounce down to $707 an ounce. Gold stocks
fared far worse. Goldcorp Inc. (GG), a very solid and popular gold stock, fell from $52.65 to $13.84. This was a typical move for gold stocks during the heat of the
financial crisis from July to October 2008. Everyone who thought she was smart and did “the wise thing” got taken out back and shot. What happened?
Figure 6.22 shows exactly what happened. The top chart is AUDJPY, and we can see that risk was coming off in a big way, as AUDJPY plummeted from just over
100.00 to below 60.00. Remember when I said that markets move because they have to, not because they want to? Bingo. This was essentially the largest margin call in
