
xvi

One who follows these simple rules is light years ahead of so many traders. These
four rules are similar to the Ten Commandments. If one follows them, one will be
“blessed” over time with the trading results. When combining these tenants one puts
one’s self in the position to potentially create extreme wealth.
A vast majority of traders spend all of their time and energy trying to predict
or guess what will occur in the markets. The right activity for traders is look at
what is happening right now. Be in the moment and just follow the plan (hopefully they have a plan). The question needs to be asked, has the market taken out
the X period high? Has the market retraced and is offering me a low‐risk retracement trade? Bloomberg and CNBC are based on predictions. Everyone wants to be
smart and show they know the future. Successful trend followers have internalized
that it is nothing about being right or predicting. The point that these successful
trend followers have internalized is to identify where they are located currently in
relation to the trend and just take the trade if they have one.
As I believe any trade is 50/50, you never know which trade will work. Too many
traders are looking for certainty. Certainty does not exist in the markets. Traders want
to know when trends start and stop. The reality is you never know. The flipside of the
50/50 is that you do not know how bad a trade can go against you. The concept of
cutting losses is a paramount issue if one wants to stay in this business. If losses get out
of control, one can easily be overwhelmed financially and emotionally.
Letting profits run is very hard for some traders. They have that urge to ring the
cash register. They do this primarily out of fear. In trend following one needs these
rare big winners to offset all of the inherent small losses. Your trading plan must have
the contingent for following trades that are working. This is the key to making money
in the long run and building your positively sloping equity curve. With a trading plan
there is no “Should I”, “Could I”, “Would I”, “Shoot, why didn’t I take that trade,” or
worse, “Why did I let this happen to me?” When we trade, we should trade for the
primary reason to make money and build a positive equity curve. This primary reason
is so powerful we are all trying (should be) to better our trading. This is why we try
to perfect our trading. This leads us at times to second guess ourselves. We second

xvii
PREFACE

guess because we don’t have a plan and do not have discipline. If you are in this state
I believe my book will truly help you develop “the plan” based on risk management,
a robust trading methodology, and the proper mindset in which you do not second
guess yourself.
One must plan in trading. The extent of planning determines success or failure in
trading. The more developed and stringent a trading plan with all potential outcomes
preplanned, the greater the potential for success over time. There will be times you
will think to violate your trading plan.You know that you should not; however, rationalization is a powerful tonic.You try to justify your decision to violate your plan. No
one is standing over you and asking you why are you breaking your own rules? You
just do it, wrongly though. Ironically, Mr. Market might even reward you for breaking
your own rules. This is even worse for your psyche! Breaking your own rules becomes
a slippery slope. It becomes easier and easier, and by the way you made some money
last time.
The big issue is you just bought yourself a one‐way ticket to the 90 percent club of
failed traders who lose money. The only way you can even hope to join the 10 percent
club of consistently successful traders over time is being consistent in your trading
plan. Consistent means seeing the same type of trade, recognizing it, and taking action. This is repetitive in nature. Actually I was recently told that this was boring. My
answer was, I am not trading for excitement. I like boring.
Without a trading plan how would you know where you are going?
Clearly you would not!
Even with your trading plan there will always be problems and surprises. Thousands of traders were caught in the MF Global debacle. A situation in which client segregated accounts were violated was an industry first. On Halloween 2011 MF Global
went bankrupt. Client accounts were frozen. Not just cash was frozen; positions could
not be offset for days. Frantic traders were calling 24 hours for days trying to exit their
positions. I know traders that flew to Chicago to try to exit their positions. Another
colleague of mine had three people on speed dialer trying to get through to the trade
desk, to no avail. This was a nightmare for traders as well as the futures industry. The
fortunate traders who had multiple accounts were able to offset their positions. Other
traders who fortunately had the majority of their funds at Treasury Direct (the U.S.
Federal Reserve bank) or at a cash management firm such as Horizon survived. Planning saved traders.Those that did not plan are not in business.Thank God I planned for
the unthinkable and had a vast percentage of assets at Treasury Direct (the U.S. Fed).
Luckily due to my paranoia and the advice of a colleague I transferred out some funds
from MF Global before they collapsed. I still got burned, however, but not destroyed.
The MF Global issue was extreme; anything can and anything will happen in trading.
The only certainty is uncertainty. Who would have thought the Nasdaq would still be
down 10 years from the highs? Who would have really believed the Japanese stock
market would be down from 39,000 to approximately 9,000? What is shocking is that

for 22 years Japan has been in a bear market. If someone told you this could happen in
the U.S. stock markets you would think they were crazy.Who would have ever thought
gold could go from a couple hundred dollars to almost $2,000 over approximately 10
years? Once you truly internalize that anything can happen, you realize the absolute
need for a complete plan. The markets will always throw you a curveball. Investing
your time and energy in your trading plan will reward you more than the futile search
for predictions, indicators, and mechanical systems. In my book I am giving you my
trading plan. What a great bargain.
A solid trading plan is the holy grail if there really is one!
Andrew Abraham

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

xviii

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

INTRODUCTION

My Journey as a
Trend Follower
T

hings that happen many times are not a coincidence. Probably today and even
more so in 1994 very few people had ever heard of the phrases “trend follower”
or “trend following.” I stumbled on the phrase “trend following” by sheer luck. I sold a
business that I started in college in 1994. I had saved the majority of the money over
the years and even acquired more money upon the sale of the business. I had no idea
how to invest it. I was not comfortable with the stock market after witnessing the
1987 stock market crash as well as the stock volatility in the early 1990s. As I have
always done, I tried to surround myself with the smartest people I could. I asked my
accountant what he suggested. He told me that he had a client who owned a commodity brokerage firm who was very successful and suggested I meet him. My accountant
was in his mid‐60s with a rather large practice, therefore he had seen a very large pool
of clients, and I trusted his unbiased opinion.
I wanted to learn how my money could work for me and compound over time. I
was overwhelmed with all the books and courses that offered so‐called magical success
and millionaire traders who really weren’t.
I started my journey of learning. Market Wizards by Jack Schwager mesmerized me
and has encouraged me. My journey of trend following began. This journey was more
like a marathon and still is.
I probably made every mistake possible. Working past mistakes and a bad memory is
very tough due to the emotional baggage we carry. I personally overtraded; I did not follow my trading plan, or better said, hardly had one; I did not follow my money management plan, as well as did not follow a correlation plan. After the many losses I encoun-

1

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

2

tered I felt frustrated, angry, and just plain lousy. Besides these emotional issues, there
were the financial issues. I felt beaten up and poorer. I knew there had to be a better way.
I wanted to dig myself out of this negative sand trap and join the rare group of 10 percent
consistently successful traders that I read about in MarketWizards by Jack Schwager.
Even though I had those who guided me, the fact is that you can be told exactly
what to do but unless you internalize it, it is worthless! It was only from mistakes and
losses that I learned. I had the extreme desire to learn and grow!
I believe most traders really make mistakes due to fear, greed, or ego. There is this
illusion or lure of supposed easiness or easy money out there. Why waste any time
planning or working? I have heard, “I can buy a Forex robot and grind out the profits.”
I chuckle to myself and think: How can it be so easy? Why isn’t everyone rich if all they
needed to do was to buy a Forex robot? The fact is everyone wants success and wealth,
but are we really ready to work so hard for it? Not many!
My journey has been two‐pronged with the goal to compound money over time.
I started my own trend following in 1994 as well as invested with hedge fund managers and commodity trading advisors who were trend followers. Investing with other
commodity trading advisors has offered me diversity and helped me build my equity
curve over the years. I allocate between 2–5 percent of my family’s net worth in
any one particular money manager. I have a group of managers. Year in and year out
they have different returns. In some years I have outperformed them, in others not,
but my goal was to diversify. It helped me very much during the MF Global debacle
that I was diversified. Two of my commodity trading managers had some exposure to
MF Global. The rest had no exposure whatsoever. In trading, as Salem Abraham from
Abraham Trading Group has so aptly stated, you never know what can kill you. This
underscores the need for a well‐thought‐out plan. My way of staying in the marathon
is to spread it out. I look for managers as aware of risk as myself. My wife tells me I am
compulsive obsessive paranoid. Before the MF Global debacle I would thank her and
took it as a compliment. We sold our private home at the top of the housing bubble in
January 2006. I did not feel comfortable with how prices were skyrocketing, and we
were contemplating moving overseas. Fate occurred and we luckily sold at the top.
This is probably the only time in my career I can claim such luck. After the MF Global
debacle I wish I had been more paranoid. However, as in my trading, it was a good
learning lesson, and I am not focusing on the past but on the future. I have opened
up with numerous futures commodity merchants, and at the slightest smell of smoke
I will wire the cash out of the futures commodity merchant and offset my positions.
When I allocate to other commodity trading advisors, I have positive advantages.
I have a diversification to clearinghouses, trading styles, and markets in addition to
how I trade. That is the good news. The bad news is that to some degree this diversification costs me and eats into my compounding of my money over time. Most commodity trading advisors and hedge fund managers charge a 2 percent management
fee and 20 percent incentive fee. I even have one manager who charges a 25 percent

incentive fee. He gets 25 percent of my profits. However, he has done very well for
me over the years, albeit there are periods in which he goes through severe drawdowns. I am willing to pay the fees as I have been able to compound money over the
years in this process, and this should be your goal as it is mine.
My personal trend following has been a work in progress. The commodity broker I
started with in 1994 learned under Ed Seykota, Van Tharp, and was an avid student of
Mark Douglas. He taught me to focus on how to think as a trend follower. He taught
me to think in terms of probabilities and to accept the risks when trading. I learned
the only certainty in trading is uncertainty. No one provided the holy grail of a magical
indicator or system, rather how to think, how to be disciplined and patient.

■ A Great Learning Lesson

3
MY JOURNEY AS A TREND FOLLOWER

Discipline and patience are the foundations of the holy grail.
Discipline means knowing exactly what you need to do at every moment and actually doing it. The easiest thing to do is to put off taking a trade that causes emotional
distress. However, this is exactly what you need to do with discipline. A lack of discipline can be expressed as failing to do what you should be doing in every given event.
A lack of discipline will destroy even professional money managers. In this book I have
highlighted numerous examples. Simply telling someone to build his discipline is a lot
easier said than done and trite. No one is perfect and discipline is not like a light switch
you can just turn on. Every trader including myself has failed in some degree of discipline. However, I learned and internalized the absolute need for complete discipline.
The discipline became enhanced over time, and when I completely internalized my
trading plan, I became rigid in my plan, which built my discipline, and at the same time
I became more accepting of my returns and the expectations of my trading returns. I
was willing to learn from all of my mistakes. I strived to get to the point at which I did
not make the same mistakes again. I learned to follow my plan and not be deluded by
the fact I made a mistake when I did not follow my plan and even profited. Breaking
my own plan or rules and profiting is what makes discipline so hard. Been there and
done it. However, I learned this would not get me to my goals of compounding money
and I was negatively rewarded.
In order to make money on my money, I started to invest with (who I thought were
very successful) hedge fund managers and trend followers. I invested “luckily” with
Monroe Trout as well as Julian Robertson. I did not know the questions to ask; rather,
I basically chased their prior returns.
In retrospect this was a mistake and yet also a great lesson.
Going back to my first two hedge fund managers that I allocated to in 1994, a valuable lesson was to be learned. Julian Robertson from the 1980s had a compounded
annual return in the 20 percent‐plus range. All I thought about was the rule of 72.Yes,

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

4

I was blinded by greed and thinking it would be easy. I had no concept of how he was
managing the risk nor even worried about it. How could a guru lose money, I thought?
The rule of 72 is how many years until your money compounds. You divide the
percent returns by 72 and this determines how many years for your money to double.
I was honestly blinded by greed.The interesting fact is twofold and I learned a fantastic
lesson in investing. First of all, there are no gurus, and second, never allocate more
than 5 percent of your net worth to any idea or money manager, including me.
I invested $200,000 with Julian Robertson through a feeder fund in 1994. All I
could think about was I am going to be rich. I was doing the math of 20 percent returns and thinking all the way of compounding my way to wealth.Well, not everything
ends as you planned it. Things were proceeding nicely in 1995, 1996, and thereafter
until 1998. In 1998 there was the Asian contagion as well as the Russian debt crisis.
Unfortunately Julian Robertson made a big bet on borrowing Japanese yen and buying
U.S. Treasuries. For years this trade was a no brainer until Mr. Murphy entered the reality. The Japanese yen took off in value and the borrowing rate changed dramatically, and
quickly this trade was a disaster. All of the years of compounding money were shot and big
losses shot up. In shock (thank God), I closed out my investment with Julian Robertson.
What did I learn? Very simply that there are no gurus and that anything can happen.
I still made money but did give back a lot of my profits.
On the other hand, Monroe Trout was still grinding out profits irrespective of the
stock market. I also invested $200,000 with him in 1994.The account just kept on growing. In 2005 or 2006, after years in the market,Trout decided to retire. My $200,000 had
compounded over the years after taking some money out to approximately a valuation
of $1,400,000. This taught me the lesson of compounding money. As Jesse Livermore
stated, patience is what can make money. In all truthfulness it was rather easy with Monroe Trout. There was not a lot of volatility or aggravation. In retrospect it grew to a big
percent of my net worth and should have taken profits off as it was compounding. Once
Trout decided to retire, I thought to myself, thank you and time to move on.
To highlight the dangers of simply chasing returns, in 2011 there was a manager called
Dighton who had a great record. On a simplistic level it would have been easy to invest
with him. Over the last six years or so he compounded money at around a 30 percent
rate. Many naïve investors threw him money and were blinded by his returns. Dighton was
managing upwards of $200 million dollars. In July 2011, however, Dighton blew up and
lost 80 percent of his fund. Dighton was a countertrend trader who blew up over one trade
with the Swiss franc.Think about it, six years of hard work to be blown up by one trade.
This is not unique. I remember in 1998 that Niederhoffer, a so‐called “guru,” was
compounding money for years. Many had no idea what he was doing other than printing
money. Until one day in late 1997 he made one bad trade after another and later blew up.
Niederhoffer believed he was right and the market was wrong (even though he was eventually right). In the meantime he blew up and left a debt of approximately a $20 million
margin call. Institutional investors are no better than most when allocating to commodity

5
MY JOURNEY AS A TREND FOLLOWER

trading advisors and hedge fund managers. The same greed is evidenced in institutional
investors. I learned over the years not to be like them. As it is easier to buy when a commodity trader or hedge fund manager is doing well, too many do this. There is a herd
mentality with institutional investors. The bigger the fund, the more confident they are
in not just generating returns but the safety of their investments. This axiom was proven
wrong in 2011 with John Paulson’s funds. Paulson had a fantastic run when he called the
housing crisis. He is the founder and president of Paulson & Co. Paulson became a billionaire by short‐selling subprime mortgages during the housing crisis in 2007. He personally made $3.5 billion that year. Institutional investors flooded him with their money
to manage. However, in 2011, he made various bad trades in banking stocks such as
Bank of America and Citigroup. I conjecture he got caught up in the fraud of the Chinese
company Sino‐Forest Corporation, which further tarnished his record. His flagship fund,
Paulson Advantage Fund, was down over 40 percent as of September 2011. Using this as
an example, bigger is neither always safer nor better. Many institutional investors buy the
equity highs and sell the equity lows. So many of these investors lose money even with
profitable hedge funds and commodity trading advisors.They do not have the patience to
permit compounding money over time to occur. They want their profits now!
What I do is the opposite of most investors and institutional investors. I buy the drawdowns of commodity trading advisors who have done well for years, who understand and
prepare for risk, yet in the current environment have a drawdown.To me it is pretty much
common sense and somewhat of a way to mitigate the inherent risks when investing. This
is counterintuitive to how most investors think. However, nothing is perfect. As in trend
following, you never buy the bottom. Because a commodity trading advisor is experiencing a 25 percent drawdown, for example, there is absolutely nothing promising you or
guaranteeing you it will not get worse or even that the commodity trading advisor could
blow up. This is the reason that in trading I risk a small percentage on any investment or
allocation. I try to take a low‐risk bet when investing in a hedge fund or a commodity
trading advisor. I accept the risks and the uncertainty. I do not sit month in and month out
praying or hoping. I set the trade and say to myself, let’s see how this will look in 10 years.
Don’t get me wrong, I do my extensive due diligence before I invest. I speak to the managers on a current basis and monitor them daily when I have the luxury of having a managed
account with them. I am not chasing quantitative numbers solely. The qualitative is much
more important.The qualitative are many matrixes based on integrity and honesty.When
I speak to a commodity trading manager, I want to understand the risk measures they utilize. These risk and money management parameters dictate to what degree the manager
“tries” to prevent losing my family’s money. It is not pertinent to me what exactly gets
them into a trade or their exact system.The most important issues are the risk and money
management aspects. After the MF Global debacle a major source of interest is where
the money sits if I invest in a fund, as well as how many futures commodity merchants
they have accounts with. These have become major issues and aspects of risk management that prior to MF Global I truly did not consider. As trading is my passion, besides

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

6

researching and building models for me to utilize for my own trading, a good part of my
day is speaking to other traders and brokers. I am not seeking any trading tips. I am seeking new trading talent that I am not familiar with. I am always exchanging thoughts and
ideas with others who invest in commodity traders like me.There are two individuals who
I feel fortunate to have come in contact with, Harry from Texas and Alan from Chicago.
These two individuals get it more than any institutional investor I have ever spoken to. In
addition, I always try to surround myself with people that have considerably more experience and knowledge than me. There is a broker in Chicago that has a small group of very
experienced clients, and his specialty is to allocate to commodity trading advisors. Todd
Fulton from Pioneer futures has his ear to the pavement and seems to know everyone in
the industry. I have had numerous conversations with him and have learned a great deal.
I have been to numerous conferences at different times such as the MFA conferences, Alphametrix, and the CTA Expos. I have had coffee and drinks with Sovereign
Wealth fund managers as well as large fund of funds managers. Comparatively, the
individuals from Texas and Chicago as well as Todd have so much more vast experience
and knowledge. Harry from Texas has been investing since 1987. He told me one of
his first managers was Paul Tudor Jones. All one has to think of is the compounding
over the years Harry has accomplished. One manager whom I know went through a
terrible drawdown in one of his programs from February 2009 till May 2010. He told
me about a client of his who bought this drawdown and without mentioning names I
understood who it was. Buying drawdowns and diversifying are some of the tools of
investing with commodity trading advisors I have used over the years.
At the last Alphametrix conference in Miami Beach, I had the luck to sit at a presentation of a commodity trading advisor, and Alan from Chicago sat down with us. I
had never met Alan before and was honored he sat in on the meeting. He was giving
me and the commodity trading advisor great insight into many trading issues and ways
he has profited over the years. It was a great lesson.
It is not easy to find the upcoming new managers. It has to be your passion. It is
not just about going to conferences, as many family offices or fund of funds try to do.
Nor is it quantitatively looking at databases. As much as I strongly recommend Iasg.
com, Autumn gold, Altegris, Alphametrix, and Barclays, however, the best is to meet
managers face to face. Both the CTA Expo and Alphametrix conferences offer that
possibility. Meeting someone face to face is personal and much can be gleaned.
Contrary to the institutional investors who think they are “safer” to invest in the
huge funds such as Winton or Transtrend with their billions of dollars under management, I feel it is more prudent to invest with a manager who is a PHD—Passionate,
Hungry, and Dedicated—who is not managing a ton of money. When a money manager is trading less money, he is more nimble and can trade markets the aircraft carrier
funds cannot trade due to liquidity issues. It would be impossible for a large fund to
try to trade cocoa or orange juice. It would be like an elephant in a china store. Many
investors were deluded in 2011 because many of these big funds did well because of
the Treasury markets. The big funds can only trade the biggest markets such as stock
