
Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

63

dynamics takes advantage of the fact that a computer model can be
of much greater complexity and carry out more simultaneous
calculations than can the mental model of the human mind.”59
This type of thought process and computer modeling is not only
a foundation of Seykota’s success, but it can be seen across the
trend following success landscape.

Seykota.com
Seykota gives visitors ample amounts of wisdom and whimsy in
answers to the emails he receives on his website. Here are some
examples of Seykota’s “clear” responses, selected by both him and
us from his website:61
“To avoid whipsaw losses, stop trading.”
Lesson: You will have losses. Accept them.
“Here’s the essence of risk management: Risk no more than
you can afford to lose, and also risk enough so that a win is
meaningful. If there is no such amount, don’t play.”
Lesson: Money management is crucial. This is further
investigated in Chapter 10.
“Trend following is an exercise in observing and responding
to the ever-present moment of now. Traders who predict
the future dwell upon a nonexistent place, and to the extent
they also park their ability to act out there, they can miss
opportunities to act in the now.”
Lesson: All we have is now. It is much better to react to the fact
of market movements in present time than a future time that
doesn’t exist.
“Markets are fundamentally volatile. No way around it. Your
problem is not in the math. There is no math to get you out
of having to experience uncertainty.”
Lesson: You can crunch all the numbers you like, but your
“gut” still has to handle the ups and downs. You have to live with
and feel the uncertainty.
“I recall, in the old days, people showing a lot of concern
that markets are different and trend following methods no
longer work.”

For a system trader, it’s
way more important to
have your trading size
down than it is to fine
tune your entry and exit
points.
David Druz62

64

I’d say the most
important benefit I
attained from my time in
the Incline Tribe was how
I learned to incorporate
my feelings around
uncertainty into my
trading. Ed and I worked
on it until I finally got the
Aha: that my need for
uncertainty is a natural
part of my emotional
constitution. And if my
clients don’t eventually
get it, I may need new
clients, or they may need
T-Bills. Their moneydrama is not part of my
system.
Michael Martin
Student of Ed Seykota’s

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Lesson: Today or yesterday, skeptics abound. They sound like
broken records in their desires to see trend following debunked.
“It can be very expensive to try to convince the markets
you are right.”
Lesson: Go with the flow. Leave your personal or fundamental
opinions at the door. Do you want to be right or make money? The
losers profiled in Chapter 4, “Big Events, Crashes, and Panics,”
tried to convince everyone that they were right and lost big time.
“When magazine covers get pretty emotional, get out of the
position. There’s nothing else in the magazine that works
very well, but the covers are pretty good. This is not an
indictment of the magazine people, it’s just that at the end
of a big move there is a communal psychological abreaction
that shows up on the covers of magazines.”63
Lesson: Crowd psychology is real, and the price reflects all.

Seykota Students
Easan Katir: Seykota Student #1
Seykota’s track record is incredible, but one of his students,
Easan Katir, offered a warning when it comes to making
comparisons:
“Journalists, interviewers, and such like to hedge their
praise and use phrases such as ‘one of the best traders,’ etc.
If one looks at Ed Seykota’s model account record and
compares it with anyone else, historical or contemporary,
he is the best trader in history, period. Isn’t he? Who else
comes close? I don’t know of anyone. Livermore made
fortunes, but had drawdowns to zero. There are numerous
examples of managers with a few years of meteoric returns
who subsequently blow up. The household names, Buffet
and Soros, are less than half of Ed’s return each year. One
might apply filters such as Sharpe ratios, AUM, etc., and
perhaps massage the results. But as far as the one central
metric—raw percentage profit—Ed is above anyone else I
know, and I’ve been around managing money for 20 years.”

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

65

Jason Russell: Seykota Student #2
Russell is a student of Ed Seykota’s. He provided me a glimpse
into the process of training with Seykota:
“Through working with Ed, I have learned many things in
the past couple of years, one of the most important being:
Apply trend following to your life as well as to your trading.
Freeing yourself from the need to understand “why” is as
useful when dealing with family, friends, and foes as it is
when entering or exiting a trade. It also has the added
benefit of making you a much better trader.”
Most traders cannot recognize how simple life really is. This is
similar to what Russell describes as Seykota’s view of simplicity:
“There is simplicity beyond sophistication. Ed spends a lot
of time there. He listens, he feels, he speaks with clarity. He
is a master of his craft. Before working with Ed, I spent
years learning, reading, and earning various designations.
All of this has been useful as it provides me with a high level
of technical proficiency. However, somehow through this
whole process, I have gained a strong appreciation for
simplifying. Miles Davis was once asked what went through
his mind when he listened to his own music. He said: ‘I
always listen to what I can leave out.’ That sounds like Ed.”
David Druz: Seykota Student #3
Druz once described what it was like to work with Seykota:
“It was one of the most incredible experiences of my life.
He is the smartest trader I have ever seen. I don’t think
anybody comes close. He has the greatest insights into how
markets work and how people operate. It’s almost scary
being in his presence. It was tough surviving working with
him because of the mental gymnastics involved. If you have
a personality weakness, he finds it—fast. But it’s a positive
thing because successful traders must understand
themselves and their psychological weaknesses. My time
with Ed was one of the greatest times of my life and gave me
tremendous confidence—but I don’t trade any differently
because of it. A guy like Ed Seykota is magic.”64

The difference between a
successful person and
others is not a lack of
strength, not a lack of
knowledge, but rather a
lack of will.
Vince Lombardi

66

I cut my trading teeth
during a year-long
apprenticeship with Ed
in 1994. The experience is
invaluable to my
subsequent trading
success. Apprenticing
with Ed is like getting a
drink of water at a fire
hydrant.
Thomas Vician, Jr.
Student of Ed Seykota’s

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Seykota would be the first to say that he is no magician.
Although it may be human nature to attribute phenomenal trading
success to magical powers, trend following is actually a form of trial
and error. The errors are all the small losses incurred while trying
to find those big trends.
Jim Hamer: Seykota Student #4
Jim Hamer, a trend follower based out of Williamburg, Virginia,
felt it was important to tell me about Seykota’s life beyond the
markets:
“I lived with Ed and his family for a little over two months
in early 1997. One of the more amazing things I observed
about Ed is that he has gifts in so many areas, trading being
just one of them. He showed me a music video that he
produced many years ago. It was an excellent production.
He also recorded an album several years before the video.
He is a very talented musician. My favorite song was Bull
Market, which he used to play for me on his acoustic guitar.
During the time I was with him, he was very involved in
experiments that attempted to redefine airflows as they
relate to the Bernoulli Principle. He spent an enormous
amount of time putting together academic papers and
sending them to several experts in the field concerning this
work. He is the consummate scientist. One day, we took a
‘field trip’ to visit Ed’s state legislator to discuss Charter
School legislation and the impact on Ed’s children and the
students of Nevada. Not long after I left, Ed ran for the local
school board. He has a keen interest in and knowledge of
education. Ed Seykota will never be defined solely by
trading. He has a love of learning and is a modern-day
Renaissance man.”
Charles Faulkner, profiled in Chapter 6, once said that if
Seykota had wanted to stay in academia, he would have won a
Nobel Prize. That said, Seykota would have abhorred life in an ivory
tower and the accompanying politics. This is a man who relishes
the here and now, where he can confront real problems and provide
real solutions. He chooses to live real trading, not admire it.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

67

Key Points
• Seykota: “Win or lose, everybody gets what they want out of
the market. Some people seem to like to lose, so they win by
losing money.”
• Seykota: “To avoid whipsaw losses, stop trading.”
• Seykota: “Risk no more than you can afford to lose and also
risk enough so that a win is meaningful.”
• Seykota: “Trend following is an exercise in observing and
responding to the ever-present moment of now.”
• Seykota: “Fundamentalists and anticipators may have
difficulties with risk control because a trade keeps looking
‘better’ the more it goes against them.”
• Seykota: “Until you master the basic literature and spend some
time with successful traders, you might consider confining your
trading to the supermarket.”
• Seykota: “I don’t predict a nonexisting future.”

Keith Campbell
Considering he’s one of the largest (in terms of client assets)
and oldest trend followers, Keith Campbell and his company,
Campbell and Company, are nearly nonexistent in terms of
visibility. Do the requisite Google search and you’ll find almost no
information about their trading. You would think that with billions
in client capital, Campbell & Co. would be as well known as
Fidelity—not true.
However, when you have a very reclusive trader, access to his
monthly performance data makes up for a lack of information due
to any self-imposed anonymity. The data (see Chart 2.8) speaks the
truth about the success of a trend follower such as Campbell even
if he’s reluctant to do so.

You’ve got to have a
longer perspective and
confidence in the veracity
of the approach that
you’re using.
Bruce Cleland, President and Chief
Executive Officer at Campbell & Co.
in Towson, Md.65

68

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Comparison of Campbell Program to the S&P 500 Cash Index
April 1983–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded
$20,000.00
$18,000.00
$16,000.00
$14,000.00
$12,000.00
$10,000.00
$8,000.00
$6,000.00

Campbell
S&P 500

$4,000.00
$2,000.00

CHART 2.8:

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

$Campbell Final Value:

$18,820

S&P 500 Final Value:

$6,915

Hypothetical $1000 Growth Chart for Campbell and Co.

About Keith Campbell
Measure what is
measurable, and make
measurable what is
not so.
Galileo Galilei66

Perhaps one reason trend followers respect the unexpected is
because many of them did not set out to become traders. When
unexpectedly exposed to trading many realized how well suited
they were for it and eventually came upon trend following as the
ideal strategy. In the 1960s, Campbell took a job in California where
he could both ski and surf. When his roommate moved out of their
California apartment, he advertised for a replacement and ended up
with Chet Conrad, a commodity broker. Campbell recalled that,
“(Conrad) got me into trading as a customer. But he was always
moaning he didn’t have enough money to trade.” Campbell then put
together $60,000 from 12 investors to form his first futures fund
with three advisors—a fundamentalist, a bar chartist, and a pointand-figure advocate. When that fund struggled, he started the
Campbell Fund and then took it over on January 1, 1972. A few
years later, Campbell and Conrad went their separate ways. Conrad

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

relocated to Lake Tahoe, Nevada on a gutsy sugar trade that turned
a borrowed $10,000 into $3 million. Campbell remained with his
fund, which today is the oldest commodity fund still trading.67
However, it is unfair to refer to Campbell and Co. as a
“commodity fund” because Campbell trades more than just
commodities. Jim Little of Campbell and Co. makes this clear when
he describes the widely diverse markets they trade, which include
stocks:
“We always are looking for non-correlated absolute return
strategies that can produce higher quality risk adjusted returns;
whether that is more managed futures strategy models or long/short
equities or whatever. We have 30 years of experience doing
long/short stock indexes, bond futures, and currencies; to do it in
individual equities (stocks) isn’t that much different.”
But, like John W. Henry, trading diverse markets doesn’t translate into complicated trading strategies. Campbell also believes in
keeping it simple:
“I’m very uncomfortable with black box trading where I’m
dealing with algorithms I don’t understand. Everything we do we
could do on the back of an envelope with a pencil.”68
Campbell’s “back of an envelope” remark must be a revelation
to those people who imagine trading to be wildly complex. The real
lesson with Campbell like other great trend followers is the
discipline to stick to his rules in the tough times.

Campbell Compared to Benchmarks
While I am no proponent of benchmarking, the following chart
(Chart 2.9) shows drawdown comparisons across asset classes:
CHART 2.9: Worst Case Cumulative Percentage Decline,
Jan. 1972–Dec. 1995

• S&P—43% (12/72–9/74)
• Fidelity Magellan—63% (6/72–9/74)
• Campbell’s Oldest Fund—36% (9/74–3/76)
• Lehman Brothers Government Bond Index—12% (1/94–10/94)

69

There was a time when a
lot of people thought that
the models or algorithms
that we used were king—
that everything else was
ancillary to the
mathematics. I think
today as an industry, we
have a much more
realistic and a better
balanced approach. The
mathematics are very
important, but it’s only
one piece of the puzzle.
The most important thing
overall is the total
investment process, of
which the signal
generator is an important
part. Portfolio
structuring, risk
management, execution
strategies, capital
management, and
leverage management
may not be directly
connected to the
algorithm that generates
the buy and sell signals,
but they are all hugely
important.
Bruce Cleland, President and
CEO,Campbell and Co.69

70

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Many skeptics like to think trend followers are the only ones
with drawdowns. The chart, however, shows the truth of drawdowns
across several indexes and fund types.
The key is to accept drawdowns and be able to manage them
when they occur. Otherwise, you are left watching the NASDAQ
drop 77 percent peak to trough over 2000—2002 with no plan on
what to do next. Buy and hope?
Campbell and Company
analyzes only technical
market data, not any
economic factors external
to market prices.71

Still, Campbell’s strategies were often doubted by Wall Street,
especially the “old guard” who like to gripe how supposedly risky
trend following is. Campbell refutes that:
“A common perception is that futures markets are
extremely volatile, and that investing in futures is therefore
very risky, much riskier than equity investments. The
reality is that generally futures prices are less volatile than
common stocks prices. It is the amount of leverage
available in futures which creates the perception of high
risk, not market volatility. The actual risk involved in
futures trading depends, among other things, upon how
much leverage is used.”70
Managing the use of leverage is a crucial component of trend
followers’ risk management. It is the part of the trading strategy that
allows them to keep coming back day after day and year after year
to trade and win.

Correlation and Consistency
Most trend followers earn their returns at different times than
common benchmark measures, such as the S&P stock index.
Campbell (see Chart 2.10), like John W. Henry & Company and
other longtime trend followers, is not correlated with major stock
market indexes.
CHART 2.10: Correlation Analysis Between Campbell Composite and S&P
500 Index, January 1980–November 2003. Source: Campbell and Co.

Both Positive

96 of 287 Months

Opposite

150 of 287 Months

Both Negative

41 of 287 Months

71

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

Even more remarkable than his lack of correlation to the S&P
benchmark, Campbell’s performance (see Chart 2.11) is consistent
over total months, total years, and 12-, 24-, 36-, 48-, and 60-month
rolling time windows:
CHART 2.11: Past Consistency of the Campbell Composite, January 1980–November 2003
(estimates). Source: Campbell and Co.

January 1980–
November 2003
(estimates)

Number of
Time Periods

Number of
Profitable Periods

Total Months

287

161

126

56.10%

Total Years

31

26

5

83.87%

12-Month Rolling Windows

276

217

59

78.62%

24-Month Rolling Windows

264

228

36

86.36%

36-Month Rolling Windows

252

226

26

89.68%

48-Month Rolling Windows

240

240

0

100.00%

60-Month Rolling Windows

228

228

0

100.00%

Number of
Percentage
Unprofitable Periods Profitable

Are you any more knowledgeable about Campbell and Co. now?
Qualitatively perhaps not, but quantitatively their performance
numbers demonstrate, yet again, a validity in trend following
trading.

Key Point
• Campbell and Co.: “Everything we do we could do on the back
of an envelope with a pencil.”

Jerry Parker
I first visited Jerry Parker’s original office in Manakin-Sabot,
Virginia in 1994. Manakin-Sabot is a rural Richmond suburb. It’s in
the “sticks.” Why make that point? Because a few months before, I
was in Salomon Brothers’ office in lower Manhattan gazing across,
for the first time, their huge trading floor, which seemed like the
epicenter of Wall Street. The light bulb of geographic irrelevance

Our trend-following
methods do not pretend to
determine the value of
what we are trading, nor
do they determine what
that value ought to be,
but they do produce
absolute returns fairly
consistently.
Jim Little, Campbell and Co.72

72

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

went off when Parker’s unpretentious offices in Manakin-Sabot hit
my eyes for the first time. You never would have guessed that this
was where the thoughtful, laid-back CEO of Chesapeake Capital
Management managed over $1 billion. For Parker, like Bill Dunn,
trappings appeared meaningless.
Parker grew up in Lynchburg, Virginia, graduating from the
University of Virginia. He was working as an accountant in
Richmond when he applied to Richard Dennis’ training program
and was the first student Dennis accepted. Pragmatic and
consistent, he went on to start his own money management firm,
Chesapeake Capital, in 1988. He made the decision to risk less and
make less for clients, so he took his Turtle trading approach, a trend
following strategy, and ratcheted it down a degree. In other words,
he took an aggressive system for making money and customized it
to investors who were comfortable with lower leverage.
Even though he was shooting for lower risk he returned 61.82
percent on his money in one incredible year of 1993. That put his
firm on the map (see Chart 2.12). However, he is generally in the
12–14 percent return range today. His more conservative approach
to trend following is different from Dunn or Seykota who have
always pushed their systems for absolute returns. Parker does it a
little differently, but no less successfully. I always walked away from
Parker impressed each time at how straightforward and unassuming
he was.

A Virginian
Technical traders do not
need to have a particular
expertise in each market
that they trade. They
do not need to be an
authority on
meteorological
phenomena, geopolitical
occurrences or the
economic impact of
specific worldwide events
on a particular market.
Jerry Parker73

Parker spoke at the annual Futures and Options Expo in
Chicago at the height of the dot-com bubble. At the time trend
following seemed stodgy, especially when the speaker was as selfdeprecating as Parker. His address covered a full range of trend
following philosophies. He left half his allotted time for Q&A,
however, and this is where attendees were able to gain more specific
insight into his firm’s trading techniques. However skeptical
Parker’s audience, it did not prevent him from offering simple,
direct, and solid advice about trading to those willing to accept it.

73

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

Comparison of Chesapeake to the S&P 500 Cash Index
February 1988–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded
$14,000.00
$12,000.00
$10,000.00
$8,000.00
$6,000.00
$4,000.00

Chesapeake
S&P 500

$2,000.00

CHART 2.12:

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

$Chesapeake Final Value:

$12,633

S&P 500 Final Value:

$4,114

Hypothetical $1000 Growth Chart for Chesapeake Capital

On the dangers of a buy-and-hold mentality:
“The strategy of buy and hold is bad. Hold for what? A key
to successful traders is their ability to leverage investments
…many [traders] are too conservative in their willingness
to leverage.”74
On the folly of predicting where markets may be headed:
“I don’t know nor do I care. The system that we use at
Chesapeake is about the market knowing where it’s
going.”75
On his trend following trading system:
“This flies in the face of what clients want: fancy schools,
huge research, an intuitive approach that knows what’s
going to happen before it happens, e.g., be overweight in the

I participated in the
Richard Dennis “Turtle
Program.” The methods
we were taught and the
trading experience
received were all a
technical approach to
trading the commodity
markets. The most
important experience that
led me to utilize a
technical approach was
the amount of success
that I experienced trading
Rich’s system.
Jerry Parker80

74

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

stock market before the rate cut. But obviously you can’t
know what’s going to happen before it happens, and maybe
the rate cut is the start of a major trend, and maybe it’s
okay to get in after. That’s our approach. No bias short or
long.”76
On counter-trend or day trading:
“The reason for it is a lot of traders as well as clients don’t
like trend following. It’s not intuitive, not natural, too long
term, not exciting enough.”77
On the wishful thinking of victims of recent market disasters:
“They said ‘the market’s wrong, it’ll come back’. The
market is never wrong.”78
Ask yourself if you want to be right or do you want to win. They
are different questions.
