
United Technologies Weekly Example
Let us move to a longer-term example of a weekly Fibonacci retracement grid also in United
Technologies, forming off a powerful upswing in price that began over the course of many months
instead of weeks in the prior example.

Starting with the March 2003 low of $26.75 and ending with the February 2004 price swing high of
$48.92, we draw a standard Fibonacci Retracement grid on the weekly chart of United Technologies.
In this example, price formed a large downward week in late February 2004, beginning a standard
downward retracement in price against a powerful uptrend that took price from a swing low of just
under $27.00 to $49.00, almost doubling in price over the period of a year.
Traders expected a natural retracement in price, but the question became a matter of finding where
to expect price to find support and resume the uptrend. Traders who drew the following Fibonacci
grid as shown in Figure 6.3 found $40.45, $37.84, and $35.21 as potential downside targets and
levels to watch for any sign of price reversal. Because price moved in a single swing off the early
2003 lows, there were few if any places to look for prior price support levels, so the Fibonacci
retracement grid became especially helpful in uncovering hidden potential support levels.
FIGURE 6.3 Weekly Chart of a Fibonacci Retracement Grid in United Technologies during 2003–
2004, with a Marabozu Candle at the 38.2 percent Retracement Level

The first test of support came in late May 2004, as price retraced to the first potential support zone
at the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement at the $40.46-per-share level. We do not know in advance
where a retracement level will end, and price will resume its uptrend, but we can look to Fibonacci
levels as sequential levels for a potential turn in price. The first level is the 38.2 percent zone, and in
this case, that was the terminal point for the downward retracement in price.
Traders who also used candlestick charts observed the bullish marabozu extreme candle that

formed just after a spinning top neutral candle at the 38.2 percent retracement zone at $40.45, giving
them an early clue that price could find support at this level and resume its upward climb. Those who
took the time to observe the daily chart at this same juncture in price saw a clear doji candle that
formed on May 21, which was a neutral candle that signaled the potential for a market turning point,
especially at a key support level. Traders could have bought United Technologies when price rose
above the high of the weekly Marabozu candle at the $42.00-per-share level or more aggressively,
bought as price rose beyond the high of the daily doji on May 21 that closed at $40.92 to target a
resumption of the uptrend and eventual retest of the prior highs just shy of $50.00 per share or beyond.
The chart also shows the custom MACD Indicator (using simple moving averages instead of the
standard exponential moving averages), with input settings 3, 10, 1, which reveals a positive
momentum divergence occurring as price formed a bullish Marabozu candle at the 38.2 percent
Fibonacci retracement price of $40.45 per share. See Chapter 2 for a discussion on the custom
MACD indicator, or the 3, 10 Oscillator and positive indicator divergences. Recall the price
principle momentum leads price, and that positive momentum divergences are associated with
positive reversals in price, especially in an established uptrend. Our job as traders is to piece
together the puzzle as we perceive it and put on trades that have the odds in their favor of successful
outcomes.
In the event that price fell through the $40.00-per-share level, traders would be on the lookout for
any reversal candle that formed at the 50 percent half-way retracement level at $37.84. Traders who
bought United Technologies at the $40.00-per-share level would also place stops conservatively
under the 38.2 percent retracement perhaps at the $39.00 level, or more aggressively under the 50
percent halfway retracement at $37.84.
In this way, traders can use Fibonacci retracement levels not only to confirm a potential support
zone, but as a location to place stops while in an established position. Should price retrace lower
than the 61.8 percent level at $35.22, traders would then start to doubt the potential for a continuation
swing back to test new highs, and might consider the possibility that a reversal swing to the downside
is occurring instead of a classic retracement in price, and move on to looking for the next opportunity.

HOW TO IDENTIFY FIBONACCI RETRACEMENT
CONFLUENCE ZONES
Once you master the concept of simple Fibonacci price retracement grids, you will likely begin
asking yourself “Where do I begin my Fibonacci grid if I see more than one swing low to begin
drawing the retracement grid?” This is an excellent question, and the quick answer is to start grids at
the immediate swing low in price and draw to the immediate swing high.
However, instead of ignoring prior swing lows, astute traders find value in drawing identical
Fibonacci retracement grids that end at the most recent swing high to multiple beginning points based
on prior swing lows in an established uptrend. Using this technique, traders are able to find hidden
confluence or convergence levels of Fibonacci grids that can provide valuable information available
to those who use this method.
A traditional Fibonacci retracement grid starts at a key swing low and ends at a key swing high in
an uptrend to find a lower support level, or alternately, starts at a key swing high and ends at the most
recent swing low in a downtrend to find an overhead resistance level. When price undergoes a

lengthy uptrend or downtrend, multiple swing levels form which create multiple departure points to
create Fibonacci grids.
Instead of finding the three primary retracement levels to expect a price reversal, Fibonacci
retracement confluence grids drawn off multiple swing lows to a common swing high help find the
more important potential turning points in a market. The goal is to observe any exact price
retracement level confluences, and then observe any resulting retracement levels that overlap
relatively close to additional retracement levels. In taking the extra time to find convergence zones,
you can gain a quick edge over traders who use single retracement grids exclusively.

Drawing Fibonacci Confluence Retracement Grids
Similar to the rules of classic Fibonacci retracement grids, a trader who draws multiple grids off key
swing lows attempts to find confluence zones of major Fibonacci retracement levels. Instead of
drawing a single retracement grid as drawn above, a trader would draw a retracement grid that ends
with the most recent swing high in an uptrend but begins at two, three, or more key swing lows in an
established uptrend. To find overhead confluence resistance levels in a downtrend, a trader would
end with the most recent swing low and then begin a classic Fibonacci retracement grid at two, three,
or more swing highs in an established downtrend.
The purpose of drawing a Fibonacci retracement confluence grid is to find hidden, important levels
of convergence starting with more than one standard Fibonacci Retracement grid. Instead of finding
the three main retracement levels, a trader is interested in finding price levels where two or more
main Fibonacci grids align closely or exactly.
The following steps represent the order a trader should take to draw multiple Fibonacci
Retracement Grids:
1. Establish that price is in a confirmed uptrend.
2. Observe a recent price swing high and note that price is retracing down from this high in
price.
3. Use the Fibonacci Retracement tool to start the grid by clicking on the most recent swing
low in price and dragging the grid to the most recent swing high in price.
4. Continue drawing similar Fibonacci Retracement grids in the same manner from prior
key swing retracement lows in price.
5. Observe the levels that align closely and watch for price to move toward these levels.
6. Consider establishing a buy position in the event that other forms of analysis such as
reversal candles, momentum divergences, or other forms of support align at or near the
confluence price level.
For finding confluence retracement grids in a downtrend, repeat the same procedure but begin each
new grid at prior swing highs in a downtrend and end each grid at the most recent swing low in price
in order to uncover confluence overhead resistance levels to establish short-sale positions on any
momentum divergence, reversal candle, or other method of charting that uncovers resistance levels or
sell signals.

Examples in an Uptrend
With the procedure for finding confluence zones established, let's discuss some examples of how to

apply this concept.

Sears Holdings (Weekly)
First, let's begin with a weekly chart of Sears Holdings (SHLD) from 2004 to 2006.
As with all examples, we can see what happened after price rallied off support, so keep in mind
that we do not know the outcome of a trade setup while it is forming.
Let's transport back in time to mid-2005 to identify how the confluence in Figure 6.4 formed. We
have confirmed that price is in an uptrend and has reached a key swing high at $160.00 per share as a
shooting star candle formed, which was then followed by a mild bearish engulfing candle. We can be
confident that a retracement swing is the next likely course of action for the daily chart.
FIGURE 6.4 Weekly Chart Example of Identifying a Hidden Fibonacci Confluence Support Zone in
Sears Holdings

We want to answer the question, “Where will price find support,” or specifically “Where will I
want to put on a buy position at a favorable entry to trade a potential bounce off support?” We can use
the classic Fibonacci Retracement tool.
Start with the key swing high of $160.00 and then look back to prior swing lows on the chart. Most
traders only draw a Fibonacci retracement grid to the obvious swing low, which is usually the
genesis of the trend, and then stop there. Take the extra step and draw as many grids as is reasonable
based on prior price swing lows. Starting with the swing low in early 2004 at $25.00 per share, we
have our dominant or long-term Fibonacci retracement. We then move up to the next immediate swing

low from the retracement to the $40.00-per-share level in May 2004. From there, we draw a third
Fibonacci retracement grid from the $60.00-per-share level on the August 2004 pullback. We can
draw a fourth and final retracement grid on the January 2005 pullback to the $90.00-per-share level.
Figure 6.4 marks each swing low with the word start to indicate where to draw the Fibonacci
retracement grid each time to the end of the $160.00 expected swing high. Our goal now is to look at
our Fibonacci retracement grid lines to find any overlapping prices which will draw our focus to
those levels as potentially hidden support zones that could provide a low-risk entry if confirmed with
other methods, such as positive divergences, trendlines, or other forms of price support.
Remember, let's pretend that we can't see the future, and can't see that price will support at the
confluence level that arises at the $115.00 level. Working our way up the chart, we see the first
confluence rests at the $100.00-per-share level, which is an overlap of the 50.0 and 61.8 percent
retracement from the starting points shown.
The level above the tight $100.00 confluence reveals four retracement lines in a loose confluence of
two 38.2 percent retracements, one 50.0 percent retracement, and one 61.8 percent retracement (look
closely at how these confluences form from the retracement grid). That naturally draws our attention
as chartists to expect a potential support area and rally from the convergences at the $115.00 area.
Closer to the swing high, we see another tight confluence at the $125.00 area from the overlap of the
38.2 percent and 50.0 percent retracement lines. The chart reveals no other major or minor
confluences to watch.
Moving ahead in time, we see that price interestingly remained between the tight confluence at
$125.00 as resistance and the looser or wider confluence of four lines at the $115.00 area. Once you
see this happening, you can then prepare to buy the stock if it forms reversal candles, positive
divergences, or other bullish developments at the $115.00 level. Alternatively, as you see price is
remaining within a tight trading range between these two levels, you could stand aside and wait to
play a potential breakout rally that would be expected to continue should buyers push price above the
$125.00 confluence.
Remember that price alternates between periods of range contraction and range expansion, and we
see that price is forming a lengthy consolidation period, which took the form of a rectangle price
pattern, between two of the three dominant Fibonacci confluence zones. This Sears Holdings chart is
the same situation we observed in Chapter 3 when discussing the Price Alternation Principle.
Once price broke above the upper confluence at $125.00, then you could have put on a buy order to
play the potential breakout and trend continuation move that ultimately did take price in the next swing
back to challenge (and exceed) the prior $160.00 level.
That was your goal anyway, wasn't it? You wanted to find a support zone to buy this stock in a
rising uptrend while controlling your risk. You would have placed a stop conservatively under the
middle confluence at the $110.00 level, or if you favor wider stops, then you would have chosen to
place a stop under the tight confluence at $100.00.

Mini-Gold Futures (Weekly)
Let's now move to the gold market to see a confluence Fibonacci example in mini-gold prices (@YG)
in Figure 6.5, which spans from 2002 to 2007.
FIGURE 6.5 Weekly Mini-Gold Prices showing two Fibonacci Retracement Confluences

This time I kept the trendlines to show the Fibonacci grids more clearly. In this example, we assume
that the May 2006 swing high to the $840.00 level is a key high, but we also suspect gold remains in
an uptrend and want to know where price is likely to find support on any pullback to a large-scale
Fibonacci support area. Start each retracement grid at key swing lows during the recent uptrend and
connect each of your four grids to the $840.00 swing high as shown.
I chose this example to show that sometimes you might get lines that form only one convergence or
perhaps none at all. In this example, we see weak convergences above $650.00, so we cannot
reasonably count those as confluence support areas.
However, if we start from the lower end of the chart and work our way higher, we do see two
distinct convergence lines, with the first overlap forming at the $640.00 level and the second nearby
overlap forming at the $655.00 level. We also see that price retraced to the $650 level and formed a
slight double-bottom price pattern before rallying higher, allowing aggressive traders to enter at this
level, provided there were other buy signals (the two lower wicks or shadows on the candles were
clues that buyers were active and rejected any price under $650.00). If you chose to enter as price
challenged the $655.00 Fibonacci confluence, then it would be encouraged to place a stop under the
lower confluence at the $640.00 level. In the event that sellers pushed price under this confluence,
odds would favor a deeper retracement swing, if not a full price reversal, and we would not want to
trade long after a deep retracement and potential reversal of trend.
Although I froze the chart slightly after price formed its rally off of the confluence support area,
prices continued to rally in the prevailing uptrend to test not only the prior $840.00 swing high, but
soared to reach $1,225.00 by December 2009.
You can apply this concept to daily charts of any market as well as the weekly chart as seen in the

prior examples. Intraday or swing traders can also use Fibonacci confluence grids on their intraday
timeframes, but it takes quicker reflexes and plenty of practice using this concept so that it becomes
second nature.

Intraday Examples of Dual Fibonacci Confluence
The rules and guidelines are the same whether you are seeking to find Fibonacci confluences on any
timeframe, but you have to be much quicker to do so while price is moving on your intraday charts.
Here are two examples in the popular SPY exchange traded fund, which would be similar to trading
the e-mini S&P 500 futures intraday along with any stock, index future, or index fund.

SPY Five-minute Chart: May 14, 2009
Remember, the goal of finding a Fibonacci Retracement Confluence zone is to locate a potential
support area to put on a buy position in an up-trending stock, or to find a resistance level to short-sell
a down-trending stock. We are always interested in the next likely swing, which allows us to play the
price movement we expect while managing risk with a close stop and a larger target, which is often a
new swing high (or low) or the retest of a prior high or low.
While these examples show the outcome after price has tested and moved off the Fibonacci level,
remember that you will not have this benefit in your real-time trading, so keep this in mind when
studying these charts.
In Figure 6.6, we see price forming an intraday swing high just above $89.80 in a prevailing uptrending move. We want to know where we can enter a buy order to try to profit if the trend continues.
To enter safely, we need to know where a likely support area exists.
FIGURE 6.6 Intraday Dual Fibonacci Retracement Confluence Grid in SPY Five-minute Chart on
May 14, 2009

In this example, observe the two Fibonacci retracement grids starting with the two immediate prior
swing lows at $88.50 and $88.80 and connected both grids to the $89.80 intraday high. We want to
know where it might be safe to buy into a confluence Fibonacci support zone.
Using the two grids, we find that an exact Fibonacci retracement grid confluence exists at $89.35,
which is valuable information to know. We drew the grid because we suspected price would be
forming a retracement swing after forming the bearish engulfing bar beginning at the $89.80 level. A
trader can draw a single Fibonacci grid or a confluence Fibonacci retracement grid as soon as he or
she suspects that price has formed a key swing high and then will be retracing lower to find support.
In this example, a trader had a span of 10 bars (50 minutes) to draw the grid after the bearish
engulfing candle formed until price tested the confluence support level and formed a spinning top
style candle at the exact confluence price of $89.35. Intraday traders must have quick reflexes and a
thorough knowledge of how to use the tools they have selected for their trading method.
Traders would look to buy when price breaks the high of the spinning top candle at 1:30 p.m. EST
(13:30) at $89.42 to trade long (buy) for a move back to test the afternoon high of $89.80 at a
minimum, while placing a stop-loss either conservatively five cents under the exact confluence, or
aggressively under the next loose confluence area at $89.20. As the chart shows, price rallied
strongly off the confluence area to give profits to those who bought as the pullback swing ended and
the trend continued in an upward, rally swing to test and exceed the intraday swing high.

SPY Five-minute Chart: December 8 and 9, 2009
Figure 6.7 is an additional example of the Fibonacci Confluence tactic as shown in the SPY intraday

frame, only this time we will describe a multi-day setup that took advantage of a retracement swing
into confluence resistance in a downtrend.
FIGURE 6.7 Downside Intraday Dual Fibonacci Retracement Confluence Grid in SPY 5-min chart
on December 8 and 9, 2009

This time, price is falling in a downtrend on our intraday five-minute chart in the SPY and we want
to find overhead resistance areas to put on a short-sell position to take advantage of a low-risk entry
into an established downtrend. We can either use a single Fibonacci retracement grid to do so, or we
can take advantage of the two prior swing highs, instead of a single swing high, to find potential
convergences of retracements. This time we will look further back to find key swing highs from which
to draw retracement grids.
Starting with the swing high of $111.52 on December 7, we draw our first grid to the $109.02
swing low two days later on December 9. The 38.2 percent retracement rests at the $110.00 area
which is helpful to know, but we can gain an added benefit from drawing one more quick Fibonacci
retracement grid from the closing high of $111.00 on December 7. We now see that the 50 percent
retracement from the $111.00 level overlaps the 38.2 percent retracement from the $111.50 level.
Now that's even more helpful!
As a reminder, traders often look to round number resistance from numbers such as $100.00,
$101.00, $110.00, and so on, making the double Fibonacci retracement confluence at the $110.00
level on December 9 align with the round number price of $110.00. We have three quick pieces of
evidence to suspect that price will find resistance at the $110.00 level, giving us a short-sale entry,
particularly if we find that a doji, bearish engulfing, or shooting star candle forms at this level.
Look closely to find that a shooting star with a long upper shadow formed at 11:00 a.m. EST into
our confluence Fibonacci target. You could have drawn this target as soon as price began to rally off
the $109.00 swing low, particularly as a spinning top or doji-style candle formed, hinting that odds
favored a retracement swing up into resistance to unfold.
As was the case, price did find resistance at the tight confluence at $110.00, but in the event that

buyers drove price higher, you could have located your stop-loss above the next confluence level at
the $110.27 or $110.30 level, which not only was a loose Fibonacci retracement confluence, but also
a prior swing high from the rally that ended at this level at noon EST on February 8 (remember to
watch prior price highs as potential resistance levels, especially when they align with a Fibonacci
retracement).
In the context of a rising uptrend, we can use the Fibonacci Retracement tool to find levels of
expected support in order to initiate a retracement trade, buying into support and expecting the trend
to continue to a higher price. Traders who locate simple Fibonacci retracements in price can identify
more potential support levels than traders who do not, while traders who specifically locate
Fibonacci confluence prices from multiple price levels can uncover hidden potential support levels
that other traders miss.
