
away is simply to control posture, breathing, and muscle tension. If you change those factors, you
will probably find that you change your emotional state.
Finally, the last major problem is making decisions. Although there are many facets to decisionmaking problems, what most people do is bring their normal method of making decisions to trading
the markets. For example, think about what you go through in order to buy a new car. You have to
think about the model, make, deal, service, cost, accessories, etc. And it probably takes you a week
or more to evaluate those factors and make a decision. Most people bring that same method of
making decisions to trading and it just doesn't work. It takes too much time. So, the solution is to
adopt a trading system that gives you signals to act. But most people with a trading system continue
to apply their normal method of making decisions to the signals given to them by their trading
system. And, of course, that doesn't work. The best method that I've found of dealing with long,
ineffective decision-making problems is to short circuit them through a process called anchoring.
That process is a little too involved to explain here.
Do you believe that most people can be successful traders if they learn to eliminate negative
emotions?
Well, that assumes that negative emotions are the cause of trading problems. I think they are just a
symptom of the basic problem. In most cases, I don't believe it's even necessary to solve specific
problems to produce success—you simply have to teach people to do things in an effective manner.
The teaching process, however, involves working with how people think, and most trainers do not
emphasize that.
Right now, I consider myself to be an expert modeler. By that, I mean that if someone can do
something well, then I can figure out how they do it and teach those skills to anyone else. I'm
concentrating on modeling trading and investment excellence. So naturally, I believe that I can
teach anyone who is committed to being a successful trader to be one of the best.
Are superior traders better because of keener analytical skills, or because they have better
emotional control?
Better emotional control, but I think that both of those factors are overemphasized.
So what does it take to duplicate successful trading?
There are three primary factors involved in duplicating success—beliefs, mental states, and mental
strategies. If you duplicate the way the best traders use those three factors for every aspect of the
trading task, then you can duplicate their results. As a nontrading example, most martial arts
experts believe that it takes years of practice to break a board with your bare hand. I was able to
observe someone for about fifteen minutes and then break two k-inch pine boards with my hand. I
even showed my son (who was ten at the time) how to do it. That's the power behind modeling.
What happens with most experts is that they are unconsciously competent. They do things well,
which means they do them automatically. For example, most people are unconsciously competent
at driving a car. You don't even think about it when you do it. When someone who is unconsciously
competent tries to explain what he or she is doing to someone else, much of what is important is
left out. Thus, my focus is to discover the missing pieces and help people install those pieces.
Let's talk about the first factor: beliefs. How are beliefs important to trading success?
Let me give you an example from another modeling project. The Army modeled the rifle skills of
the two best sharpshooters in the U.S. They were then able to develop a training class for Army
recruits in which they reduced the training time from four to two days, while increasing the
qualification rate from 80 to 100 percent. In addition, they were able to use the same knowledge to
help the top shooters improve their skills. The information they gathered about shooting beliefs was
particularly revealing.
The two top shooters, for example, believed:
• Shooting well is important for my survival.
• Hunting is fun.
• Mental rehearsal is important to successful performance.
• If I miss a shot, it has something to do with my performance.
200

One of the two top shooters, when they were in competition together, always won. And you
could tell the difference between the two in accordance with their beliefs. For example, the
best shooter believed that it was important to rehearse an entire 1,000-round match the prior
evening, whereas the second best shooter only believed that mental rehearsal was important.
In addition, the best shooter believed that it was important to hit the center of the bull's eye
on each shot (even though you didn't get extra points for that), whereas the second best
shooter believed that it was only important to hit the bull's eye. Can you understand why one
was better than the other just from their beliefs?
Now, contrast the beliefs of top shooters with the beliefs of new recruits coming into the Army.
The latter might believe:
• Guns are evil; they kill people.
• If they shoot this weapon too many times, they might go deaf.
• If they miss the target, it means the gun is misaligned.
I think, just on beliefs alone, you can begin to understand why the top shooters were so much better
than the raw recruits.
Now, let me explain some of my findings in working with top traders. You might find some of
these beliefs confirmed in other interviews in your book. Generally, I find that top traders believe:
• Money is NOT important.
• It is OK to lose in the markets.
• Trading is a game.
• Mental rehearsal is important for success.
• They've won the game before they start.
Although there are a lot more than five critical beliefs, I think these five are among the most
important. Most people approach trading to make a lot of money, and that is one of the primary
reasons they lose. Because money is so important, they have trouble taking losses and letting
profits ran. In contrast, when you think of trading as a game and play by certain rules, then it
becomes much easier to follow those two golden rales.
In addition, because of mental rehearsal and extensive planning, top traders have already gone
through all the trial and error in their mind before they begin. As a result, they know they are going
to win in the long ran, and that makes the little setbacks much easier to deal with.
You mentioned that winners know they've won the game before they start. Although I can
easily see how such confidence would be beneficial for the established winning trader, might
the impact of this trait actually be reversed for the novice trader? For example, in your first
week on skis, confidence about your ability to go down the expert slope might not be such a
great quality. How does the less expert trader distinguish between justified and misplaced
confidence?
The top traders that I've worked with began their careers with an extensive study of the markets.
They developed and refined models of how to trade. They mentally rehearsed what they wanted to
do extensively until they had the belief that they would win. At this point, they had both the
confidence and the commitment necessary to produce success. In addition, they also had the entire
constellation of beliefs I just described. As a result, I believe that there are three major differences
between justified confidence and misplaced confidence. First of all, justified confidence comes
from a constellation of beliefs, such as the one I just described. If a trader has confidence and
nothing else, he is probably in a lot of trouble. Second, justified confidence comes from extensive
testing of some sort of model of trading. If you don't have a model that you have properly tested,
then your confidence is probably misplaced. Third, justified confidence comes with an extensive
commitment to being successful as a trader. Most people who want to be traders are not committed—they just think they are. There is a poem by W. N. Murray, of the Scottish Himalayan
expedition, that says: "That the moment that one definitely commits oneself, then Providence
moves too."
If you are really committed, then not only are you certain that you are doing the right thing, but
somehow events just seem to occur to help you. If you are really committed to being a trader, then
you probably have an understanding at some level of what I'm talking about. You probably even
understand that those events that help you might be big losses. If you are not committed, on the
201

other hand, then you are probably saying, "I don't understand what Tharp is saying. I'm committed,
but events certainly have not been helping me."
Earlier, you mentioned "mental states" as the second critical factor in modeling success.
Could you explain what you mean by that?
If you ask people to list their trading or investment problems, they are of two types—problems they
don't own and mental state control problems. Problems they don't own consist of blaming the
markets, blaming floor traders or locals, blaming insider trading, blaming their broker, or blaming
their system for what goes wrong. We have a natural tendency to blame something other than
ourselves for what happens. Society promotes it. For example, the recent media coverage of
program trading virtually implies that investors who lost money in the stock market did so because
of this activity, rather than because of any fault of their own. Yet, when you blame something other
than yourself, you can continue to repeat the mistake because it was the result of something beyond
your control.
The best thing an investor can do, when things go wrong, is to determine how he or she produced
those results. Now, I don't mean that you should blame yourself for your mistakes either. I mean
that at some point in time, for any situation, you made a choice that produced those results.
Determine what that choice point was and give yourself other options to take when you encounter a
similar choice point in the future. Change the decision at similar choice points in the future and you
will change the results you get. And by imagining doing so now, you can make it easy to select
those alternatives in the future.
When people own their own problems, they discover that their results usually stem from some sort
of mental state. Common examples are:
• I'm too impatient with the markets.
• I get angry at the markets.
• I'm afraid at the wrong time.
• I'm too optimistic about what will happen.
These are just a few examples of mental state problems. Once you identify a mental state problem,
you can do something about it because this sort of problem is within your control. I've already
mentioned how one can use body posture, breaming, and muscle control to manipulate one's mental
state. To try this out for yourself, go into a shopping mall and notice how other people walk.
Duplicate a dozen or so walks for yourself and notice how your mental state changes with each one.
I'm not saying that controlling your mental state is the magic solution to trading success. It's just
part of the answer. But when you admit that the answer is within yourself, you've come a long way.
The realization that you are responsible for the results you get is the key to successful investing.
Winners know they are responsible for their results; losers think they are not.
Can you give a practical example of how someone can control their mental state?
Well, mental state manipulation is what most people call discipline. I teach people a very simple
procedure that they can use right away. For example, suppose you are at your desk and you become
aware that you are in a mental state that you would like to change. Get up out of the chair. Walk
away about four feet and then look at how you looked in that chair. Notice your posture, your
breathing, your facial expressions. Then imagine how you would look if you had the sort of mental
state you would like. When you can see that clearly, sit down in the chair again and assume the
position that you just imagined. That exercise works for almost any situation as it involves several
important principles—changing your body posture, seeing yourself from a more objective
viewooint, and imagining a more resourceful state.
Please elaborate on mental strategies—the third element you cited earlier as critical to
duplicating success. Could you provide some examples?
To understand strategies, you have to understand how people think. People think in the same
modalities as their five senses, that is, in terms of visual images, sounds, feelings, and for some
people, tastes and smells. Those five modalities are to mental strategies as the alphabet is to a great
novel, or as musical notes are to a great symphony. It's not the elements, but the way in which the
elements are put together. A mental strategy is really the sequence in which you think.
Rather than explain a complex topic in detail, which I think is beyond the scope of this interview,
202

let me give you two examples. First, imagine that you have a trading system that gives you specific
signals. Since most signals are visual, such as a particular chart pattern or certain signals on your
computer, imagine that your system gives you visual signals. Now, try on the following strategy:
• See the signal.
• Recognize that it is familiar.
• Tell yourself what might go wrong if you take it.
• Feel bad about it.
Could you trade effectively using that strategy? Would you even take the signal? Probably not!
What if you used the following strategy?
• See the signal.
• Recognize that it is familiar.
• Feel good about it.
Could you trade from that signal? Probably. So even though the two strategies are quite similar,
they lead to very different results in terms of trading. If you are trading a system, you need a simple
strategy like the last one in order to use it effectively.
Two of the top traders that you used in your research in modeling success have completely
different trading styles. One is very mechanical, while the other uses a much more intuitive
approach. Could you contrast their differences and compare their similarities?
First, let me talk about their similarities, because they are extensive. In fact, when you find
extensive similarities between two excellent traders who seem so different, then you can begin to
assume that those similarities are essential to successful trading. Both traders, for example,
developed models for how the markets work and did extensive research to test those models.
Although their ideas are very different, I think the process of developing and testing some sort of
model is probably very important. In addition, both traders share all the same beliefs that I mentioned earlier as common to successful traders. Third, both traders are very aware of their purpose
in life and as a trader. They believe they are part of a "bigger picture" and they just go with the
flow.
The mechanical trader is very logical. He constructs his models visually in his imagination. He is
very precise in his language and thinking. His models tend to focus on his concept of how to trade
successfully and of how the economy works. He does not believe that his models are adequate until
they can be converted into algorithms for the computer that match his own mental processes. As a
result of this belief, he has computerized his models, modifying both his constructed image and his
computer output, until both models match—in his words, "until they both look right." This is a very
slow and laborious process. I think it hinders his decision making on everyday events, and he tends
to agree with me, but it helps him in the long run. When his mental image and the computer model
match, he virtually takes himself out of the trading picture. The computer does everything, so at
that point, decision making is easy for him.
The intuitive trader, in contrast, has developed a model of how he thinks markets operate, rather
than a model of how to trade successfully. He also believes that the markets are constantly evolving
and that it is more important to keep up with changes in the market than to test his models by
developing an algorithm to computerize them. He trades from his expectations of what the markets
will do, which are visualizations. But I think that he tends to convert his visualizations into
feelings. Feelings actually are a mode of thinking, but they are difficult to communicate to others or
to computerize. As a result, he believes that exercises such as computerizing a trading system are a
waste of time. Remember that his main emphasis is to explain how markets work (rather than how
to trade), and he believes that the markets are constantly evolving. As a result, he has difficulty
explaining how he trades to anyone else. He just calls it intuitive. At the same time, he makes dayto-day decisions easily—a distinct contrast to the mechanical trader who is uncomfortable until he
has proven his work by computerizing it.
What are the most difficult problems to solve?
I think there are only two difficult problems. One is lack of commitment to trading. People are not
going to do what I tell them to do unless they are committed to becoming a good trader, so I don't
see many noncommitted traders. It's only occasionally, when I do a free or reduced-rate
203

consultation, that I see traders with this sort of problem. The man who wanted to remain a little
boy, and was trying to use trading as a means of accomplishing that, was a classic example. I don't
make the mistake of seeing noncommitted traders too often.
The second most difficult situation is the trader who does not own his problems. This person can
continue to repeat his problems because he never gets at the source. Once again, I usually don't see
these people. When people come to me, they realize that they produce their own problems,
although, to some extent, everyone has problems that they don't own—even my clients.
Among the people who come to see me, I think the most difficult type is the compulsive gambler.
Since these people typically crave the action of the markets, they are not likely to want my help
until they are heavily into debt. At that point, I refer them to Gamblers Anonymous or to some local
source forhelp. However, I have had one compulsive trader among my clients. He's now in my
super-trader program. I've simply channeled his compulsiveness from the markets into working on
himself.
I'm not sure that correcting trading problems is always the answer though. For example, one
approach to teaching a class on trading would be to give everyone the fundamentals in the first
session and a simple trading system in the second. You could then spend the remaining sessions
dealing with their problems trading that system. That would probably be a very effective class. On
the other hand, you could conduct the same class by giving them the fundamentals. Then you might
give them the beliefs, mental states, and mental strategies necessary to trade the system. Finally,
you might give them the system. I'm willing to bet that the second method would be more effective
than the first. At least that is the direction I'm heading.
Talk about the origins, concepts, and direction of your super-trader program.
It all began on Christmas Eve one year, when that one trader called and told me that he had made
$650,000 in the two months since I had finished working with him. In a sense, I felt that we had
only started working together. The more I thought about it, the more the question kept popping into
my mind: "What if we pushed this to the limits? What is he capable of accomplishing?" So the idea
of the super-trader program was born from those thoughts. I called him up and suggested the idea to
him. Naturally, he was all for it.
About four of my clients have now graduated to the super-trader program. It simply means that I
continue to work with these people on a regular basis (usually semiarmualry). The idea is to stretch
their performance to the limits. Many people aren't ready for that, but I have enough among my
clients who are. Who knows, in three or four years, I might just have about fifty top traders that I
work with on a continual basis! Incidentally, I find that my best clients now make excellent models
to use to study top traders.
I sometimes have dreams which involve impending market direction. Although these are
rather infrequent, they prove right a high percentage of the time. Is this unusual?
I imagine that it's quite common because people tell me that all the time, especially top traders. For
example, both the mechanical and intuitive super-traders that we talked about earlier expressed that
they had dreams about the market that were amazingly accurate. But most traders say that such
dreams are infrequent enough so that they could not trade on them regularly. This phenomenon
may even occur more frequently than one might imagine—in symbolic form. But most people do
not bother to interpret their dreams, so they miss the symbolic predictions. However, I must admit
that although it interests me, I have not investigated this area very extensively.
I know of lots of people of genius level who claim that some of their creativity comes from their
dreams. Michael Jackson claims he doesn't write his songs—they just come to him. Paul
McCartney said that he heard the song "Yesterday" in a dream. Einstein essentially dreamed the
theory of relativity. I think there are probably a lot of famous examples of this sort. It all boils
down to what intuition really is, but don't ask me to explain it. I don't understand it—YET!
I assume that the reason you have not tried trading again is that you perceive that it would
interfere with your objectivity in dealing with your clients. Yet, given all that you have
learned about successful trading during the past five years, I imagine there must be some
temptation to try it again. How do you handle this conflict? What do you envision as the long-term
resolution?
204

There are two reasons I don't trade. The first is the reason you mentioned about objectivity with
clients. If I'm helping someone trade and I have conflicting positions, then I may not be very
objective about what they are doing. An equally important reason, however, is that I am fully committed to doing what I am doing. I love helping other people, writing, giving talks, and so on. I'm
very happy doing that. It is also a sixty-hour per week job right now. If I wanted to start trading,
then I would have to devote almost as much time to doing that, at least at the beginning. Why
should I do that and give up what I already know I love doing? Player coaches, in the history of
most sports, usually are not that effective at either coaching or playing.
Your question also assumes that I am committed to trade, and as a result there is a conflict.
Actually, I find that as I get more and more into helping others become successful, I have less and
less interest in trading myself. I'm investing in myself and in my business right now. I constantly
work at improving my skills and knowledge, and that is paying off forme. Why should I dilute that
effort? Perhaps some time in the future, I will decide that I have done everything I can do, or
perhaps I'll want to change what I'm doing, or perhaps I'll just want a break. For example, three to
four years from now I might just be working with fifty or more top quality traders. If that happens,
then maybe I'll also trade. But for the near future, it doesn't seem very likely.
