
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

333

is therefore a variant of a spike and channel trend. This parabolic move will often
contain a large trend bar. For example, if there is a bear spike, which is one or more
large bear trend bars, then a pause, and then another bear spike, then you have
consecutive sell climaxes. Every large trend bar should be thought of as a spike, a
breakout, a gap, and a climax. When there are consecutive climaxes (separated by
a pause or a small pullback), they are usually followed by a two-legged correction
that tests the pause that followed the first climax. The second climax should be
thought of as the channel phase of the spike and channel pattern, even though it
is another spike and not a low-momentum channel. However, since what usually
follows is the same as with a conventional spike and channel pattern, consecutive
climaxes form a variant of a spike and channel trend. Rarely, there will even be a
third consecutive climax before a more complex correction ensues.
Why does the market tend to have a larger correction after consecutive sell
climaxes? When there is a sell climax, there is panic selling. Weak bulls feel that
they have to get out of their longs at any price. Also, weak bears see the strong
momentum and are afraid they are missing a great move so they are shorting at the
market to make sure they get in. If the market pauses and then has another large
bear bar, that second sell climax again represents urgent sellers who don’t want to
wait for a pullback that may never come. Once these weak longs are out and the
weak bears are in, there is no one left to short at these low prices and this creates an
imbalance to the buy side. There aren’t enough bears left to take the opposite side
of the trade, so the market has to go up to find enough traders willing to short to fill
the buy orders. The opposite is true with consecutive buy climaxes. They represent
urgency. Traders feel compelled to buy at the market as it is rising quickly because
they are afraid that there will not be a pullback that will let them sell at a better
price. Once these emotional weak bears and bulls (the late bulls are weak) have
bought all that they want to buy at these high prices, there is no one left to buy and
the market has to come down to attract more buyers. The result is a correction that
usually has two legs and lasts at least 10 bars or so.
Another type of a strong channel occurs in a spike and climax trend. Here,
after the pause from the spike, the market creates another spike. All spikes are
climaxes and when the market forms consecutive climaxes, it usually will form a
larger correction, often to the beginning of the second spike. But this is exactly how
a spike and channel behaves and it is therefore a variant, where there is a second
spike instead of a channel. Sometimes the climax is a spike and the spike is more of
a channel. For example, there might be a bull channel that then has a large one-bar
bull spike. This can become a spike and climax reversal. Even though there was a
channel and then a spike, it behaves like a traditional spike and channel pattern.
Since any strong vertical move can function as a spike, a gap opening qualifies.
If you look at the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) cash index on a day when the Emini has
a large gap up opening, you will see that the first bar of the cash index is not a gap.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

334

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Instead, it is a large bull trend bar with its open around the close of yesterday and
its close around the close of the first bar of the Emini. If there is then a pause or
pullback and then a channel, this is a gap spike and channel trend.
When the channel is very steep, the spike and channel often together form just
a spike on a higher time frame chart, and that spike will usually be followed by a
channel on that higher time frame. At other times there will be a spike that lasts
several bars but there is no channel. Usually the final bars of the spike have some
overlap and there actually is a channel on a smaller time frame chart.
There will sometimes be a large bull trend bar, which is a spike up, and then a
large bear trend bar, which is a spike down. When this happens in a bull trend that
has gone on for a while, the market usually enters a trading range, with the bulls
trying to generate a bull channel and the bears trying for a bear channel. Eventually
one side wins and either the trend resumes or the market forms a spike and channel bear trend. The opposite happens in bear trends, where there is then a large
bear trend bar. If there is a bull spike bar soon afterward, the market usually goes
sideways as the two sides fight over the direction of the channel. If the bears win,
the bear trend will resume, and if the bulls win, there will be a reversal. Sometimes
one side appears to win in the form of a second spike, but it fails within a bar or
two and leads to a channel in the opposite direction.
A spike and channel pattern is composed of two parts, and they are best traded
differently. A spike is a breakout and is traded like all breakouts, which are discussed in book 2. In general, if the breakout appears to be very strong and in the
context where it is likely to be successful, you can enter at the market or on small
pullbacks as the spike is forming. Since a spike is also a climax, there will be a pullback at some point and this provides other opportunities to enter with the trend.
Finally, the channel is no different from any other channel. If it is a tight bull channel, you can enter in the direction of the trend on pullbacks, such as those to the
trend line or the moving average, or on a limit order below the low of the prior bar,
or every 10 cents lower in Intel (INTC) when it is trading at $20. If the channel has
broader swings, it has stronger two-sided trading and you can take trades in both
directions. Since a channel is a flag in the opposite direction, once it starts to reverse you can take the reversal trade. It usually corrects to around the beginning
of the channel where you can enter on a test of the start of the channel, which will
be a double bottom bull flag in a spike and channel bull pullback, and a double top
bear flag in a spike and channel bear pullback.
If the channel has lots of overlap between adjacent bars and many trend bars in
the opposite direction and several pullbacks that last several bars, it is a weak channel. The weaker the channel, the more aggressive the institutional counter trend
traders will be. For example, if there is a weak bear channel after a bear spike,
strong bulls will scale in as the market moves lower. There will be firms buying
with every conceivable reason, like buying below the low of every bar or every

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

335

prior swing low, or buying every $1.00 lower in Google (GOOG) when it is trading
at $500, or on every test of the trend channel line, or on every reversal bar on a
small time frame chart, or on every $1.00 bounce up off the low in GOOG, in case
the reversal up has begun. If, instead of breaking out of the top of the channel, the
market breaks strongly out of the bottom and creates a strong bear spike that lasts
several bars, these bulls will have to cover by exiting their longs. As they sell out
of their longs, they add to the strength of the bear breakout, and they might even
reverse to short for a momentum trade down. However, in most cases the downside breakout will not go very far, and once the last desperate bulls have sold out of
their positions, there is no one left who is willing to short at these low prices. The
market will usually rally for at least two legs and at least 10 bars as it searches for
a higher price where bears might be willing to short once again.
When the market is trending strongly and then develops a spike in the opposite
direction, the spike will usually lead to just a pullback (a flag) and then the trend
will resume. However, it is a statement that the traders who believe that the market
might reverse are now willing to begin taking positions. If the market begins to
form one or two more spikes over the next 10 to 20 bars, the countertrend force
of those spikes is cumulative and the market is transitioning to more two-sided
trading. This can develop into a trading range, a deeper correction, or even a trend
reversal. For example, if there is a very strong bull trend of any type, not simply
a spike and channel bull, and the market has been above the moving average for
20 or more bars and it is at its high, then the bull trend is very strong. If there is
suddenly a moderately sized bear trend bar that opens near its high and closes near
its low, this is a bear spike. The bar can be a bear reversal bar, an entry bar below
a bear reversal bar, or even an inside bar, and it does not matter. This first spike
down will almost always just lead to a bull flag. After the bull trend resumes, watch
for another bear spike. Eventually one will be followed by a pullback to the moving
average. This first pullback to the moving average will usually be followed by a test
of the high of the bull trend. The test can be in the form of a higher high, a double
top, or a lower high. However, the pullback to the moving average is usually enough
to break at least some bull trend line and then the rally that follows might be the
final rally before a significant pullback or even a reversal takes place.
If there is a third and larger bear spike at the new high, the odds of at least a
two-legged correction increase, and the move down after the spike down will usually be in some type of channel. Is the market ignoring those prior two bear spikes?
The market never ignores anything. Although this latest bear spike might be the one
everyone considers to be the seminal event, there is a cumulative effect from the
other bear spikes as well. In fact, if the second bear spike was particularly strong
and then the market rallied to a new high, and the next bear spike was modest but it
led to a correction, you have to consider a different interpretation of what just took
place. It is possible that the second bear spike was actually the more important one,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

336

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

and was the actual start of the down move, and that the rally to the new high after
the spike was simply a pullback from that spike. It is important to understand that
any breakout pullback can test the old extreme with either a lower high, a double
top, or a higher high, and that test can often be the start of the bear channel. Although it may appear that the small spike down began the bear trend and that the
channel that followed it was the first bear channel, sometimes the earlier spike is
more influential. Its channel can begin at the high of the bull trend, and it can begin
with that smaller spike down from the high. The channel that follows that small
bear spike is then inside the larger channel that began at the bull high, just before
that small bear spike formed.
When the market is in a trading range, it often has both a bull spike and a
bear spike. The bulls and bears then fight to create a channel. Eventually one
side will dominate and will be able to form a trend channel. It often begins with a
breakout, which is then a second spike. Both spikes contribute to the formation of
the channel.
A bull channel is a bear flag and a bear channel is a bull flag, and like all flags
they are continuation patterns that usually break out in the direction of the trend.
However, sometimes they break out in the opposite direction, leading to a trend reversal. The breakout is a spike, so instead of a spike and channel trend, the market
forms a channel and spike trend that is unrelated to a spike and channel pattern.
But usually the spike is followed by a channel. For example, if there is a bear trend
and it has a pullback, the pullback is a rising channel and therefore a bear flag.
Sometimes the channel will break out to the upside. A breakout is a bull trend bar
and a spike, and if the breakout is successful, the follow-through will be a channel.
The bull trend began with the spike, and that spike and the channel that follows
form a spike and channel bull trend. The original channel was the final flag of the
bear trend and it broke to the upside, but it is not related to the spike and channel
bull trend that followed. The spike changed the market and it is the start of the new
perspective for traders, who will then ignore the bear flag that preceded it.
A similar situation happens when a wedge reversal fails. For example, a wedge
top is a rising bull channel, and therefore a bear flag, and it usually breaks to the
downside. If instead it breaks to the upside, the breakout is a spike and it may be
followed by a channel and a measured move up. The breakout always resets the
mind-set and should be thought of as the start of a new trend. In this case, the trend
is still a bull trend, like the trend before the wedge, but now it is an even stronger
bull trend. Usually, upside breakouts do not go more than five to 10 bars before
reversing into either a protracted, two-legged pullback or a trend in the opposite
direction. They represent exceptionally climactic and therefore overdone buying.
This is at the tails of the bell curve of behavior, and institutions will have all sorts
of indicators telling them that the bull trend is overdone and should correct. Each
institution will rely on its own measure of excess, but enough institutions usually

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

337

will see the rally as excessive and their bets that the market will fall will soon
overwhelm the bulls, and the reversal will ensue.
Spike and channel behavior is one of the most common and therefore most
important things that you will see on every chart. There are countless variations
and many interpretations of every pattern. Sometimes the spike will be one bar,
but then, after a pause, there will be an even better-looking spike. The channel
can be so vertical that it functions as part of the spike, and the spike and channel
might be simply a spike on a higher time frame. That channel can be very small or
very large relative to the spike. When there is a strong trend, there will usually be
several spikes within the channel, and the channel can subdivide into smaller spike
and channel patterns. Be open to all possibilities because they all have the potential
to offer profitable trading opportunities.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

338

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

FIGURE 21.1

Figure 21.1

Three Pushes in a Spike and Channel

Sometimes a bull spike and channel can end with three pushes up, a trend channel line overshoot, and a strong bear reversal bar, but most reversals are not so
straightforward. In Figure 21.1, bar 6 was part of a two-bar spike up but the move
up from the bar 5 low was so steep that you can also consider bar 5 as the start of
the spike. It does not matter because any strong reversal up on the open is likely to
have follow-through buying, and there will be buy programs based on each. Here, it
was in the form of a channel that had three pushes up and a wedge shape. Channels
often pull back after a third push up. Bar 10 overshot the trend channel line and
reversed down into a bear reversal bar, which set up a short trade. A bull wedge
usually corrects in two legs down to around the bottom of the wedge, and a channel in a spike and channel bull usually corrects down in two legs to the start of the
channel, which is also the bar 7 low.
Spikes can be cumulative. The bar before bar 7 was a bear spike but it simply
led to a test of the moving average. Bar 9 was a second bear spike. These two spikes
indicate that the bears were trying to seize control over the market and that the
market was becoming two-sided. Bar 10 was the first bar of a two-bar bear spike,
and bar 11 was followed by another bear spike. Just because that final spike broke
below the wedge and clearly led to the bear leg does not mean that it turned the
market all by itself. Those earlier spikes were also part of the transition and should

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 21.1

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

339

not be overlooked. As they were forming, you should understand that the market
was telling you that it was in transition and you should begin to look for trades in
both directions and not just buy setups.
Bar 16 was a one-bar spike but the spike up also can be considered to have
begun with bar 15. There was a pullback to bar 17 and then three small pushes up
to bar 21, where the market reversed.
The bar after 15 is a one-bar spike, and the four bars that followed formed a
small channel, ending at bar 16; the entire move up to 16 was also a spike.
Bar 22 was a spike down and it corrected sideways to bar 25, where a channel
began down to bar 27, which was the third push down after the spike (bars 23 and
26 were the first two), and bar 27 overshot the trend channel line and closed in its
middle. That was not a strong signal bar and neither was the bear inside bar that
followed, but the market reversed up into the close.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
In Figure 21.1, the market broke below the moving average and the trading range at the
close of yesterday. Since there were many bear trend bars in that trading range and the
ﬁrst bar of today had a strong bear body, it is reasonable not to buy the failed breakout
long that was set up by the second bar of today and instead to wait for a second signal
before going long. Even though the second bar was a strong bull reversal bar, there was
nothing to reverse since it totally overlapped the prior bar. This was a small trading range,
not a good reversal. All down gaps are bear spikes and can be followed by bear channels.
Bar 2 trapped bulls and became a breakout pullback short setup for a bear spike and
channel trend to bar 3. Bar 3 was a breakout below a one-bar ﬁnal ﬂag and became the
ﬁrst bar of a strong two-bar reversal that became the low of the day. Arguably, this bull
reversal can be described as a failed breakout but it more accurately is a reversal up at
the end of a bear channel.
The bull trend bar before bar 6 is when traders gave up on the possibility that the
rally from bar 3 was just a bear ﬂag. That bar was a breakout from the notion that the
market was in a bear trend to the idea that it had ﬂipped into a bull trend. This idea was
conﬁrmed on bar 6, when most traders ﬁnally believed that the market became always-in
long. Many believed that the market had reversed to up by the close of the bar before
bar 6, and that bull trend bar was also a spike, a breakout bar, and a gap. The low of
the bar that followed it (bar 6, in this case) formed the bottom of the gap, and the high
of the breakout point formed the top of the gap. Here it was both bar 5 and the small
bear inside bar that followed it. Since the bar before bar 6 was a gap, that gap was a
magnet and had a good chance of being tested over the next 10 bars or so. Bar 7 was
the test, and it became the bottom of the channel that followed the spike up. Some saw
the spike beginning on the trend bar before bar 6, and others saw it as beginning at
bar 5 or the bull bar after bar 3. Bar 12 was the correction down from the channel high,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

340

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Figure 21.1

and, as expected in a spike and channel pattern, the pullback again tested the gap and
tried to form a double bottom with the bar 7 bottom of the channel up to bar 10. In this
case, it failed.
Bar 12 was the test of the bar 7 bottom of the bull channel that ended at bar 10,
but the move down to bar 12 was in a tight channel so it was likely just the ﬁrst of two
legs down. Because of this, a double bottom bull ﬂag long never triggered above the bull
inside bar after bar 12. Instead, bar 13 was a large bear trend bar. Since it was occurring
at the end of a relatively long bear leg, it was more likely to be an exhaustive climax that
should lead to at least a 10-bar, two-legged sideways to up correction. I use the phrase
“10-bar, two-legged” often, and my intention is to say that the correction will last longer
and be more complex than a small pullback. That usually requires at least 10 bars and
two legs.
The move up to bar 14 was the ﬁrst leg, and then it pulled back to a lower low at
bar 15, and this was followed by a second leg up to bar 21. Bar 15 might have been the
second leg down from the bar 10 high but it turns out that the correction became more
complex and the second leg ended at bar 27, which formed a double bottom bull ﬂag
with bar 5 and again with bar 15. It does not matter which you consider, because the
implication is the same. There will be some programs that use one and other programs
will use the other, but both types of programs will be buying for a measured move up.
They were looking for a second leg up from the bar 3 low in the form of leg 1 = leg 2
where leg 1 was bar 3 to bar 10, and leg 2 was the bar 27 low up to the bar 31 high.
On a higher time frame chart, bar 27 was a simple high 2 buy setup, since it was two
legs down from the rally to bar 10. It was a two-legged higher low after a strong move
up, and became the pullback that led to the measured move up to bar 31. The rally to
bar 31 overshot the measured move by a few ticks but it was close enough to satisfy the
bulls who took proﬁts there. The market then sold oﬀ to the bar 32 low.
The move down to bar 15 was a wedge bull ﬂag where the ﬁrst two pushes ended
at bars 7 and 13. It does not matter that bar 10 was a higher high test of bar 6 instead
of a lower high because this is common in wedge ﬂags.
Bar 21 was a wedge bear ﬂag, which is common when the breakout above a double
top fails. Bars 16 and 18 formed a double top but instead of breaking out to the downside,
the market broke out above. The market had two small legs up to bar 21, where the
market reversed and the breakout failed. Bars 16, 18, and 21 are the three pushes up in
the wedge bear ﬂag.
