
212

Inside the Currency Market

OIS rates were once very stable rates and rarely moved in terms of basis
points so OIS represented a perfect ﬁxed-leg option to the SONIA and
LIBOR ﬂoating leg. Economic crisis caused OIS rates to skyrocket and move
far out of market norms. This further caused OIS and the ﬂoating interestrate swap legs to become ﬂoating as market uncertainty grew. As OIS became
the norm and stable ﬁxed rate, SONIA and LIBOR represented the unsecured portion of the ﬂoating leg. Now both are treated as unsecured.
So a better measure was needed to gauge swap rates and gilts against
interest rate swaps.
The BOE factors swap spreads as the sum of two-year interest rate swap
settles on six-month LIBOR minus two-year OIS plus the sum of two-year
OIS rate minus two-year generic gilt spread.
Canada

Canada employs CDOR-OIS as a means to ﬁnance interest-rate swaps, yet
overnight transactions account for 10 to 20 percent of daily trading volume
in U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar (Canadian FX Committee 2010). FX swaps
account for 64.3 percent of daily trading volume, 23.8 percent in spot transactions. This says the majority of Canadian ofﬁcial business is ﬁnanced by a
currency other than the Canadian dollar. The vast majority of all U.S. dollar/
Canadian dollar transactions were done for seven days or less with the U.S.
dollar as the primary foreign currency. Between 2005 and 2010, FX swaps
volume remained stable. The last fact is spot U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar
spreads on $50 million or more was 8 to 10 points before the economic crisis
but widened to 20 to 25 points during the peak of the crisis (Canadian FX
Committee 2010). Another aspect to ﬁnance is the ﬁxed OIS against a ﬂoating CORRA rate. Swap rates here are based on CORRA, Canada’s overnight
repo rate. As swap spreads widen, sell U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar or long
Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar.
Swiss Swaps

SARON is the ofﬁcial overnight rate for the Swiss and is employed in interest-rate swaps. For research, the SNB is by far the worst. If the answer is not
found at the SIX Swiss Exchange, a search for Swiss information throughout
the Swiss government is futile.

213

Swaps and Forwards

On the SIX Swiss Exchange along with the interactive yield-curve function is the ability to interactively employ Swiss and other nation’s swap rates
against any nation’s yield curves. It is a fabulous tool and worthwhile for traders of all investment instruments due to its high reliability. One can perform
bond-nation comparisons with any maturities or individually, compare individually, or compare interest-rate swaps and deposit rates.
United States

Two methods exist to measure the U.S. market. The 30-day Fed funds futures
contract tracks the overnight Fed funds rate for a month. But the three-month
OIS more closely tracks effective rates and it provides a guide to expectation
and probabilities of those rates. The key word is probability as U.S. markets track Fed funds-rate increases or decreases based on probabilities. Other
nations use different methodologies.
To calculate, Futures price minus 100, 1.00 minus 0.98 with an expected
25-basis-point change.
(Target fed funds)  (implied rate)  rate spread
1.00  0.98  0.02. (rate spread)
 percent chance of 25 basis point change
(25 basis point change)
0.02 / 0.25  0.08
No conﬁdence in a rate hike at this point.
What is tracked is U.S. interbank deposit rates that settle based on
actual/360. An inverse relationship exists between interest rates and the OIS
contract. If interest rates head higher, the contract price falls and vice versa.
It’s a longer-term gauge inside deposit rates and a great method to trade
FOMC meetings and rate expectations.
The purpose for a swap transaction is varied. Some may wish to hedge
an interest-rate risk using OIS contracts while others may employ OIS as a
forward contract that exchanges ﬁxed for ﬂoating streams. Currency swaps
are varied as well. Some may borrow in one currency and lend in another
currency. Some employ these methods for conversion purposes, while others
will for example sell U.S. dollar debt in exchange for another currency.
Canada for example employs interest-rate cross currency swaps to fund
foreign-currency reserves by issuing ﬁxed-rate domestic bonds then swap into
ﬁxed- or ﬂoating-rate debt. Many facets of the swap market exist as well as

214

Inside the Currency Market

many variations of a swap curve from nation to nation due to the difference
in focus to employ monetary policy that meets three-month target rates. Yet
since the Lehman Brothers’ collapse, the major focus for central banks and
traders is the focus on the short term due to market uncertainties and because
so many ﬁnancial instruments now exist that focus on the short end.
Central banks have a three-month horizon with a daily monitoring of
overnight rates with the opportunity to hedge any market risk. Money must
constantly move in order to keep it working within an economy. For this
reason, the swap market can provide vital information in terms of a spot
transaction.
The further reason for the increased focus on the swap market is the
recent development that central banks employ eight monetary policy
meetings a year. These meetings determine policy rates and gauge economic development in the future. This further enhanced the short-term
economic focus.
The gauge is the spread. As spreads widen, it’s always a sell position as the
cost of business is too high. To understand this varied market is to understand
the forward market.

Outright Forwards

The method to connect interest rate swap conditions is to employ forwardimplied rates. The forward price of a currency must relate to an interest-rate
differential between two currencies. The classic deﬁnition says it assumes an
arbitrage condition is possible if parity doesn’t exist.
A formula to look at this relationship is:
ti*  it  set  1  st  pt
where
ti*  foreign period nominal interest rate,
it  domestic period interest rate,
st  spot rate (foreign to domestic in logs),
set1  market one step ahead forecast for the spot rate at t, and
pt  risk premium.
This formula captures bond-yield differentials that reﬂect expected exchangerate movements over the life of the bond, plus risk. This methodology is

215

Swaps and Forwards

termed covered-interest parity and is designed to determine where the spot
price is trading in relation to the forward rate. The correct term is uncovered
Interest Parity but if a position is covered by an interest rate, it’s no longer
uncovered. The purpose of both serves as a method to determine interest rates
and conditions of parity. Much has been written on this topic in the 30 years
since its early inception. Forward points actually found its beginnings since
World War II, but its importance as a trading vehicle began when the gold
standard was set aside in exchange for ﬂoating exchange rates.
The formula
F  S (1  r/1  rf )t
where
F  the current forward rate,
S  current spot rate,
r  domestic interest rate for term t,
rf  foreign interest rate for term t, and
t  time to delivery.
The formula can also be viewed as
F  S(1  rate cc1 t)/(1  rate cc2 t)
where

F  Forward rate,
S  spot,
cc1  interest rate of currency 1,
cc2  interest rate of currency 2, and
t  time.
The key term is foreign to domestic interest rate. This category is where
overnight rates are factored, LIBOR, effective interest rates, repo rates, yield
curves and market rates such as a T-Bill. A spot price and forward point can
be found within the calculation.
A forward points is the most important and vital link to understanding
currency spot prices as well as their relationship to other pairs and ﬁnancial
instruments.
The key to forward points is points per day, which is the link to determine the cost of maintaining a position overnight through either a Tom/Next,
overnight, or spot/Next trade. These are rollover rates and are debited or
credited to accounts at the 5:00 p.m. EST closing.

216

Inside the Currency Market

Outright forward points trade at a discount or premium depending on
which side of the currency pair is the lesser or greater interest-rate currency.
Forward points are quoted against spot. A long or short position is debited or
credited based on interest rates that translate to forward points and factored
into a spot price. The determination to roll over daily is how many forward
points are debited or credited based on the 5:00 closing.
If a trader is long the greater interest-rate currency pair, that account
will be credited and debited for the lesser interest-rate currency to reﬂect the
premium or discount in each pair. The greater interest-rate side of a pair is
the premium, while the lesser pair is the discount. Its market is determined
based on any day’s trading.
More important to forward points is the prediction to determine possible
future spot prices. Outright forwards and forward curves are good factors, a
future prediction based on present market conditions based on interest rates.
Today’s forward points drive future forward predictions.
Forward points are bounded by the interest rate differentials within each
currency pair. Those interest-rate differentials are reﬂected in the market by
traders that anticipate changes to monetary policy made by central banks.
Both sides are bounded by interest rates, but short interest rates change daily
so forward points will change daily. Central banks maintain rates 25 to 50
basis points from current rates yet markets and traders anticipate future rates
reﬂected in bonds, yields, and forward points. Sometimes the market overshoots the target, sometimes not. So forward points are bounded within the
context of a spot price by the bond/yield interplay on one side and monetary
policy on the other. Monetary policy means rates rise, fall, or stay the same
and it’s the overall driver of spot prices.
The twist is that each central bank meets eight times yearly but not at the
same time. So currency pairs maintain monetary policy within its price based
on two monetary policies. The interest rate is the measure and is found in the
markets because it streamlines the tedious process to factor every economic
announcement, every bond issuance, every cash ﬂow, and every basis point
yield.
So a forward point represents an interest rate, an expected rise, fall, or
stasis condition and is reﬂected in the bond/yield interplay on a daily basis.
Because currency pairs are two-sided equations between two nations, yieldcurve spreads could be measured by forward points to arrive at a daily spot
price. Yet as markets, bond prices and yields change, so do forward points
and spot prices. Forward points can rise and fall within a trading day. Fixing
times are most important for pairs and forward points because they establish

Swaps and Forwards

217

a spot reference price for central banks, importers and exporters, banks, and
major companies to lock in a price. Fixing times are best points for proﬁt
because they distill conﬁdence in a price and the market will follow its price,
so volatility may occur if the market price is far from the ﬁx.
The idea of interest-rate differentials is the method how and where
money must seek its yield, yet it is the cost of capital. Forward points represent interest income or the cost of capital.
For example, forward points are quoted as 0.0094, which means multiply by either 100 or 1000 and the price of interest is established for one
side of a currency pair. If the other side is, for example, 74, multiply by 100
or 1000 and the other side is established. Interest payments are factored. To
receive the 94 in interest from the bid side, a buy forward/sell spot is transacted or a sell spot/buy forward. To gain the 94 interest, buy spot and sell
the other side of the pair forward, the 74. Forward means from one day to
10 years. Positions can always be rolled over if a trade was entered for a short
duration. A rolled position means rolling over the same trade for a longer time
frame. The offer side works the same, sell forward/buy spot. The methodology
is to buy/sell, sell/ buy. Look at bids and offers as lend/borrow. And look at
forward points as the guide to interest income. Refer to the currency swap
examples above. All take the form sell/buy, buy sell. A nation like Japan with
a deﬂationary environment and low interest rates must seek higher yield in
other markets. Monetary policy in Japan has been stiﬂed by current and past
conditions, so traders and investors sought yield in higher interest-rate paying nations. This was the basis for the methodology for carry trades that later
became accepted practice and the basis for the yen to become the funding
currency. Lastly, it became the basis for the Japanese to transfer operations to
offshore markets.
Market anticipation in terms of forward curves alludes to construction
of the curves. Banks may employ OIS strips, zero-coupon strips, or forward/
forward FRA strips to discount two different yield curves.
As time progressed and the use of swaps became an increasing phenomenon, forwards were factored for implementation in various currency-swap
arrangements.
Forward traders are actually spot traders. The difference is forward traders
trade based on forward points, interest-rate differentials. Those interest-rate
differentials are found between two nations’ yield curves and depend on
which of two maturities is the focus.

218

Inside the Currency Market

Calculate Forward Points, Yield Curves, and Spot Prices

The formula is:
Interest rate differential  number of days  outright/interest rate base
(Day Count)  Spot  100
Suppose Australian dollar/U.S. dollar yield spread is 418.9 bp or 4.189
percent/U.S. yields 2.625 percent.
FX points midday  790  0.8786/0.8706 2 year outright/Spot 
0.9581/84. From above formula-4.188 percent  730 (2Year)  0.8796/365 
0.95825 (Mid spot price)  100  2689.148/38090.27  7.059935/100 
.0705 points market forward.
Or suppose $1 is invested in Australia at 6.813 percent and $1 is invested
in the United States at 2.625 percent for one year. The difference would be
the dollar’s discount reﬂected in spot points 0.95825  0.04188  .0401 or
401 pts, twice that is 802. Mid forward  790.
As ﬁnancial instruments constantly trade, interest rates will change along
with fast market movements. So a calculation must be made constantly to
ﬁnd a mismatch of rates. Calculations are provided for forward points.
There are two factors for consideration within the formula. Day counts
must be speciﬁc and interest payment schedules must be factored in monthly,
quarterly, semi-annual, or as bullet pay. Bullet pay is deﬁned as no interest
payments. Principal and interest is paid upon maturity.
Forward points in terms of a currency price can be factored against many
ﬁnancial instruments. The key to other calculations is to divide the cash rates
by the futures rates. A stock market index can be factored against a spot price
by fair value calculations. The key is to determine index points and factor
those points against spot forward points.
In bond terms, a U.S. 30-year Treasury is priced in thirty-seconds is
$312.50 each thirty-second or $3,000 per point. One basis point on a 10-year
bond is $1,000 plus interest ﬂows quarterly, semi-annually, or annually.
A foreign bond is equal to one basis point British pound 1,000 and British
pound 3,000. Foreign bonds trade 0.01 percent. The key to understand foreign bonds in relation to spot prices and forward points is to understand and
measure cash ﬂows.
In the United States, average treasury yields on any given day trade about
1.48 for the two-year, 2.18 for the ﬁve-year, and 3.21 for the 10-year. Each
nation’s yield curve must be measured against these rates for U.S. dollar
traded pairs.

Swaps and Forwards

219

Conclusion

This chapter focused on the various types of swaps. It began with currency
swaps, cross currency swaps, and basis swaps and examples were provided, as
well as types of traders that would employ each type. Swaps comprise many
types, such as OIS swaps, and connect to other revenue sources. All types
were provided by explanation and example, as well as types of markets that
employed these instruments. Forward points and outright forwards were
highlighted and explained and examples provided for each instrument.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 8

Stock and Bond Markets
The focus of this chapter is nation-to-nation stock and bond markets and the
dynamics of the two markets in relation to currency prices. Bond markets are
indicators to stock market direction because of their early opening from formal stock market opens. This interplay as an indicator prices yields and yields
price currency pairs. An in-depth look into each nation and the dynamics of
each structure will be highlighted, as well as the characteristics of each currency pair within the respective market.
Stock markets in the respective nations that are attached to one side of
a currency-pair trade can provide vital answers to direction of that pair for
many reasons. The ﬁrst point is stock markets determine direction of the
interplay between bonds and yields. In this instance, it answers the question
whether to go long or short a pair in a particular market. This represents
proﬁts or losses.
Secondly, stock markets must be looked upon as a risk indicator. In the
United States, Germany, and Canada, rising stock markets are measures of
risk because government bond yields rise with the currency. Stock markets
ebb and ﬂow, so currency pairs will ebb and ﬂow as pairs follow the bond
yield interplay.
Rising stock markets represent the fact that LIBOR, repurchase agreements, effective, and swap rates all fell into a perfect pattern that allowed the
rise. Currency pairs move based on interest rates, so sometimes the proper
alignment of the most important of rates allows stock markets to rise, yet an
improper alignment allows stock markets to fall. This equation is not necessarily written in stone as outside developments can disrupt the balance, but
it’s always better to follow the equation as a high probability for stock-market
moves. Economic performance is the sole reason for stock-market movements, up during good times and down during bad.

221

222

Inside the Currency Market

Stock markets provide either early warning down signs or positive up
signs that ensure currency pair direction. Yet they provide answers as to which
pair to trade and in what direction to take that particular pair. Because the
Australian Stock market opened doesn’t mean only the Australian dollar/U.S.
dollar should be traded. Almost any pair can be traded in any market. The
question must be which pair and what direction, long or short? If a stock
market chooses not to rise or fall and instead ranges, that can be a vital source
of proﬁts as range tops and bottoms can be bought and sold. For this reason,
stock markets should be evaluated as closely as any currency pair and measured against ranges.
To hold currency pairs through many markets means a further evaluation
and proper knowledge of other nations’ stock markets. Stock markets have
deﬁnite opening and closing times within nations, but in many instances
stock market openings and closings overlap around the world. This could
have dramatic effects on a trade held throughout many markets. An up market in Australia doesn’t automatically presuppose an up market in Japan, so an
exit may be necessary from the Australian market before the Japanese opening. But continuity may exist, so a trade can possibly run throughout other
markets. London, Frankfurt, and the SIX Swiss Exchange all trade at some
point together on any trading day, while Canada and the United States open
later in the day—that leaves these ﬁve markets trading at the same time. This
situation could represent enormous proﬁts, but without proper knowledge,
huge losses.
Stock markets around the world sometimes correlate, sometimes not.
Correlations occur provided an economic situation doesn’t force a change of
direction. Wars, natural disasters, and even political personnel changes can
force dramatic and immediate directional changes.
Correlations normally occur within regions such as Australia and New
Zealand, or the United States and Canada. Yet each nation is completely
a separate entity with various monetary policies, various interest rates, and
various objectives to achieve its goals. For this reason, stock markets will react
very differently. A 100-point rise in Japan doesn’t correlate to the United
States market rising 100 points. Correlations indicate ups or downs rather
than exact point movements. The key to correlations is to follow the leaders
as they provide direction, yet leaders doesn’t necessarily correlate as the United
States or Europe, because anything can occur throughout the markets within
a trading cycle. A leader could be Australia as easily as Japan.
For currency pairs in U.S. markets, always look at yen crosses as the
measure of stock-market risk. Australian dollar/Japanese yen should move in
conjunction with Australian dollar/U.S. dollar if conﬁdence exists. Canadian

Stock and Bond Markets

223

dollar/Japanese yen is the premier measure of risk in Canada trade simply
because of its correlation to oil. Conﬁdence in Canada and the U.S. economic
system means Canadian dollar/Japanese yen should move in conjunction with
Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar. British pound/Japanese yen should move in conjunction with British pound/U.S. dollar. euro/Japanese yen should move in
lockstep with euro/U.S. dollar. A rising stock market may see for example
euro/U.S. dollar rise, but if euro/Japanese yen doesn’t follow, the stock market
bond/yield interplay is not a sign of conﬁdence. Without conﬁdence in stockmarket moves, any rise in, say, euro/U.S. dollar without euro/Japanese yen as a
follower, means euro/U.S. dollar can’t hold any gains. Euro/Swiss franc, however, will always maintain its dominance as the premier measure of risk. U.S.
dollar/Swiss franc and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar conﬁdence must be measured
with euro/Swiss franc, especially during European trade. Yet euro/Swiss franc
serves well as a risk measure in U.S. markets.
Stock markets, just like currency pairs, tend to function in wave patterns during normal economic periods. Each nation or region experiences
tops or bottoms throughout any given year. To know tops and bottoms helps
to understand how to proﬁt with various currency pairs.
All markets and all ﬁnancial instruments experience this wave pattern
and the patterns are as deﬁnite as the seasons of change. It’s as if each nation
receives a turn in the wave-pattern structure. Through this structure, stock
markets ﬁnd tops and bottoms, currency pairs experience tops and bottoms,
bonds and yields experience tops and bottoms, and LIBOR experiences tops
and bottoms. One must wonder if wave-pattern structures were a manmade
design as a consequence to ensure that every nation prospers or the Invisible
Hand of self-regulating markets ﬁrst outlined by Adam Smith in 1759 in The
Theory of Moral Sentiments and later in 1776 in An Inquiry into the Nature and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
With the introduction of the euro in 1999, the newly formed G-20
Finance Ministers began regular meetings to discuss world economic events.
At the time of the 1997 Asian crisis, when Asian currencies crashed, the introduction of the euro was foremost on their minds. The statement in 1999
from the ﬁrst meeting in Berlin began with a policy to “make globalization
work.” Further, “evaluation by nations’ compliance with international codes
and standards in transparency and ﬁnancial sector policy” and “examination
of differing exchange-rate regimes and role to cushion impact of international
ﬁnancial crisis.” They sought reform and globalization, an integration of the
world and markets.
The 2000 Montreal meeting sought to “reduce countries’ vulnerabilities to ﬁnancial crisis including exchange-rate arrangements.” From 1999
