
For most traders, it is preferable to place a stop-loss order as soon as possible after executing an
entry into a trade. While some traders prefer to use mental stops, which have the advantage of your
position surviving sudden price moves that dissipate as soon as they happen, most new traders do
well to use hard (actual) stops because it not only creates discipline, but prevents them from playing
the game of hope and hold when a position turns against them. A professional trader will exit
immediately when price hits the predetermined stop, which was placed logically, while a new trader
—convinced that the next trade will be a surefire winner—may be prone to letting price run beyond
the predetermined stop-loss. The new trader justifies holding on to a losing position until he or she
can no longer emotionally stand the pain of financial loss, and thus exits at a much larger loss than
expected. Such unexpected large losses often result in feelings of personal failure, which increases
doubt, fear, and hesitation. Trading is a game of probabilities rather than certainties, and stop-loss
orders help keep the results within the parameters of predetermined risk-reward parameters and edge.
In addition to assessing where to locate our stop-loss price and also potential target, we then must
assess how many shares or contracts to put on in the position. As described in Chapter 8, this
decision may be fixed, as in purchasing 500 or 1,000 shares or one or two contracts on every
position, or may be part of a more sophisticated formula such as using the risk in a trade to determine
position size. For example, if I decide I can risk no more than $2,000.00 on my next trade and I
determine that my stop-loss price in a swing trade from the daily chart is $2.00 lower than my entry,
then I can purchase 1,000 shares of the stock to trade. If my stop was $1.00 lower than entry, I could
purchase 2,000 shares, provided my account was large enough for me to do so. Your trading plan
includes your decision for your position-sizing parameters on each position you take, and you must
determine this formula or value in advance of executing your trade.

Trade Management
Most traders spend far more time planning their entry than they do planning their exit. Like Mark
Douglas wrote, we determine when to enter our trades, and we do so out of a clear mind without the
pressure or stress of having a position in the market. Having a trade on may cause us to fall victim to
ownership bias, which states that we value something we own more than something we do not own.
Also, we can analyze more clearly when we do not have a position on as opposed to when we do,
because if we are long shares of a stock, we may miss or ignore bearish chart signals that hint that we
should exit early. Studies show that when presented with conflicting chart information, traders who
have a position on tend to value information that confirms their position and expected outcome
(bullish information if long, for example) and discount or ignore information that contradicts their
position (bearish information such as negative divergences or reversal candles).
The time between trade entry and trade exit is the trade management phase, which can make or
break you as a trader. Just as you determine when exactly to enter a new position, you determine when
to exit it, unless you are losing money in a leveraged position and your broker forces a margin call on
you, demanding either you add additional funds to your account or liquidate your position. In this
sense, only you can determine when to enter, but there are conditions, such as remaining stubbornly in
a mounting losing trade, where outside forces can force you to exit your trade unwillingly.

Managing Open Positions
The determining factor of your ultimate trade outcome is how you manage the open position. A trade

reflects a temporary position when the odds favor one outcome occurring over another, which often
derives from an opening in the structure of price that allows for a low-risk opportunity. Stated in
simpler terms, a retracement trade in the context of an uptrend bets that price will stabilize at support
then rise higher off of that support level. If price breaks under support, then the trader will need to
close the position because the price did not achieve the desired outcome. With similar logic, traders
expect a price breakout to continue once price breaks free from a lengthy trading range, but if the
breakout does not materialize, then a trader will need to take a stop-loss execution in the event that
price returns back inside the trading range.
You cannot control what happens to price between your trade entry and your trade exit; you can
only monitor what happens and avoid the emotional biases that befall many traders. You control when
you enter, how many shares or contracts to purchase, and when you exit. Everything else is out of your
control and is determined by buying and selling pressure of market participants in an environment of
probabilities, not certainties. That is why it is important to locate your stop-loss orders at an area that
would disconfirm your market thesis, such as a break under confluence support in an uptrend, or a
break to new highs after you shorted shares expecting the market to reverse lower.
After you put on a trade based on a high probability setup, one of two outcomes will occur: either
the price will fulfill your expectation and touch your target, allowing for a profit, or price will move
the opposite way than you expected and touch your stop-loss price, at which time you probably should
exit your position to prevent a small loss from turning larger. While these are the two standard
outcomes of trade management, these are not the only outcomes. A trader who went long could see
price trade slightly below the entry but above the stop, which could scare the trader into exiting the
entire position early. This is how emotions destroy a positive expectancy. Alternatively, a trader who
purchased shares in a breakout move places a stop $2.00 lower and envisions a price move at least
$10.00 higher in a trade, but decides to exit the position when a single shooting star candle appears
when there is a $3.00 profit from the trade, which is $7.00 lower than the target. Again, fear of losing
the open profit actually cost in the position because the market rose to and above the initial target.
While it's been said “You cannot go broke by taking a profit” and while that might be technically
true, a trader who employs breakout or reversal strategies often needs to manage the position for very
large targets in order to overcome the numerous smaller losses the strategy generates. Each trade we
take costs us in slippage and commissions, so we need to overcome not just the losses from the losing
trades, but the slippage and commissions from every single trade we take. If we leave too much
money on the table, which is the term used for when a trader exits a trade too early, then we will not
capture the monetary edge from our activities and will not make as much money as we anticipate.
Alternately, a trader may see price rally up to the initial target but then decide that the price will
continue higher. The trader mismanages the trade and remains in the position after price hit the initial
profit target. While this can work sometimes, other times it will lead to situations where price begins
to fall from the target and the trader decides not to exit, thinking price will return to the initial high.
However, if price never returns to that swing, then the paper profits will evaporate and then the trader
holds on to the position until it devolves into a loss, despite the fact that the price hit the overhead
target exactly as expected. Greed, in this case, prevented the trader from selling when the price
structure suggested it, and thus the trader lost not only unrealized paper profits, but real money when
the position was exited later than anticipated with a loss. The common theme is that the trader failed
to manage the trade appropriately by basing entry or exit decisions on emotion, rather than objective
evidence from the charts.

Traders should not exit a position early for emotional reasons, but rather maintain a concrete set of
rules for when to exit a position early should the need arise. Specifically, conditions may change
while the trader is in a trade, but before the price reaches the upside target. A common example is
when a trader plays a retracement trade off support in the context of a rising uptrend and sets a stop
under the support, as well as a price target above the most recent swing high in the uptrend. However,
as price rallies upward off confluence support as expected, it finds unexpected resistance at the prior
price swing high. At the same time, the chart may be showing a distinct negative momentum
divergence at the retest of the prior price high, along with a reversal candle or a double-top price
pattern formation. What is a trader to do? This is where management is key.
We do not know the exact outcome of any trade; all we can do is monitor the probabilities as they
develop while we are in a position. In this case, the failure to break through overhead price resistance
from the prior high, in conjunction with a negative momentum divergence and reversal candle, is most
likely evidence that the price will reverse lower soon. Seeing that evidence objectively, a trader
should take profits before price reaches the desired upside target because the evidence of further
upside potential deteriorated due to the bearish chart evidence. A trader who firmly believes price
will continue to the upside target beyond the prior price high may decide to sell half of the position
and keep the reminder open in the event that price does overcome the divergence and resistance and
continues to the target. Doing so could also be good management, because the trader was not blinded
by greed or certainty that price was required to hit the target, such that the trader ignores chart
evidence to the contrary. Selling half the position into a bearish chart development may also be
considered good trade management. While price did not reach the official target, the trader was open
to information that disconfirmed the bullish bias and exited when the chart evidence shifted against
the position, saving what profits there were and exiting when the odds turned against the position.

Trade Management of Specific Types of Trades
In terms of trade management, when trading fade trades, look for unexpected bearish weakness if
playing long from a bounce off support to target the upper horizontal resistance line in the context of a
sideways trading range. Unexpected weakness may indicate price may fall shy of the full upside
target. For fade trades in particular, trade management is key because fade trades are counter-trend in
the context of a prevailing trend, and subject to an eventual strong range breakout in the context of a
sideways consolidation.
For retracements, look for price to find unexpected resistance, negative divergences, or reversal
candles at prior highs in the context of a rising trend, or alternately, unexpected support, positive
divergences, or bullish reversal candles in the context of a short-sell in the context of a prevailing
downtrend.
If you are playing for a very large target in the context of either a trend reversal or breakout trade,
you may choose to trail a stop in your position either beyond the 50 period or other intermediate term
moving average or beyond recent swing highs in the context of a down move or beneath recently
formed swing lows in the context of an uptrend. Look for multi-swing divergences to signal a
potential reversal of trend, and be willing to hold through the counter-trend swings or waves that form
in the context of a new up or down trend, so that you can capture a larger profit over time rather than
just swing to swing as in fade or retracement strategies.
If you are day trading, you have much less time to make decisions and must rely in part on reflex

and a focus on the developing price structure, though swing traders on the daily chart have extra time
to assess the current structure of open positions in the evening, to determine whether the technical
structure requires adjusting your position mid-course.

Trade Exit
The final component to any trade is the exit, which results either in a profit or a loss to the trader. The
trade exit is a factor of the initial opportunity, type of trade setup, and discretionary management
while the trade remains open. The ideal exit results in a profit from the price moving in the expected
direction, with the trader managing the position appropriately and exiting at the predetermined price
target indicated by the original opportunity. Not all trades produce profits of course, and it is
important to assess the reasons for a losing trade.
Trading is a numbers game of probabilities, risk management, and opportunity maximization; you
control when you enter and exit a trade, but not what happens to price between that time. After taking
a loss, it is important to distinguish between the reason for that outcome, namely to discern if the loss
was due to random probability that is out of your control (meaning you did the right thing), or if your
emotions or other discretionary errors resulted either in an unnecessary loss, or a larger than expected
loss (meaning you did something incorrect that needs adjusting in the future).
If the loss resulted from poor trade management, such as holding on to a profitable trade so long
after an exit signal developed that it turned into a loss, or exiting a trade the moment you saw a
frightening single bar or candle against your position that did not touch your predetermined stop-loss
price, then your emotions were a factor in the loss.
If you develop a consistent pattern of allowing emotions to dictate when you exit a trade,
particularly when fear forces you to sell either ahead of the predetermined stop-loss price or
expected price target, then you create unforced trading errors that erode both your accuracy and
monetary edge, and possibly end your trading career early.
In assessing your trading performance, note the specific reason for a trade exit. Clarify if a loss
resulted from normal market action or from an emotional mistake on your part. Eliminate emotional
mistakes, or unforced trading errors, as much as possible. If you fail to detect destructive patterns
early, then they become destructive habits that will be much more difficult to break later. Answering
this simple question after a trading loss helps you understand what went wrong and if there was
anything you did to cause the loss; if so, you can strive not to repeat the same mistake.
On the same thought, if price behaved in the opposite direction than the chart indicated, then it was
the result of random probability and a shift in the supply/demand relationship. In this event, you must
not blame yourself for a loss that occurred as a result of an unexpected price move. Most likely, if you
observed a very high probability trade setup, then other traders observed it as well and took a very
similar trade that you did, and are stopping-out right there with you. Other traders may decide to fight
the unexpected price action, which could result in a very large loss if a positive feedback loop
develops quickly. In fact, there are some advanced trading techniques and setups that take advantage
of this exact situation where very obvious trade setups fail.
Never seek 100 percent trading accuracy as your goal—it is unachievable. Traders who use fade
strategies or retracement strategies can expect to have an accuracy rate greater than 50 percent, while
traders who employ reversal or breakout strategies can expect to have an accuracy rate close to or
less than 50 percent. In real terms, a 50 percent accuracy rate means five trades out of every 10 are

winners, or 50 trades out of every 100 are winners; by the same token, the remaining trades are
losers, but if traders manage them correctly, the losers are smaller than the winning trades.

Conservative and Aggressive Exits
For both profit targets and stop-loss orders, you must decide between conservative or aggressive
tactics, as similar logic applies to entries as exits. Review Chapter 8 for a deeper discussion on these
types of tactics for trade entries. A conservative trader might exit the whole position exactly at the
expected price target, or might exit the whole position exactly at the predetermined stop-loss price.
However, an aggressive trader might monitor price closer and determine that odds favor a move
through the expected price target, perhaps if momentum and volume increase as price travels quickly
toward a price target. If so, the aggressive trader might keep at least half the position open beyond the
expected target, but only because the chart evidence suggested bullish strength. An aggressive trader
might decide to sell half the position at the target and then hold on to see if price can continue to move
through the expected target, and sell only on a confirmed sell-signal from a long trade, perhaps when
a negative divergence develops, or price breaks a rising trendline or breaks under the low of a
reversal candle. In this sense, aggressive traders will monitor conditions as they exist at the time of
exit to determine whether or not new information suggests that holding on to the trade would be better
than exiting the whole position.
In contrast, a conservative trader might sell the entire position as price touches the expected target
and then move on to the next trade immediately, booking profits and feeling satisfied. In some cases, a
conservative trader might decide to sell the whole position early when price approaches, but not
officially touches, the expected target.
In the same thought process, a conservative trader might exit a full position in the event price
touches the predetermined stop-loss price and then the trader will move on to the next position. An
aggressive trader might decide to evaluate conditions as they exist closely at the time price touches
the stop-loss price to see if price may be forming a stop-gun or rinse and wash situation wherein it
would be best to hold the full or partial position to see if this situation resolves in a continuation in
the original direction of the trade as expected. Markets are so sophisticated today that if a trade setup
is too obvious, price can often try to throw-off the weak traders who have extremely tight stop-loss
orders in what is called a stop-gun or rinse and wash situation.
For example, in a retracement setup, price may fall to an expected support zone, which triggers
traders to buy and then place stops under the support zone. In the event the market continues falling
through support, it may start taking out these stop-loss orders of those traders who use a very tight
stop-loss price and then stabilize and rise in the original expected direction upward to the price
target, leaving aggressive traders who had wider stop-loss orders, or held through this phase, in their
original positions to profit from the move. In this sense, trades can be envisioned as holding on to a
bucking bull, where only the strong survive and the weak ones get thrown off the bucking bull.
Conservative traders demand as much price information as possible before executing a trade, and
then exit a trade as quickly as possible or on the first sign of trouble, both of which lessens their
actual time in a trade. Aggressive traders might enter a trade earlier, perhaps as price touches
support, and then hold on to that trade as long as possible, demanding that price reveal negative
divergences or some sort of confirmed sell-signal develop before exiting. Aggressive traders thus
hold through the random wiggles that occur as prices moves forward in time from price to price.

That's not to say you must employ conservative or aggressive tactics at both entries and exits; you
might prefer to take a more conservative approach to your trade entries and a more aggressive
approach to your trade exits, or vice versa. Again, the decision is completely up to you, but do
monitor your choices to see what works best for your unique personality, risk-tolerance level, and
experience.
Table 9.1 summarizes this entire discussion into a neat grid you can use as a quick reference for
planning your trades.
TABLE 9.1 Common Components of Any Trade
Component of any Trade Sub-components

Opportunity Recognition

Price principles
Trend structure
Price pattern
Volatility structure

Trade Entry

Specific price
Conservative or aggressive
Amount of confluence
Initial stop-loss order
Position size

Trade Management

Confirmation or non-confirmation
New price data

Trade Exit

Specific price
Conservative or aggressive
Stop-loss order or target
Hold beyond target

Though not mentioned specifically in the components, asses the performance of your trades with
regard to entry, management, and exit in your trade journal. Go beyond labeling the essentials such as
stock symbol, number of shares purchased, entry price, initial stop price, exit price, and so on.
Discretionary trading is a performance discipline where a great deal of individual success comes
from personal performance, specifically in finding opportunities and managing them properly,
balancing the pull of emotions with the objective evidence in the price chart. Make comments as
needed in respect to how you entered, how well you managed, and why you exited, paying specific
attention to any unforced mental errors you created which resulted in any unexpected losses.
Without further delay, let us put all this information into practice and examine just some of the basic
trade setups you can employ right now on any timeframe in any market!

HOW TO CLASSIFY TRADE SETUPS
When you look at a chart for the first time, you may see endless possibilities and opportunities to
make money; on the other hand, you may see the price chart as a series of random wiggles that mean
nothing to you. Hopefully, after progressing through this book, you see more opportunity than
randomness, but if not, you will develop your skills with time. Like any performance discipline, the
more you practice, the better you will become at your skills.
The young piano student sits down at the keyboard for the first lesson and sees nothing but white
and black keys. Over time, the student will not only learn the names of these keys, but how to form
chords, melodies, and songs from them. The skills required and the study hours necessary to play
