
Note the higher level of correlations over the more recent two-year period compared to the longer

ten-year time frame. Also, over the longer period, the USD index is about as highly correlated to
the commodities as the so-called commodity currencies themselves. So instead of thinking of these
currencies as strictly commodity-price driven, think of commodity price movements as just one
factor affecting these currencies.

Trading USD/CAD by the numbers
The standard market convention is to quote USD/CAD in terms of the number of Canadian dollars
per USD. A USD/CAD rate of 1.0200, for instance, means it takes CAD 1.02 to buy USD 1. The
market convention means that USD/CAD trades in the same overall direction of the USD, with a
higher USD/CAD rate reflecting a stronger USD/weaker CAD and a lower rate showing a weaker
USD/stronger CAD.
USD/CAD has the USD as the primary currency and the CAD as the counter currency. This means
USD/CAD is traded in amounts denominated in USD. For online currency trading
platforms, standard lot sizes are USD 100,000, and minilot sizes are USD 10,000.
The pip value, or minimum price fluctuation, is denominated in CAD.
Profit and loss registers in CAD. For a standard lot position size, each pip is worth
CAD 10, and each pip in a minilot position is worth CAD 1. Using a USD/CAD rate of
1.0200 (which will change over time, of course), that equates to a pip value of USD 9.80
for each standard lot and USD 0.98 for each minilot.
Margin calculations are typically based in USD, so to see how much margin is
required to hold a position in USD/CAD, it’s a simple calculation using the leverage
ratio. At 50:1 leverage, for instance, $2,000 of available margin is needed to trade
100,000 USD/CAD, and $200 is needed to trade 10,000 USD/CAD.

USD/CAD is unique among currency pairs in that it trades for spot settlement only one day
beyond the trade date, as opposed to the normal two days for all other currency pairs. The
difference is due to the fact that New York and Toronto, the two nations’ financial centers,
are in the same time zone, allowing for faster trade confirmations and settlement transfers.
For spot traders, the difference means that USD/CAD undergoes the extended weekend
(three-day) rollover after the close of trading on Thursdays, instead of on Wednesdays like
all other pairs, assuming no holidays are involved.

Canadian events and data reports to watch
On top of following U.S. economic data to maintain an outlook for the larger economy to the south,
you’ll need to pay close attention to individual Canadian economic data and official

commentaries. CAD can react explosively when data or events come in out of line with
expectations. In particular, keep an eye on the following Canadian economic events and reports:
Bank of Canada speakers, rate decisions, and economic forecasts
Employment report
Gross domestic product (GDP) reported monthly
International securities transactions
International merchandise trade
Wholesale and retail sales
Consumer price index (CPI) and BOC CPI
Manufacturing shipments
Ivey Purchasing Managers Index

Trading fundamentals of AUD/USD
The Australian dollar is commonly referred to as Aussie (pronounced aw-zee), or even just Oz for
short. These terms refer to both the AUD/USD pair and Australian dollar cross pairs. Aussie
trading volume accounts for a little over 5 percent of daily global spot turnover, but it’s still a
regular mover, both against the U.S. dollar and on the crosses, so it makes an active currency pair
for speculators.
In trading AUD/USD, you need to factor in all the usual macroeconomic suspects, like monetary
policy outlooks, interest-rate levels, and all the domestic economic data that determine them.
Comments by officials from the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), the central bank, and the
finance minister can move Aussie sharply.

The boom in Asian regional growth over the past decade has supported the Australian
economy in recent years. Those high levels of growth have brought with them higher levels of
inflation, prompting the RBA to generally maintain higher interest rates than the major central
banks. In addition to commodity prices and the outlook for global demand, the interest-rate
outlook is especially critical to the value of the Aussie.

Aussie trading is also heavily influenced by cross trading, especially against the yen,
because the AUD/JPY cross captures one of the highest interest differentials between major
currencies. AUD/JPY has been a favorite among traders pursuing the carry trade, so you’ll
want to monitor important AUD/JPY technical levels.

Aussie trading is also regularly influenced by New Zealand economic data, but the flow is usually
more significant in the opposite direction, where Aussie data will exert a larger pull on NZD
prices, given the larger size of the Australian economy. Still, when trading Aussie, it helps to be
aware of upcoming NZD data, because data surprises in NZ can trigger sharp swings in the
AUD/NZD cross rate, with implications for AUD/USD.

Australian events and data reports to watch
Australian data and events regularly transpire during the New York late afternoon or early
evening, which is early morning the next day in the land down under. Keep an eye on the
following:
RBA and Treasury speakers, RBA rate decisions and monetary policy statements, and the
minutes of RBA meetings
Trade balance (monthly) and current account balance (quarterly)
Employment report (full-time/part-time)
Westpac consumer and NAB business confidence indices
CPI and producer price index (PPI) reports
Retail sales and housing market data

Trading fundamentals of NZD/USD
The New Zealand dollar is nicknamed the Kiwi, as are most things New Zealand, after the
indigenous bird of the same name; the term Kiwi refers to both the NZD and the NZD/USD pair.
(What is it with birds and currency nicknames, anyway?) Given the relatively small size of the
New Zealand economy, Kiwi is among the most interest-rate sensitive of all currencies.
The New Zealand economy has undergone a major transformation over the past two decades,
moving from a mostly agricultural export orientation to a domestically driven service and
manufacturing base. The rapid growth has seen disposable incomes soar; with higher disposable
incomes have come generally high levels of inflation. As a result, the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand (RBNZ), the central bank, has frequently been among the more hawkish central banks.

I put Kiwi in the commodity currency grouping, but there is an important distinction to note.
New Zealand is primarily an agricultural-commodity-producing economy (dairy products and
meat in particular), as opposed to the metals and energy commodities of Canada and
Australia. As such, Kiwi displays a weaker relationship than CAD and AUD to the prices of
gold, silver, and oil, as seen in the two tables in the previous sidebar.

In addition to all the standard New Zealand economic data and official pronouncements
you’ll need to monitor, Kiwi trading is closely tied to Australian data and prospects, due to a
strong trade and regional relationship.
No set formula exists to describe the currencies’ relationship, but a general rule is that when it’s a
USD-based move, Aussie and Kiwi will tend to trade in the same direction as each other relative
to the USD. But when Kiwi or Aussie news comes in, the AUD/NZD (Aussie/Kiwi) cross will
exert a larger influence. For example, disappointing Aussie data may see AUD/USD move lower,
which will tend to drag down NZD/USD as well. But Aussie/Kiwi cross selling (selling
AUD/USD on the weaker data and buying NZD/USD for the cross trade) will typically reduce the
extent of NZD/USD declines relative to AUD/USD losses. A similar effect will play out when
New Zealand data or news is the catalyst.

New Zealand events and data reports to watch
RBNZ commentary and rate decisions are pivotal to the value of Kiwi, given the significance of
interest rates to the currency. Finance ministry comments are secondary to the rhetoric of the
independent RBNZ but can still upset the Kiwi cart from time to time. Additionally, keep an eye
on the following:
Consumer prices, housing prices, and food prices
Retail sales and electronic-card spending (debit and credit)
Westpac and ANZ consumer confidence indices
Quarterly GDP and monthly trade balance
National Bank of New Zealand (NBNZ) business confidence survey

Trading Aussie and Kiwi by the numbers
AUD/USD and NZD/USD are both quoted in the same way, so I’ve put them together to look at the
numbers. AUD/USD and NZD/USD rates reflect the number of USD per AUD or NZD. For
example, a NZD/USD rate of 0.7000 means it costs USD 0.70 (or 70¢) to buy NZD 1. Aussie and
Kiwi trade in the opposite direction of the overall value of the USD, so a weaker USD means a
higher Aussie or Kiwi rate, and a lower Aussie or Kiwi rate represents a stronger USD.
AUD and NZD are the primary currencies in the pairs, and the USD is the counter currency, which
means
AUD/USD and NZD/USD are traded in position sizes denominated in AUD or NZD.
The pip values are denominated in USD.

Profit and loss accrues in USD. On a 100,000 NZD/USD position, each pip is worth
USD 10; on a 10,000 Aussie position size, each pip is worth USD 1.
Margin calculations are typically based in USD on margin trading platforms.
Using an NZD/USD rate of 0.7000 and a leverage ratio of 50:1, a 100,000 Kiwi position requires
USD 1400 in margin, while a 10,000 NZD/USD position would need only USD 140 in margin.
AUD/USD has risen to around parity with the USD as of early 2011, meaning an AUD/USD rate of
1.0000. At those levels, a 100,000 AUD/USD position requires $2,000 of available margin and a
10,000 AUD/USD position needs $200.

Tactical trading considerations in USD/CAD,
AUD/USD, and NZD/USD
I group these three currency pairs together because they share many of the same trading traits and
even travel as a pack sometimes — especially Aussie and Kiwi, given their regional proximity
and close economic ties. Whether they’re being grouped as the commodity currencies or just
smaller regional currencies versus the U.S. dollar, they can frequently serve as a leading indicator
of overall USD market direction.

Liquidity and market interest are lower
One of the reasons these pairs tend to exhibit leading characteristics is due to the lower relative
liquidity of the pairs, which amplifies the speculative effect on them. If sentiment is shifting in
favor of the U.S. dollar, for example, the effect of speculative interest — the fast money — is
going to be most evident in lower-volume currency pairs.
When a hedge fund or other large speculator turns around a directional bet on the U.S. dollar (for
example, from short to long), it’s going to start buying U.S. dollars across the board (meaning
against most all other currencies). A half-billion EUR/USD selling order (650 million USD
equivalent at 1.3000 EUR/USD) is relatively easily absorbed in the high-volume, liquid
EUR/USD market and may move it only a few points (say, 10 to 20 pips, depending on the
circumstances). However, a proportionately smaller order to sell Aussie, sell Kiwi, or buy
USD/CAD (large speculators will typically allocate smaller position sizes to less-liquid currency
pairs), amounting to only 100 million or 200 million in notional terms, may generate a 20- to 40pip movement in these currency pairs, depending on the time of day and overall environment.

In general, you need to be aware that overall liquidity and market interest in these pairs is
significantly lower than in the majors. On a daily basis, liquidity in these pairs is at its peak
when the local centers (Toronto, Sydney, and Wellington) are open. London market makers
provide a solid liquidity base to bridge the gap outside the local markets, but you can largely

forget about USD/CAD during the Asia/Pacific session, and the Aussie and Kiwi markets are
problematic after the London/European session close until their financial centers reopen a
few hours later. The net result is a concentration of market interest in these currency pairs
among the major banks of the currency countries, which has implications of its own (see the
“Technical levels can be blurry” section, later in this chapter).

Price action is highly event driven
As a result of the overall lower level of liquidity in these currency pairs, in concert with relatively
high levels of speculative positioning (at times), you’ve got the ultimate mix for explosive
reactions after currency-specific news or data comes out. A dovish statement from a previously
hawkish Bank of Canada governor can trigger a sea change in sentiment against the CAD. If
expectations are running high for an NZD interest-rate hike, and a key inflation report contradicts
that outlook (it’s lower than expected), we’ve got a relatively small market, probably
overpositioned in one direction (long NZD/USD), that’s all heading for the exit (selling) at the
same time.

The bottom line in these currency pairs is that significant data or news surprises, especially
when contrary to expectations and likely market positioning, tends to have an outsized impact
on the market. Traders positioning in these currencies need to be especially aware of this and
to recognize the greater degree of volatility and risk they’re facing if events don’t transpire as
expected. It’s one thing if Eurozone CPI comes in higher than expected, but it’s another thing
entirely if Australian CPI surprises to the upside.

A data or event surprise typically leads to a price gap when the news is first announced. If
the news is sufficiently at odds with market expectations and positioning, subsequent price
action tends to be mostly one-way traffic, as the market reacts to the surprise news and exits
earlier positions. If you’re caught on the wrong side after unexpected news in these pairs,
you’re likely better off getting out as soon as possible than waiting for a correction to exit at a
better level. The lower liquidity and interest in these currency pairs mean you’re probably
not alone in being caught wrong-sided, which tends to see steady, one-way interest,
punctuated by accelerations when additional stop-loss order levels are hit.

All politics (and economic data) is local
Most of my discussion of market drivers centers on economic data and monetary policy, but
domestic political developments in these smaller-currency countries can provoke significant
movements in the local currencies. National elections, political scandals, and abrupt policy
changes can all lead to upheavals in the value of the local currency. The effect tends to be most
pronounced on the downside of the currency’s value (meaning, bad news tends to hurt a currency
more than good news — if there ever is any in politics — helps it). Of course, every situation is

different, but the spillover effect between politics and currencies is greatest in these pairs, which
means you need to be aware of domestic political events if you’re trading them.
In terms of economic data, these currency pairs tend to participate in overall directional moves
relative to the U.S. dollar until a local news or data event triggers more concentrated interest on
the local currency. If the USD is under pressure across the board, for instance, USD/CAD is likely
to move lower in concert with other dollar pairs. But if negative Canadian news or data emerges,
USD/CAD is likely to pare its losses and may even start to move higher if the news was bad
enough. If the Canadian news was CAD-positive (say, a higher CPI reading pointing to a potential
rate hike), USD/CAD is likely to accelerate to the downside, because USD selling interest is now
amplified by CAD buying interest.

Technical levels can be blurry
The relatively lower level of liquidity and market interest in these currency pairs makes for
sometimes-difficult technical trading conditions. Trend lines and retracement levels in
particular are subject to regular overshoots. Prices may move beyond the technical level —
sometimes only 5 to 10 pips, other times for extensive distances or for prolonged periods —
only to reverse course and reestablish the technical level later.
The basic reason behind this tendency to overshoot technical levels is that market interest is
concentrated in fewer market-makers for these pairs — usually the local banks of the currency
country. The result is a concentration of market interest in fewer hands, which can result in order
levels being triggered when they may not be otherwise. For example, if you’re an interbank
market-maker watching a stop-loss order for 5 million AUD/USD, it’s not a big deal, because 5
million Aussie is transacted easily. But if you have a stop loss for 50 million or 100 million
AUD/USD, you’re going to need to be fast (and, likely, preemptive) to fill the order at a
reasonable execution rate.

If the price break of a technical level is quickly reversed, it’s a good sign that it was just a
position-related movement. If fresh news is out, however, you may be seeing the initial wave
of a larger directional move.

Trading the Scandies: SEK, NOK, and DKK
A few of the Scandinavian, or Nordic, countries chose not to join the monetary union that led to the
euro, namely Sweden, Norway, and Denmark. Trading volumes in the Scandies are generally light,
but sufficient enough to offer additional speculative trading opportunities depending on the
circumstances. Most of the trading in the Scandies is done versus EUR, driven by intra-European

divergences in either growth or interest rate outlooks. Generally speaking, trading the USD versus
the Scandies tends to mimic EUR/USD, but in mirror image due to quoting conventions.

Swedish krona — “Stocky”
The Swedish krona is affectionately referred to as Stocky after the capital Stockholm, and its
currency code is SEK. Trading volumes in USD/SEK (dollar/Stocky) and EUR/SEK
(euro/Stocky) each amounted to 1 percent of daily global volume, according to the 2010 BIS
survey of forex markets. The Swedish central bank, Sveriges Riksbank in Swedish, is independent
and is the key actor in setting interest rates and maintaining currency stability.

In addition to following the economic data coming out of Sweden, pay close attention to
comments from the governor and other Riksbank officials. The Riksbank follows an inflation
target, a desired level of inflation, so CPI reports are also critical inputs to the outlook for
interest rates and SEK. The Swedish central bank also has a history of speaking out on the
value of the krona itself, especially when it’s either too strong or weak relative to EUR,
where most of Swedish trade is conducted. EUR/SEK can become especially active when the
Riksbank and the ECB are seen to be on divergent interest rate paths.
Technically speaking, after joining the European Union in 1995, Sweden is obliged to adopt the
euro at some point in the future, but has effectively opted out and shows no signs of joining the
euro.

Norwegian krone — “Nokkie”
The Norwegian krone (NOK) is nicknamed Nokkie after its currency code and in symphony with
Stocky. USD/NOK and EUR/NOK trading volumes didn’t get broken out on the 2010 BIS survey,
so they’re likely sub-1 percent of daily global volume. Still, liquidity in NOK is more than
sufficient, especially during European trading hours. Norway’s central bank, Norges Bank, is
independent and pursues a traditional policy of maintaining price stability. Keep an eye out for
guidance from the governor and other central bank officials, as Norges Bank policy may frequently
diverge from ECB policy.

Norway is exceptionally wealthy owing to its large energy reserves, mainly North Sea oil,
which has given it a large sovereign wealth fund, making it an important global asset
manager. More importantly for day-to-day trading, Norway is the world’s tenth largest oil
producer, and NOK tends to trade as a petro-currency, similar to CAD, strengthening as oil
prices rise and vice versa. Norway is not a member of the EU and so is unlikely to ever
adopt the euro.

Danish krone — “Copey”
The Danish krone (DKK) is sometimes called Copey in reference to the capital of Copenhagen.
Rather than pursuing currency independence like Sweden and Norway, Denmark opted to enter
into a cooperative exchange rate agreement with Eurozone members, and the Danish krone is
linked to the euro at a fixed exchange rate of 7.46038 +/–2.25%. Within this arrangement, the
Danish central bank (Danmarks Nationalbank) effectively sets interest rates according to ECB
decisions. The result is that the USD/DKK pair trades in mirror opposite fashion to EUR/USD and
that the EUR/DKK pair trades in a very narrow band, typically about 0.25 percent, around the
fixed rate. As such, there is little incentive for trading DKK, as EUR/USD offers better liquidity
and EUR/DKK doesn’t move. In early 2011, the Danish government indicated it hoped to hold
another referendum on joining the euro later in 2011, so Copey’s days may be numbered.

Cross-Currency Pairs
A cross-currency pair (or cross, for short) is any currency pair that does not have the U.S. dollar
as one of the currencies in the pairing. (Turn to Chapter 4for a list of all the different cross pairs.)
But the catch is that cross rates are derived from the prices of the underlying USD pairs. For
example, one of the most active crosses is EUR/JPY, pitting the two largest currencies outside the
U.S. dollar directly against each other. But the EUR/JPY rate at any given instant is a function (the
product) of the current EUR/USD and USD/JPY rates.
The most popular cross pairs involve the most actively traded major currencies, like EUR/JPY,
EUR/GBP, and EUR/CHF. According to the 2010 BIS survey of foreign-exchange market activity,
direct cross trading accounted for a relatively small percentage of global daily volume — around
10 percent for the major crosses combined.
But that figure significantly understates the amount of interest that is actually flowing through the
crosses, because large interbank cross trades are typically executed through the USD pairs instead
of directly in the cross markets. If a Japanese corporation needs to buy half a billion EUR/JPY
(half a yard, in market parlance), for example, the interbank traders executing the order will
alternately buy EUR/USD and buy USD/JPY to fill the order. Going directly through the EUR/JPY
market would likely tip off too many in the market and drive the rate away from them. (I look at
how large cross flows can drive the dollar pairs in the “Stretching the legs” section, later in this
chapter.)
