
367


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: You have seven Level 2 screens that you are watching, but
you are actually trading only one stock at a time, correct?

A : I may be in two or three. I won't be in more than that. But I
want to be watching everything. I was in a stock today. It sat in a
range of 15 cents for four hours. But I just traded it back and forth,
back and forth.

Q Now that you are trading for such small spreads, how is your
cost structure?

A : Prices have come down a lot. When I first started trading it
was 3 cents a share. So $30 for a thousand shares. Then it came
down to a penny a share or $10 a thousand. Now it’s 0.4 or 0.5
cents a share. So, basically, when I trade in and out on a stock I
can scratch the trade on just 1 cent gain, which is nice because I
can trade bigger size.

: A nickel is about as much as you are willing to sacrifice on
each trade. But on average, and of course each trade is different,
how much do you try to profit from each trade?

A : I don’t set hard targets. If] am in a stock and the buyer comes
up, I will stay in it and I can make a dollar sometimes. I can make
75 cents. Whatever the market gives me depends on where I got
in. If I got in at the bottom and the market tured and there is no
reason to get out, no one is offering, and the bids are holding up,
I will stay in it.

Q.: That brings up an interesting question. No financial instru-
ment goes up vertically. There are always retraces along the way.
So even if you have a 50 cents move up, there is at least a 10
cent retracement somewhere along the way. What gives you the
confidence to hold through those retracements?

368


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

A : That’s the hardest part of trading, and to tell you the truth,
I am not as good of a holder as I could be. I get out of my losers
right away, but I don’t hold winners as long as I could. A lot times
if I am in a stock and it starts to retrace I will try to get out.

Q,: since you don’t average down into your losers, do you scale
out of your winners? Or are you doing a single-entry, single-exit

type of strategy?

A: I will definitely scale out of my winner. I'll offer out some—not
all—of my position if starts moving my way.

: Let’s step back from trading. Could you run through your
daily routine? What is an average day in your life like?

A : I've always worked out. I was a competitive weight lifter. I
have always been into sports. So, every morning, I will get up at
5:30 and check what the markets did overnight. Then I will go to
the gym 6:30-7:30 Chicago time. Shower, hang out with the family
a little, then get into the office by 8:05, check the news. I will trade
until 3 o’clock. Then I will usually go pick up my son from school,
and if the weather is nice, we'll hang out. We'll go to the pool or
the park. Then [ll do half an hour of work at night and hang out
with my wife. I am in bed by 10 o’clock.

Q.: When you are trading all day, do you go out for lunch? Do

you have any interruptions?

A: No, I don’t eat much. I will have a little coffee, a little oatmeal,
go to the bathroom, and trade all day because I don’t want to miss
anything. It is a relatively short day.

369


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: But at the same time it’s enormously intense. You are not
just sitting. Every single moment you are focusing on the screen.
Having done this, we know how draining this can be. How do you
relieve the pressure and maintain the focus for six straight hours?

A : I just do it. I just concentrate and focus, wait and watch, and
then attack. You are up in a tree like a hunter waiting for prey.
If the opportunity comes you, got to be there. If you are in the
bathroom or walking around, you miss it.

Q. Yes. But often in the market, sometimes for an hour, nothing
happens. If you ask a normal human being to stare at the screen
for even 10 minutes—when there is no action—most people can’t
do it. Do you use any meditation or mental tricks to help you?

A : No. No, mental tricks. I am always watching, and something is
always happening. Whether it’s something big or something small.
Yes, sometimes I do get bored. Sometimes I do something I
shouldn't do. But generally I try to stay disciplined and wait for the
opportunity to happen.

Q: Do you ever dream about the day’s trading?

A : Yes, sometimes that will happen. I will see the Level 2 in my
head. It hasn’t happened recently. As I traded more I have been
able to relax more. Now, when I come home, I am not as happy
after my big days, and I am not as upset after my bad days. The
highs are not as big and the lows are not as low. I come home every
day and try to do it again the next day.

: When you first started out, the pressure of being
profitable—where you had to make money or you didn’t eat in
a sense—how did you deal with that?

A : Yeah, that was terrible. My first day, when I started, I made
$1,500. After the first week I was down $5,000 because I had

370


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

no idea what I was doing. I thought I knew, but I didn’t, and I
didn’t approach breakeven for about five months where every day
I would come home depressed. I'd lay on the couch and think, “I
can’t figure this out.” After five months I was down $20,000. And
then in the sixth month, I made $20,000 and that was it. At the
beginning it was very hard because I couldn’t figure it out. You’d
feel a sense of failure, why can’t I figure it out? And then it just
clicked. I tell people that after six months you either get it or you
won't. Most people don’t get it. If you don’t get it after six months,
it’s time to do something else.

Q.: what skills would you say a person needs in order to do the
kind of trading you do?

A : I would say someone who is disciplined, someone who can
follow a plan, someone who is risk averse, but not so risk averse that
they are afraid to trade. I’ve had people whom I’ve trained who
would make or lose $50 every day for a year. They were just afraid
to trade. As soon as they got a winner they would try to get out.

Q:mn general, I would say, someone doesn’t have to be book
smart, but someone who is a good poker player, a chess player,
somebody who understands how to read a situation. Someone like
a quarterback who comes up to the line of scrimmage and looks
at the defense and knows probability-wise what will work with this
formation. Just like I look at Level 2 and I put on a trade and, sure, it
may not work all of the time, but it will work 8 out of 10 times based
on what I’ve seen before. So, in short, the ability to read a situation
and process that information as things are going on at a fast pace
and stay cool under pressure. I always thought that guys who were
good quarterbacks in the NFL would make good day traders.

QO. ow many people have you trained?
A : About 20.

371


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: of the 20, how many are still in the business?

A : None. I’ve been able to help people who were already suc-
cessful traders in futures or other instruments and show them my
methodology. But someone who was not a successful trader already
I was not able to train. They can understand what I am doing, but
they just can’t follow through.

For example, I had a guy. Id tell him we are buying
evens—buying stock at the round figure like 101.00 or 102.00—we
are buying evens with the bid. The market is going down. The fu-
tures are going down. It looked bad, but I tell him, “Don’t get out
unless the evens leave.” Well, the guy panics. He sees the market
going down. There is nothing below evens and he gets out. The
market turns. All the 01 offers get lifted, but the trader is not in
the stock. I am in the stock, but he is not because all he could
think about was if the evens leave he can lose money. So we put on
the exact same trade. But he couldn't hold the position. So I can
tell people exactly what to do. But their emotions get the better of
them. But I have trained people who were good traders to become
better traders.

: What do you do specifically for those good traders to make
them better traders?

A : Mainly I showed them things about Level 2. Maybe they were
overall market traders or chart traders, and I got them to pay more
attention to price action—more micro stuff rather than the macro.
I showed them how market makers and funds work their orders
and how to capitalize on that.

Q.- You've trained people. But was someone a mentor to you?

A : The guy who got me started, who was a very successful futures
trader, taught me more about how to handle myself, than actually
giving me an idea on how to trade.

372


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

Q.; would you say that it is much more important to learn
that aspect—the ability not to sabotage yourself—rather than any
specific methodology of trading?

A : [would say they are equal. If you don’t have a methodology you
won't make any money anyway. But if you do have a methodology,
and you know how to control yourself, that makes you a better
trader. But without the methodology, you have noting.

: True. There are million ways of making money in the mar-
ket. Every one of them will also lose you money because every
methodology ultimately fails, and the problem is that most people
don’t have the self-control to abandon the methodology when it’s
not working.

A : That’s definitely true. You have to know when things change
and you have to change with them. It’s survival of the fittest. If you
don’t change, you are done. But at the same time, you have to have
the discipline to follow your methodology.

Q_: During the day do you IM anybody? Is there a support group
you hang with?

A: No, I do it all myself.

Q what about once a month, are there meetings you attend?

A : No, I talk to a few of my buddies, but the stocks I am in, there
is only so much to go around and you really don’t want to give them
out. That’s one of the things I like better than trading in big office.
Then you may have a few traders in the same stock and then you
have the problem of who goes first. I'd rather just not know. That’s
what’s so good about electronic markets instead of the pit. You hit
the button. Whoever is first is first. Generally, I prefer to be left
alone. My wife doesn’t even call when I am in the office unless it
is an emergency.

373


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q. ; speaking of that, does your wife work? Does she have a
source of income?

A : No, she is a stay-at-home mom. She used to be a teacher
before our sons were born.

Q.: So the period when it was kind of hard—the first six
months—was your wife supportive? Was it difficult for you guys?
How did you handle that?

A : We had some savings, I didn’t have any bills, and she was very
supportive.

Q.- that must have been important.
A: Yes, definitely.

: Some operational details. Do you trade one account or do
you trade multiple accounts?

A : I trade one account.

: You run a self-proprietorship. You pay all your expenses,
medical bills. It’s as though you are running a hardware store. You
had the same set of possibilities and problems.

A : Exactly.

: Do you target income for yourself? Do you say I want to make
$1,000 per day or $20K a month? Or do you not believe in targets?

A : Yes, I do have targets for myself. But if1 don’t get them, I don’t
get them. It not like I say to myself, oh, I made « amount today. I
am going to stop trading. I never stop trading until the close.

374


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

QO: Even if you had a $5K by 11 A.M. you wouldn’t stop?

A: No, never because if there is opportunity to make more, that’s
what I am there for.

: Have you ever had a situation where you were up by $5K at
11 A.M. and back to $0K at 3 P.M., where you gave it all back?

A. No. Not after my learning phase. Usually I will trade more con-
servatively if I am up. I will try to trade only much higher percent-
age setups, smaller share size. Just trying to pad what I already have.

Qs what do you consider to be a great day to make money? High
volatility? Big ranges?

A. It depends. Sometime the stock will move but I can’t figure it
out. I have no edge. I don’t know who is buying and I really don’t
know what going on. But ifthe stock moves and the clues are there,
I see bids, and they cancel offers. A lot of times what will happen
is that the market maker will come in and will hold the price up
even if the market is going down. And he will do it for a couple of
days. When I see that, I buy them with him on every pullback. He
may do that for three or four days in a row. If I can identify that
early I can get with him and make money.

Sometimes guys will hold the stock in very small range on the
bid and the offer and I can’t make any money, but a lot of times
there may be a buyer at 15 and a seller at 70, and I'll try to trade
that in between all day long. As long as I can identify who the
buyers and sellers are, I can make money. But if the stock goes
straight up and the market is flying, it doesn’t necessarily mean I
can make money because I have no clue what’s going on.

Q.: you may actually stand down then, even if there is move-
ment just because you don’t understand the reason behind the
directionality?

A : Exactly. Let’s say they took out a big level. Say they took out all
the evens. But if I don’t know who the buyer is, I don’t necessarily

375


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

want to buy the 01s or the 02s. I need to know where I am out if
I am wrong. On every trade I always answer these two questions.
Number one: Why am I getting into this trade? And number two:
Where am I getting out if 1 am wrong? IfI can’t answer those two
questions, then I can’t get into the trade no matter what the stock
is doing.

Another thing other traders always ask me is, why don’t I watch
more stocks? So I can have more opportunities on, say, days that
my stocks are not moving. My response is that I need to watch my
stocks—in case they do move, I want to be the first one to know it.
I try to know everything about these stocks, and I watch enough
stocks such that there is always something to do. Sometimes I may
trade less shares, sometimes more. But I have this little niche.
There are people who make a lot more money than me. But I am
one of the most consistent traders.

Q_: speaking of that, and again obviously on average—wins versus
losses—what’s the ratio like?

A : So far this year I have traded every single day. So we've had
approximately 180 days so far and I have had four losing days. And
three of those days were $100.

Qn average, how many trades do you do? 150?
A : More than that.
Q.: Really? So let’s for argument’s sake say it’s 250 round turns

per day. That means at six and half hours worth of trading it’s
almost a trade every two minutes or so.

A : Right. I would say that’s correct. It’s nonstop.

: So that makes no single trade meaningful. You take losses
quickly and move on to the next one?

A : Right. I just move on to the next one.

376


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

Q.: out of that basket of 250 trades, how many winners, how
many losers?

A : would say more than half are winners and my winners are
always bigger than my losers. I scratch a lot of trades just trying
to figure out what is going on. For example, if the stock is 50 bid
51 offer. I may try the 51 offers because in stocks you can show
anything you want on the size. You may have a million, but only
show 100, and then just refresh all day long. If you show a million,
you have to do a million unless you quickly cancel. So Pll buy an
offer or hit a bid just to see ifthe buyer or seller is real.

Sometimes I want to see if the bid will come up so I will buy
the 51 offer, lift him, and then go 51 bid just to see if the 50 bid
will come up and join me.

Q.:some final questions. What’s your number one rule for trading
if you were to boil it down to one idea?

A : Number one rule of trading is risk aversion. To make sure
that no matter what happens, no one trade can put you out of
business.

Q what was your worst trade ever?

A : The only thing I can tell you is once I was in a stock and the
stock got halted. There was nothing you can do. I was long the
stock. It got halted and it was bad news. It was a biotech stock. It
opened a dollar and half lower and I had 1,000 shares. So I got
hit.

Q.:s0 you never had a 10-point gap against you.

A : No, because I don’t hold stuff overnight and the only thing
that can happen to me is the stock gets halted.

377


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- what about one of your better trades?

A : I made good money on Imclone [IMCL] when there was
congressional investigation. I got short and the stock went down
a good amount. Sometimes it takes a few minutes for news to
disseminate and this was one of those times.

Q.- what was the most humbling experience for you?

A : My first six months I could not figure out how to make any
money. I was just humbled. I was saying to myself: Wow, this is
not as easy as I thought. Trading is not easy and not for everyone.
If it was, everybody would do it.

Q.: what is the most interesting part of this job?

A : It’s just like sports. You come in. You play every day and there
is a scorecard at the end of the day. I liken trading to baseball.
There is a game every day. Some days you play well and some days
you play badly. But you play every day. When the game is over,
you do it again the next day.

Q.: Do you gamble at all?

A : No, if I go to Vegas I don’t gamble because there is no edge.
The house has the edge. If I know I can make money 9 out of 10
time trading, then why would I gamble when someone else has the
edge? I have no interest in it.

LESSONS FROM STEVEN ICKOW
Make Your Stand in the Right Domain

Success in trading is as a much a function of finding the right
instrument to trade as it is a matter of using the correct strategy.
Building on his experience from trading on the floor of the Chicago

378


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

Mercantile Exchange, where he found the smaller, slower Nikkei
pit provided him with a much better edge than the more crowded
S&P pit, Steven Ickow took the same philosophy to the screen
and decided to specialize only in medium-cap stocks that trade an
average of 1 million shares per day. Those types of stocks attract
less attention from the day-trading crowd and allow Ickow, who
is a master of observation, to better handicap the price action,
quickly picking up on the nuances of the move. This idea can be
extended even further for most traders. We, for example, have
never been comfortable day trading the stock index futures, which
tend to move in very herky-jerky fashion quite often in direct
opposition to the news. On the other hand, we took to the currency
market like fish to water, instantly making the connection between
macroeconomics, geopolitical events, and price flow. Therefore,
struggling traders should examine their market of choice before
examining their methodology.

Use Reconnaissance Orders

A big part of Steven’s day is spent breaking even. Of the more than
200 trades that he puts on every day, a significant proportion ends
up in scratch because he is using the small orders to probe the
market. By watching how the market reacts to his moves, Steven
often gleans very valuable information about the intent of the play-
ers in the stock. He can then exploit this information for profitable
setups. This use of “reconnaissance” orders is a technique em-
ployed not only by him but by some of the biggest and most fa-
mous traders in the world. George Soros was well known to put
out orders in the opposite direction of his true view just to see
how well the markets absorbed the order flow. If his “opposite”
trade became profitable, he would revaluate his thesis and would
on occasion hold off on trading his real intentions until market
conditions became more favorable.

Focus, Focus, Focus!

Speculation is observation. In order to observe carefully a trader
needs total concentration and complete focus. Steven Ickow does

379


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

not do lunch. He does not putter about in his backyard during
market hours. He does not surf the net looking for gadgets to buy.
During every second of market hours Steven stares intently at the
screens carefully assessing the price action. He eats lightly, takes
no personal phone calls unless there is some sort of emergency
from his wife, and even tries to keep his bathroom breaks to a
minimum. It may seem like a monastic existence, but this is the
price of success. Just like any other endeavor worth doing well,
trading requires total dedication and complete commitment. The
hours may be short but they are intense.

Know the Reason to Get into the Trade and the
Reason to Get Out

Perhaps no other lesson is as valuable as this rule from Steven
Ickow. The biggest difference between professional and novice
traders is that professionals do not make random trades. They
don’t just go into a position because it “looks good” or “looks bad”
or because it “feels” cheap or dear. Winning traders always have a
crisp, clear and logical foundation for their trade. The reason may
be technical or fundamental in nature or it may rely on their ability
to read price flow on the tape. But they always know exactly why
they are in the trade and much more importantly at what point
(both profit and loss) they will get out. Trade your plan and plan
your trades may be an overused maxim in trading, but it is the
underlying truth of the game.

380


CHAPTER 14

GETTING STARTED
IN TRADING

1. BE WELL CAPITALIZED

Why do most businesses fail? Is it lack of desire on the part of their
owners? Is it inferior intelligence or the absence of people skills
necessary to succeed? Although many failed entrepreneurs believe
that these are the causes of their demise, the truth is often far more
mundane. The majority of businesses fail simply because they do
not have enough money to survive the inevitable mistakes that
befall all startups. Often the difference between eventual profit
and dead certain loss is the amount of money at the disposal of the
business owner. Money buys time and time turns into experience,
which is the necessary ingredient to master any skill. Therefore,
the need to be well capitalized is one of the key rules for starting a
career in trading.

Does that mean that a trader needs to have hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars at his disposal in order to enter the trading busi-
ness? Not at all. Many of our interviewees started with very modest
amounts. However, none of the traders who started small relied on
trading as their sole source of income during their initial learning
stages. Several like Paul Willette and Hoosain Harneker had their
