
E-mini S&P—December 2004 Contract, October 7, 2004
1. This daily chart of the E-mini S&Ps (Figure 19.2) is the same as Figure 19.1. However, this chart focuses on the initial reversal trade off the lows. The bar labeled
point 1 takes place at the end of the September, marking the lows of this particular move, which aren’t quite 20-day lows, but they are 18-day lows, which is fine.
I want to buy a close above the high of the low day. The high on this day registered at 1112.50.

367

Figure 19.2

2. The next day, we close above this bar, and I enter this trade right after the 4:00 p.m. eastern close of the regular cash session. I am filled at 1115.25. M y initial stop
is the lows of bar 1 just above 1100.00.
3. I’m in this trade for seven days. In the bar labeled 3, the S&Ps close below the low of the previous two bars. Once this happens, I exit right after 4:00 p.m. and get
out at 1132.25, for a gain of 17.00 points, or $850 per contract. Note that the exit of this long also coincides with the initialization of the new short position in
Figure 19.1. This doesn’t always happen, but it does once in a while.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2004 Contract, August 6, 2004
1. On August 6, 2004, the mini-sized Dow establishes a new low within its current trend, and then starts to rally (see Figure 19.3). This bar marks the low day, so I’m
looking to buy a break of the high of this low day.

368

Figure 19.3

2. It takes seven trading days to close above the high of the low day. When this finally happens on August 17, I get in after the close, and my entry is 9974. M y initial
stop is the low of the bar that triggered this trade, near 9770. Once I’m in the trade for two days, I start using a two-bar trailing stop.
3. On August 26, this bar closes below the close of the two-bar trailing stop. I’m out at 10,121 for a gain of 147 points, or $735 per contract.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2004 Contract, June 23, 2004
1. On June 23, 2004, the mini-sized Dow futures put in a nice high bar (see Figure 19.4). The low of this high day is 10,343.

369

Figure 19.4

2. On June 28, the YM closes below the low of the high day at point 2. I enter this position short at the close of this day at 10,329. I start off with a stop at the highs
of the high day, and once I’m in the trade for two days, I start to use a two-bar trailing stop. Remember, I’m looking for a close above these levels as a signal to exit
the trade.
3. On July 27, I exit at the close of bar 3 at 10,061 for a gain of 268 points, or $1,340 per contract.

E-mini Nasdaq—September 2004 Contract, August 13, 2004
1. On August 13, 2004, the high of the low day on the E-mini Nasdaq is 1317.50 (see Figure 19.5).

370

Figure 19.5

2. On August 16, since the bar labeled 2 broke the high of the low day, I enter this position at the close of this day at 1322.00.
3. On August 30, I exit at the close of bar 3 at 1367.00, for a gain of 45 points, or $900 per contract.

E-mini Nasdaq—September 2004 Contract, June 30, 2004
1. On June 30, 2004, the low of the high day is 1506.00 on the daily NQ chart (see Figure 19.6).
2. On July 1, since the bar labeled 2 broke the low of the high day, we enter this position at the close of this day at 1494.00.
3. As the NQ sells off, we start using the two-bar trailing stop. On July 29, prices close above our trailing stop, and we exit at the close of the bar labeled point 3 at
1401.50, for a gain of 92.50 points, or $1,850 per contract.

371

Figure 19.6

30-Year Bond—September 2004 Contract, July 28, 2004
1. On July 28, 2004, the high of the low day is 106

for the 30-year bonds, which can be seen on the bar labeled point 1 (see Figure 19.7).

372

Figure 19.7

2. On July 29, since the bar labeled 2 broke the high of the low day, we enter this position at the close of this day at 106
3. We start trailing our stop, and on August 23, we exit at the close of the bar labeled point 3 at 110
of 3

.

. Bonds are worth $1000.00 for a full point move. This move

is worth $3, 531.25 per contract.

Forex Markets—EURUSD, December 31, 2004
1. On December 31, 2004, the EURUSD breaks and closes below the low of the high day (see Figure 19.8). The entry on the short side is 1.3553.
2. The market continues to drop lower for five days in a row before bottoming out. On January 12, the stop is triggered, and we are out at 1.3254 for a gain of 299
pips, or $2,990 per lot.
3. On February 4, the EURUSD makes new nearly 20-day lows and is now a candidate for this setup. The entry signal fires off on February 9 with a close above the
high of the low day. The entry is taken at 1.2803.
4. The markets work higher until the two-bar trailing stop is hit on M arch 1 at 1.3186, for a gain of 383 pips, or $3,830 per lot being traded.

GOOG (Google Inc.)—September 2, 2004
1. On September 2, 2004, the high of the low day is 102.37 on the bar labeled point 1 on GOOG (see Figure 19.9). The low here isn’t a 20-day low, but GOOG had
just gone public on August 19, 2004, 11 days prior.

373

Figure 19.8

374

Figure 19.9

2. On September 10, since the bar labeled 2 broke the high of the low day, we enter this position at the close of this day at 105.33.
3. We start trailing the stop, and on October 12, we exit at the close of bar 3 at 136.55, for a gain of just over 30 points.

TZOO (Travelzoo Inc.)—August 30, 2004
1. On August 30, 2004, the high of the low day is 42.37 on the bar labeled 1 on TZOO (see Figure 19.10).
2. On August 31, since the bar labeled 2 broke the high of the low day, we enter this position at the close of this day at 45.00.
3. On September 28, we exit at the close of bar 3 at 56.42. This is one of those trades where, in hindsight, it would have been “genius” to exit at the intraday break of
the two-bar trailing stop. That exit would have been around $70. However, I have done this play both ways, and I’ve found that the intraday stop will frequently
get a trader out of a position that still has a lot of room to move. In any event we still netted nearly 12 points on this trade.

375

Figure 19.10

EXM (Excel Maritime Carriers Ltd.)— September 2, 2004
1. On September 2, 2004, the high of the low day is 23.50 at the bar labeled 1 on EXM (see Figure 19.11).

376

Figure 19.11

2. On September 3, since the bar labeled 2 broke the high of the low day, we enter this position at the close of this day at 24.21.
3. On September 15, our trailing stop is hit, and we exit at the close of bar 3 at 38.00, for a gain of nearly 14 points. On this play, we got stopped out just before the
stock rocketed higher another 30 points in just three trading days. This goes back to being a “genius in hindsight.”

Forex Markets—EURGBP, June 16, 2005
1. I like this particular example because it demonstrates how important it is for a trader to stick to his setups. On June 16, the EURGBP makes new lows, and the next
day prices reverse and close above the high of this low day, firing off a long signal (see Figure 19.12).
2. I go long, and a group of other traders I work with also goes long. Our entry was 0.6709.
3. EURGBP rolls over and closes below our two-bar trailing stop. Our exit is 0.6632, at point 3 on June 23, for a loss of 77 pips. This bar also marks a fresh low and
becomes the new signal bar in this setup.
4. On June 29, at point 4, we get another close above the high of the low day, and I take the entry at 0.6680. Other forex traders I work with pass on this setup, having
felt the sting of the first loss.
5. EURGBP rallies nicely, and the two-bar trailing stop gets hit on July 13 at point 5, at 0.6851, for a gain of 171 pips. The point of this example is to show the
importance of not filtering out a particular setup because of how you feel about it. If the previous setup was a loss, many newer traders will hold off on taking the
next setup because of the feelings associated with the last time they took the play. In reality, our feelings have nothing to do with how the next trade will work
out. We never really know what the market is going to do next, but we can plod along, follow our setups, and try to make a living.

377

Figure 19.12

378

Forex Markets—GBPUSD, August 29, 2003
1. In this example, I will also focus on rule 5, which talked about holding a stop in place until the trend resumes (see Figure 19.13). As I said, this doesn’t happen very
often, but it does happen once in a while, and it will make sense once I show it to you. This is a weekly chart of GBPUSD. I like to use the weekly chart to catch
macro trend reversals, as these can result in big plays. The stops are also wider, so it is important to determine position size correctly on this larger time frame. In
this weekly chart, a new low bar is created during the week of August 29, 2003, with a low of 1.5620. The very next week, prices dip below this level to 1.5612,
creating a new low bar. Because this is a weekly bar, the only time action is taken is at the end of the week. These plays require a lot of patience.

379

Figure 19.13

380

2. There is a close above the high of the low week during the week ending September 12, at point 2. The entry is 1.6037.
3. GBPUSD rallies strongly the following week and then edges up for the next several weeks. During the week of November 9, labeled at point 3, prices fall below the
two-bar trailing stop intraweek, but then rally and close above the lows by 30 pips. At this point, if we move the two-bar trailing stop up to the next bar, we will
be stopped out because prices are already trading below that new stop. This is what I talked about in rule 5. Because of this, I just leave my closing stop in place,
which is designated by the longer line reaching out from point 3. I will just leave my stop here until I am stopped out or until prices make new trend highs.
4. At point 4, prices make new trend highs, and I go ahead and resume my two-bar trailing stop.
5. GBPUSD rallies strongly until my two-bar trailing stop is hit during the week ending M arch 5, 2004, about six months after the entry, for a gain of 2,424 pips, or
$24,240 per contract. This is the type of trade that makes the forex markets interesting, because a trader could take a $50,000 account in this example and make a
million dollars on the trade. Needless to say, there is also the obvious risk of losing the entire $50,000. It wouldn’t be fun if it were easy.

Summing Up the HOLP and LOHP Plays
There are two ways to try to catch tops and bottoms: the wrong way and the only way. Shorting a stock or a market just because it is too high is the trader’s version
of committing suicide. Just as a dog will generally let you know when it’s about to attack, a market will let you know that it is about to reverse. All you have to do is
pay attention and be alert to the appropriate entry signal.
For updates to this play, visit www.tradethemarkets.com/holp to see a list of current markets that I’m using this strategy with.

381

20
Gold Trades and
the Darvas Box
This Is How I Like to Trade Gold
Hi, my name is Hubert Senters, and I’m a cofounder of www.tradethemarkets.com. I have a Series 3 and 30, and I hold a seat on the CM E Group/CBOT via an IDEM .
I am also John’s business partner in many other ventures.
Welcome to the chapter from a guy who hates to write. There are only a few things I’m good at, and writing isn’t one of them. You have been warned; continue
reading at your own risk. John said that he would read over my text and attempt to clean up what he could. I wish him the best of luck.
I don’t think I have a natural talent for anything, but there are skills that I’ve developed and refined over time. Trading is in my blood, and I’m also an excellent
entrepreneur, which is a form of trading. I understand how business and marketing work, and I’m great at taking complicated subjects and breaking them down so that
they’re easy to understand.
In John’s first version of this book, I had it easy. All I had to do was give John several screen shots showing a few of my trading setups, such as the Ping-Pong play
on KLAC. Then all John had to do was “write all the content for the chapter.” I actually thought that writing the content was the easy part. Hell, I had to find those
charts, didn’t I? I was horribly wrong. This time, John suggested that I write an entire chapter from scratch. That sounded good. I asked, “How long does the chapter
need to be, and when do you need it?”
He said, “It needs to be about 20 pages. I know how much you hate to write. That’s why I’m telling you three months in advance. And don’t worry too much about
the text. Just take some screen shots, with detailed explanations of how your trade setups work.” He gave me three months’ notice. I got this to him about 30 minutes
before his deadline to the publisher.

My Pain, Your Gain
Because I hate writing so much, I’ll include a link for a video update at the end of this chapter. I love doing videos. I hate to write. Why? There are a few reasons.
REASON 1
I’m dyslexic. That’s a broad defining term for a learning disability that impairs a person’s ability to read and spell. M any dyslexics switch letters and numbers. What
you see as an E, I might see as a 3.
If you suffer from dyslexia, or if you think your child has dyslexia, don’t worry too much about it. It’s not a bad thing. I’ve never seen my dyslexia as a learning
disability. People with dyslexia process information differently, and I see that as a gift and an advantage. One of the big advantages of being dyslexic is that we learn
and process information in a different way from most people. Hell, who wants to be like everyone else anyway? Different is good. Dyslexia helps me process an
extremely complicated subject and break it down into its simplest parts. There is a great book on the subject, The Gift of Dyslexia: Why Some of the Smartest People
Can’t Read and How They Can Learn, revised and expanded, by Ronald D. Davis and Eldon M . Braun.
What kind of a sick joke, or twisted mind, came up with the name dyslexia anyway? They must have known how difficult it would be to spell dyslexia without spell
check or Google. It’s almost impossible, but it does make me laugh.
REASON 2
I’m still a hunt-and-peck typist, and I need to fix it. I know I have a M avis Beacon Teaches Typing program in my office somewhere.
REASON 3
It’s far easier for me to do video than to write copy. I know I learned much more easily and a lot faster by watching videos myself. You will learn faster by watching
someone do whatever you want to learn, too.
Since I’m not a professional writer, I’m going to talk to you as if we are friends at a bar having drinks, and you ask me how to trade. I’ll let the editors clean up the
grammar and spelling! Here’s what I’m going to do. I have an outline of some of my favorite trading setups, working right now in the markets. I’m going to create
screen shots, then label them with numbers. The corresponding numbers will give you directions and descriptions of what to look for and how to trade them, with
entries, stops, and targets. If you can follow simple directions, you should be able to follow along easily. Let’s jump into the world of trading.

Welcome to Trading. Are You Ready for the Bad News?
Okay, which do you want first, good news or bad news? Let’s start with the bad. You have less than a 9 percent chance of ever making any money day-trading the
markets over the long haul. Ouch! That stung a little, didn’t it? The good news is, your account’s destruction will happen quickly, so you won’t be in pain that long. It
will be like ripping off a Band-Aid. Has anyone ever told you that if you rip it off fast, it won’t hurt as much? You’ve been lied to there, too. It still hurts like crazy,
and I actually think it hurts worse. M any people who try to do it that way lose most, if not all, of their money within the first three months. Another stat you need to
know is that most people blow out three accounts before they figure out how to do this. Fun, fun, fun.
Or are all successful traders just a little crazy? I actually think all successful traders are abnormal, for what it’s worth. If you think you are a little odd, or strange, or
different, the good news is that you might have what it takes to become a successful trader. Welcome to the Land of Weirdos. I’m not pointing fingers; I’m right there
with you. We are an odd lot. Where else in the world can you go to a room and see grown men and women staring at price action charts like they’re porn, for hours at a
time? When a group of traders get together, it’s a little like an AA meeting. For those who do figure out how to do this, the cash flow can be addictive. But that’s a
topic for a later discussion. First, let’s see if I can share some good trade setups with you. Then you can go out and start making some consistent income.
382

It’s Not Your Fault
If you are losing money trading, it might not be your fault. Oddly enough, most people trade the first market they come to, whether it matches their trading personality
or not. M ost people don’t know that markets have individual trading personalities.
For example, if you’re trading the index e-minis, which are made up of the mini-sized Dow, the E-mini S&P, the E-mini Nasdaq, and the E-mini Russell, and you’re
losing money, that market might not match your particular style of trading. So index futures may not be the best place to start, but that is where most people cut their
teeth in futures trading. This is not a good thing or a bad thing. You just have to understand that there are other markets out there that may suit your personality better.

Food for Thought
For example, the index futures trading personality is like a sprinter, moving quickly in one direction, then stopping, reversing, and running back in the other direction. If
you’re getting stopped out a lot, which happens quite often in the E-minis, it’s because they are a great countertrend trading market. You may want to consider trading
in a different market.
Now let’s compare gold to the e-minis. Gold tends to have the trading personality of a marathon runner or the Energizer Bunny because it just keeps going and going
and going and going, until you eventually get a minor pullback, then it will start again and keep on going and going and going. So gold would be a better trend trading
market than the E-minis if you buy breakouts.
The setups I’m about to share with you are working right now in the markets, but you and I both know that not all trading setups last forever. You must be willing
to adjust, adapt, and evolve with the markets. I cannot promise you that these trading setups will always work with these parameters. They can and will change over
time, so make sure you go to www.tradethemarkets.com and get our free daily trading videos so that you can stay on top of the current parameter changes for these
setups.

RAW Trading Rules
This section of the book is like a trader’s handbook where you’re going to get RAW trading rules. In RAW, R = Real, as these rules have been tested in the real
world, not just back-tested. There’s only testing with real money in my real trading account. A = Actionable, as in the steps you need to take in order for them to work
for you. W = Working right now in the markets.
The first trades I want to share with you are my gold trading setups. I have seven gold trades that I use on a consistent basis, but I am only going to be able to share
three. The three that I’m sharing with you are the good night gold (GNG) trade, the gold rush (GR) trade, and the gold spike (GS) trade.

Why Should You Consider Trading Gold?
By now you know that John and I teach people how to trade for a living at our site, www.tradethemarkets.com. At one of our monthly live trading webinars, I asked
attendees the following question: what are you having the hardest time with when it comes to your trading? The traders on the monthly live trading webinar were
mostly day traders trading the E-minis. Guess what their answer was.
As you probably guessed, most of them were having issues with consistent cash flow or income generation. The number one answer was, “I’m getting chopped up
in the E-minis, and I can’t seem to get enough consistent winners or runners to make up for all the small losses.” This is pretty common with E-minis. They just don’t
trend well on an intraday basis.
M y follow-up question was asking what style, strategies, and tactics they were using to trade the E-minis. Not all of them were using a breakout strategy. I’m not
saying that a breakout strategy will never work on the E-minis, but let’s face it, the odds of that working consistently are rare. You can occasionally buy breakouts and
trend trade the E-minis intraday, but it has to be at just the right time and place. It’s like hitting yourself in the head with a hammer—it feels great once you stop. Let’s
face it, trading is hard enough, so why make it harder? Your job as a professional trader isn’t to work harder, it’s to work smarter. Don’t get me wrong, I like hard work
as much as the next guy. I know from personal experience that the harder I work, the luckier I get.
I came to the conclusion that most traders were in the wrong markets for their trading personality and style. If you are always chasing at the wrong time, or always
getting stopped at the worst possible time, you are probably in the wrong markets for your trading personality and style.
If you ever find yourself in this type of situation, there are only two things you can do to fix it. One is hard, and the other is easy.
The hard way is to learn to trade that market, even if it goes against your style. Basically, you will be changing your natural habits into forced habits. It can be done,
but it’s hard, and people tend to relapse to their old true self. You’ve probably heard the line, fake it till you make it, but it’s not a good idea in the markets that will
break you.
The easy way to figure out your natural style is to gravitate toward the market that looks, sounds, and feels right to you. It will take work, but it won’t be nearly as
hard as forcing your style on a market that won’t work for you.
The market is a ruthless bitch, and she will try to trip you up every chance she gets. She will slit your throat and watch you bleed. She doesn’t care about you, so
why should you play her game by her rules when you can slant the odds in your favor and play by your rules, where you have the edge or advantage? I can think of no
better way than figuring out your natural trading style, then finding a market to match it. Do you want to be right, or would you rather be wealthy?
So back to the story. I wanted to help out everyone on the monthly live trading webinar, so the first thing I did was look for something with a wider average true
range. Oddly enough, it was gold. I set out to figure a way in which people with smaller accounts trading one to five lots could make about $300 to $2,000 a day.
Obviously, you won’t do that every day. Some days are better than others. There is no guarantee of performance. These were trades I was doing in my own live
trading account with smaller size, so I could figure out whether or not I could teach them to others to enhance their chances of trading success. I found a few
methodologies that I could share with them that would work.
