
10.7 EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES
The signal grid and the risk appetite indicator should be the two main tools of the currency
strategist. There are however other aspects of the currency markets that still have to be considered. For instance, the type of exchange rate regime is an important consideration as it can have
a signiﬁcantly different impact on the economy depending on what type of regime is being
used. The latest fashion within the ofﬁcial community in Washington DC is to advocate the
so-called “bi-polar” world of exchange rates, supporting the idea that in a world of free capital
markets only the hardest currency peg or a completely free-ﬂoating currency are appropriate,
and that anything else is unsustainable. It seems likely that this will ultimately give way to a
new trend, whereby there are signiﬁcantly less currencies, all of which are freely ﬂoating. As
far as currency market practitioners are concerned, key questions that a corporate executive or
an investor must ask if they are exposed to a currency peg regime are:

r Does the currency peg itself contribute to macroeconomic stability?
r What is the degree of participation in global capital ﬂows of the country concerned?
r Is the currency peg at the right value?
Most soft or semi-pegged exchange rate regimes have gone, voluntarily or otherwise. If you
have currency exposure to a pegged exchange rate regime and you are concerned about currency
risk, the rule to remember is that you should hedge when the market has no interest in hedging
and thus when risk premiums are low. By the time the market is keen to hedge currency risk,
liquidity and price conditions will have deteriorated and it will be too late to obtain anything
but the most expensive of currency protection.
The beauty of freely ﬂoating exchange rates is that they act as a self-adjusting mechanism,
transmitting changes in fundamental dynamics across the economy. In that sense, a freely
ﬂoating exchange rate regime cannot be defeated, unlike a pegged exchange rate regime. That
said, they can still be highly volatile at times.

Applying the Framework

197

10.8 CURRENCY CRISES AND MODELS
10.8.1 CEMC
Most of the currency crises of the 1990s happened against soft currency pegs. In the wake
of the Asian currency crisis, I made a stab at creating a model which focused on how exchange rates typically performed in the run to and after the break down of a pegged exchange
rate regime. For good or ill, the Classic Emerging Market Currency Crisis (CEMC) model was
the result. To be sure, the title is a mouthful, but for the most part it tells the story of most
emerging market currency crises during the 1990s and thus may serve as a useful barometer
should any such crises be experienced going forward. This can be broken down into ﬁve phases
during which the currency crisis takes place:
1. Capital inﬂows and real currency appreciation
2. Fundamental deterioration and inevitable currency collapse
3. A positive current account swing and a liquidity-based rally
4. The economy hits bottom; a period of consolidation
5. The fundamental rally
A key aspect of these crises was the relationship between the real exchange rate and the external
balance. In ﬂoating exchange rate regimes, economic imbalances are usually smoothed out
over time. In pegged exchange rate regimes, they can build up to unsustainable levels, thus
forcing the collapse of the exchange rate peg, if not checked by changes in macroeconomic
policy.

10.8.2 The Speculative Cycle
While CEMC focuses speciﬁcally on pegged exchange rates, the “speculative cycle” model
focuses instead on freely ﬂoating exchanges. This model consists of four phases, describing
the relationship between “fundamental” and “speculative” forces within the markets and the
effect they have on the economy:
1. Capital ﬂows are attracted and the local currency rallies
2. Speculators join the crowd and the local currency continues to rally
3. This causes fundamental deterioration, causing increased price volatility
4. Fundamental selling overwhelms speculative buying and the currency collapses
The basic idea behind this is that freely ﬂoating exchange rates are not random, but instead tend
to trade in cycles, though the length of those cycles can vary from weeks to years depending
on other factors such as capital ﬂows.

10.9 MANAGING CURRENCY RISK I — THE CORPORATION
10.9.1 Types of Currency Risk
For corporations, there are three key kinds of currency risk they have to manage. They are:
1. Transactional risk (receivables, dividends, etc.)
2. Translational risk (balance sheet)
3. Economic risk (present value of future operating cash ﬂows)

198

Currency Strategy

Transactional risk or exposure is essentially cash ﬂow risk. Translational risk, for its part, results
from the consolidation of group and subsidiary balance sheets, and deals with the exposure
represented by foreign investment and debt structure. Economic risk is an overall measure of
the currency risk of the corporation, focusing on the present value of future operating cash ﬂows
and how this present value in the base currency changes as a result of changes in exchange rates.
Over the long term, however, exchange rates adjust through the concept of PPP, depending on
relative inﬂation and domestic price levels. Thus, theoretically, a corporation whose foreign
subsidiaries experience price inﬂation in line with the general level of inﬂation should be
returned to its original value through an adjustment in the exchange rate exactly according
to the PPP concept. In such circumstances, one might argue that economic risk or exposure
is irrelevant. However, corporations rarely experience cost inﬂation exactly in line with the
general level of inﬂation. Therefore, economic risk does matter. The best way of dealing with
this is to ﬁnance operations in the currency to which the ﬁrm’s value is sensitive.
10.9.2 Internal Hedging
There are of course well-known methods of hedging internally, such as:

r Netting (debt, receivables and payables are netted out between group companies)
r Matching (intragroup foreign currency inﬂows and outﬂows)
r Leading and lagging (adjustment of credit terms before and after due date)
r Price adjustment (raising/lowering selling prices to counter exchange rate moves)
r Invoicing in foreign currency (thus reducing transaction risk)
r Asset and liability management (to manage balance sheet, income, cash ﬂow risk)

10.9.3 Key Operational Controls for Treasury
Assuming that the corporation has accepted in principle that it needs to manage its currency
risk, it then has several choices to make with regard to how it will go about achieving this — the
instruments it will allow itself to use, the type of currency hedging carried out, positional and
credit limits and so forth. All of these matters need to be dealt with in a systematic and rigorous
way at the start, before the currency hedging programme begins. Performance measurement
standards, accountability and limits of some form must be part of a Treasury foreign currency
hedging programme. Management must elucidate speciﬁcally the goals and the operational
limits of such a programme.
10.9.4 Optimization
For a given exchange rate view, an optimization model can create an “efﬁcient frontier” of
hedging strategies to manage currency risk. The most efﬁcient hedging strategy is that which
is the cheapest for the most risk hedged. This is a very efﬁcient and useful tool for hedging
currency risk in a more sophisticated way than just buying a vanilla hedge and “hoping” that
it is the appropriate strategy. Hedging optimizers frequently compare the following strategies
to ﬁnd the optimal one for the given currency view and exposure:

r 100% hedged using vanilla forwards
r 100% unhedged
r Option risk reversal

Applying the Framework

199

r Option call spread
r Option low-delta call
10.9.5 Budget Rates
The budget exchange rate can drive both the corporation’s hedging strategy and its pricing
strategy as well, and can be set in a number of ways. It can simply be the spot exchange rate
at the end of the previous ﬁscal period. This is often referred to as the accounting rate. Alternatively, when dealing with forecasted cash ﬂows, the issue becomes slightly more complex.
Theoretically, the budget exchange rate should be derived from the domestic sales price and the
foreign subsidiary sales price. Thus, if the parent sales price for a good is USD10 and the Euro
area sales price for argument’s sake is EUR15, the theoretical budget rate would be 0.67. The
Euro–dollar exchange may be different from that, so the corporation needs to evaluate whether
there is room to change its Euro-denominated pricing without reducing margin substantially in
order to set a budget rate that is closer to the spot exchange rate. If there is a major difference
between the spot exchange rate and the budget rate, the corporation may have to reassess its
currency risk management policy. Once the budget rate is set, the Treasury has to secure an
appropriate hedge rate and ensure minimal slippage relative to that hedge rate. Timing and the
instruments used are key to achieving that. Finally, it is important to note that the budget rate
comes from relative price differentials. This however is also at the heart of PPP, which states
that exchange rates should adjust for relative price differentials of the same good between two
countries. Thus, a corporation could use PPP as a benchmark for setting budget rates.

10.10 MANAGING CURRENCY RISK II — THE INVESTOR
Managing currency risk remains a controversial issue for institutional investors. At one end of
the spectrum, you have many international equity funds who either do not hedge their currency
risk or use an unhedged currency benchmark. At the other end, you have ﬁxed income funds
that use a currency overlay manager to manage their currency risk actively. To be sure, this is a
gross generalization. There are equity funds that do manage their currency risk, whether on a
passive or an active basis, and equally there are ﬁxed income funds that make a deliberate choice
not to hedge their currency risk. That said, it is the case that ﬁxed income funds are generally
more responsive to the idea of managing their currency risk separately and independently from
the underlying than their equity fund counterparts, because currency risk empirically makes up
a substantially higher portion of the average return volatility of a ﬁxed income portfolio than
for an equity portfolio. The ﬁgures are roughly 70% and 30% respectively, not least because
equities are generally more volatile than bonds. When investing abroad however, there are two
core principles concerning currency risk:
1. Investing in a country is not the same as investing in that country’s currency.
2. Currency is not the same as cash; the incentive for currency investment is primarily capital
gain rather than income.
Like corporations, institutional investors face transaction risk when they make investments in
a foreign currency. They also face translation risk on net assets if they spread their operations
overseas. Whether or not it is done by the same individual, it is a core view of this book that
currency risk and underlying asset risk should be managed separately and independently from
each other. The way currencies and underlying assets are analysed and the way they trade are

200

Currency Strategy

both different from each other. Consequently, the way they should be managed should also be
different.
Having decided to manage a portfolio’s currency risk, one then has to decide whether the
aim is to achieve total returns or relative returns.
10.10.1 Absolute Returns: Risk Reduction
Just as a corporation has to decide whether to run their Treasury operation as a proﬁt or as
a loss reducing centre, so a portfolio manager has to make the same choice in the approach
they take to managing currency risk. If a portfolio manager is focused on maximizing absolute
returns, the emphasis in managing their currency risk is likely to be on risk reduction. In
order to achieve this, they will most likely adopt a strategy of passive currency management.
This involves adopting and sticking religiously to a currency hedging strategy, rolling those
hedges during the lifetime of the underlying investment. The two obvious ways of establishing
a passive hedging strategy are:

r Three-month forward (rolled continuously)
r Three-month at-the-money forward call (rolled continuously)

The advantage of passive currency management is that it reduces or eliminates the currency risk
(depending on whether the benchmark is fully or partially hedged). The disadvantage is that it
does not incorporate any ﬂexibility and therefore cannot respond to changes in market dynamics
and conditions. The emphasis on risk reduction within a passive currency management style
deals with the basic idea that the portfolio’s return in the base currency is equal to:
The return of foreign assets invested in + the return of the foreign currency
This is a simple, but hopefully effective way of expressing the view that there are two separate
and distinct risks present within the decision to invest outside of the base currency. The motive
of risk reduction is therefore to hedge to whatever extent decided upon the return of the foreign
currency.
10.10.2 Selecting the Currency Hedging Benchmark
The most disciplined way of managing currency risk from a hedging perspective is to use a
currency hedging benchmark. There are four main ones:

r 100% hedged benchmark
r 100% unhedged benchmark
r Partially hedged benchmark
r Option hedged benchmark

Being 100% hedged is usually not the optimal strategy, apart from in exceptional cases. Equally,
using a currency hedging benchmark of 100% unhedged would seem to defeat the object. Many
funds are not allowed to use options, thus in most cases the best hedging benchmark to use is
partially hedged.
10.10.3 Relative Returns: Adding Alpha
Portfolio or asset managers who are on the other hand looking to maximize relative returns compared to an unhedged position will most likely adopt a strategy of active currency management
@Team-FLY

Applying the Framework

201

