
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

All of a sudden the manager came to me and said they'd
got a message from New York they had a direct wire of
course—asking if I was in the office, and when they
answered yes, another came saying: "Keep him there. Tell
him Mr. Harding wants to speak to him."
I said I'd wait, and bought five hundred shares more of
UP. I couldn't imagine what Harding could have to say to
me. I didn't think it was anything about business. My
margin was more than ample for what I was buying. Pretty
soon the manager came and told me that Mr. Ed Harding
wanted me on the long-distance telephone.
"Hello, Ed," I said.
But he said, "What the devil's the matter with you? Are
you crazy?"
"Are you?" I said.
"What are you doing?" he asked.
"What do you mean?"
"Buying all that stock."
"Why, isn't my margin all right?"
"It isn't a case of margin, but of being a plain sucker."
"I don't get you."
"Why are you buying all that Union Pacific?" "It's going
up," I said.
"Going up, hell! Don't you know that the insiders are
feeding it out to you? You're just about the easiest mark up
there. You'd have more fun losing it on the ponies. Don't
let them kid you."
"Nobody is kidding me," I told him. "I haven't talked to
a soul about it."
But he came back at me: "You can't expect a miracle to
save you every time you plunge in that stock. Get out while
you've still got a chance," he said. "It's a crime to be long of
that stock at this level when these highbinders are
shoveling it out by the ton."
"The tape says they're buying it," I insisted.

88

VI

"Larry, I got heart disease when your orders began to
come in. For the love of Mike, don't be a sucker. Get out!
Right away. It's liable to bust wide open any minute. I've
done my duty. Good-by!" And he hung up.
Ed Harding was a very clever chap, unusually wellinformed and a real friend, disinterested and kindhearted.
And what was even more, I knew he was in position to
hear things. All I had to go by, in my purchases of UP., was
my years of studying the behaviour of stocks and my
perception of certain symptoms which experience had
taught me usually accompanied a substantial rise. I don't
know what happened to me, but I suppose I must have
concluded that my tape reading told me the stock was
being absorbed simply because very clever manipulation
by the insiders made the tape tell a story that wasn't true.
Possibly I was impressed by the pains Ed Harding took to
stop me from making what he was so sure would be a
colossal mistake on my part. Neither his brains nor his
motives were to be questioned. Whatever it was that made
me decide to follow his advice, I cannot tell you; but follow
it, I did.
I sold out all my Union Pacific. Of course if it was
unwise to be long of it it was equally unwise not to be short
of it. So after I got rid of my long stock I sold four
thousand shares short. I put out most of it around $162.
The next day the directors of the Union Pacific
Company declared a10 per cent dividend on the stock. At
first nobody in Wall Street believed it. It was too much like
the desperate maneuver of cornered gamblers. All the
newspapers jumped on the directors. But while the Wall
Street talent hesitated to act the market boiled over. Union
Pacific led, and on huge transactions made a new highrecord price. Some of the room traders made fortunes in
an hour and I remember later hearing about a rather dullwitted specialist who made a mistake that put three

89

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

hundred and fifty thousand dollars in his pocket. He sold
his seat the following week and became a gentleman
farmer the following month.
Of course I realised, the moment I heard the news of the
declaration of that unprecedented 10 per cent dividend,
that I got what I deserved for disregarding the voice of
experience and listening to the voice of a tipster. My own
convictions I had set aside for the suspicions of a friend,
simply because he was disinterested and as a rule knew
what he was doing.
As soon as I saw Union Pacific making new high records
I said to myself, "This is no stock for me to be short of."
All I had in the world was up as margin in Harding's
office. I was neither cheered nor made stubborn by the
knowledge of that fact. What was plain was that I had read
the tape accurately and that I had been a ninny to let Ed
Harding shake my own resolution. There was no sense in
recriminations, because I had no time to lose; and besides,
what's done is done. So I gave an order to take in my
shorts. The stock was around $165 when I sent in that
order to buy in the four thousand UP. at the market. I had
a three-point loss on it at that figure. Well, my brokers
paid $172 and $174 for some of it before they were
through. I found when I got my reports that Ed Harding's
kindly intentioned interference cost me forty thousand
dollars. A low price for a man to pay for not having the
courage of his own convictions! It was a cheap lesson.
I wasn't worried, because the tape said still higher
prices. It was an unusual move and there were no
precedents for the action of the directors, but I did this
time what I thought I ought to do. As soon as I had given
the first order to buy four thousand shares to cover my
shorts I decided to profit by what the tape indicated and so
I went along. I bought four thousand shares and held that
stock until the next morning. Then I got out. I not only
made up the forty thousand dollars I had lost but about
fifteen thousand besides. If Ed Harding hadn't tried to
90

VI

save me money I'd have made a killing. But he did me a
very great service, for it was the lesson of that episode that,
I firmly believe, completed my education as a trader.
It was not that all I needed to learn was not to lake tips
but follow my own inclination. It was that I gained
confidence in myself and I was able finally to shake off the
old method of trading. That Saratoga experience was my
last haphazard, hit-or-miss operation. From then on I
began to think of basic conditions instead of individual
stocks. I promoted myself to a higher grade in the hard
school of speculation. It was a long and difficult step to
take.

91

VII
I never hesitate to tell a man that I am bullish or bearish.
But I do not tell people to buy or sell any particular stock.
In a bear market all stocks go down and in a bull market
they go up. I don't mean of course that in a bear market
caused by a war, ammunition shares do not go up. I speak
in a general sense. But the average man doesn't wish to be
told that it is a bull or a bear market. What he desires is to
be told specifically which particular stock to buy or sell. He
wants to get something for nothing. He does not wish to
work. He doesn't even wish to have to think. It is too much
bother to have to count the money that he picks up from
the ground.
Well, I wasn't that lazy, but I found it easier to think of
individual stocks than of the general market and therefore
of individual fluctuations rather than of general
movements. I had to change and I did.
93

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

People don't seem to grasp easily the fundamentals of
stock trading. I have often said that to buy on a rising
market is the most comfortable way of buying stocks. Now,
the point is not so much to buy as cheap as possible or go
short at top prices, but to buy or sell at the right time.
When I am bearish and I sell a stock, each sale must be at
a lower level than the previous sale. When I am buying, the
reverse is true. I must buy on a rising scale. I don't buy
long stock on a scale down, I buy on a scale up.
Let us suppose, for example, that I am buying some
stock. I'll buy two thousand shares at no. If the stock goes
up to ill after I buy it I am, at least temporarily, right in my
operation, because it is a point higher; it shows me a
profit. Well, because I am right I go in and buy another
two thousand shares. If the market is still rising I buy a
third lot of two thousand shares. Say the price goes to
$114. I think it is enough for the time being. I now have a
trading basis to work from. I am long six thousand shares
at an average of 111-¾, and the stock is selling at $114. I
won't buy any more just then. I wait and see. I figure that
at some stage of the rise there is going to be a reaction. I
want to see how the market takes care of itself after that
reaction. It will probably react to where I got my third lot.
Say that after going higher it falls back to 112-¼, and then
rallies. Well, just as it goes back to 113-¾ I shoot an order
to buy four thousand at the market of course. Well, if I get
that four thousand at 113-¾ I know something is wrong
and I'll give a testing order that is, I'll sell one thousand
shares to see how the market takes it. But suppose that of
the order to buy the four thousand shares that I put in
when the price was 113-¾ I get two thousand at $114 and
five hundred at 114-½ and the rest on the way up so that
for the last five hundred I pay 115-½ . Then I know I am
right. It is the way I get the four thousand shares that tells
me whether I am right in buying that particular stock at
that particular time for of course I am working on the
94

VII

assumption that I have checked up general conditions
pretty well and they are bullish. I never want to buy stocks
too cheap or too easily.
I remember a story I heard about Deacon S. V. White
when he was one of the big operators of the Street. He was
a very fine old man, clever as they make them, and brave.
He did some wonderful things in his day, from all I've
heard.
It was in the old days when Sugar was one of the most
continuous purveyors of fireworks in the market.
H. O. Havemeyer, president of the company, was in the
heyday of his power. I gather from talks with the oldtimers that H. O. and his following had all the resources of
cash and cleverness necessary to put through successfully
any deal in their- own stock. They tell me that Havemeyer
trimmed more small professional traders in that stock
than any other insider in. any other stock. As a rule, the
floor traders are more likely to thwart the insiders' game
than help it.
One day a man who knew Deacon White rushed into the
office all excited and said, "Deacon, you told me if I ever
got any good information to come to you at once with it
and if you used it you'd carry me for a few hundred
shares." He paused for breath and for confirmation.
The deacon looked at him in that meditative way he had
and said, "I don't know whether I ever told you exactly that
or not, but I am willing to pay for information that I can
use."
"Well, I've got it for you."
"Now, that's nice," said the deacon, so mildly that the
man with the info swelled up and said, "Yes, sir, deacon."
Then he came closer so nobody else would hear and
said, "H. O. Havemeyer is buying Sugar."
"Is he?" asked the deacon quite calmly.
It peeved the informant, who said impressively: "Yes,
sir. Buying all he can get, deacon."
"My friend, are you sure?" asked old S. V.
95

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Deacon, I know it for a positive fact. The old inside
gang are buying all they can lay their hands on. It's got
something to do with the tariff and there's going to be a
killing in the common. It will cross the preferred. And that
means a sure thirty points for a starter."
"Do you really think so?" And the old man looked at
him over the top of the old-fashioned silver-rimmed
spectacles that he had put on to look at the tape.
"Do I think so? No, I don't think so; I know so.
Absolutely! Why, deacon, when H. O. Havemeyer and his
friends buy Sugar as they're doing now they're never
satisfied with anything less than forty points net. I
shouldn't be surprised to see the market get away from
them any minute and shoot up before they've got their full
lines. There ain't as much of it kicking around the brokers'
offices as there was a month ago."
"He's buying Sugar, eh?" repeated the deacon absently.
"Buying it? Why, he's scooping it in as fast as he can
without putting up the price on himself."
"So?" said the deacon. That was all. But it was enough to
nettle the tipster, and he said, "Yes, sir-ree! And I call that
very good information. Why, it's absolutely straight."
"Is it?"
"Yes; and it ought to be worth a whole lot. Are you going
to use it?"
"Oh, yes. I'm going to use it."
"When?" asked the information bringer suspiciously.
"Right away." And the deacon called: "Frank!" It was
the first name of his shrewdest broker, who was then in
the adjoining room.
"Yes, sir," said Frank.
"I wish you'd go over to the Board and sell ten thousand
Sugar."
"Sell?" yelled the tipster. There was such suffering in his
voice that Frank, who had started out at a run,
halted in his tracks.
"Why, yes," said the deacon mildly.
96

VII

"But I told you H. O. Havemeyer was buying it!"
"I know you did, my friend," said the deacon calmly;
and turning to the broker: "Make haste, Frank!"
The broker rushed out to execute the order and the
tipster turned red.
"I came in here," he said furiously, "with the best
information I ever had. I brought it to you because I
thought you were my friend, and square. I expected you to
act on it." "I am acting on it," interrupted the deacon in a
tranquillising voice. "But I told you H. O. and his gang
were buying!" "That's right. I heard you."
"Buying! Buying! I said buying!" shrieked the tipster.
"Yes, buying! That is what I understood you to say," the
deacon assured him. He was standing by the ticker,
looking at the tape. "But you are selling it."
"Yes; ten thousand shares." And the deacon nodded.
"Selling it, of course."
He stopped talking to concentrate on the tape and the
tipster approached to see what the deacon saw, for the old
man was very foxy. While he was looking over the deacon's
shoulder a clerk came in with a slip, obviously the report
from Frank. The deacon barely glanced at it. He had seen
on the tape "how his order had been executed.
It made him say to the clerk, "Tell him to sell another
ten thousand Sugar."
"Deacon, I swear to you that they really are buying the
stock!"
"Did Mr. Havemeyer tell you?" asked the deacon
quietly.
"Of course not! He never tells anybody anything. He
would not bat an eyelid to help his best friend make a
nickel. But I know this is true."
"Do not allow yourself to become excited, my friend."
And the deacon held up a hand. He was looking at the
tape. The tip-bringer said, bitterly:

97

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"If I had known you were going to do the opposite of
what I expected I'd never have wasted your time or mine.
But I am not going to feel glad when you cover that stock
at an awful loss. I'm sorry for you, deacon. Honest! If you'll
excuse me I'll go elsewhere and act on my own
information."
"I'm acting on it. I think I know a little about the
market; not as much, perhaps, as you and your friend H.
O. Havemeyer, but still a little. What I am doing is what
my experience tells me is the wise thing to do with the
information you brought me. After a man has been in Wall
Street as long as I have he is grateful for anybody who feels
sorry for him. Remain calm, my friend."
The man just stared at the deacon, for whose judgment
and nerve he had great respect. Pretty soon the clerk came
in again and handed a report to the deacon, who looked at
it and said: "Now tell him to buy thirty thousand Sugar.
Thirty thousand!" The clerk hurried away and the tipster
just grunted and looked at the old gray fox.
"My friend," the deacon explained kindly, "I did not
doubt that you were telling me the truth as you saw it. But
even if I had heard H. O. Havemeyer tell you himself, I still
would have acted as I did. For there was only one way to
find out if anybody was buying the stock in the way you
said H. O. Havemeyer and his friends were buying it, and
that was to do what I did. The first ten thousand shares
went fairly easily. It was not quite conclusive. But the
second ten thousand was absorbed by a market that did
not stop rising. The way the twenty thousand shares were
taken by somebody proved to me that somebody was in
truth willing to take all the stock that was offered. It
doesn't particularly matter at this point who that
particular somebody may be. So I have covered my shorts
and am long ten thousand shares, and I think that your
information was good as far as it went."
"And how far does it go?" asked the tipster.
98

VII

"You have five hundred shares in this office at the
average price of the ten thousand shares," said the deacon.
"Good day, my friend. Be calm the next time."
"Say, deacon," said the tipster, "won't you please sell
mine when you sell yours? I don't know as much as I
thought I did."
That's the theory. That is why I never buy stocks cheap.
Of course I always try to buy effectively in such a way as to
help my side of the market. When it comes to selling
stocks, it is plain that nobody can sell unless somebody
wants those stocks.
If you operate on a large scale you will have to bear that
in mind all the time. A man studies conditions, plans his
operations carefully and proceeds to act. He swings a
pretty fair line and he accumulates a big profit on paper.
Well, that man can't sell at will. You can't expect the
market to absorb fifty thousand shares of one stock as
easily as it does one hundred. He will have to wait until he
has a market there to take it. There comes the time when
he thinks the requisite buying power is there. When that
opportunity comes he must seize it. As a rule he will have
been waiting for it. He has to sell when he can, not when
he wants to. To learn the time, he has to watch and test. It
is no trick to tell when the market can take what you give
it. But in starting a movement it is unwise to take on your
full line unless you are convinced that conditions are
exactly right. Remember that stocks are never too high for
you to begin buying or too low to begin selling. But after
the initial transaction, don't make a second unless the first
shows you a profit. Wait and watch. That is where your
tape reading conies in to enable you to decide as to the
proper time for beginning. Much depends upon beginning
at exactly the right time. It took me years to realize the
importance of this. It also cost me some hundreds of
thousands of dollars.

99

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I don't mean to be understood as advising persistent
pyramiding. A man can pyramid and make big money that
he couldn't make if he didn't pyramid; of course. But what
I meant to say was this: Suppose a man's line is five
hundred shares of stock. I say that he ought not to buy it
all at once; not if he is speculating. If he is merely
gambling the only advice I have to give him is, don't!
Suppose he buys his first hundred, and that promptly
shows him a loss. Why should he go to work and get more
stock? He ought to see at once that he is in wrong; at least
temporarily.

100

VIII
The Union Pacific incident in Saratoga in the summer of
1906 made me more independent than ever of tips and
talk that is, of the opinions and surmises and suspicions of
other people, however friendly or however able they might
be personally. Events, not vanity, proved for me that I
could read the tape more accurately than most of the
people about me. I also was better equipped than the
average customer of Harding Brothers in that I was utterly
free from speculative prejudices. The bear side doesn't
appeal to me any more than the bull side, or vice versa. My
one steadfast prejudice is against being wrong.
Even as a lad I always got my own meanings out of such
facts as I observed. It is the only way in which the meaning
reaches me. I cannot get out of facts what somebody tells
me to get. They are my facts, don't you see? If I believe
some thing you can be sure it is because I simply must.
When I am long of stocks it is because my reading of
101

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

conditions has made me bullish. But you find many
people, reputed to be intelligent, who are bullish because
they have stocks. I do not allow my possessions or my
prepossessions either to do any thinking for me. That is
why I repeat that I never argue with the tape. To be angry
at the market because it unexpectedly or even illogically
goes against you is like getting mad at your lungs because
you have pneumonia.
I had been gradually approaching the full realization of
how much more than tape reading there was to stock
speculation. Old man Partridge's insistence on the vital
importance of being continuously bullish in a bull market
doubtless, made my mind dwell on the need above all
other things of determining the kind of market a man is
trading in. I began to realize that the big money must
necessarily be in the big swing. Whatever might seem to
give a big swing its initial impulse, the fact is that its
continuance is not the result of manipulation by pools or
artifice by financiers, but depends upon basic conditions.
And no matter who opposes it, the swing must inevitably
run as far and as fast and as long as the impelling forces
determine.
After Saratoga I began to see more clearly perhaps I
should say more maturely that since the entire list moves
in accordance with the main current there was not so
much need as I had imagined to study individual plays or
the behaviour of this or the other stock. Also, by thinking
of the swing a man was not limited in his trading. He could
buy or sell the entire list. In certain stocks a short line is
dangerous after a man sells more than a certain
percentage of the capital stock, the amount depending
upon how, where and by whom the stock is held. But he
could sell a million shares of the general list if he had the
price without the danger of being squeezed. A great deal of
money used to be made periodically by insiders in the old
days out of the shorts and their carefully fostered fears of
corners and squeezes.
102

VIII

Obviously the thing to do was to be bullish in a bull
market and bearish in a bear market. Sounds silly, doesn't
it? But I had to grasp that general principle firmly before I
saw that to put it into practice really meant to anticipate
probabilities. It took me a long time to learn to trade on
those lines. But in justice to myself I must remind you that
up to then I had never had a big enough stake to speculate
that way. A big swing will mean big money if your line is
big, and to be able to swing a big line you need a big
balance at your broker's.
I always had or felt that I had to make my daily bread
out of the stock market. It interfered with my efforts to
increase the stake available for the more profitable but
slower and therefore more immediately expensive method
of trading on swings.
But now not only did my confidence in myself grow
stronger but my brokers ceased to think of me as a
sporadically lucky Boy Plunger. They had made a great
deal out of me in commissions, but now I was in a fair way
to become their star customer and as such to have a value
beyond the actual volume of my trading. A customer who
makes money is an asset to any broker's office.
The moment I ceased to be satisfied with merely
studying the tape I ceased to concern myself exclusively
with the daily fluctuations in specific stocks, and when
that happened I simply had to study the game from a
different angle. I worked back from the quotation to first
principles; from price fluctuations to basic conditions.
Of course I had been reading the daily dope regularly
for a long time. All traders do. But much of it was gossip,
some of it deliberately false, and the rest merely the
personal opinion of the writers. The reputable weekly
reviews when they touched upon underlying conditions
were not entirely satisfactory to me. The point of view of
the financial editors was not mine as a rule. It was not a
vital matter for them to marshal their facts and draw their
conclusions from them, but it was for me. Also there was a
103
