
In Fig. 10-8, we see a exhaustion blowoff to the bull move as the oscilla-
tor reaches a very overbought reading. This is subsequently followed by a
Price decline that pushes it to the other extreme. Such action indicates a
dramatic shift in sentiment as market participants change from a mood of
Cuphoria to one of despondency as the security eventually reacts in the direc-
ton opposite to that originally expected.

In order to qualify for an extreme swing, the first swing must represent

€ strongest move in several years, certainly the strongest since the initial



194 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Bull market It's nice to see a

confirmation, too!

Muttiyear overbought
following an uptrend... amp

nw

is quickly followed by
a multiyear oversold... m——p W

Figure 10-8 Bearish extreme swing.

thrust from the previous bear market bottom. It is really a climax move for
the bull market. The second swing to the downside should really be a mega-
oversold, though in some cases an extreme oversold will suffice.

This phenomenon is undoubtedly formed because the first swing encour-
ages the participants who have been right about the prevailing trend and
discourages those who have been wrong. In the case of a bull market, the
final rally also squeezes out all of the remaining shorts, so when the trend
reverses, there is virtually no buying activity from speculators covering short
positions. The preceding sharp advance also encourages buyers who could
see that there was only one way prices could go, and that was up. As a result,
decisions on the buy side are made carelessly and without thought for the
fact that prices may move the other way. When they do, such individuals are
flushed out of the market with no quarter given. Since there are few short
sellers able to pick up the pieces, the price drops ferociously.

Extreme swings also develop between a bear and bull primary trend, as
featured in Fig. 10-9. In this case though, the mood swing is from total
despondency and depression as the bear market squeezes out the last of the
bulls from the sharp and persistent downtrend. Even the strongest bulls are
forced to capitulate and eventually there is no one left to sell. Then during
the rally phase, the shorts are forced to cover and new buying comes in
because of the perceived improvement in the fundamentals. Since there is
virtually no one left to sell, prices shoot up, and a mega- or extreme over
bought is registered.

Momentum Principles 195

Primary bear market

..foillowed by an
fi 4——_extreme overbought

setmennen final panic declines to a
Tuitiyear momentum low...

Figure 10-9 Bullish extreme swing.

Needless to say, extreme swings are quite unusual, but when you can spot
them, it really pays to follow their lead since a new trend invariably results.

An example of a bullish extreme swing is shown in Chart 10-3 featuring VF
Corp.

Divergences

The ball example used at the beginning of the chapter showed that maxi-
mum velocity was obtained fairly close to the point at which the ball leaves
the hand. Similarly, prices in financial markets usually reach their maximum
level of momentum ahead of the final peak in prices. In Fig. 10-10, this is
shown at point A. If the price makes a new high, which is confirmed by the
Momentum index, no indication of technical weakness arises. On the other
hand, if momentum fails to confirm (point B), a negative divergence is set
up between the two series, and a warning of a weakening technical struc-
ture is given. Such discrepancies normally indicate that the price will
undergo a corrective process. It can take the form of either a sideways or a
horizontal trading range, or (more likely) a downward one. However, the
Price will sometimes continue upward to a third top and be accompanied
by even greater weakness in the momentum index (point C). Occasionally,
the third peak in the momentum index may be higher than the second, but
lower than the first. Either circumstance requires some degree of caution,
Since this characteristic is a distinct warning of a sharp reversal in price or
along corrective period.



196 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 10-3 VF Corp., 1989-1993, and a positive extreme swing. (From www.pring.com.)

.. followed by a mult-
year overbought...

we equals an extreme swing

Multiyear oversold
a

100 ale nm
/ pk ™

Figure 10-10 Momentum and divergences.

ery’

~ Major. Technical Principle itis extrethely i
*_ divergences only warn of a weakening or strenathe nif
dition and do not represent actual buy and sell:signals.

64 eae

Momentum Principles 197

Figure 10-10 also shows a positive divergence. In this instance, the price
makes its low at point £, but this is preceded by the oscillator that bottomed
at D.

Whenever any divergence between momentum and price occurs, it is
essential to wait for a confirmation from the price itself that its trend has
also been reversed. This confirmation can be achieved by (1) the violation
of a simple trendline, as shown in Fig. 10-10, (2) the crossover of an MA, or
(3) the completion of a price pattern or (4) a reversal in peak/trough pro-
gression. This form of insurance is well worth taking, since it is not unknown
for a security to continually lose and regain momentum without suffering
a break in trend during a long cyclical advance. Examples of this phenom-
enon occurred during the 1990’s bull market in U.S. stocks and in Japanese
stocks between 1982 and 1990.

A good example can be seen in Chart 10-4, which shows the Nikkei Dow
violating an important 3!/year secondary trendline after the 13-week ROC
indicator had negatively diverged several times with the index. As a result,
the final rally was accompanied by very little upside momentum. It would
have been a mistake to sell on any of the prior divergences, buta very timely
sell signal was generated by waiting for a confirmation in the form of a trend
break in the index itself.

At point C in Fig. 10-11, the price moves to a significant new high, but
the momentum indicator is barely able to remain above the equilibrium
line. Such a situation demands the utmost caution when accompanied by a
trend break, because it is usually a sign of extreme technical weakness and is
Often, though certainly not always, followed by an above average decline.
The opposite type of situation (see Fig. 10-12) in a bear market should be
viewed as a very positive characteristic, especially if the upward trend break
in price is accompanied by high volume. The more explosive the volume,
the more reliable the signal.

In asense, it is possible to equate momentum divergences and price trend
breaks with dark clouds and rain. If you look up at the sky and observe dark
clouds, common sense tells you that it will probably rain, but you do not
know for sure until you can hold out your hand and actually feel rain falling.
In other words, the clouds (like the divergences) warn of the deteriorating



198 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

=] a bd "SAA A AA (A 7 he

Confirmation

Sharp decline

Virtually no upside
momentum at the final peak

Lc ., L™
i as

Figure 10-11 Extreme bearish divergence.

Momentum Principles 199

Followed by a
sharp rally

Virtually no downside
momentum at the final low

\ raat
\J VS

Figure 10-12 Extreme bullish divergence.

weather (technical condition), but the change in weather is signaled only
by the first raindrop (reversal in the price). It is possible to take the anal-
ogy a step further by concluding that the darker the clouds (the greater the

number of divergences), the heavier the rainstorm (the sharper the price
decline).

Price Discrepancy Divergences

A further indication of subtle strength or weakness is given when the
Momentum series moves strongly in one direction, but the accompanying
Move in the price index is a much smaller one. Such a development sug-
8ests that the security is tired of moving in the direction of the prevailing
Wend, because despite a strong push of energy from the oscillator, prices
are unable to respond. This unusual but powerful phenomenon is illustrated
for both tops and bottoms in Figs. 10-13 and 10-14.



200 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Price is not that weak ————_——>

Signifcant decline in the momentum

Figure 10-13 Bullish price discrepancy divergence.

Price is not that strong

Signifcant rally in momentum

AN

A L\
TY’ VY

Figure 10-14 Bearish price discrepancy divergence.

YNI™

Complex Divergences

It is widely recognized that price movements are simultaneously influenced
by several cyclic phenomena. Because a single momentum indicator can
monitor only one of these cycles, it is always a good idea to compare several
different momentum indicators based on differing time spans.

Momentum Principles 201

One approach is to plot two momentum indicators of differing time spans
on the same chart, as shown in Fig. 10-15. Since this method tries to mon-
itor two separate cycles, it is just as well to choose two widely different time
spans. For example, not much could be gained from the comparison of 12-
and 13-week ROCs since they would move very closely together. On the
other hand, comparing 13- and 26-week spans would clearly reflect differ-
ent cycles.

Most of the time, the two indicators are moving in gear, so this study does
not give us much information. On the other hand, when the longer-term
indicator reaches a new peak and the shorter one is at or close to the equi-
librium line, they are clearly in disagreement or out of gear (see point A,
in Fig. 10-15). This normally, but not necessarily, indicates that a reversal in
trend will take place, and it is usually a significant one. Even so, it is very
important to make sure that any such divergence is confirmed by a rever-
sal in the price trend itself. In Fig. 10-15, a trend break does occur, but in
Fig. 10-16, no reversal takes place and the price continues upward.

Complex divergences also occur in a positive combination, as indicated
at point B, in Fig. 10-15, but again, it is mandatory to wait for that trend-
reversal signal in the price itself.

An example in Chart 10-5 features Lowe's using 20- and 1d 45-day ROGs. The
45-day series makes its bottom in January of 1995, but by that time the 20-
day series is already around zero. Soon after, the price confirms this diver-
gence by rallying above a small resistance trendline.

——— Index

tree Long-term MA
{e.9.,40 weeks)

Negative
trend
confirmation

Positive
trend
Negative divergence confirmation
A whe ,
f 1 ta Ay
‘ v tA, aa v™.

POAT A ’

————— 13 - week ROC Vv
iatetate 26~ week ROC

Positive divergence

Figure 10-15 Complex divergence.



202

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

—— Index

=< Long-term MA
{e.g.,40 weeks)

Ae 4
 ' eI

F
fy / \ Bece
7 1) VA 4 RAN
, 7 7g i
Th ft A Deg

> fs V
UF ae V —— 13-week ROC
----- 26-week ROC

Confirmation

i
wrath

ae
‘

iy

,
‘. ' 4 ! ’
y H
bofirs
Hiv; oj i te a7 ‘
he wy Ave i oy ‘
af ‘ a * ’
‘
yy os?

ug [Sep " [Oct " INov’ ‘Dec’ ~[1988" "Feb" Mar" rT

Momentum Principles 203

Momentum Trend-Reversal
Techniques

Trendline Violations

Occasionally, it is possible to construct a trendline on the momentum indi-
cator by connecting a series of peaks or troughs. An example of an uptrend
reversal is shown in Fig. 10-17. When the line is violated, a trend-reversal
signal for the oscillator is generated.

The construction and significance of the break should be based on the
principles outlined in Chapter 8. This type of momentum weakness must
be regarded as an alert, and action should be taken only when confirmed
by a break in the price trend itself (indicated at point AA in Fig. 10-17). In
effect, the momentum trend break is reinforcing the price trend break and
offers an additional piece of evidence that the trend has reversed.

An example signaling a new uptrend is featured in Fig. 10-18. It is possi-
ble for the momentum trend break to precede that of the price by some
time, yet it does not generally lose its potency because of this.

nthe trendlines for the oscillator
the signal i ‘onger,

Momentum must be
confirmed by price

za f\ 7
AAA EMA

Figure 10-17 Bearish momentum trend break.



204 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Momentum must be
confirmed by price

ya
VER AV Am

Figure 10-18 Bullish momentum trend break.

It should also be noted that momentum trendline breaks can be con-
firmed by any legitimate trend-reversal technique in the price, be itan MA
crossover, a price pattern or peak-trough progression reversal, and so on.
Of all the methods of momentum interpretation, the joint trendline viola-
tion technique is one of the simplest and without doubt one of the most
effective.

Momentum Price Patterns

Momentum indicators are also capable of tracing out price patterns.
Because of the shorter lead times normally associated with reversals of falling
momentum, a breakout from an accumulation pattern, when accompanied
by a reversal in the downward trend of the price itself, is usually a highly
reliable indication that a worthwhile move has just begun. An example is
shown in Fig. 10-19 and Chart 10-6.

It is important to use a little common sense in interpreting momentum
price patterns. Figure 10-20, for example, shows a breakout from a reverse
head-and-shoulders (H&S) pattern that takes place as a result of an overbought
condition. This is not to say that such signals will never be valid, but it stands
to reason that a breakout from an extreme level is very unlikely to result in
a sustainable price move. Remember, technical analysis deals with probabilities,
and the odds of a favorable outcome in this case are low.

Momentum Principles 205

Price index

EA womentum

7 Cyt index

Figure 10-19 Momentum price pattern completion.

Chart 10-6 Alcoa, 1999-2000, and momentum Price patterns. This chart features Alcoa
with a 10-day ROC. Note how a reverse H&S in the 10-day ROC was completed just before
the price broke a nice trendline to the upside. Adding to the significance of the signal was the
fact that the price crossed above its MA more or less simultaneously with the trendline viola-
tion. Since both the line and the MA represent resistance, the breakout offered two pieces of
evidence that the trend had reversed. As soon as the ROC had broken out, it began to form
an H&S top. The break from this momentum distribution Pattern was then confirmed by the
Price violating a small up trendline. (From www.pring.com.)

Equilibrium Crossovers

Some technicians have devised indicators that offer buy and sell signals when
..€ Momentum indicator crosses above and below its equilibrium or zero
line, Many markets do not lend themselves to this approach, so its imple-
mentation depends very much on a trial and error basis through



206 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Price index

Mormentum index
Overbought line

77 " v
~~~ a ee

Figure 10-20 Overbought momentum pattern completion.

experimentation. In any event, it is always a good idea to use this method in
conjunction with a reversal in the price itself. Chart 10-7 shows how zero 12-
month ROC crossovers, used in conjunction with 12-month MA crossovers,
have consistently given reliable buy signals for the Economist All Items
Commodity Index. The two sets of ellipses point out few whipsaw signals.

Momentum and MAs

By now, it is apparent that all the trend-determining techniques used for
price are also applicable to momentum. The interpretation of oscillators,
as described previously, depends to a considerable extent on judgment. One
method of reducing this subjectivity is to smooth the ROC index by using
an MA. Warnings of a probable trend reversal in the price being monitored
are offered by momentum MA crossovers, as indicated in Fig. 10-21.

One of the problems associated with this approach is that the momen
tum indicator is often much more Jagged than the price index that it is ty
ing to measure, causing an unacceptable number of whipsaw signals. It is
possible to filter out some of these whipsaws by using a combination of two
MAs, as shown in Fig. 10-22. Buy and sell alerts are given when the shorter
term MA crosses above or below its longer-term counterpart.

Momentum Principles 207

Chart 10-7 The Economist Commodity Index, 1968-2001, and zero crossovers. (From
www. pring.com.}

100-1 Economist Commodity Indexr...

t

12-month ROC
a Ny nh oe’
eA Tape
c= a a
Price index Whipsow signnis,

Momentum index

Figrse 10-21 MA crossovers.



208 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

‘Short-term Ma

Figure 20-22 MA crossovers smoothed.

This concept of momentum is explained in greater detail in the next
chapter, since smoothed momentum forms the basis of the trend deviation
and MACD indicators.

Smoothed Momentum Indicators

Another way of incorporating MAs into momentum studies is to smooth the
momentum indicator by a long-term MA. The meaning of long-term in this
case will depend on the type of trend being monitored. For example, a 20-
to 30-day time span would be suitable for a short-term price movement, but
a G-, 9, or 12-month smoothing, or one even longer, is more appropriate
for a primary trend. Warnings of a probable trend reversal in the price would
be offered by a reversal in the snoothed momentum index itself, as shown
in Fig. 10-23(a), or by a penetration of the MA through a designated over~
bought or oversold level, as in Fig. 10-23(d). The level of the dashed over
bought and oversold barrier would be determined on a trial and error basis,
with reference to a historical study of the relationship between the price and
the momentum curve. ;
If the momentum curve is found to be unduly volatile, it is always poss!
ble to smooth out fluctuations by calculating an even longer-term MA or by

‘
i
i
|

Momentum Principles 209

100
Smoothed momentum
index

(a)

-
aN fie

»

4

es dain a Aa
oof = NLL an

)

Figure 10-23 (a) Directional changes of smoothed momentum MAs. (b) Overbought/over-
sold recrossovers of smoothed momentum MAs.

smoothing the MA itself with an additional calculation. Another possibility
is to construct an oscillator by combining the MAs of three or four ROCs
and weighting them according to their time span. This possibility is discussed
at length in Chapter 12.

Chart 10-8 shows the effectiveness of combining two smoothed ROC indi-
cators. In this case, the smoothing is a 10-month weighted average of
11- and 14-month ROGs of the S&P Composite monthly closing prices. Since
this indicator has been found useful for market bottoms rather than tops,
the momentum curve is significant only when it falls below the zero refer-
ence line and then rises. The arrows show that bull market signals between
1960 and 2000 were particularly timely. The ellipse represents a signal where
the indicator was timely, although in this case it did not drop below zero. I
have traced this indicator back to 1900 and found that very few whipsaws
Were triggered. These could have been eliminated by waiting for a 12:month

crossover as confirmation. Clearly, this is an excellent track record
(derived from an approach discovered by E.S.C. Coppock).
_ Afurther variation on the construction of a smoothed momentum index
Sto take the ROC of an MA of a price index itself. This method reverses
the process described previously, because instead of constructing an ROC



210 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 10-8 S&P Composite and the Coppock Indicator, 1960-2001. (From
www. pring.com.)

1000-4 S&P Composite

44 t t ft

ae a

V Vv

Fa |

and then smoothing the resulting momentum index, the price index itself
is first smoothed with an MA, and an ROC is taken of that smoothing.

Summary

* Momentumis a generic term embracing many different types of oscillators.

* Momentum measures the rate at which prices rise or fall and gives use-

ful indications of latent strength or weakness in a price trend. This is

because prices usually rise at their fastest pace well ahead of their peak

and normally decline at their greatest speed before their ultimate low.

Since markets generally spend more time in a rising than a falling phase,

the lead characteristic of momentum indicators is normally greater dur-

ing rallies than during reactions.

* Oscillators reflect market sentiment and have different charactersistics i
primary bull and bear markets.

° There are two basic methods of interpreting momentum: momentum
characteristics and momentum trend reversal.

* Momentum signals should always be used in conjunction with a trend-
reversal signal by the actual price.

11

Individual
Momentum
Indicators I

In this and the next chapter, several specific momentum indicators will be
examined. It is recommended that you study them all and then choose three
or four in which you have confidence and with which you feel intuitively
comfortable. Following too many indicators usually leads to confusion.

Relative Strength Indicator
The Formula

The relative strength indicator (RSI) was developed by Welles Wilder! It is
a momentum indicator, or oscillator, that measures the relative internal
strength of a security against itself This should not be confused with com-
parative relative strength, which compares the performance of one security
to another. The formula for the RSI is as follows:

100
RSI = 100 — 88
1+RS

average of x days’ up closes

average of x days’ down closes

roells Wilder, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems, Trend Research, Greensboro, NC,

211



212 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

where RS = the average of x days’ up closes divided by the average of x days’
down closes. The formula aims to overcome two problems involved in the
construction of a momentum indicator: (1) erratic movements and (2) the
need for a constant trading band for comparison purposes. Erratic move-
ments are caused by sharp alterations in the values, which are dropped off
in the calculation. For example, in a 20-day rate of change (ROC) indica-
tor, a sharp decline or advance 20 days in the past can cause sudden shifts
in the momentum line even if the current price is little changed. The RSI
attempts to smooth out such distortions.

The RSI formula not only provides this smoothing characteristic, but also
results in an indicator that fluctuates ina constant range between 0 and 100.
The default time span recommended by Wilder is 14 days, which he justi-
fied on the basis that it was half of the 28-day lunar cycle.
