 a.  Understand the power of the “cleansing storm.” 
 13.5  Build the organization around goals rather than tasks. 
 a.  Build your organization from the top down. 
 b.  Remember that everyone must be overseen by a believable person who has high standards. 
 c.  Make sure the people at the top of each pyramid have the skills and focus to manage their direct reports and a deep understanding of their jobs. 
 d.  In designing your organization, remember that the 5-Step Process is the path to success and that different people are good at different steps. 
 e.  Don’t build the organization to fit the people. 
 f.  Keep scale in mind. 
 g.  Organize departments and sub-departments around the most logical groupings based on “gravitational pull.” 
 h.  Make departments as self-sufficient as possible so that they have control over the resources they need to achieve their goals. 
 i.  Ensure that the ratios of senior managers to junior managers and of junior managers to their reports are limited to preserve quality communication and mutual understanding. 
 j.  Consider succession and training in your design. 
 k.  Don’t just pay attention to your job; pay attention to how your job will be done if you are no longer around. 
 l.  Use “double-do” rather than “double-check” to make sure mission-critical tasks are done correctly. 
 m.  Use consultants wisely and watch out for consultant addiction. 
 13.6  Create an organizational chart to look like a pyramid, with straight lines down that don’t cross. 
 a.  Involve the person who is the point of the pyramid when encountering cross-departmental or cross-sub-departmental issues. 
 b.  Don’t do work for people in another department or grab people from another department to do work for you unless you speak to the person responsible for overseeing the other department. 
 c.  Watch out for “department slip.” 
 13.7  Create guardrails when needed—and remember it’s better not to guardrail at all. 
 a.  Don’t expect people to recognize and compensate for their own blind spots. 
 b.  Consider the clover-leaf design. 
 13.8  Keep your strategic vision the same while making appropriate tactical changes as circumstances dictate. 
 a.  Don’t put the expedient ahead of the strategic. 
 b.  Think about both the big picture and the granular details, and understand the connections between them. 
 13.9  Have good controls so that you are not exposed to the dishonesty of others. 
 a.  Investigate and let people know you are going to investigate. 
 b.  Remember that there is no sense in having laws unless you have policemen (auditors). 
 c.  Beware of rubber-stamping. 
 d.  Recognize that people who make purchases on your behalf probably will not spend your money wisely. 
 e.  Use “public hangings” to deter bad behavior. 
 13.10  Have the clearest possible reporting lines and delineations of responsibilities. 
 a.  Assign responsibilities based on workflow design and people’s abilities, not job titles. 
 b.  Constantly think about how to produce leverage. 
 c.  Recognize that it is far better to find a few smart people and give them the best technology than to have a greater number of ordinary people who are less well equipped. 
 d.  Use leveragers. 
 13.11  Remember that almost everything will take more time and cost more money than you expect. 
 14  Do What You Set Out to Do 
 14.1  Work for goals that you and your organization are excited about and think about how your tasks connect to those goals. 
 a.  Be coordinated and consistent in motivating others. 
 b.  Don’t act before thinking. Take the time to come up with a game plan. 
 c.  Look for creative, cut-through solutions. 
 14.2  Recognize that everyone has too much to do. 
 a.  Don’t get frustrated. 
 14.3  Use checklists. 
 a.  Don’t confuse checklists with personal responsibility. 
 14.4  Allow time for rest and renovation. 
 14.5  Ring the bell. 
 15  Use Tools and Protocols to Shape How Work Is Done 
 15.1  Having systemized principles embedded in tools is especially valuable for an idea meritocracy. 
 a.  To produce real behavioral change, understand that there must be internalized or habitualized learning. 
 b.  Use tools to collect data and process it into conclusions and actions. 
 c.  Foster an environment of confidence and fairness by having clearly-stated principles that are implemented in tools and protocols so that the conclusions reached can be assessed by tracking the logic and data behind them. 
 16  And for Heaven’s Sake, Don’t Overlook Governance! 
 16.1  To be successful, all organizations must have checks and balances. 
 a.  Even in an idea meritocracy, merit cannot be the only determining factor in assigning responsibility and authority. 
 b.  Make sure that no one is more powerful than the system or so important that they are irreplaceable. 
 c.  Beware of fiefdoms. 
 d.  Make clear that the organization’s structure and rules are designed to ensure that its checks-and-balances system functions well. 
 e.  Make sure reporting lines are clear. 
 f.  Make sure decision rights are clear. 
 g.  Make sure that the people doing the assessing 1) have the time to be fully informed about how the person they are checking on is doing, 2) have the ability to make the assessments, and 3) are not in a conflict of interest that stands in the way of carrying out oversight effectively. 
 h.  Recognize that decision makers must have access to the information necessary to make decisions and must be trustworthy enough to handle that information safely. 
 16.2  Remember that in an idea meritocracy a single CEO is not as good as a great group of leaders. 
 16.3  No governance system of principles, rules, and checks and balances can substitute for a great partnership.

Principles 

 For any group or organization to function well, its work principles must be aligned with its members’ life principles.

Principles 

 I don’t mean that they must be aligned on everything, but I do mean that they have to be aligned on the most important things, like the mission they’re on and how they will be with each other. 
 If people in an organization feel that alignment, they will treasure their relationships and work together harmoniously; its culture will permeate everything they do. If they don’t, they will work for different, often conflicting, goals and will be confused about how they should be with each other. For that reason, it pays for all organizations—companies, governments, foundations, schools, hospitals, and so on—to spell out their principles and values clearly and explicitly and to operate by them consistently. 
 Those principles and values aren’t vague slogans, like “the customer always comes first” or “we should strive to be the best in our industry,” but a set of concrete directives anyone can understand, get aligned on, and carry out. As we shift our attention from Life Principles to Work Principles, I will explain how we went about achieving these alignments at Bridgewater and how that affected our results. But first, I want to explain how I think about organizations. 

 •  An organization is a machine consisting of two major parts: culture and people. 
 Each influences the other, because the people who make up an organization determine the kind of culture it has, and the culture of the organization determines the kinds of people who fit in. 
 a.  A great organization has both great people and a great culture. Companies that get progressively better over time have both. Nothing is more important or more difficult than to get the culture and people right. 
 b.  Great people have both great character and great capabilities. By great character, I mean they are radically truthful, radically transparent, and deeply committed to the mission of the organization. By great capabilities, I mean they have the abilities and skills to do their jobs excellently. People who have one without the other are dangerous and should be removed from the organization. People who have both are rare and should be treasured. 
 c.  Great cultures bring problems and disagreements to the surface and solve them well, and they love imagining and building great things that haven’t been built before. Doing that sustains their evolution. In our case, we do that by having an idea meritocracy that strives for meaningful work and meaningful relationships through radical truth and radical transparency. By meaningful work, I mean work that people are excited to get their heads into, and by meaningful relationships I mean those in which there is genuine caring for each other (like an extended family). I find that these reinforce each other and that being radically truthful and radically transparent with each other makes both the work and the relationships go better. 
 By constantly looking down on the machine, its managers can objectively compare the outcomes it produces with their goals. If those outcomes are consistent with those goals, then the machine is working effectively; if the outcomes are inconsistent with the goals, then something is wrong with either the design of the machine or the people who are a part of it and the problem needs to be diagnosed so the machine can be modified. As laid out in Chapter Two of Life Principles, this ideally happens in a 5-Step Process: 1) having clear goals, 2) identifying the problems preventing the goals from being achieved, 3) diagnosing what parts of the machine (i.e., which people or which designs) are not working well, 4) designing changes, and 5) doing what is needed. This is the fastest and most efficient way that an organization improves. 
 I call this process of converting problems into progress “looping,” and how it happens through time is visualized in the diagrams to the right. In the first, a problem occurs that takes you off track from your goals and makes things worse than you planned. 
 If you identify the decline, diagnose the problems that caused it so as to get at their root causes, come up with new designs, and then push them through, the trajectory will loop back on itself and continue its upward ascent, like in the second diagram. 
 If you don’t identify the problem, design a suboptimal solution, or fail to push it through effectively, the decline will continue as shown in the diagram at the bottom. 
 A manager’s ability to recognize when outcomes are inconsistent with goals and then modify designs and assemble people to rectify them makes all the difference in the world. The more often and more effectively a manager does this, the steeper the upward trajectory. 
 As I explained in Life Principles, this is what I believe evolution looks like for all organisms and organizations. Having a culture and people that will evolve in this way is critical because the world changes quickly and in ways that can’t possibly be anticipated. I’m sure you can think of a number of companies that failed to identify and address their problems on time and ended up in a terminal decline (see: BlackBerry and Palm) and a rare few that have consistently looped well. Most don’t. For example, only six of the companies that forty years ago made up the Dow Jones 30, which is about when Bridgewater got started, are still in the Dow 30 today. Many of them—American Can, American Tobacco, Bethlehem Steel, General Foods, Inco, F. W. Woolworth—don’t even exist; some (Sears Roebuck, Johns-Manville, Eastman Kodak) are so different as to be almost unrecognizable. And many of the standouts on the list today—Apple, Cisco—were yet to be founded.

Principles 

 The rare few that have been able to evolve well over the decades have been successful at that evolutionary/looping process, which also is the process that has made Bridgewater progressively more successful for forty years. That is the process I want to pass along to you. 
 As I mentioned earlier, nothing is more important or more difficult than to get the culture and the people right. Whatever successes we’ve had at Bridgewater were the result of doing that well—and whatever failures were due to our not doing it adequately. That might seem odd because, as a global macroeconomic investor, one might think that, above all else, I had to get the economics and investments right, which is true. But to do that, I needed to get the people and culture right first. And, to inspire me to do what I did, I needed to have meaningful work and meaningful relationships. 
 As the entrepreneur/builder of Bridgewater, I naturally shaped the organization to be consistent with my values and principles. I went after what I wanted most, in the way that seemed most natural to me with the people I chose to be with, and we and Bridgewater evolved together. 
 If you had asked me what my objective was when I started out, I would’ve said it was to have fun working with people I like. Work was a game I played with passion and I wanted to have a blast playing it with people I enjoyed and respected. I started Bridgewater out of my apartment with a pal I played rugby with who had no experience in the markets and a friend we hired as our assistant. I certainly wasn’t thinking about management at the time. Management seemed to me like something people in gray suits with slide presentations did. I never set out to manage, let alone to have principles about work and management. 
 From reading Life Principles, you know that I liked to imagine and build out new, practical concepts that never existed before. I especially loved doing these things with people who were on the same mission with me. I treasured thoughtful disagreement with them as a way of learning and raising our odds of making good decisions, and I wanted all the people I worked with to be my “partners” rather than my “employees.” In a nutshell, I was looking for meaningful work and meaningful relationships. I quickly learned that the best way to do that was to have great partnerships with great people. 
 To me, great partnerships come from sharing common values and interests, having similar approaches to pursuing them, and being reasonable with, and having consideration for, each other. At the same time, partners must be willing to hold each other to high standards and work through their disagreements. The main test of a great partnership is not whether the partners ever disagree—people in all healthy relationships disagree—but whether they can bring their disagreements to the surface and get through them well. Having clear processes for resolving disagreements efficiently and clearly is essential for business partnerships, marriages, and all other forms of partnership. 
 My wanting these things attracted others who wanted the same things, which drove how we shaped Bridgewater together. 36 When there were five of us it was totally different than when there were fifty of us, which was totally different than it was when we were five hundred, a thousand, and so on. As we grew, most everything changed beyond recognition, except for our core values and principles. 
 When Bridgewater was still a small company, the principles by which we operated were more implicit than explicit. But as more and more new people came in, I couldn’t take for granted that they would understand and preserve them. I realized that I needed to write our principles out explicitly and explain the logic behind them. I remember the precise moment when this shift occurred—it was when the number of people at Bridgewater passed sixty-seven. Up until then, I had personally chosen each employee’s holiday gift and written them a lengthy personalized card, but trying to do it that year broke my back. From that point on, an increasing number of people came in who didn’t work closely with me, so I couldn’t assume they would understand where I was coming from or what I was striving to create, which was an idea meritocracy built on tough love. 
 •  Tough love is effective for achieving both great work and great relationships. 
 To give you an idea of what I mean by tough love, think of Vince Lombardi, who for me personified it. From when I was ten years old until I was eighteen, Lombardi was head coach of the Green Bay Packers. With limited resources, he led his team to five NFL championships. He won two NFL Coach of the Year awards and many still call him the best coach of all time. Lombardi loved his players and he pushed them to be great. I admired, and still admire, how uncompromising his standards were. His players, their fans, and he himself all benefited from his approach. I wish Lombardi had written out his principles for me to read. 
 a.  In order to be great, one can’t compromise the uncompromisable. Yet I see people doing it all the time, usually to avoid making others or themselves feel uncomfortable, which is not just backward but counterproductive. Putting comfort ahead of success produces worse results for everyone. I both loved the people I worked with and pushed them to be great, and I expected them to do the same with me. 
 From the very beginning, I felt that the people I worked with at Bridgewater were a part of my extended family. When they or members of their families got sick, I put them in touch with my personal doctor to make sure that they were well taken care of. I invited all of them to stay at my house in Vermont on weekends and loved it when they took me up on it. I celebrated their marriages and the births of their children with them and mourned the losses of their loved ones. But to be clear, this was no lovefest. We were tough on each other too, so we could all be as great as we could be. I learned that the more caring we gave each other, the tougher we could be on each other, and the tougher we were on each other, the better we performed and the more rewards there were for us to share. This cycle was self-reinforcing. I found that operating this way made the lows less low and the highs higher. It even made the bad times better than the good ones in some important ways. 
 Think about some of your toughest experiences in life. I bet it is as true for you as it has been for me that going through them with people you cared about, who cared about you, and who were working as hard as you were for the same mission, was incredibly rewarding. As hard as they were, we look back on some of these challenging times as our finest moments. For most people, being part of a great community on a shared mission is even more rewarding than money. Numerous studies have shown there is little to no correlation between one’s happiness and the amount of money one accumulates, yet there is a strong correlation between one’s happiness and the quality of one’s relationships. 
 I laid this out in a memo to Bridgewater in 1996: 
 Bridgewater is not about plodding along at some kind of moderate standard, it is about working like hell to achieve a standard that is extraordinarily high, and then getting the satisfaction that comes along with that sort of super-achievement. 
 Our overriding objective is excellence, or more precisely, constant improvement, a superb and constantly improving company in all respects. 
 Conflict in the pursuit of excellence is a terrific thing. There should be no hierarchy based on age or seniority. Power should lie in the reasoning, not the position, of the individual. The best ideas win no matter who they come from. 
 Criticism (by oneself and by others) is an essential ingredient in the improvement process, yet, if handled incorrectly, can be destructive. It should be handled objectively. There should be no hierarchy in the giving or receiving of criticism. 
 Teamwork and team spirit are essential, including intolerance of substandard performance. This is referring to 1) one’s recognition of the responsibilities one has to help the team achieve its common goals and 2) the willingness to help others (work within a group) toward these common goals. Our fates are intertwined. One should know that others can be relied upon to help. As a corollary, substandard performance cannot be tolerated anywhere because it would hurt everyone. 
 Long-term relationships are both a) intrinsically gratifying and b)efficient, and should be intentionally built. Turnover requires re-training and therefore creates setbacks. 
 Money is a byproduct of excellence, not a goal. Our overriding objective is excellence and constant improvement at Bridgewater. To be clear, it is not to make lots of money. The natural extension of this is not that you should be happy with little money. On the contrary—you should expect to make a lot. If we operate consistently with this philosophy we should be productive and the company should do well financially. There is comparatively little age- and seniority-based hierarchy. 
 Each person at Bridgewater should act like an owner, responsible for operating in this way and for holding others accountable to operate in this way. 
 •  A believability-weighted idea meritocracy is the best system for making effective decisions. 
 Unlike Lombardi, whose success depended on having his players follow his instructions, I needed my players to be independent thinkers who could bang around their different points of view and reach better conclusions than any one of us could come up with on our own. I needed to create an environment in which everyone had the right and the responsibility to make sense of things for themselves and to fight openly for what they think is best—and where the best thinking won out. I needed a real idea meritocracy, not some theoretical version of one. That’s because an idea meritocracy—i.e., a system that brings together smart, independent thinkers and has them productively disagree to come up with the best possible collective thinking and resolve their disagreements in a believability-weighted way—will outperform any other decision-making system. 
 Our idea-meritocratic system evolved over the decades. At first, we just argued like hell with each other about what was best and by thrashing through our disagreements came up with better paths than if we had made our decisions individually. But as Bridgewater grew and our range of disagreements and needs to resolve them changed, we became more explicit in how this idea meritocracy would work. We needed a system that could both effectively weigh the believability of different people to come to the best decisions and do that in a way that was so obviously fair everyone would recognize it as such. I knew that without such a system, we would lose both the best thinking and the best thinkers, and I’d be stuck with either kiss-asses or subversives who kept their disagreements and hidden resentments to themselves. 
 For this all to work, I believed and still believe that we need to be radically truthful and radically transparent with each other. 
 RADICAL TRUTH AND RADICAL TRANSPARENCY 
