
If a theoretical pricing model makes the assumption that prices follow a diffusion
process, when in fact they don’t, how is this likely to affect values generated by the
model? Consider a situation where an underlying futures contract is trading at 100 and
a trader feels that implied volatility in the option market is much too high. Because all
options are overpriced, the trader decides to sell the 100 straddle. Unfortunately,
immediately after he sells the straddle the market gaps up to 105. How will the gap
affect the trader’s position?


39S

Models and the Real World

sse00/g “oIsnyig-dwine

sseo0ld dun¢

$s800Jd UOISNIG

6-81 einbi4



396 Chapter 18

A trader who is short straddles does not want to see a gap in the market. The fact
that a gap has occurred will hurt the trader, but will it cause him only minor pain, or
will it destroy him? If the options are relatively long-term, say nine months, the gap in
the underlying price is unlikely to be the end of the world. After all, with nine months
remaining to expiration the underlying market could easily fall back to 100. And while
the gap has clearly hurt the trader, it is probably not disastrous.® But if the gap occurs
with only a very short time remaining to expiration, say one day, the trader is now ina
situation where he might very well be ruined. With only one day to expiration, there is
simply not enough time for the market to retrace its movement. The 100 calls which
the trader sold as part of his short straddle will act like short futures contracts. While
the spread began approximately delta neutral, after the gap the trader will find himself
naked short deeply in-the-money calls, each with a delta of 100, in a market which has
just made a giant leap upward. Figure 18-4 shows how prices might change with nine
months versus one day remaining to expiration.

With nine months remaining to expiration the 100 straddle increased in value by
approximately 7% (14.04/13.18 = 1.07). But with one day remaining to expiration the
100 straddle increased in value by 495% (5.00/.84 = 5.95), The gap was painful with
nine months to expiration, but it was devastating with one day to expiration.

The reason that the gap caused such a dramatic change in the one-day straddle was
that the delta of the 100 straddle was much more sensitive to a change in the price of
the underlying contract. With nine months to expiration the 100 call and put have a
gamma of only 2.2. But with one day to expiration they have a gamma of 38.1. In the
latter situation, with such a high negative gamma, any movement will undoubtedly be
very painful. The trader could reduce some of the damage if he were able to adjust the
position by purchasing futures as the market moved upward. But a gap is an instanta-
neous move; there is no opportunity to adjust. The very high gamma, combined with
an inability to make any adjustment, is what makes the gap so devastating.

Options have the unique characteristic of automatically, and continuously, rehedg-
ing themselves by changing their deltas as the price of the underlying contract changes.
It is this characteristic which buyers of options are paying for. A trader who uses a
theoretical pricing model attempts to take advantage of a mispriced option by estab-

Figure 18-4
Implied Volatility = 20%; Interest Rate = 6%
9 months to expiration 1 day to expiration
Futures Futures Futures Futures
at 100 at 105 at 100 at 105
100 call price 6.59 9.41 42 5.00
100 put price 6.59 4.63 42 0
100 straddle price 13.18 14,04 84 5.00

8. For simplicity, we assume that there is no change in implied volatility after the gap, Admittedly, this Is
unlikely to be the case.


Models and the Real World 397

lishing a delta neutral hedge against the underlying, and then manually performing the
rehedging process himself over the life of the option. This was the basis for the examples
in Chapter 5. If amodel assumes, as most do, that prices follow a diffusion process, the
model assumes that one can continuously maintain a delta neutral hedge. But when the
market gaps, the assumptions on which the model is based are violated. Consequently,
the values generated by the model are rendered invalid. This problem extends to any
application which attempts to replicate option characteristics through a continuous
rehedging in the underlying market. The proponents of portfolio insurance suffered their
greatest setbacks on October 19 and 20, 1987, when the market made several large gap
moves. Because of the gaps, the portfolio insurers were unable to make continuous delta
adjustments to their positions. As a consequence, they found that the cost of protection
offered by portfolio insurance was much greater than they had ever expected.

Since traditional pricing models make an unrealistic assumption about how prices
change, perhaps a model which makes a more realistic assumption would yield more
accurate theoretical values. Theoreticians tend to agree that underlying contracts in
most markets follow a combination of both a diffusion process and a jump process. Most
of the time prices change smoothly and continuously, with no gaps. Every now and
then, however, a gap will occur, instantaneously sending the price to a new level. From
there prices will again follow a smooth diffusion process until another gap occurs. If one
could generate a underlying price distribution which resulted from this jump-diffusion
process, and feed this distribution into a theoretical pricing model, the model should
give more accurate values.

A variation of the Black-Scholes model which assumes that the underlying contract
follows a jump-diffusion process has in fact been developed. If used correctly, this
Jump-diffusion model does give values which are probably more accurate than tradi-
tional Black-Scholes values.” Unfortunately, the model is considerably more complex
mathematically than the traditional Black-Scholes model. Moreover, in addition to the
five customary inputs, the model also requires two new inputs: the average size of a
jump in the underlying market, and the frequency with which such jumps are likely to
occur. Unless the user can accurately estimate these new inputs, the values generated
by a jump-diffusion model may be no better, and might be worse, than those generated
by a traditional model. Most traders take the view that whatever weaknesses are
encountered in a traditional model can be best offset through intelligent decision making
based on actual trading experience, rather than through the use of a more complex
jump-diffusion model.

Since a gap in the market will have its greatest effect on a high gamma option, and
since at-the-money options close to expiration have the highest gamma, it is these
options which are likely to be mispriced by a traditional theoretical pricing model with
its continuous diffusion process. The closer one gets to expiration, the more suspect

7, Information on the jump-diffusion model can be found in most advanced texts on option theory. For
additional information see:
Merton, Robert, “Option Pricing when Underlying Stock Returns are Discontinous,” Journal of
Financial Economics, Volume 3, March 1976, pages 125-144.
Beckers, Stan, “A Note on Estimating the Parameters in the Jump-Diffusion Model of Stock Returns,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, March 1981, pages 127—140,


398 Chapter 18

model-generated values become. Consequently, traders pay less and less attention to
model-generated values as expiration approaches. It is common practice among floor
traders on option exchanges to take with them to the trading floor sheets with
theoretical values to enable them to make markets which are consistent with a
theoretical pricing model. But as expiration approaches traders are more likely to discard
their sheets because the values on the sheets become less reliable. With only one or two
days to expiration, most traders simply make decisions based on experience and
intuition. While this is perhaps unscientific, it sometimes makes better sense than
trading from model-generated values when the model is known to be incorrect.

AS a result of the gaps which occur in the real world, both a trader’s experience
and empirical evidence seem to indicate that a traditional model, with its built-in
diffusion assumption, tends to undervalue at-the-money options as expiration ap-
proaches, From a risk standpoint, this means that it can be very dangerous to sell a large
number of at-the-money options close to expiration, since any gap in the underlying
market can have devastating results. New traders, in particular, are advised to avoid
such positions. No risk manager will appreciate even experienced traders being short
large numbers of at-the-money options as expiration approaches.

Expiration Straddles

If it is dangerous to sell atthe-money options going into expiration, perhaps there is
some sense in taking the opposite position by purchasing at-the-money options as
expiration approaches. This may seem to contradict conventional option wisdom,
which contends that a trader should sell at-the-money options in order to take advantage
of the rapid time decay associated with such options. What traders tend to forget is that
there is always a tradeoff between risk and reward. If one sells at-the-money options,
the reward may be an accelerated profit if the market doesn’t move (high positive theta).
But the risk is an increased loss if the market does move (high negative gamma). Because
the model does not know about the possibility of a gap in the underlying market, the
risk is often greater than the reward. If one sells at-the-money options, the losses from
an occasional gap will more than offset the profits resulting from increased time decay.
An experienced trader will therefore tend to do the opposite of conventional wisdom.
If conditions are right, he will tend to buy at-the-money options close to expiration.

This is not to suggest that every time expiration approaches, a trader should run
out and buy at-the-money options. As with any strategy, conditions must make the
strategy attractive. But because so many traders are intent on selling time premium as
expiration approaches, it is often possible to find cheap at-the-money options. For
example, suppose that with three days remaining to expiration the Black-Scholes model
generates a value for an at-the-money call of .50, but that it is priced at .45. What can
we say about this call? While we may not know the exact value, we can certainly say
that the call is likely to be worth more than .50, since there is always the possibility of
a gap in the market. Clearly, if the call is trading at .45, but has a value in excess of .50,
it must be a good buy.

As with any strategy based on volatility, the trader who buys these calls will try to
establish a delta neutral position. Because of the synthetic relationship, if the calls are


Models and the Real World 399

underpriced the puts at the same exercise price will also be underpriced. A logical
strategy might be the purchase of at-the-money straddles. This enables a trader to buy
poth underpriced calls and underpriced puts, and to profit if the underlying market gaps
either up or down.

In theory all volatility strategies, including an expiration straddle, ought to be
periodically adjusted in order to remain delta neutral. However, with little time
remaining to expiration the model is not only unreliable with respect to theoretical
values, it is also unreliable with respect to deltas. Because it is impossible to say what
the right delta is, it is also impossible to say what the correct adjustment is. For this
reason, traders who initiate expiration straddles often forget about trying to adjust, and
simply sit on the position to expiration. This may not be the theoretically correct way
to handle a volatility position. But it may be the practical choice given all the uncertain-
ties associated with theoretical evaluation as expiration approaches.

Even if a trader carefully chooses his expiration straddles, the great majority of time
no gap will occur in the market. In any single case he is more likely to show a loss than
a profit. A trader needs to remember that the primary concern is not the profit or loss
from any single trade, but what happens in the long run. Going Dack to the roulette
example in Chapter 3, a player who buys a number at a roulette table can expect to win
only once in 38 plays. But if the theoretical value of the bet is 95¢, and the player can
buy the bet for less than 95¢, he expects to be a winner in the long run. If he pays a
very low price for the bet, say 50¢, he still expects to lose 37 times out of 38. But now
the bet is very attractive because even if he only wins once in 38 plays, this will still be
often enough to more than offset the small losses he takes each time he loses. The same
logic is true of expiration straddies. A trader may lose several times before winning.
When he does win, he can expect a return great enough to more than offset all the
previous losses.

Because a trader knows that he will lose much more often than he will win, a trader
should only invest an amount in expiration straddles which he is prepared to lose. But
when conditions are right, a trader ought to be willing to make the investment. Even if
he loses several times in succession, in the long run he will encounter gaps in the market,
or sudden increases in volatility, often enough to make such strategies profitable.

VOLATILITY IS INDEPENDENT
OF THE PRICE OF THE
UNDERLYING CONTRACT

When a trader feeds a volatility into a theoretical pricing model, the volatility defines a
One standard deviation price change at any time during the life of the option, regardless
of whether the underlying contract happens to be rising or falling in price. If a contract
is currently at 100, and we assume a volatility of 20%, a one standard deviation price
change is always based on this volatility of 20%. If at some later time during the life of
the option the contract should move up to 150 or down to 50, 20% is still assumed to
be the operative volatility.


400 Chapter 18

Unfortunately, this assumption seems to fly in the face of most traders’ experience.
If one were to ask a stock index or bond trader whether his market were more volatile
when rising or falling, he would probably say that it was more volatile when falling. On
the other hand, if one were to ask an agricultural or precious metal trader the same
question about his market, he would almost certainly give the opposite answer. Those
markets tend to be more volatile when rising. In other words, the volatility of a market
is not independent of the price of the underlying contract. On the contrary, the volatility
over time seems to be dependent on the direction of movement in the underlying
contract. In some cases a trader expects the market to become more volatile if the
movement is downward and less volatile if the movement is upward; in other cases a
trader expects the market to become more volatile if the movement is upward and less
volatile if the movement is downward.

Because volatility in some markets does seem to be dependent on the price of the
underlying contract, a further variation of the Black-Scholes model has been proposed.
The constant-elastictty of variance, or CEV, model® is based on an assumed relationship
between volatility and the price level of the underlying contract. This relationship
determines the probability of price moves of various magnitudes at each moment in
time. Price changes are still random under a CEV assumption, but the randomness varies
with the price of the underlying contract.

Like the jump-diffusion model, the CEV model is mathematically complex, and
therefore difficult for most traders to compute. And like the jump-diffusion model it
requires additional input in the form of a mathematical relationship between the
volatility and price movement in the underlying contract. Given these difficulties, the
CEV model has not found wide acceptance among option traders.

Over small periods of time the percent price changes in an
underlying contract are normally distributed, resulting in a
lognormal distribution of underlying prices at expiration

Does the real world look like a lognormal distribution? One way to answer the question
is to ask how percent price changes over small periods of time are distributed. If this
distribution is normal, then the prices at expiration are likely to be lognormally
distributed.

Figure 18-5a is a frequency distribution of daily price changes in the S&P 500 stock
index from 1989 through 1993. Each bar represents the number of occurrences of a
given price change to the nearest 14 percent. As one would expect, most of the changes
are relatively small and close to zero. As we move away from the zero in either direction,

8. For information on the CEV model see:
Cox, John C.; and Ross, Stephen A.; “The Valuation of Options for Alternative Stochastic Processes”;
The Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 3, March 1976; pages 145-166.
Beckers, Stan; “The Constant Elasticity of Variance Model and Its Implications for Option Pricing”;
Journal of Finance; June 1980; pages 661-673.
Schroder, Mark; “Computing the Constant Elasticity of Variance Option Pricing Model”; Journal of
Finance; Vol. 44, No. 1; March 1989; pages 211-219.


Models and the Real World 401

Figure 18-5a: S&P 500 Stock Price Index,
Percent Daily Price Changes 1989-1993

225

200-4

1754

ie

Total number of days = 1265
Largest upward move = +3,.73 %
128-4 Largest downward move = -6.12 %
Mean = +.044 %

Standard deviation = .795 %
normal distribution

Occurrences

1005 Annualized volatility = 12.653 %
Skewness = -.352
Kurtosis = +4.343

75+

504

25+

OL PTT TTT TTT
- - 4 3 -2 -1 (e) +1 +2 +3 +4

we encounter fewer and fewer occurrences. The distribution certainly seems to have
many of the characteristics of a normal distribution. But is it really a normal distribution,
and if it isn’t, how does it differ from such a distribution?

If the frequency distribution conforms exactly to a normal distribution, the tops of
the bars should coincide exactly with a true normal distribution. To find out if this is
the case, the mean (+.044%) and standard deviation (.795%) have been calculated for
all 1,265 daily price changes over the five-year period. From these numbers, a theoreti-
cally exact normal distribution has been overlaid on our frequency chart. Note that the
actual frequency distribution is similar to the normal distribution, but there are some
clear differences. Because the bars representing the small price changes rise above the
normal distribution curve, there seem to be more small price changes than one would
expect from a true normal distribution. There are also several large price changes, or
outliers, which rise above the extreme tails of the normal distribution. These outliers
seem to indicate that there are more large moves in our frequency distribution than one
would expect from a true normal distribution. Finally, in the midsections, between the
peak of the distribution and the extreme tails, there seem to be fewer occurrences than
one would expect.

One might at first surmise that differences in Figure 18-5a between the S&P 500
frequency distribution and the true normal distribution are either unique to the S&P
500, or an aberration of the five-year period in question. It turns out, however, that price


402 Chapter 18

change distributions for almost all underlying markets exhibit characteristics which are
very similar to our S&P 500 distribution. There are usually more days with small moves,
more days with large moves, and fewer days with intermediate moves than are
predicted by a true normal distribution. These differences between the real world and
a theoretical distribution can also be seen in Figures 18-5b and 18-5c, the distribution
of price changes for German Bonds and soybeans over the same five-year period.

SKEWNESS AND KURTOSIS

Distributions such as those in Figures 18-5a, 18-5b, and 18-Sc are approximately
normal, but still differ from a true normal distribution. If one is trying to make decisions
based on the characteristics of a distribution, it might be useful to know how the actual
distribution differs from the normal. A perfectly normal distribution can be fully
described by its mean and standard deviation. But two other numbers, the skewness
and kurtosis, are often used to describe the extent of the difference between an actual
frequency distribution and a true normal distribution.

The skewness of a distribution (Figure 18-6a) can be thought of as the lopsidedness
of the distribution, or the extent to which one tail is longer than the other tail.9 If a
distribution is positively skewed, the right-hand tail is longer than the left-hand tail. If

Figure 18-5b: German Bonds, Percent Daily Price Changes 1989-1993

225

Total number of days = 1261
Largest upward move = +2.323 %
Largest downward move = -1.930 %
Mean = +.0038 %

Standard deviation = .3265 %
Annulaized volatility = 5.183 %
Skewness = -.009

Kurtosis = 6.473

2007

17575

15075

1257

100 normal distribution

Occurrences

757

50>

254

-1.5 -1.0 -5 ie) +5 +1.0 +15 +2.0

9. The calculation of skewness and kurtosis can be found in Appendix B.


Models and the Real World 403

Figure 18-5c: Soybeans, Percent Daily Changes 1989-1993

150

425- Total number of days = 1262
Largest upward move = +7.75 %
Largest downward move = -7.12 %
Mean = -.020 %
Standard deviation = 1.202 %

1005 Annulaized volatility = 19.084 %
Skewness = +.152
Kurtosis = +4.606

754

normal distribution

Occurrences

so-

25>

Figure 18-6a: Skewness

Negative Skewness
(longer left tail)

Positive Skewness
(longer right tail)



404 Chapter 18

the distribution is negatively skewed, the left-hand tail is longer than the right-hand tail.
A true normal distribution has a skewness of zero. The frequency distributions in Figures
18-5a (S&P 500) and 18-5b (German Bonds) are slightly negatively skewed, while the
distribution in Figure 18-Sc (soybeans) is slightly positively skewed.

The kurtosis of a distribution (Figure 18-6b) is the extent to which the peak of the
distribution is unusually tall and pointed, or low and flat. A distribution with a positive
kurtosis has a tall, pointed peak (/eptokurtic), while a distribution with a negative
kurtosis has a low, flat peak (platykurtic). A perfectly normal distribution has a kurtosis
of zero (mesokurtic).
