
Fibonacci Drawings

413

FIGURE 15.4 This retracement is shown with a reference line. You can choose
whether you want the retracement line to be displayed for any drawing.

There are many different ways to apply the predictive power of the
Fibonacci retracement. Let’s mentally return to the autumn of 2003, a time
when all the U.S. markets had suffered a severe downturn. Texas Instruments (symbol TXN) was especially hard-hit, losing nearly 90 percent of
its value.
Let us further suppose you felt the selling was done with, and you
wanted to take a large, long position in TXN. You know where you want
to set your stop price—that’s easy—you will set it just beneath the all-time
low set in October. But how long do you hold onto the position? When do
you take profits off the table?
That question is virtually impossible to answer unless you tell yourself
to buy and hold in perpetuity. A Fibonacci retracement, however, proves to
be invaluable in this decision. As Figure 15.6 shows, the stock seems to be
Fibonacci-friendly. During the stock’s entire descent, it seems to bounce
off or cling to the various retracement levels. During its last gasp before
the final fall, it hangs on to the 23.6 percent level before finally succumbing
and bottoming out at $13. Let us suppose you bought the stock at $15.
As a skilled chartist, you would know to take profits off the table—at
least some of them—at around $33 per share, since that is the level that

414

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.5 These arrows help illustrate how the price bounces from level to
level, both before and after the reference line.

represents major resistance to the price moving higher. In about a year’s
time, the stock pushed up to that level, and sure enough, it started to fall
again. It repeated this behavior again and again and again. By taking profits
at the appropriate time, you would have bagged a very healthy gain and
been able to invest your money elsewhere (or, if you were particularly confident, perhaps even short TXN as it bounced off the retracement).
The more obedient the price action is with respect to the Fibonacci
retracement levels, the more likely it is that these lines will have power
over future price action. From 1986 to 1991, the prices bounced very firmly
off the various retracement levels (Figure 15.7), and having done so, the
prices likewise continued to comply with these retracements after the termination of the reference line.

Fibonacci Drawings

415

FIGURE 15.6 After a severe decline in a stock, the retracement level represents
a formidable area of resistance.

But here is the remarkable thing—and you may want to read this several times for it to fully sink in—the reference line didn’t even exist until
1991. In other words, the market was obviously blind to these Fibonacci
levels in 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, and most of 1991. Once the stock
had peaked and clearly was heading south, a person could lay down a pattern like this only to discover at that time the almost eerie behavior of the
prices relative to the Fibonacci retracement that was only now just laid
down. This provides a very clear affirmation that these levels should be
respected on a going-forward basis with this stock.
If you hold the mouse cursor over any element of a retracement, more
information about that element will be displayed. For instance, Figure 15.8
shows the result of mousing over the 23.6 percent retracement level. A box
appears that displays the date and value at the start of the reference line,
the date and value at the end of the reference line, and the percentage and
dollar value of the particular retracement being moused over.
Because the Fibonacci retracement is a relatively complex drawn object, there are many aspects of it you can control. There are two ways to invoke the Customize Fibonacci Retracements dialog box (Figure 15.9): you
can right-click on a retracement and select Customize Fibonacci Retracements from the pop-up menu, or you can hold down your mouse button

416

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.7 If a price seems to bounce oﬀ retracement levels consistently before the reference line, the odds are much stronger it will do so as well after the
reference line.

while pointing at the retracement tool in the toolbar to get the same selection. This dialog box lets you control these aspects of the retracement:
Color: Controls the color of the entire Fibonacci drawing.
Opacity: Controls the transparency of the retracement, ranging from 0
(invisible) to 1 (solid).

FIGURE 15.8 Mousing over any retracement level will reveal information about
that level and the entire drawn object.

Fibonacci Drawings

417

FIGURE 15.9 The wide variety of choices in the Customize Fibonacci Retracements dialog box control its appearance and settings.

Show checkboxes: Checking each of these will make particular retracement levels display. At first, all of them are checked. You can turn
any levels on or off with these checkboxes.
Value entry boxes: These are the percentage values used to lay down
the retracements. It is very unlikely you will want to change these.
Line Style dropdowns: You can choose from three line styles: normal, bold, and dotted. If you want to emphasize or de-emphasize
any particular level, you may want to change the kind of line
displayed.
Show Value checkboxes: This controls which of the retracement lines
will have their percentage value displayed. These are all on by

418

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

default. You can simplify the drawing by turning off any of these
that you want, although knowing the percentage levels being displayed is usually helpful.
Show Reference Line checkbox: The line that connects the two points
you click as extremes is displayed by default. If you want to hide
this line, you can turn this checkbox off.
Show Price checkbox: If you want the dollar value of each retracement
level displayed, this checkbox should be checked. Normally you
get the percentage value shown for each line for which Show Value
is checked. If you want the dollar value as well, which can be helpful when setting a stop price, you should check this, too.
Reset button: Clicking this resets all the values and checkboxes to their
default condition.
Figure 15.10 shows a Fibonacci retracement with all the normal
settings, except the Show Value checkboxes are all off and the Show
Reference Line has been unchecked. This makes for a clean, simple
look, although some of the key information is being suppressed. You can
still access numeric data about any retracement level by mousing over

FIGURE 15.10 A sample Fibonacci retracement drawn on a stock chart.

Fibonacci Drawings

419

FIGURE 15.11 A stock will not necessarily follow a retracement path all the way
back down, but it may still pause at certain levels before reversing direction.

any particular line of interest to you. (As before, the rounded rectangles
highlighting the reversal and resistance points are drawn here for emphasis
and are not normally displayed in the charting program.)
It is impossible to know, of course, when a stock has reached a
long-term peak or trough. Just because you are able to draw a good
Fibonacci retracement that seems to line up well with prior price action
doesn’t mean a major reversal is in the works. What the lines do tell you,
however, is that if the stock does start moving firmly either up or down, its
next natural stopping point (either to pause or reverse) is going to be the
next Fibonacci level.
Take Figure 15.11 as an example. The very top line represents the termination point of the reference line. A person deciding to sell this stock
short around this point would need to pay close attention to the retracement levels beneath the current price. In this instance, the price moved
down two retracement levels before reversing and moving higher. A trader
short this stock would want to be especially watchful when the stock
reached any retracement level, because each of them represents a potential
reversal point, as was the case here.

420

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.12 A retracement will not indicate how long a price will remain at
any given level, but it provides clear boundaries of support and resistance in both
directions.

The longer and more substantial a prior price move, the longer it will
probably take prices to move through the retracement levels in the opposite direction. Figure 15.12 shows the stock chart for Duke Energy, and the
reference line is displayed. Notice the price action that took place to the
right of the reference line. It took years, but the price pushed higher and
higher through the various retracement levels.
First the price reached the 23.6 percent level, then it backed off. The
next time, it pierced this level, almost reaching the 38.2 percent level, at
which time it eased back to the 23.6 percent level (this time as support instead of resistance). It then pushed through the 38.2 percent level to pause
at the 50 percent level, and so forth. You can follow the steady progression
on the chart, but it is clear what an invaluable perspective the retracement
levels would give to a person trading this stock. Without it, a trader is essentially flying blind.
Fairchild Semiconductor (Figure 15.13) provides another good example of using retracement levels as anticipated reversal points. After a very
broad downward move from 2000 to 2002, the stock bounces within a very
wide range. The lower three retracement levels, however, provided excellent indications as to the reversal points during those postcrash gyrations.

Fibonacci Drawings

421

FIGURE 15.13 A stock does not necessarily make a broad down move and then a
correlating broad up move. It may instead remain range-bound among the Fibonacci
levels.

As always, drawn objects can be used in combination. If more than one
object suggests a reversal point, that only strengthens the argument that
the price will pause or reverse at that level. Healthnet (Figure 15.14) has
both a retracement and a trend line drawn. There are four rectangles drawn
on top of the chart. Reading from left to right: the first rectangle shows
the price bouncing off the supporting trend line as well as the retracement
level. Once the stock breaks beneath the trend line, the next stopping point
is two more retracement levels down.
At this point, the price action becomes very interesting, because a
trader would want to anticipate how far the stock is going to retrace upward after its recent plunge. The trend line and Fibonacci retracement, acting in concert, provide an excellent clue. The third rectangle shows how the
price clung tightly to the retracement line, never getting higher than the former supporting trend line (which has changed roles and is now resistance).
As the stock weakens again, it falls to the next retracement level beneath.
Used properly, well-drawn retracements are akin to getting tomorrow’s newspaper today: you have a very strong predictor as to what price
level will be reached next.

422

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.14 This chart has two helpful drawn objects: the retracement levels
and a trend line, which provides clear resistance when the price tries to move upward
again.

One instance where the Fibonacci retracement is especially useful is
after a stock has made a major move, either up or down. After a large movement with a lot of volatility, traders are extremely uncertain as to where the
next support or resistance level is going to be.
Take yourself back to the autumn of 2002. All the U.S. stock indexes,
particularly the NASDAQ, had suffered a brutal bear market. The NASDAQ
100 ETF, better known as the QQQ (or cubes) had lost about 80 percent of
its value. Suppose you believed the selling was overdone and you took a
major long position in this security. (Take note that even though the financial instrument is known as the QQQ, the symbol is QQQQ.)
The QQQ begins to move higher, producing a profit for you. But how
long do you hold on? Unless your intent is to hold it forever, you should
probably try to optimize your holding period so that you get out when the
recovery seems to have been fully realized. In this instance, the retracement is once again invaluable. Figure 15.15 shows the retracement levels
placed on top of the QQQQ graph. The stock bottomed out at about $20,
and the first retracement level is at about $43, a more than 100 percent gain.

Fibonacci Drawings

423

FIGURE 15.15 After the gigantic slide of QQQ, which represents the NASDAQ
100 stocks, virtually no study except the Fibonacci retracement could have provided
a good prediction as to how high QQQ would be able to climb back.

It took three years to get there, but as the arrow indicates, the QQQ came
within pennies of the retracement point, at which time it eased away.
You may have noticed in the dialog box that the Fibonacci retracements do not end at 100 percent. They can go on to higher ratio levels, such
as 161.8 percent, 261.8 percent, and higher. So not only can these retracement levels guide you in terms of price action between the two extremes
of the reference line but also they can give you guidance as to how high or
low a price may move outside those extremes.
The stock graph shown in Figure 15.16 provides a fitting example of
this. The graph encompasses the time range 1985 to 2006, a period of more
than two decades. The retracement was drawn based on points in 1985
(the low) and 1991 (the high). From 1987 through 1999, there are many
instances—just a few of which are highlighted—where the retracement levels have been obeyed.
What’s more interesting is what happens when the price breaks above
the 100 percent level. There are three times when the stock paused and consolidated, and in each of those three instances, it matched the retracement

424

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.16 Fibonacci levels beyond 100 percent can be an invaluable predictive tool, as illustrated here.

level perfectly. Thus, the retracements are not only able to provide interpolation between two extremes but also able to extrapolate to price levels
that haven’t even been experienced by a stock yet. This obviously doubles
the power and value of a well-placed Fibonacci retracement object.
Figure 15.17 is a powerful illustration of Fibonacci retracements, as
well as intermarket analysis. What is shown is the ratio between the New
Zealand currency (the kiwi) and the U.S. dollar. The retracement levels are
established based on the extremes of 2001 and 2008, with important hits to
those levels highlighted in yellow.
During the financial crisis of 2008–2009, a trader might have put this
chart to good use in trying to find a good entry point to go long. Although
NZD/USD fell very hard, it finally found stabilization in early March 2009 at
the 23.6 percent retracement level, almost to the day that the equity market
bottomed.
The retailer Nordstrom has a very Fibonacci-friendly stock chart, illustrated in Figure 15.18. Based on the extreme high (in 2007) and low
(in 2008), the retracements provided multiple opportunities for a trader to
profit from both long and short positions, as there was a strong tendency
to bounce off these levels in both directions.

Fibonacci Drawings

425

FIGURE 15.17 The currency chart NZD/USD provided a powerful indication that
the equity market had bottomed in early March 2009.

When price levels approach multiple points of support or resistance
that are in agreement, those levels should be heeded more than if simply one tool was being used. In Figure 15.19, the NASDAQ Composite
($COMPQ) is approaching both the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement
and the underside of a broken trend line that was started almost 20 years
earlier. The resolution of this resistance will be history long after the publication of this book, but as of this chart’s capture, prices will have difficulty
pushing easily past those levels.

FIBONACCI FANS
By now it should be clear how to draw and use the Fibonacci retracement.
We now turn our attention to an equally useful tool, the Fibonacci fan. The

426

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.18 Nordstrom’s price action is well-bounded between the retracement levels.

application and interpretation of fans is very similar to retracements. As
with a retracement, you need to identify a low and a high extreme to place
your reference line, at which point the fans will be automatically placed
for you. As with retracement, the fan lines indicate important support, resistance, and consolidation points for price action.
Except for the fact that fan lines are at an angle, the interpretation
of these lines is very similar to the application of retracements. Examine

Fibonacci Drawings

427

FIGURE 15.19 Both the failed trend line and the retracement levels suggest the
NASDAQ Composite faces diﬃculty at present prices.

the chart for Hansen Natural (symbol HANS) in Figure 15.20. To draw this
Fibonacci fan, a user would:
1. Choose the Fibonacci fan tool from the toolbar.
2. Draw a line from the low on February 12, 2003, at 40.62 cents all the

way up to the extreme high of $52.72 on July 6, 2006 (an amazing
130-fold increase in price in just over three years).
3. Release the mouse, thus displaying the Fibonacci fans.
The three arrows on the chart indicate where the price reversed off
the highest fan line. This is a good confirmation of the Fibonacci-friendly
nature of this stock with respect to these fan lines. Now suppose you had
sold this stock short in July as it started to ease. As sensational a run-up
as this stock has had, it’s obviously very strong and has no clear areas of
support. The question is: when do you take profits?

428

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.20 These Fibonacci fans are drawn from one extreme to another on
the symbol HANS. The arrows indicate points where the price touched the top of the
highest fan line, at which point it reversed each time.

On August 7, 2006, HANS started to plunge on record volume. If you
owned puts on this stock or had a short position, you would be in the happy
predicament of wondering when to take profits. Fibonacci fans would have
yielded a ready answer: because the stock opened beneath one of the fan
lines, that level of support was clearly already taken out. The next fan line
down, therefore, would be the next level of support. As Figure 15.21 illustrates, this level offered formidable support for HANS in spite of the
high-volume plunge in price. Traders covering their positions in this area
would have had good timing, and those empowered with the insight of the
Fibonacci fan probably would have done so.
Although the trading public is obviously not aware of where Fibonacci
fan lines are placed, there is still a remarkable tendency on the part
of prices to either cling to a certain fan line or be plainly bounded between two lines, bouncing between the two of them. This applies even
when fan lines span years, or even decades, which makes them positively remarkable, particularly considering they are sloped (as opposed
to horizontal zones of support and resistance, which are easier to explain
away).

Fibonacci Drawings

429

FIGURE 15.21 When HANS got hammered after its earnings announcement, the
fan line provided a natural stopping point during the plunge.

A number of the following examples are drawn from extremely large
Fibonacci fans that span many decades. The chart shown in Figure 15.22 is
just a portion of the Dow Jones Industrial Average on which a 70-year-old
fan has been drawn. The rectangle has been drawn to highlight how the
price action not only is bounded by two fan lines but also, for many years,
tends to cling to one of the lines. This particular section is following the
dramatic crash of 1987. In spite of all the chaos and tumult surrounding
that crash, the prices continue their orderly motion between and along the
fan lines.
One should pause to consider how simply remarkable this is. The fan
lines were drawn from the depths of the Great Depression to the peak of
the Internet bubble (1932 to 2000). The market had no awareness—at least
none of which it was conscious—of these boundaries. Over the decades,
billions upon billions of individual decisions are made that move this index
up and down every day. And in spite of all of these variables, which number
on an astronomical scale, the index performs in a stunningly orderly and
systematic fashion.
Looking at another, broader index—the S&P 500—we can see similar
fascinating phenomena (Figure 15.23). The arrows show how the highest

430

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.22 Prices will often become bound between the support and resistance provided by fan lines.

and lowest fan lines constrict the price movement. Keep in mind the graph
is showing a period of more than 70 years. The price reverses on various
fan lines in many instances, and the two rectangles that are drawn here
highlight two multidecade years when the prices were bound between two
fan lines.
Looking at a specific portion of this index (from 1954 to 1985), we can
see a neat, tidy progression of tilted rectangles (Figure 15.24). The rectangles move slightly down each time, since this period of market history
included several vicious bear markets, including the infamous 1973–1974
bear market. Even when prices made extreme moves, pushing outside the
bounds of the rectangle, the fan lines still provided support against the
price moving any lower.
Experimenting with Fibonacci studies, particularly the fans, can be a
mesmerizing experience because they seem to wield an almost mysterious
power over the markets. Figure 15.25 shows a close-up of the Dow Jones
Industrial Average from 1988 to 1994, which includes the minicrash of 1989.
This close-up view shows the remarkable tendency, again and again, for

Fibonacci Drawings

431

FIGURE 15.23 The arrows here indicate extreme levels of support and resistance
during this multidecade movement of the S&P 500, with the rectangles showing just
a couple of the bounded areas.

FIGURE 15.24 Here we can see a neat and tidy progression of rectangles that
are bounded by the fan lines.

432

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.25 A close-up of the Dow Jones Industrial Average shows the remarkable ability of the fan lines to dictate where resistance will be, even when it was
predicted decades in the past.

the price to move upward toward and then move away from the higher fan
line. During the minicrash, the price collapse was stopped short by the fan
line beneath it.
The China index, symbol $CZH, had remarkable behavior with respect
to its fan lines (Figure 15.26). There are eight specific instances highlighted
in the chart where the price bounced almost perfectly off the fan line. Although prices eventually broke free of this confinement, as they always
will, for a while this drawing provided remarkable insight into what was
most likely to happen next with this index.
The fan lines for American Electric Power (AEP), with points between
October 10, 2002, and April 5, 2007, also provided potent levels of support
and resistance as the equity generally turned downward for several years
(Figure 15.27).
Emerson Electric’s (EMR) fan lines were established from much
longer-range data points, beginning at October 4, 1974, and ending December 4, 2007 (Figure 15.28). We see again that selling short when the
price was at the upper range of fan lines and going long when the price
