
FIGURE 13.3
Short squeezes ignite repeatedly and without warning during an extended decline on Talk.com. Overnight gaps trap
shorts, but sellers quickly reappear after the squeeze ends. The squeeze leaps as high as a 100% retracement early in
Talk’s bear market. But as conditions deteriorate, so do the rallies. The last two can only reach the 38% retracement of
the last decline leg.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Intraday short sales follow the same strategies as longer-term positions. But the reduced holding
period offers fewer exits, so the short squeeze generates greater risk. The first hour often establishes
trends that persist throughout the session. Try to sell stocks that open weak and stay under pressure
after the first 60 minutes. Many of these issues will attempt one strong rally as the day progresses.
This bounce often provides the most rewarding short sale if the swing trader can locate a natural
failure point. That price level should be well below the intraday high as long as the issue did not gap
down to start the day. Use Fibonacci retracement to predict the top and time entry to a short-term
Stochastics rollover.

APPLICATIONS
Bear hug concentrates on weak markets rather than attempting countertrend entry into strong ones.
It finds stocks in bear declines that look ready to start another leg down. Remember that this setup
actually relies on two different scenarios. The NR7 hug produces fast results as price expands out of
a narrow range. The bear rally hug may need to push below congestion after the signal before

decline momentum accelerates. Many short sale strategies work best in small bites. In other words,
consider brief entries that depart at the first sign of danger and reenter as soon as the swing shifts
back in your favor.

50–200 PINBALL
The zone between the 50-day and 200-day moving averages may induce sharp swing movement
when price gets caught within its boundaries. Under the right conditions, the range ends with a
breakdown through the 200-day MA in a major bear decline. Initiate short sales at failed tests of the
50-day near the end of this odd congestion. These allow profit even if price cannot pierce the lower
barrier.
Description
The stock pierces the 50-day moving average in a selloff after a solid bull run.
Price tests but remains above the 200-day moving average.
Relative strength rises but the subsequent bounce fails at the 50-day moving average.
The congestion pattern completes and the market moves lower.
Look for a familiar topping pattern within the congestion even though it prints at an intermediate
low. A head and shoulders or Adam and Eve formation at this location portends good news for short
sales. The frequent appearance of this profitable setup ensures that swing traders will see it often
during routine chart examination.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 13.4)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Vical rallies along a solid 3-month trendline (1).
The trendline breaks in a hole-in-the-wall gap (2).
Price pierces the 50-day EMA (3).
Congestion forms below the 50-day EMA and 62% retracement (4) but above the 200-day
EMA.
Price fails at the 50-day EMA (5) and forms a possible double top pattern.
The stock falls to the 200-day EMA, where a small NR7 (6) prints.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 13.5)
•
•
•

•
•

Price gaps through the 200-day EMA (1) on the next bar and enters a major 2-day decline.
This rewards short sales from the 50-day EMA or NR7.
The congestion pattern holds together for another hour at the two lower trendlines (2), (3)
before it breaks. Short entry between 28 and 26 requires a narrow limit order to control risk.
The expansion bars on the daily and 60-minute charts encourage an exit before the close. A
momentum-based, trailing stop loss produces better results and manages growing profits as
the decline accelerates.
The selloff ends (5) at a first failure retracement to the starting point of the prior rally.
The next opportunity comes at the 38% retracement of the selloff (6). A doji signals a shortterm reversal that eventually carries back into a double bottom test.

Reward:Risk

The only danger between the failed test at the 50-day EMA and the final low stands at congestion
support near 30. A simple trend-following strategy would book an outstanding profit within the 50–
200 zone and through the ensuing decline. This setup has great potential due to the crowd that
builds within the congestion. They all abandon ship quickly once the 200-day violates.
FIGURE 13.4

CHANNEL SHORT
This setup executes short sales within a parallel price channel rather than trading the channel break
that ends the formation. PPCs and their related harmonics define clear S/R for low-risk entry.
Always bet on a channel to stay intact unless price action congests and narrows along one of the
trendlines after a recent strike. Draw smaller lines and channels within the larger pattern to locate
converging points where price expansion should erupt. Two or three sets of embedded PPCs often
hide within the boundaries.
Description
Parallel price channel forms with at least two points at each extreme.
Channel harmonics develop within the larger pattern.

Falling channels offer more bearish opportunities than rising ones.
Locate trendlines and channels within the PPC.
Trade breakdowns of the smaller landscape features.
FIGURE 13.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execute the first trade right at the channel extreme, if possible. A series of entries then follows as
smaller patterns identify reward:risk targets. When price action finally reaches the other extreme,
continue the same strategy if a channel break sets up.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 13.6)
•
•
•
•
•

Wit Soundview draws a 6-month parallel price channel (1).
A channel harmonic (2) forms near the lower trendline.
A small uptrend (3) rises from the last lower channel strike (5).
Price gaps into the top channel and reverses (4).
The 50-day EMA remains below the 200-day EMA.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 13.7)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Sell short the reversal at the upper channel (1). The best entry sets up on the gap that fills at
21-¾. A second opportunity signals on the breakdown of the small double top at 20.
Price declines toward 15 in a series of small waves. The action may require a fast exit to
avoid whipsaws.
Price approaches the small rising trendline (2) and violates it (5). Enter on the break if the
trade fills close to 15-½.
Exit on price expansion into the harmonic (3).
Price retests the broken trendline (6) and builds another small one (4). Short entry at (6)
works as a 2B top reversal. A better short sale comes as the second trendline breaks (7).
The tests at the trendline (2) form the right shoulder of a head and shoulders pattern (9) with
the channel harmonic (3) as the neckline.
Trade the harmonic breakdown (8) as a head and shoulder reversal. Enter close to the break
point or stand aside.
Exit on the expansion candle as it strikes the lower channel (10).

Reward:Risk
A series of low-risk opportunities appears on the swing from the upper to lower price channel.
Reward potential of 2–3 points matches well with the one-half-point risk of a bad trade. Each price
twist and turn seems to draw another classic pattern in this example. This phenomenon is quite
common and can be used to find many profitable channel trades.
FIGURE 13.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

INTRADAY SHORT
Highly liquid stocks offer excellent intraday short sale opportunities. While an uptrend may
continue in the larger time frame, short-term strategy shifts downward to trade 5-minute charts that
display strong bear market declines. Because these selloffs only persist for hours instead of days,
find an impending 60-minute breakdown and use that chart to locate the first position. This allows
the strategy to capture a larger proportion of the smaller decline.
FIGURE 13.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000 All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Description
•
•
•
•
•
•

Consider only highly liquid stocks and active markets.
Locate a 5–10-day uptrend that starts to pull back on a 60-minute chart.
Draw a Fib grid over the trend.
Look for a failure near the 38% or 62% retracement.
Drop down to the 5-minute chart and trade a 38% failure down to the 62% level.
Drop down to the 5-minute chart and trade a 62% failure down to the 100% level.

Enough reward must exist within the trading zone to make entry worthwhile. The setup relies on
finding low-risk short sales within the 5-minute chart. Stand aside if the right patterns don’t
appear. The nature of breakdown on the 60-minute chart determines profitability and odds. Failure
at the 38% often constitutes a C wave that will be very dynamic. Failure at the 62% may initiate a
primary fifth wave that triggers a vertical decline.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 13.8)
•
•
•

Amazon prints a 7-day uptrend on the 60-minute chart.
The rally breaks to new highs (1) in a continuation gap (2).
It climaxes in a tall expansion bar (3) that quickly reverses.

•
•
•

The pullback (5) successfully tests the old high and continuation gap as it strikes the rally
trendline (4).
Narrow price action draws a small descending trendline (6).
The two trendlines form a symmetrical triangle at the 38% retracement.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 13.9)
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•

The triangle breaks down (1) and invites a short sale at 52. Place a stop loss on the other side
of the rising trendline.
Watch whole number 50 (4) or exit as soon as Level II starts to build rising tick.
The stock sells off without a bounce until 50-½ (3). The quick reversal above 51 reduces
profits and demands a fast exit.
The stock pulls back to the 38% retracement of the small selloff (2) and the 8-bar moving
average. The first pullback after a major breakdown should not bounce sharply, and
aggressive traders can consider short entry while others wait for safer opportunity.
The low breaks and offers a scalp down to 50 (4). The one-half-point reward target should
force most traders to the sidelines.
The pullback to 50-½ (3) strikes the 13-bar moving average and top of last resistance. It also
marks an excellent short sale entry. The next violation should take price below whole
number support at 50. This offers good reward and gets the trade in motion before the crowd
joins in.
Price breaks 50 (4). Exit as the bar expands out of the bottom Bollinger Band to 49-¼ or as
soon as the small hammer (8) forms.
The pullback to 50 (4) marks another good short sale entry level.
Hold the position as price tests the hammer and fails (5). The weak action signals little
danger and the short position may carry through past 48-½.
Break of the down trendline (6) flags a potential bottom and approach of the larger 62%
retracement.
A 3:30 p.m. selloff (7) carries the stock to the lows for the day, but profit requires very fast
fingers.

FIGURE 13.8

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIGURE 13.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
The triangle break signals a major bear market within the 5-minute charting landscape. The setup
works with a simple pullback strategy that enters at resistance. Whipsaws are manageable, and
active short entry that day leads to consistent profits. Pay attention to changing conditions. The
afternoon ends the active selloff, and the last hour traps short sellers in a quick squeeze.

14 CHAPTER
3rd WATCH

CHARACTERISTICS
William J. O’Neil defined the cup and handle (C&H) pattern in his classic How to Make Money in
Stocks. Since that time, popular market culture has adopted the C&H through a series of articles in

Investors Business Daily and other journals. But few swing traders recognize this formation’s
versatility or its appearance through all time frames and markets.
The classic pattern looks like a rounded cup and small handle. It represents a breakout through a
triple top. Price first rallies into a high and fails as it forms the left side of the cup. The issue finds
support and builds a sideways base. A new rally erupts and rises toward the old high. This forms the
cup’s right side. Sellers appear at the double top and the stock pulls back. The next decline draws
the smaller handle until price again stabilizes. It rises into a third rally and breaks out sharply to
new highs.
FIGURE 14.1
Keithley Instruments prints a well-proportioned cup and handle breakout that completes a 3-month congestion
pattern. The small, rounded handle follows a deep, wide cup that takes much longer to form. Note how the
hammer at the handle’s bottom telegraphs the subsequent rally. The 3rd watch setup digests price action after a
failed double top to locate many variations of this classic pattern.

TRADE MECHANICS
Look at the market mechanics behind this pattern. After the first high, price pulls back sharply
before it bounces. This forces oscillators to roll over and encourages longs to exit positions. Swing
traders then enter new short sales as price approaches the double top test. This contributes to selling
pressure and forces the market to pull back again. It eventually reaches support while indicators
recover from oversold levels. Longs then sense a new opportunity and build volume back toward

the old highs. This forms a handle base that discourages further selling and builds
accumulation. Price reaches the high for the third time and breaks out.
Volume must support price action for the new rally to succeed. The original O’Neil approach
demands that breakout volume rise at least 50% above the 50-day volume moving average before
the new high. It searches for candidates that have more participation on up days leading into the
breakout than down days. The classic definition also filters volume action within the cup itself. The
rising days on the cup’s right side should print higher volume than both the falling days and the 50day VMA.
These strict requirements lead swing traders to misunderstand this pattern’s power. Many predictive
C&H formations never meet these standard definitions. Handles can retrace deeply or actually
build a base at new highs above the cup. Volume can break all the rules as the pattern forms but still
show excellent accumulation by the time the breakout erupts. And a deep handle may even push
toward the low of the cup’s bottom before the final rally begins.
The 3rd watch scan seeks the classic pattern but cuts the dimensions in half. It locates breakouts that
occur within 6-month highs rather than 52-week highs. The handle language captures many
variations of this complex formation. It requires only that the market print no new high within 4
weeks of the signal. This allows a short base and pullback before the stock erupts through the
barrier. The scan also looks for volume to spike at least 150% of average on the breakout bar.
Use 3rd watch strategy to trade triple-top breakouts. While mathematics outputs a specific type of
C&H, the markets draw this pattern in many unique ways. Both ascending triangles and rectangle
formations rely on the same price mechanics. Channel resistance often breaks on the third high as
momentum triggers bar expansion. Sometimes relative highs will print at an equal distance to each
other rather than in a proportional cup and handle. This powerful setup offers swing traders valuable
insight and profitable tactics for all of these breakout incarnations.
The handle’s location provides accumulation feedback. A previous chapter noted that volume tends
to lead or lag price, especially at new highs and lows. When the handle forms below the cup, it
suggests that accumulation needs to build before a breakout can proceed. Alternatively congestion
right above two old highs denotes a very strong stock that should trend sharply once it completes
the new platform. Keep an eye out for a double handle formation. This odd pattern forms bases on
both sides of the two old highs. If this cup and two handles (C&2H) appears, measure the last trend
just below the first handle. Add that length to the bottom of the second handle to estimate a price
target for the next rally.
The pattern works well through most intermediate highs. This gives swing traders another valuable
tool to execute breakouts from narrow congestion. Look for any horizontal resistance and count the
highs. Follow the action back to the third high and watch for price to pause at the barrier. Measure
the potential reward on a price break. Many short-term watch candidates will not generate enough
profit potential to trigger an entry. When a setup shows promise, enter on a narrow range bar near
the high or wait for the breakout and execute on the first pullback.
3rd watch offers excellent intraday trades. The setup carries few of the restrictions that limit most
other bells in the short-term environment. This dependable pattern appears frequently on short-term
charts and encourages many quick profits. In addition to simple highs, look for first-hour range to
break on the third try. Even scalpers can apply effective watch strategy. Locate intermediate highs
on a 1-minute chart and trade quick thrusts or tick breakouts above that level.
FIGURE 14.2
Clarent’s cup and two handles prepare the way for a vertical rally. A breakout to new highs must attract enough

interest to move that market higher. When it lacks good sponsorship, the developing trend may pause to build new
congestion until accumulation generates enough horsepower for higher prices. The C&2H provides an efficient
pattern to accomplish this important task.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Major intraday setups tend to peak in the last hour. A strong trend often reaches a first climax
early in the day and spends several hours testing its new range. Positive bias then carries it back
towards the intraday high late in the day if the market stays strong. This encourages new speculators
who hope for another trend leg or want to buy in anticipation of a continuation move the next
morning. Sometimes the markets will close just as the stock reaches the peak but doesn’t eject.
Odds then favor a breakout gap when trading resumes the next morning.

WATCH STRATEGIES
Always look for a breakout from congestion rather than a trend that begins well below the old highs
and ejects without a base. These issues can retrace deeply, not find any base support, and break
even lower. Insist on horizontal resistance rather than a series of ascending highs. The setup
mechanics require strong tension at the breakout level so that price can expand sharply into a new
trend. Ascending highs relieve demand a little bit at a time (similar to a rising wedge) and often run
out of stream before price can break through an upper trendline.

The 3rd watch scan on daily charts provides an excellent indicator for market corrections.
Candidates dry up more quickly than any other bell as broad conditions deteriorate. They may even
disappear for long periods as most stocks fail to make new highs. Move on to other bell strategies
during these phases or shift down to shorter-term charts. Strong rallies will continue to print on 5minute and 60-minute views through the most severe market corrections.
Consider entry within congestion prior to the actual signal. Watch as price builds into the third high
and look for narrow-range bars. Then enter quietly after locating an acceptable stop loss just below
the tight pattern. This method works very well for short-term charts where breakouts trigger strong
Level II demand and induce slippage. Congestion entry also limits risk because a small failure
proves that the trade was in error and any breakout pushes it into a profit.
Use closing price for daily 3rd watch signals to avoid false breakouts. Try to execute as near to the
old highs as possible to reduce risk. After a sharp breakout, this will only occur on a deep pullback.
If a strong move doesn’t retrace to this level, look for high, tight congestion near the top of one or
two expansion bars after the breakout. Another sharp move may erupt shortly if price narrows
toward the top of the range on the fourth or fifth bar. When all else fails, drop down to the nextlower time frame and enter the trade on any small pullback that appears. Then use a flat stop loss to
catch momentum without incurring excessive risk.
Avoid chasing runaway moves through new highs. The prospects for a violent reversal increase
dramatically after stocks go into parabolic rallies. As price extends vertically through new highs, it
moves above natural support levels and finds no trend mirrors to offer guidance. When a reversal
finally begins, nothing holds up the stock until supply dissipates or it reaches a support level. Flat
stop loss controls some of this risk, but slippage will increase dramatically if the selloff becomes
violent.
3rd watch encourages many profitable exit strategies. Swing traders should consider longer holding
periods on new high breakouts than other types of setups. Place a trailing stop below price as soon
as the position moves into a profit. These trends can move sharply higher, and this simple strategy
lets profits run. Or consider immediate sell limit orders after entry that reflect both a profit target
and a stop loss. Shorter holding tactics benefit when they sell into the first sharp expansion after the
entry. This reliable strategy also books quick profits and moves on to the next trade just as the
crowd piles in.
Exit strategies depend on whether entry lies within a trend mirror or at an all-time high. Breaks
through intermediate highs still face overhead resistance that limits profit. Measure the distance to
the next obvious barrier to establish a profit target. If the trade makes sense, exit just below this
resistance unless the personal plan controls risk on the expected retracement. One excellent tactic
buys a deep pullback from a double top failure after it reaches support. Then hold the position
through the rally into the 3rd high, take some money off the table, and let the rest ride into the
breakout.

FIGURE 14.3
Tight congestion at the third high offers a low-risk opportunity just before a market ejects to higher prices. Most
of the crowd waits for a breakout before committing to a new position. This increases risk and limits reward.
Narrow-range entry uses the crowd’s enthusiasm to ride a position into a fast profit and escape before whipsaws
damage the trade.
