
stated were not produced by the power of the imagination. The patients of Perkins, of
Valentine Greatraks, of Sir Kenelm Digby, of Father Gassner, were all equally positive:
but what availed their assertions? Experience soon made it manifest, that no other power
than that of imagination worked the wonders in their case. M. Itard's is not half so
extraordinary; the only wonder is, that it should ever have been insisted upon.
The Commissioners having, as they thought, established beyond doubt the existence of
the magnetic fluid, (and these are all their proofs,) next proceeded to investigate the more
marvellous phenomena of the science; such as the transfer of the senses; the capability of
seeing into one's own or other people's insides, and of divining remedies; and the power
of prophecy. A few examples will suffice.
M. Petit was magnetised by M. Dupotet, who asserted that the somnambulist would be
able to choose, with his eyes shut, a mesmerised coin out of twelve others. The
experiment was tried, and the somnambulist chose the wrong one. [Report of the
Commissioners, p. 153.]
Baptiste Chamet was also magnetised by M. Dupotet, and fell into the somnambulic state
after eight minutes. As he appeared to be suffering great pain, he was asked what ailed
him, when he pointed to his breast, and said he felt pain there. Being asked what part of
his body that was, he said his liver. [Ibid, p. 137.]
Mademoiselle Martineau was magnetised by M. Dupotet, and it was expected that her
case would prove not only the transfer of the senses, but the power of divining remedies.
Her eyes having been bandaged, she was asked if she could not see all the persons
present? She replied, no; but she could hear them talking. No one was speaking at the
time. She said she would awake after five or ten minutes sleep. She did not awake for
sixteen or seventeen minutes. She announced that on a certain day she would be able to
tell exactly the nature of her complaint, and prescribe the proper remedies. On the
appointed day she was asked the question, and could not answer. [Report of the
Commissioners, p. 139.]
Mademoiselle Couturier, a patient of M. de Geslin, was thrown into the state of
somnambulism, and M. de Geslin said she would execute his mental orders. One of the
Committee then wrote on a slip of paper the words "Go and sit down on the stool in front
of the piano." He handed the paper to M. de Geslin, who having conceived the words
mentally, turned to his patient, and told her to do as he required of her. She rose up, went
to the clock, and said it was twenty minutes past nine. She was tried nine times more, and
made as many mistakes. [Idem, p. 139.]
Pierre Cazot was an epileptic patient, and was said to have the power of prophecy. Being
magnetised on the 22nd of April, he said that in nine weeks he should have a fit, in three
weeks afterwards go mad, abuse his wife, murder some one, and finally recover in the
month of August. After which he should never have an attack again. [Idem, p. 180] In
two days after uttering this prophecy, he was run over by a cabriolet and killed. [Foreign
Quarterly Review, vol. xii. p. 439] A post mortem examination was made of his body,

when it was ascertained beyond doubt, that even had he not met with this accident, he
could never have recovered. [At the extremity of the plexus choroides was found a
substance, yellow within, and white without, containing small hydatids. -- Report oltre
Commissioners, p. 186.]
The inquest which had been the means of eliciting these, along with many other facts,
having sat for upwards of five years, the magnetisers became anxious that the report
should be received by the solemn conclave of the Academie. At length a day (the 20th of
June 1831) was fixed for the reading. All the doctors of Paris thronged around the hall to
learn the result; the street in front of the building was crowded with medical students; the
passages were obstructed by philosophers. "So great was the sensation," says M. Dupotet,
"that it might have been supposed the fate of the nation depended on the result." M.
Husson, the reporter, appeared at the bar and read the report, the substance of which we
have just extracted. He was heard at first with great attention, but as he proceeded signs
of impatience and dissent were manifested on all sides. The unreasonable inferences of
the Commissioners -- their false conclusions - their too positive assertions, were received
with repeated marks of disapprobation. Some of the academicians started from their seats,
and apostrophising the Commissioners, accused them of partiality or stolidity. The
Commissioners replied; until, at last, the uproar became so violent that an adjournment of
the sitting was moved and carried. On the following day the report was concluded. A
stormy discussion immediately ensued, which certainly reflected no credit upon the
opponents of Animal Magnetism. Both sides lost temper - the anti-magnetists declaring
that the whole was a fraud and a delusion; the pro-magnetists reminding the Academy
that it was too often the fate of truth to be scorned and disregarded for a while, but that
eventually her cause would triumph. "We do not care for your disbelief," cried one, "for
in this very hall your predecessors denied the circulation of the blood!" - "Yes," cried
another, "and they denied the falling of meteoric stones!" while a third exclaimed
"Grande est veritas et praevalebit!" Some degree of order being at last restored, the
question whether the report should be received and published was decided in the
negative. It was afterwards agreed that a limited number of copies should be
lithographed, for the private use of such members as wished to make further examination.
As might have been expected, magnetism did not suffer from a discussion which its
opponents had conducted with so much intemperance. The followers of magnetism were
as loud as ever in vaunting its efficacy as a cure, and its value, not only to the science of
medicine, but to philosophy in general. By force of repeated outcries against the decision
of the Academie, and assertions that new facts were discovered day after day, its friends,
six years afterwards, prevailed upon that learned and influential body to institute another
inquiry. The Academie, in thus consenting to renew the investigation after it had twice
solemnly decided (once in conjunction with, and once in opposition to a committee of its
own appointment) that Animal Magnetism was a fraud or a chimera, gave the most
striking proof of its own impartiality and sincere desire to arrive at the truth.
The new Commission was composed of M. Roux, the President; and Messieurs
Bouillard, Cloquet, Emery, Pelletier, Caventon, Oudet, Cornac, and Dubois d'Amiens.
The chief magnetiser upon the occasion was M. Berna, who had written to the Academie

on the 12th of February 1837, offering to bring forward the most convincing proofs of the
truth of the new "science." The Commissioners met for the first time on the 27th of
February, and delivered their report, which was drawn up by M. Dubois d'Amiens, on the
22nd of August following. After a careful examination of all the evidence, they decided,
as Messieurs Bailly and Franklin had done in 1784, that the touchings, imagination, and
the force of imitation would account satisfactorily for all the phenomena; that the
supposed Mesmeric fluid would not; that M. Berna, the magnetiser, laboured under a
delusion; and that the facts brought under their notice were anything but conclusive in
favour of the doctrine of Animal Magnetism, and could have no relation either with
physiology or with therapeutics.
The following abridgment of the report will show that the Commissioners did not thus
decide without abundant reason. On the 3rd of March they met at the house of M. Roux,
the President, when M. Berna introduced his patient, a young girl of seventeen, of a
constitution apparently nervous and delicate, but with an air sufficiently cool and selfsufficient. M. Berna offered eight proofs of Animal Magnetism, which he would elicit in
her case, and which he classed as follow:-1. He would throw her into the state of somnambulism.
2. He would render her quite insensible to bodily pain.
3. He would restore her to sensibility by his mere will, without any visible or audible
manifestation of it.
4. His mental order should deprive her of motion.
5. He would cause her, by a mental order, to cease answering in the midst of a
conversation, and by a second mental order would make her begin again.
6. He would repeat the same experiment, separated from his patient by a door.
7. He would awake her.
8. He would throw her again into the somnambulic state, and by his will successively
cause her to lose and recover the sensibility of any part of her body.
Magnetisers - 5
Before any attempt at magnetisation was made by M. Berna, the Commissioners
determined to ascertain how far, in her ordinary state, she was sensible to pricking.
Needles of a moderate size were stuck into her hands and neck, to the depth of half a line,
and she was asked by Messieurs Roux and Caventon whether she felt any pain. She
replied that she felt nothing; neither did her countenance express any pain. The
Commissioners, somewhat surprised at this, repeated their question, and inquired whether

she was absolutely insensible. Being thus pressed, she acknowledged that she felt a little
pain.
These preliminaries having been completed, M. Berna made her sit close by him. He
looked steadfastly at her, but made no movements or passes whatever. After the lapse of
about two minutes she fell back asleep, and M. Berna told the Commissioners that she
was now in the state of magnetic somnambulism. He then arose, and again looking
steadfastly at her from a short distance, declared, after another minute, that she was
struck with general insensibility.
To ascertain this, the girl's eyes having been previously bandaged, Messieurs Bouillard,
Emery, and Dubois pricked her one after the other with needles. By word she complained
of no pain; and her features, where the bandage allowed them to be seen, appeared calm
and unmoved. But M. Dubois having stuck his needle rather deep under her chin, she
immediately made with much vivacity a movement of deglutition.
This experiment having failed, M. Berna tried another, saying that he would, by the sole
and tacit intervention of his will, paralyze any part of the girl's body the Commissioners
might mention. To avoid the possibility of collusion, M. Dubois drew up the following
conditions:-- " That M. Berna should maintain the most perfect silence, and should
receive from the hands of the Commissioners papers, on which should be written the
parts to be deprived of motion and sensibility, and that M. Berna should let them know
when he had done it by closing one of his eyes, that they might verify it. The parts to be
deprived of sensibility were the chin, the right thumb, the region of the left deltoid, and
that of the right patella." M. Berna would not accept these conditions, giving for his
reason that the parts pointed out by the Commissioners were too limited; that, besides, all
this was out of his programme, and he did not understand why such precautions should be
taken against him.
M. Berna had written in his programme that he would deprive the whole body of
sensibility, and then a part only. He would afterwards deprive the two arms of motion -then the two legs -- then a leg and an arm - then the neck, and lastly the tongue. All the
evidence he wished the Commissioners to have was after a very unsatisfactory fashion.
He would tell the somnambulist to raise her arm, and if she did not raise it, the limb was
to be considered paralyzed. Besides this, the Commissioners were to make haste with
their observations. If the first trials did not succeed, they were to be repeated till paralysis
was produced. "These," as the Commissioners very justly remarked, "were not such
conditions as men of science, who were to give an account of their commission, could
exactly comply with." After some time spent in a friendly discussion of the point, M.
Berna said he could do no more at that meeting. Then placing himself opposite the girl,
he twice exclaimed, "Wake!" She awakened accordingly, and the sitting terminated.
At the second meeting, M. Berna was requested to paralyze the right arm only of the girl
by the tacit intervention of his will, as he had confidently assured the Commissioners he
could. M. Berna, after a few moments, made a sign with his eye that he had done so,
when M. Bouillard proceeded to verify the fact. Being requested to move her left arm,

she did so. Being then requested to move her right leg, she said the whole of her right
side was paralyzed -- she could neither move arm nor leg. On this experiment the
Commissioners remark: "M. Berna's programme stated that he had the power of
paralyzing either a single limb or two limbs at once, we chose a single limb, and there
resulted, in spite of his will, a paralysis of two limbs." Some other experiments, equally
unsatisfactory, were tried with the same girl. M. Berna was soon convinced that she had
not studied her part well, or was not clever enough to reflect any honour upon the
science, and he therefore dismissed her. Her place was filled by a woman, aged about
thirty, also of very delicate health; and the following conclusive experiments were tried
upon her:The patient was thrown into the somnambulic state, and her eyes covered with a bandage.
At the invitation of the magnetiser, M. Dubois d'Amiens wrote several words upon a
card, that the somnambule might read them through her bandages, or through her occiput.
M. Dubois wrote the word Pantagruel, in perfectly distinct roman characters; then placing
himself behind the somnambule, he presented the card close to her occiput. The
magnetiser was seated in front of the woman and of M. Dubois, and could not see the
writing upon the card. Being asked by her magnetiser what was behind her head, she
answered, after some hesitation, that she saw something white -- something resembling a
card -- a visiting-card. It should be remembered that M. Berna had requested M. Dubois
aloud to take a card and write upon it, and that the patient must have heard it, as it was
said in her presence. She was next asked if she could distinguish what there was on this
card. She replied "Yes; there was writing on it." -- "Is it small or large, this writing?"
inquired the magnetiser. "Pretty large," replied she. "What is written on it?" continued the
magnetiser. "Wait a little-I cannot see very plain. Ah! there is first an M. Yes, it is a word
beginning with an M." [The woman thought it was a visiting-card, and guessed that
doubtless it would begin with the words Monsieur or Madame.] M. Cornac, unknown to
the magnetiser, who alone put the questions, passed a perfectly blank card to M. Dubois,
who substituted it quietly for the one on which he had written the word Pantagruel. The
somnambule still persisted that she saw a word beginning with an M. At last, after some
efforts, she added doubtingly that she thought she could see two lines of writing. She was
still thinking of the visiting-card, with a name in one line and the address on the other.
Many other experiments of the same kind, and with a similar result, were tried with blank
cards; and it was then determined to try her with playing-cards. M. Berna had a pack of
them on his table, and addressing M. Dubois aloud, he asked him to take one of them and
place it at the occiput of the somnambule. M. Dubois asked him aloud whether he should
take a court card. "As you please," replied the magnetiser. As M. Dubois went towards
the table, the idea struck him that he would not take either a court or a common card, but
a perfectly blank card of the same size. Neither M. Berna nor the somnambule was aware
of the substitution. He then placed himself behind her as before, and held the card to her
occiput so that M. Berna could not see it. M. Berna then began to magnetise her with all
his force, that he might sublimate her into the stage of extreme lucidity, and effectually
transfer the power of vision to her occiput. She was interrogated as to what she could see.
She hesitated; appeared to struggle with herself, and at last said she saw a card. "But what

do you see on the card?" After a little hesitation, she said she could see black and red
(thinking of the court card).
The Commissioners allowed M. Berna to continue the examination in his own way. After
some fruitless efforts to get a more satisfactory answer from the somnambule, he invited
M. Dubois to pass his card before her head, close against the bandage covering her eyes.
This having been done, the somnambule said she could see better. M. Berna then began
to put some leading questions, and she replied that she could see a figure. Hereupon,
there were renewed solicitations from M. Berna. The somnambule, on her part, appeared
to be making great efforts to glean some information from her magnetiser, and at last said
that she could distinguish the Knave. But this was not all; it remained for her to say
which of the four knaves. In answer to further inquiries, she said there was black by the
side of it. Not being contradicted at all, she imagined that she was in the right track; and
made, after much pressing, her final guess, that it was the Knave of Clubs.
M. Berna, thinking the experiment finished, took the card from the hands of M. Dubois,
and in presence of all the Commissioners saw that it was entirely blank. Blank was his
own dismay.
As a last experiment, she was tried with a silver medal. It was with very great difficulty
that any answers could be elicited from her. M. Cornac held the object firmly closed in
his hand close before the bandage over her eyes. She first said she saw something round;
she then said it was flesh-coloured -- then yellow -- then the colour of gold. It was as
thick as an onion: and, in answer to incessant questions, she said it was yellow on one
side, white on the other, and had black above it. She was thinking, apparently, of a gold
watch, with its white dial and black figures for the hours. Solicited, for the last time, to
explain herself clearly -- to say, at least, the use of the object and its name, she appeared
to be anxious to collect all her energies, and then uttered only the word "hour." Then, at
last, as if suddenly illumined, she cried out that "it was to tell the hour."
Thus ended the sitting. Some difficulties afterwards arose between the Commissioners
and M. Berna, who wished that a copy of the proces verbal should be given him. The
Commissioners would not agree; and M. Berna, in his turn, refused to make any fresh
experiments. It was impossible that any investigation could have been conducted more
satisfactorily than this. The report of the Commissioners was quite conclusive; and
Animal Magnetism since that day lost much of its repute in France. M. Dupotet, with a
perseverance and ingenuity worthy a better cause, has found a satisfactory excuse for the
failure of M. Berna. Having taken care in his work not to publish the particulars, he
merely mentions, in three lines, that M. Berna failed before a committee of the Royal
Academy of Medicine in an endeavour to produce some of the higher magnetic
phenomena. "There are a variety of incidental circumstances," says that shining light of
magnetism, "which it is difficult even to enumerate. An over-anxiety to produce the
effects, or any incidental suggestions that may disturb the attention of the magnetiser,
will often be sufficient to mar the successful issue of the experiment." ["Introduction to
the Study of Animal Magnetism," by Baron Dupotet de Sennevoy, London, 1838, p.
159.] Such are the miserable shifts to which error reduces its votaries!

While Dupotet thus conveniently forbears to dwell upon the unfavourable decision of the
committee of 1837, let us hear how he dilates upon the favourable report of the previous
committee of 1835, and how he praises the judgment and the impartiality of its members.
"The Academie Royale de Medicine," says he, "put upon record clear and authenticated
evidence in favour of Animal Magnetism. The Comissioners detailed circumstantially the
facts which they witnessed, and the methods they adopted to detect every possible source
of deception. Many of the Commissioners, when they entered on the investigation, were
not only unfavourable to magnetism, but avowedly unbelievers; so that their evidence in
any court of justice would be esteemed the most unexceptionable that could possibly be
desired. They were inquiring too, not into any speculative or occult theory, upon which
there might be a chance of their being led away by sophistical representations, but they
were inquiring into the existence of facts only -- plain demonstrable facts, which were in
their own nature palpable to every observer." ["Introduction to the Study of Animal
Magnetism," p. 27.] M. Dupotet might not unreasonably be asked whether the very same
arguments ought not to be applied to the unfavourable report drawn up by the able M.
Dubois d'Amiens and his coadjutors in the last inquiry. If the question were asked, we
should, in all probability, meet some such a reply as this: -- "True, they might; but then
you must consider the variety of incidental circumstances, too numerous to mention! M.
Berna may have been over anxious; in fact, the experiments must have been spoiled by an
incidental suggestion!"
A man with a faith so lively as M. Dupotet was just the person to undertake the difficult
mission of converting the English to a belief in magnetism. Accordingly we find that,
very shortly after the last decision of the Academie, M. Dupotet turned his back upon his
native soil and arrived in England, loaded with the magnetic fluid, and ready to re-enact
all the fooleries of his great predecessors, Mesmer and Puysegur. Since the days of
Perkinism and metallic tractors, until 1833, magnetism had made no progress, and
excited no attention in England. Mr. Colquhoun, an advocate at the Scottish bar,
published in that year the, till then, inedited report of the French commission of 1831,
together with a history of the science, under the title of "Isis Revelata; or, an Inquiry into
the Origin, Progress, and present State of Animal Magnetism." Mr. Colquhoun was a
devout believer, and his work was full of enthusiasm. It succeeded in awakening some
interest upon a subject certainly very curious, but it made few or no converts. An
interesting article, exposing the delusion, appeared in the same year in the "Foreign
Quarterly Review;" and one or two medical works noticed the subject afterwards, to
scout it and turn it into ridicule. The arrival of M. Dupotet, in 1837, worked quite a
revolution, and raised Animal Magnetism to a height of favour, as great as it had ever
attained even in France.
He began by addressing letters of invitation to the principal philosophers and men of
science, physicians, editors of newspapers, and others, to witness the experiments, which
were at first carried on at his own residence, in Wigmore-street, Cavendish-square. Many
of them accepted the invitation; and, though not convinced, were surprised and
confounded at the singular influence which he exercised over the imagination of his
patients. Still, at first, his success was not flattering. To quote his own words, in the
