
By industry exposure
According to William J. O’Neil, founder of Investor’s Business Daily, an industry group roughly determines 30 to 40 percent of a security’s return. So being
exposed to only one or two industry groups is extremely risky because the
returns of your securities will be very similar. Think about it in terms of the
auto example from earlier in this chapter: Are the factors affecting General
Motors and Ford all that different? Or Dell Computer and Hewlett-Packard?
Exxon Mobil and Chevron?
Following is an outline of the major industry sectors (as defined by the
Global Industry Classification Standard, or GICS). Fortunately, the software
services you use should break down the industry or economic sector that
your securities belong to.
 Energy
 Materials
• Industrials
• Capital goods
• Commercial services
• Transportation

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
 Consumer discretionary
• Automobiles
• Retailers
 Consumer staples
• Food and drug retailing
• Household products
 Healthcare
 Financials
 Information technology
 Telecommunications services
 Utilities
There’s nothing wrong with concentrating in a few sectors — say four or five.
But beware of investing in only one or two sectors because you won’t benefit
from the diversification benefits inherent in investing in different parts of the
economy.
Be sure to set a minimum number of industry groups that you trade in. I
recommend identifying at least three different sectors and trading a minimum
of six different industry groups, smaller classification groupings than sectors.
For example, energy drilling, energy services, and energy integrated are all
industry groups in the energy sector.

By asset class
Another way to diversify your portfolio is to invest in different investment
vehicles. The asset classes you trade decrease your overall portfolio risk, so
if you’re using this approach, you should shoot to trade two to three different
asset classes. Two primary vehicles for achieving diversification by asset
class are exchange traded funds (ETFs) and American Depository Receipts
(ADRs):
 Exchange traded funds (ETFs): These funds are a growing segment of
the market. They represent baskets of stocks in a sector, style (such as
growth or value), country, and even short positions of major indexes.
ETFs now also provide exposure to commodities and currencies.
Trading ETFs helps diversify your portfolio across several stocks in one
sector or country. For example, you may be right on a substantial move
in oil stocks, but you may select the one oil company that’s having problems. Buying an energy ETF (such as the iShares Dow Jones US Energy
ETF) allows you to profit from the movement of several energy stocks.
Purchasing one ETF is like instant diversification across a style or sector
of the market.

219

220 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Sometimes there’s a bull market in commodities or currencies while
stock markets are lagging. So various asset classes can provide a boost
of returns in addition to lower risk. Here are some of the main ETFs that
offer you exposure to commodities:
• Precious metals: Gold can be traded via streetTRACKS Gold
(symbol: GLD); silver can be traded via iShares Silver Trust
(symbol: SLV). If you’re interested in metals and mining, you can
swing trade the SPDR S&P Metals & Mining ETF (symbol: XME).
• Energy: Your options for trading energy ETFs include Energy
Select Sector SPDR (symbol: XLE). Or you can trade energy stocks
that rise and fall with the price of oil. Energy exploration and
production companies especially track changes in crude oil and
natural gas prices.
• Agricultural commodities: The Dow Jones-AIG Agriculture Total
Return ETF (symbol: JJA) provides exposure to agricultural
commodities.
You can obtain exposure to currencies (such as the Euro or Canadian
Dollar) through the various Currency Shares ETFs found at www.
currencyshares.com.
 American Depository Receipts (ADRs): ADRs allow you to take advantage of strength (or weakness) in a company based outside the U.S
without ever leaving home. Currently, the fastest growing markets are
in China, India, and Latin America.
Mixing international securities into your portfolio offers greater diversification benefits than having strictly U.S. stocks because international
markets may zig when the U.S. market zags. The more technical explanation of the benefit of ADRs is that foreign securities have lower correlation ratios to the U.S. market than domestic securities. Of course, the
currency of those foreign markets may also improve (or hurt) your
returns. To find a list of international equities, check out www.adr.com.

Combine long and short positions
You can reduce the risk for your total portfolio by combining long and
short positions. Having long and short positions gives you a lower standard
deviation of returns than if you have a portfolio that’s 100 percent long or 100
percent short (which means its returns vary less than the overall market).
Translating that into English: A swing trader who combines long and short
positions is protected in the event of a major rally or decline in the market.
Gains off of shorts/longs can offset losses from longs/shorts.
When the overall market is in a heavy bull advance, a portfolio with short
positions is likely to be stopped out of those positions often (meaning your
stop loss orders will be executed). Alternatively, when the overall market is

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
in a heavy bear decline, a portfolio with long positions is likely to be stopped
out of those positions frequently. In other words, profitably shorting in a
strong bull market or profitably going long in a strong bear market is difficult.
The conundrum of having too many long or short positions has two possible
solutions:
 Limit the amount of your portfolio that’s short or long, depending on
the strength or weakness of the market. For example, in a strong bull
market, you may hold short positions not exceeding 20 percent of your
entire portfolio. Alternatively in a strong bear market, you may hold long
positions not exceeding 20 percent of your entire portfolio.
 Trade different asset classes that may be trending in a different
direction than the stock market. If stocks are in a raging bull market,
perhaps your short positions can come from the commodities or
currency markets (see the preceding section for ideas of how to gain
exposure to these markets).
Whichever method you choose, make sure your trading plan outlines how
you determine when you’re net long (that is, when you hold more long
positions than short) or net short (when you hold more short positions
than long).

Planning Your Exit Strategies
Your exit strategy dictates when you’ll exit a security. Some swing traders
believe that an exit strategy is more important than an entry strategy, and I
agree wholeheartedly.
Believe it or not, a trader can generate healthy profits by randomly entering
securities if he or she has an exit strategy that lets winners run and cuts
losers fast.
Sometimes you’ll exit for profits, and other times you’ll exit for losses. Of
course, the most desirable exit strategy is exiting for profits. The next desirable option is exiting because of the passage of time. The least desirable exit
strategy is exiting for losses. Most trades, however, fall into the profit or loss
category. Rarely will you exit because of time.

Exiting for profitable trades
Stop loss rules are your way out when a trade goes bad (more on that topic
later in this chapter). But what should you do when a trade turns out right?

221

222 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
There are three major ways to exit profitable trades: by a predetermined
profit target, by a predetermined price target, or by swing lows/highs.

Predetermined profit target
A predetermined profit target is the easiest method of taking profits off the
table. When you enter your trade, you set a specific gain (usually expressed
in percentage terms) that you seek and then take your money off the table
after that gain has been achieved.
Swing traders shouldn’t set unreasonable profit targets; your profit target is a
function of your time horizon. Because swing traders’ horizons can vary from
a few days to a few weeks, your profit target may range from the low single
digits to the low double digits. If you’re active in the markets and trade often,
then your profit target should be modest — closer to 5 percent. However, if
you prefer to hold your swing trades for a few weeks, then a 10 percent or 15
percent profit target is attainable.
Some professional swing traders exit in stages. For example, they may sell 50
percent of their position after a security has risen 10 percent in price. Then
they may ride the rest of the position until there’s a technical breakdown or
change in fundamentals. The advantage of exiting in stages is that you lock in
profits early. A security that rises 10 percent and then falls back to your entry
price results in a 0 percent return if you failed to take profits on its way up.
Exiting in stages may improve your returns, but it also requires more work.
There’s more record-keeping, for example, if you exit in stages versus exiting
in one go. You also generate more commissions, more taxes, and so on. Make
sure that your strategy fits your work ethic and time commitment to the
market.

Predetermined price target
A predetermined price target is an alternative way to take money off the
table. In this case, you set a specific target based on the chart or the fundamentals of the company.
In the case of technical alert criteria, you may set your profit target equal to a
prior swing high or swing low. Securities tend to find resistance and support
at price levels achieved in the past, so you may set your target on the basis
that the security will reach that prior peak. (I cover how to determine technical alert criteria in Chapters 4 and 5.)
In the case of fundamental criteria, you may set your profit target equal to
a price multiple of the security — a price multiple based on earnings, sales,
and so on (see Chapter 9 for more on the different price multiples). For example, if you suspect that Dell’s shares should be trading for a price to earnings

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
(P/E) ratio equal to Hewlett-Packard’s shares, then your price target would
be equal to Hewlett-Packard’s P/E ratio multiplied by Dell’s trailing earnings.
(I cover fundamental analysis in detail in Part III.)
One word of caution: Don’t set price targets equal to round numbers or whole
dollar amounts (like $35, $80, or $120). Many novice traders set their price
levels in the same area, which may prevent the security from reaching that
price. For example, if you buy a security and expect the stock to face some
headwind when it reaches $50, place your limit order to sell shares at $49.83
or a level nearby. Traders who place their limit orders right at the level of
resistance and at a round number often are left with unfilled orders.

Swing lows/highs
Swing traders often use prior swing lows and highs as reference points on
when to jump ship from a profitable investment. A breakdown below a low
or above a high may signal the beginning of a new downtrend or uptrend,
respectively.
This strategy differs somewhat from the predetermined price target I explain
in the preceding section. In that strategy, you set a price target of when to
take profits off the table. In this case, however, you use prior swing lows and
highs as reference points for when to exit. If you’re long shares of a security,
this strategy calls for putting a stop loss order below a recent swing low. In
contrast, a predetermined price target calls for placing a limit sell order when
the security reaches the area you expected.
Figure 10-3 shows Exxon Mobil (symbol: XOM) from July 2007 through
October 2007. It illustrates how a predetermined price target differs from
exiting on a swing low or high.

Figure 10-3:
This chart
of XOM
shows how
you can
plan your
exit based
on previous
swing highs.

223

224 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
In the case of buying shares of Exxon Mobil, you may have set a sell limit
order near the prior high of $94 (but not at $94 — use a price below that and
not a round number).
Contrast the Exxon Mobil exit to the strategy of placing a stop sell order
below prior swing lows in the chart of Sigma Designs, Inc. (symbol: SIGM),
shown in Figure 10-4. It shows that by placing a sell stop order below
prior swing lows, you can stay in a strong trend longer and reap a larger
percentage of the move.

Figure 10-4:
Placing stop
loss orders
below swing
lows helps
you stay
in strong
trends and
get out of
lagging
ones.

Taking cues from technical signals
In addition to taking profits based off of swing lows and swing highs, you
can take profits based off of technical signals. When using technical signals
(flip back to Chapter 5 for a refresher on the various technical indicators),
ensure that some crystal clear trigger or catalyst is present that leads you to
take profits.
Some examples of selling strategies for profits include:
 Exiting when shares close below a moving average (for example, a
nine-day moving average)
 Exiting when the MACD line crosses below (or above, if you’re short)
the signal line
 Exiting when –DMI crosses above +DMI (if you’re long)
 Exiting when prices break an uptrend line (or downtrend line)
Consider Figure 10-5, which highlights how a swing trader may have taken
profits in a trade of shares of W&T Offshore (symbol: WTI) on the turn-up of
the nine-day moving average. The profit-taking exit in this example is based
on the share price closing below the nine-day moving average. The potential

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
profit — assuming entry and exits near the closing prices on the days highlighted, and exclusive of commissions, taxes, and slippage — is 19.18 percent
over 18 days. The stop loss level (which I delve into in the later section,
“Exiting based on a stop loss level”) should be placed below a recent swing
low but not exactly at the low or exactly at a round number.

Figure 10-5:
Taking
profits
based off of
a technical
signal in
shares of
WTI.

Exiting based on the passage of time
A time trigger exit is sometimes necessary when a position you trade meets
neither its profit target nor its stop loss exit. But because your capital
shouldn’t be tied up in a position that isn’t generating profits, I must cover
the rare but possible exit based on the passage of time.
Perhaps you bought or shorted at the wrong time, or an event you expected
to occur didn’t materialize. In any case, a security that meanders sideways is
tying up your capital. You’re better off exiting the security and having cash at
your disposal should an opportunity present itself.
As with other aspects of swing trading, there’s no hard and fast rule on what
constitutes sufficient time for a position to make a move. If you trade often
with a time horizon measured in days, you should give a position up to a week
to make a move. However, if you’re a swing trader who goes for larger moves
that unfold over a few weeks, you may give a position more time.

Exiting based on a stop loss level
Wouldn’t it be nice if your only decision was when to take a profit off the
table? “Hmm . . . should I leave with a 10 percent gain or wait for a 15 percent
gain?” Alas, you don’t always have this luxury.

225

226 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Many times you’ll be faced with the prospect of exiting a position at a loss.
Although it may be difficult to admit you were wrong, you have to get used to
it if you’re going to be a swing trader. The most common way you’ll exit
losing positions is through a stop loss level.
Technically, a stop loss can be mental or physical:
 A mental stop loss level is a price level you keep in your own records but
only submit to your broker when the security has reached that price
level. The advantage of using a mental stop loss level is that you may
avoid a whipsaw — being forced out of a position due to a short but
violent move up or down.
 A physical stop loss order is an order you submit to your broker the
second your entry is executed. When you enter a stop loss order (which
should be submitted “Good till cancelled” so that it doesn’t expire after
one day), your order is visible to other traders, so it’s possible for them
to move prices to take out your order.
Although this risk exists, I can’t stress enough the importance of using
physical stop loss orders entered with your broker for the first few years
you swing trade. You expose yourself to the risk of a whipsaw, but you
also avoid the risk of failing to exit when a security’s price moves fast
and furious (furiously, for all you English majors).
Stop loss orders should be entered around some major support/resistance
level or technical level. If you’re long shares of a position, your stop loss order
should be below the entry price and entered as a sell order. If you’re short
shares of a position, your stop loss order should be above the entry price and
be entered as a buy to cover order.
The following techniques for setting stop losses only apply to swing traders
who set their positions based on a risk level. Swing traders who set their
position sizes based on a percent of capital approach automatically determine a stop loss level based on their loss threshold level. Swing traders who
set their position sizes based on a risk level, however, should understand the
different methods of selecting a risk level.

Stop loss based on a support/resistance level
This first approach to setting your stop loss level is straightforward. By
examining a chart, you should be able to determine levels of support and
resistance that, if broken, would signal the end or beginning of a trend.
Your job, should you choose to accept it, is to identify a level that’s most
applicable to you.
To simplify matters, suppose you’re interested in buying a security. In that
case, your stop loss level should be based around a major support level
(preferably, right below that support level). A three-year-old support level
isn’t going to have significant relevance most of the time (an exception being
if the support level was tested several times during those three years).

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk

In general, a support level is significant the
 More recent it is
 More often it has been tested
 Closer it is to a significant price level ($100, $10, $50, and so on)
 Heavier the volume is on the formation of the support level
Choose important support levels so that you only exit a position when a
trend change is most likely. Choosing a weak support level may cause you to
exit a position prematurely.

Stop loss based on a technical level
You may exit a position based on the breaking of a significant technical level.
Dozens of technical indicators can be plotted on a chart, and when one of
those indicators gives a signal, an informed swing trader exits.
Technical indicators can be tricky. Just because your technical charting program may have 101 different technical indicators developed by individuals I
won’t name here (because I don’t know their names) doesn’t mean you need
to use all 101 indicators in your strategy. In fact, professionals often use only
two or three to make their decisions. Why not use all the bounty with which
you’ve been bestowed?
As it turns out, all technical indicators are based on one or two inputs: price
and volume. Consequently, there are only so many ways you can peel an
onion before you realize those tears are coming out no matter what you do.
You don’t get a performance boost from using ten indicators; instead, you get
ten people telling you largely the same thing.
Stop loss orders are sometimes used in conjunction with moving averages.
Some swing traders place stop loss orders right below a major moving
average and adjust the order every day or two. Others who use mental stop
loss orders may wait for a security to close below a moving average before
taking action to enter an order with their broker.
Figure 10-6 shows a stop loss order executed based on the nine-day moving
average (DMA). A gap up in shares of Yahoo! (symbol: YHOO) in early 2006
seemed to be a prelude to a strong uptrend. However, shares of Yahoo!
quickly reversed. Setting a stop loss based on a support level may have
exposed you to the violent fall, whereas a stop loss based on the moving
average would’ve given you an earlier exit.
A stop loss order can be based on actual signals from a technical indicator
(such as MACD). The downside to using such orders is that delays can result.
You don’t know for sure what price a security must reach before an indicator
will signal its flashing red lights. Using an indicator like a moving average,
which is actually plotted on the chart, is helpful because you can identify a
specific price before the signal is given.

227

228 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan

Figure 10-6:
A stop
loss order
for YHOO,
based on
the nineday moving
average.

Responding wisely when you take a hit
The only thing worse than exiting a position for
a loss is doing nothing. If you break your rules
and decide to pass on a sell signal, you’ll be run
over by a fast-moving car. Maybe not today and
maybe not tomorrow, but the market exacts
painful penalties from traders who think rules
don’t apply to them.
Interestingly, women tend to be better at this
aspect of trading than men. For the same reason
that men are prone to drive around in circles
before they ask for directions, male traders
often refuse to recognize their mistakes. Cutting
a loss is admitting you’re wrong — admitting
you’re lost and need help. Female swing traders
often have less ego — and smaller losses to
show for it.
To make this topic more palpable, think of your
stop loss orders as insurance policies (that’s
masculine, right?). When a position falls to your
stop loss level, you have to exercise your policy
and get out. (Your insurance policy returns your
original capital minus the small loss.) By ignoring your sell order, you’re effectively relying on
hope. If you turn out to be right, you’ve only reinforced a negative behavior.

This is one reason many swing traders fail outside of a supervised office. In a corporate atmosphere, someone is looking over your shoulder
to make sure you’re doing your job right. Take a
shortcut or two, and you’ll be called out for it. In
trading, you have to look over your own shoulder. No one will punish you for ignoring the rules
except “Mr. Market.” And he isn’t forgiving.
So how can you respond wisely to losses?
Remember that all traders face losses, and the
only poor way to respond is to not respond at
all. Keep the following points in mind:
 All traders experience losses. You may
take comfort in exiting a position for a loss
if you know that all professional traders
experience them. No matter how good you
become, you’ll always have losing positions. The key is to limit those losses, exit
them, and move on. Does Michael Jordan
make every shot he takes? No. Did Pele
score a goal each time he touched the
soccer ball? No. What you’ll find as a swing
trader is that most of your positions will produce average gains — in line with the
