
Spread 4: -72.0/2.70 Ps -26.7
Spread 6: -56.0/2.90 = -19.3


Risk Considerations 187

We can see that spread 6 is at less risk from a large move in the price of the
underlying contract because -19.3 is closer to zero than -26.7. This confirms the
conclusion from Figure 9-9.

Aword of warning about this method of estimating the relative riskiness ofa spread.
Because an option’s sensitivities are only well defined within a narrow range, dividing
the risk sensitivity by the theoretical edge offers only an estimate of the relative riskiness
of a position. Consider, for example, the relative volatility risks of spreads 1, 2, and 3.
Dividing the vega by the theoretical value for each spread we have:

Spread 1:  -1.368/2.86 = -478
Spread 2: -435/3.00 = 145
Spread 3: -630/2.80 =  -225

From these numbers it appears that spread 2 is the least risky with respect to volatility
since —.145 is closer to zero than -.478 or —.225. But going back to Figure 9-4 we find
that spread 3 actually has the highest implied volatility, and therefore the least volatility
tisk. Even so, this method would have at least warned us away from spread 1, which
clearly has the greatest volatility risk.

Sometimes, if a trader is under great pressure to make a quick decision, he may not
have the time to make even a cursory analysis of relative riskiness of various spreads. In
such cases, he will often have to rely on his instincts in choosing a strategy. While there
is no substitute for experience, most traders quickly learn an important rule: straddles
and strangles are the riskiest of all spreads. This is true whether one buys or sells these
strategies. New traders sometimes assume that the purchase of straddles and strangles
is not especially risky because such strategies have limited risk. But it can be just as
painful to lose money day after day when one buys a straddle or strangle and the market
fails to move, as it is to lose the same amount of money all at once when one sells a
straddle and the market makes a violent move. Of course, a trader who is right about
volatility can reap large rewards from straddles and strangles. But an experienced trader
knows that such strategies offer the least margin for error, and he will usually prefer
other strategies with more desirable risk characteristics.

HOW MUCH MARGIN FOR ERROR?

New traders sometimes ask what is a reasonable margin for error in assessing the inputs
into a theoretical pricing model, particularly when it comes to the volatility input. As is
often the case, it will depend on the trader’s experience in the market in which he is
trading. In some cases, 5 percentage points may be an extremely large margin for error,
and the trader will feel very confident with any strategy passing such a test. In other
cases, five percentage points may be almost no margin for error at all, and the trader
will find that the strategy is a constant source of worry.

Perhaps a better way to approach the question is to ask not what is a reasonable
margin for error, but rather to ask what is the correct size in which to do a spread given
a known margin for error. Practical trading considerations aside, a trader should always
choose the spread with the best risk/reward characteristics. But sometimes even the


188 Chapter 9

best spread will have only a small margin for error, and consequently entail significant
risk. In such cases a trader, if he wants to make a trade, ought to do so in small size. If,
however, a trader can execute a spread with a very large margin for error, he ought to
be willing to do the spread in much larger size.

As an example, considet a trader whose best estimate of volatility in a certain
market is 15%. If implied volatility is higher than 15% he will look for positions with a
negative vega. If the best negative vega strategy the trader can find isa 1 x 2 ratio vertical
spread with an implied volatility of 1614% (only a 1%4-percentage-point margin for
error), he will almost certainly keep the size of his strategy small, perhaps executing the
spread only five times (5 x 10). If, however, the same spread has an implied volatility
of 25% (a 10-percentage-point margin for error), and the trader has never seen volatility
go that high, he may have the confidence to execute the spread in much larger size,
perhaps 50 x 100.4 The size of a trader’s positions should depend on the riskiness of
the positions, and this in turn depends on how much can go wrong without the strategy
turning against the trader.

DIVIDENDS AND INTEREST

In addition to the delta, gamma, theta, and vega risks which all traders must consider,
stock option traders might also have to consider the risk of changes in dividends and
interest rates.> This is especially true of time spreads, since options with different
expirations react differently to changes in these inputs.

Consider the evaluation table for stock options shown in Figure 9-11. With implied
volatilities well below the forecast of 27%, it makes sense to look for spreads with
positive vegas, Suppose we focus on four possible spreads shown in Figure 9-12. Spreads
7 and 8 are long time spreads, while spreads 9 and 10 are diagonal spreads. What are
the relative merits of each spread?

As with all option spreads, we have to consider a variety of risks. Note that in the
evaluation table in Figure 9-11 we used an interest rate of 8%. Suppose we believe that
interest rates are likely to rise sharply in the near future. How might these spreads react
to rising interest rates? We can see from Figure 9-13 that spreads 7 and 9 will be hurt
by rising interest rates, while spreads 8 and 10 will be helped. If a rise in interest rates
is our primary concern, we might focus on spreads 8 and 10, regardless of any desirable
vega or gamma characteristics associated with spreads 7 and 9.

If we focus on spreads 8 and 10, we will still want to consider the volatility risk.
We can do a cursory comparison of this risk by dividing the vega by the theoretical edge.
From this we find:

Spread 8: 1.380/6,45 | = 214
Spread 10: 2.774/6.14 x 452

4. — Size, of course, is relative. To a well capitalized, experienced trader even 50 x 100 may be a small trade.

5. Futures options can also be affected by changes in interest rates since a change in interest rates will
affect the forward price of the underlying futures contract. Unlike stocks, factors other than interest
rates, such as short term supply and demand, can also affect these contracts.


189

sez zez 6600- 2 zo 6r'Ol %6 eyo eez) s9z0- oS ge £0'F "AE sol
aes epz zelo- —s'Y’ os- er xg sez eve 26z0- —v'% os e's S 001
L've eee Gblo- = &% 6E- e6'b “AP v're eee 86z0- SS 19 28 %L sé
AyMeioA eBeA BEUL eu EYed = ONIEA soug ANNEIOA eBaq eyoyL euUeD eyed nA = Sold 80ld
peydu feopjesoeyL pendu feonesoouL @s)010X4
slnd si1v9o anne
ere zl oslo- =— ss SE al- Lv'8 7} Sve gzl' oseO- =—s« SE eid 69'1 %l core)
ove Igp 6Z9z0- WE g¢- ars Ye eve Ist osvo- SE Sb 6z'e He ool
74 FA Sa 100 ee 9e- 99% "eS ose Zr 6gero- = OE +9 61'S 5 66
Amen eBejA Bou, euWeH eyeg = oneA solid AMINEIOA eBeA eyoUL eWWeED eyed = enieA = eld ald
pod] jeonosoauL poduy feopeioey, => = 88] 8XF
sind stivo HOUVIN

shep 61} pue sAep gz Ul
Sz'1 puepinig peedxy © 00'S WSELeW] «LT OUNE MLZ YOIRIN :AUINEIOA ‘shep Zp} eunc ‘skep 9g YEW OWL = $4, 86 :20Ud YOOIS

Lb-6 eanBig

Risk Considerations


Chapter 9

190

plliat $90 oy's+ bet plot
ohh x Ol- 9Er0- x OL- gE xOl- v9t X Ol- 6L~ xX Ob
€€c' x Stt+ g9z0'— x 8Lt+ ex sett Set+ x Bt+ eZ+xel
See t+ S6PO'+ i se- og'o+
Gb x OL- 2Z9Z0"- x Ol— ge xOl- Ss-x OL- Ze'-xol
bee < Stt+ SPLO- Xx SGE+ ox Gtt+ 6E- X Get go'+ x Gt
ose’ 1+ o20e"+ Ole SZt+ Sb'g+
SEX GI- Ogro- x SI- BEXxSt- Sp+x St- ov-X<St
cpa’ x Stt+ Z6Z0'— X GE + POXGtt OSt+ X GI+ Set xGh
gloet+ oore’+ gS ce- gi—- Slot
orl x GZ- +8z0'— x Se- 9'€ x S2—- 9E-x Ge- by x So
eee’ x get GbLo— x G2t e'ex Gat 6e- x Sz+ got x Gz
UOTYSOd Uo}}|S0q UOTISOg uopisod a6py
eboa eyouL euwer eyeq feopesoayy

$|29 G6 YeW Ol—
sifeo SOL oun ett

sind oO} yey Ol-
sind g6 eunr gt+

SHED OO} YOTEW SI-
$29 OOF SUNF G+

sind ¢6 yale Sz—
sind g6 ounr g2+

‘OL peaids

‘6 peaids

7g peeids

‘2 peaids

zZi-6 enbiy



Risk Considerations 197

Figure 9-13

30

254 spread 7

spread 8
(long put time spread)

(long call time spread)
20-

154

107

spread 9

5+ (diagonal put spread! : spread 10
("89 pars ) a ; (diagonal call spread)
074— ~ —— a (ee an

ae

Theoretical Profit & Loss

sl

-104

-15 T T T T T 1
0.00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 10.00 12,00

Interest Rate (%)

If volatility risk is our second concern, then spread 8 is probably best because its vega
divided by theoretical edge is much smaller than that of spread 10. Suppose, however,
that we are more concerned with a large move in the underlying stock than with a
decline in volatility. Now we can see that spread 10 is best because its positive gamma
means that a large move in the price of the underlying stock can only work to our
advantage. As always, the choice of strategies will require us to make some judgements
as to what risks we are willing to accept, and to what degree.

Finally, let’s look at our spreads with respect to a change in dividends. In our
evaluation table we assumed a quarterly dividend of 1.25. Suppose we believe that the
dividend is likely to be increased. How will this affect our four spreads? From Figure
9-14 we can see that now spreads 7 and 9 look the best since they are helped by an
increase in the dividend.

What about volatility and curvature risk? Estimating the relative risks by dividing
the sensitivity by theoretical edge, we have:

Vega Risk Gamma Risk
Spread 7: 2.275/6.75 = .337 -32.5/6.75 = ~4.8
Spread 9: 1.985/6.50= 305 -3.5/6.50= -.5

Since there is not much difference in the spreads in terms of vega risk, we might
choose spread 9 since it has much less gamma risk. At the same time, if we believe an


192 Chapter 9

Figure 9-14
25
spread 8 spread 7

20+ (long call time spread) (long put time spread)
8 15 mN. a
a J iain
rs] spread 10
2 57 (diagonal call spread) Se spread 9
D “so (diagonal put spread)
Co wren
£ -
£ o+—~ _ a

54

-1 0 T T T T
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50

Quarterly Dividend

increase in the dividend is very likely, we may prefer spread 7, since we can see from
Figure 9-14 that if the dividend is increased, spread 7 shows the greatest increase in
value.

WHAT IS A GOOD SPREAD?

Option traders, being human, would rather talk about their successes than their
disasters. If one were to eavesdrop on conversations among traders, it would probably
seem that no one ever made a losing trade. Disasters, when they do occur, only happen
to other traders. The fact is every successful option trader has had his share of disasters.
What separates the successful trader from the unsuccessful one is the ability to survive
such occurrences.

Consider the trader who initiates a spread with a good theoretical edge and a large
margin for error in almost every risk category. If the trader still ends up losing money
on the spread, does this mean that the trader has made a poor choice of spreads? Maybe
a similar spread, but one with less margin for error, would have resulted in an even
greater loss, perhaps a loss from which the trader could not recover.

It is impossible to take into consideration every possible risk. A spread which passed
every risk test would probably have so little theoretical edge that it wouldn’t be worth
doing. But the trader who allows himself a reasonable margin for error will find that
even his losses will not lead to financial ruin. A good spread is not necessarily the one


Risk Considerations 193

that shows the greatest profit when things go well; it may be the one which shows the
least loss when things go badly. Winning trades always take care of themselves. Losing
trades, which don’t give back all the profits from the winning ones, are just as important.

ADJUSTMENTS

In the last chapter we considered the question of when a trader should adjust a position
to remain delta neutral. The trader must also consider how best to adjust, for there are
many different ways to adjust the total delta position. An adjustment to a trader’s delta
position may reduce his directional risk, but if he simultaneously increases his gamma,
theta, or vega risk, he may inadvertently be exchanging one type of risk for another.

A delta adjustment made with the underlying contract is essentially a risk neutral
adjustment. By this we mean that an adjustment made with the underlying contract
will not change any of the other risks we have discussed because the gamma, theta, and
vega associated with an underlying contract are zero. Therefore, if a trader wants to
adjust his delta position, but wants to leave the other characteristics of the position
unaffected, he can do so by purchasing or selling an appropriate number of underlying
contracts.

An adjustment made with options may reduce the delta risk, but will also change
the other risk characteristics associated with the position. Every option, in addition to
having a delta, also has a gamma, theta, and vega. When an option is added to or
subtracted from a position, it necessarily changes the total delta, gamma, theta, and vega
of the position. This is something which new traders sometimes forget.

Consider an option market where the underlying contract is trading at 99.25. If all
options appear to be overpriced, a trader might decide to sell the 95/105 strangle (sell
the 95 put, sell the 105 call). Suppose the deltas of the put and call are, respectively,
—36 and +36, and the trader decides to sell 20 strangles. He is initially delta neutral
since

(+20 x -36) + (-20 x +36) = 0

Suppose several days pass and the underlying market has fallen to 97.00, with new
delta values for the 95 put and 105 call of —41 and +30. Assuming that no adjustments
have been made, the trader’s delta position is now

(-20 x—41) + (-20 x +30) = +220
If the trader now decides to make an adjustment he has three basic choices:

1. sell underlying contracts

2. sell calls
3. buy puts
Which method is best?

All other considerations being equal, whenever a trader makes an adjustment he
should do so with the intention of improving the risk/reward characteristics of the


194 Chapter 9

position. If the trader decides to adjust his delta position by purchasing puts, he also
reduces his other risks since the gamma, theta, and vega associated with the put
purchase are opposite in sign to the gamma, theta, and vega associated with his existing
short strangle position.

Unfortunately, all other considerations may not be equal. Since implied volatility
can remain high or low for long periods of time, it is quite likely that if all options were
overpriced when the trader Initiated his position, they will still be overpriced when he
goes back into the market to make his adjustment. Even though the purchase of puts to
become delta neutral will reduce his other risks, such an adjustment will also have the
effect of reducing the theoretical edge. On the other hand, if all options are overpriced
and the trader decides to sell additional calls to reduce the delta, the sale of the
overpriced calls will have the effect of increasing the theoretical edge. If the trader
decides that adding to his theoretical edge is of primary importance he may decide to
sell seven more 105 calls, leaving him approximately delta neutral since

(-20 x41) + (-27 x +30) = +10

Now suppose several more days pass and the market has rebounded to 101.50,
with new delta values for the 95 put and 105 cali of -26 and +40. The position delta
is now

{-20 x -26} + (~27 x +40) = -560

Again, if the trader wants to adjust he is faced with three choices: buy underlying
contracts, buy calls, or sell puts. Assuming that all options are still overpriced and that
the trader wants to continue to increase his theoretical edge, he may decide to sell an
additional 22 of the 95 puts. The total delta position is

(-42 x -26) + (-27 x +40) = +12

It should be clear what will result from these adjustments. If all options remain
overpriced and the trader is always intent on increasing his theoretical edge, he will
continue to make whatever adjustments are necessary by continuously selling over-
priced options. This method of adjusting may indeed result in the greatest profit to the
trader. But notice what is happening. The strangle, which the trader was initially
prepared to sell 20 times, has now increased in size to 42 x 27, If the market now makes
a violent move in either direction, the negative consequences will be greatly magnified.
Unfortunately, the new trader, overly concerned with always increasing his theoretical
edge, often finds himself in just such a position. If the market makes a very swift move,
the trader may not survive, For this reason, a new trader who is unfamiliar with all the
subtleties of an option market should avoid making adjustments which increase the size
of his position.

No trader can afford to ignore the effect his adjustments will have on the total risk
to his position. If he has a positive (negative) gamma position, buying (selling) any
additional options will increase his gammia risk. Likewise, if he has a positive (negative)
vega position, buying (selling) any additional options will increase his vega risk. A trader
cannot afford to sell overpriced options or buy underpriced options ad infinitum. At


Risk Considerations 195

some point the size of the spread will simply become too large, and any additional
theoretical edge will have to take a back seat to risk considerations. When that happens
there are only two choices: decrease the size of the spread or adjust in the underlying
market.

A disciplined trader knows that sometimes, because of risk considerations, the best
course is to reduce the size of the spread, even if it means giving up some theoretical
edge. This may be hard on the trader's ego, particularly if he must personally go back
into the market and either buy back options which he originally sold at a lower price,
or Sell out options which he originally purchased at a higher price. However, if a trader
is unwilling to swallow his pride from time to time, and admit that he made a mistake,
his trading career is certain to be a short one.

If a trader finds that any delta adjustment in the option market that reduces his risk
will also reduce his theoretical edge, and he is unwilling to give up any theoretical edge,
his only recourse is to make his adjustments in the underlying market. An underlying
contract has no gamma, theta, or vega, so the risks of the position will remain essentially
the same.

A QUESTION OF STYLE

Because most option pricing models assume that movement in the underlying contract
is random, an option trader who trades purely from the theoretical values generated by
a model should not have any prior opinion about the direction in which the underlying
market will move. In practice, however, many option traders begin their trading careers
by taking positions in the underlying market, where direction is the primary considera
tion. Many traders therefore develop a style of trading based on presumed directional
moves in the underlying market. A trader might, for example, be a trend follower,
adhering to the philosophy that “the trend is your friend.” Or he might be a contrarian,
preferring to “buy weakness, sell strength.”

Traders often try to incorporate their personal trading styles into their option
strategies. One way to do this is to consider beforehand the adjustments which will be
required for a certain strategy if the underlying market begins to move. For example,
suppose a trader sells straddles in such a way that he is initially delta neutral. Such
spreads have a negative gamma, so that as the market moves higher his delta position
is getting shorter, and as the market moves lower his delta position is getting longer. If
this trader likes to trade against the trend, he will avoid adjustments as much as possible
because his position is automatically trading against the trend. Whichever way the
market moves, the position always wants a retracement of this movement.

On the other hand, a trader who sells the same straddles but prefers to trade with
the trend will adjust at every opportunity. In order to remain delta neutral, he will be
forced to buy underlying contracts as the market rises and sell underlying contracts as
the market falls.

The opposite is true for a trader who buys straddles. He has a positive gamma
position, so that as the market rises his delta is becoming longer, and as the market falls
his delta is becoming shorter. If this trader likes to trade with the trend, he will want to


196 Chapter 9

adjust as little is possible in the belief that the market is likely to continue in the same
direction. However, if he prefers to trade against the trend, he will want to adjust as
often as possible. Every adjustment will represent a profit opportunity if the market does
in fact reverse direction.

A trader with a negative gamma is always adjusting with the trend of the
underlying market. A trader with a positive gamma is always adjusting against the
trend of the underlying market. If a trader prefers to trade with the trend or against the
trend, he should choose a strategy and an adjustment process that is appropriate to his
preference. A trader who prefers to trade with the trend can choose a strategy with a
positive gamma together with less frequent adjustments, or a strategy with a negative
gamma with more frequent adjustments. A trader who prefers to trade against the trend
can choose a strategy with a negative gamma together with less frequent adjustments,
or a strategy with a positive gamma with more frequent adjustments. The purely
theoretical trader will not have to worry about this since for him there is no such thing
as a trend. However, for most traders old habits, such as trading with or against the
trend, die hard.

LIQUIDITY

As long as a trader has an open option position it represents a risk. Even if the risk is
limited to the current value of the options, by leaving the position open the trader is
Tisking the loss of that value. If he wants to eliminate the risk, he will have to take some
action which will in effect close out the position. Sometimes this can be done through
early exercise, or by taking advantage of an opposing position to create an arbitrage.
More often, however, in order to close out an open position a trader will be required
go into the marketplace and buy in any short options and sell out any long options.
