
P1: PIC/PIC
c01

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

6

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 17, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

HIGH PROBABILITY TRADING STRATEGIES FOR ANY MARKET AND ANY TIME FRAME

A leading indicator will prepare you in advance for probable trade conditions. Using my unique approach to dynamic time and price strategies, developed over the past
20 years, you will learn how to identify in advance the probable price and time target
zones not just for support and resistance, but, more importantly, for trend reversal. We
call these price and time strategies leading indicators because they identify in advance
conditions with a high probability outcome. If a market fulfills those conditions, a trade
setup is made. I know they will become a very important part of your trading plan when
you learn the power of being prepared in advance for specific price and time targets for
trend reversal.

WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS BOOK AND
VIDEO CD
In this book, you will first learn the four dimensions of market position: multiple time
frame momentum, pattern, price, and time. Each factor provides an important piece of
information you will use to make a trading decision. A trading plan that does not include
these four market dimensions is missing a big piece of the market puzzle and is much
less effective than one that includes all four dimensions.
Most readers are familiar with momentum studies, also called indicators or oscillators. A momentum indicator by itself is not of much practical use to the trader. All momentum studies are lagging indicators. They are great for showing you the current market
position relative to the past, but are not of much help in pointing to the probable trend
position in the future—unless you use them in the unique way you will learn in Chapter
2. Chapter 2 presents a momentum strategy used by few traders that will teach you how
to use the lagging momentum indicators as a powerful technique as a filter for trade direction and execution setups. This multiple time frame momentum strategy will become
the most useful and practical momentum application you can add to your trading plan.
Elliott wave pattern analysis has been so overcomplicated and misinterpreted over
the years that many traders avoid it like the plague. I don’t blame them. In Chapter 3,
you will learn the simple guidelines based on Elliott wave structures to identify three frequent patterns for all markets and all time frames. One simple guideline will instantly reveal if a market should be in a trend or countertrend. This simple guideline itself should
make a big difference in your trading results. It is critical for the trader to recognize
whether the current market condition is part of a correction or trend, and, more important, if the correction or trend is in a position to be complete. This information can be
a very important part of your trading plan and help prepare you for market reversals of
any time frame. After you have learned the pattern guidelines in Chapter 3, you will be
able to quickly recognize the probable structure position of any market and any time
frame.
Most traders are familiar with Fibonacci (Fib) price retracements. Like a single time
frame momentum study, they are not of much practical use by themselves to make a
trade decision. Chapter 4 teaches you how to identify in advance which retracement

P1: PIC/PIC
c01

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 17, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

High Probability Trade Strategies for Any Market and Any Time Frame

7

level is likely to complete a correction of any time frame. It also teaches you how to
project the probable trend targets in advance to be prepared for the price level at which
a trend should be complete. You will also learn some new ratios that are not a part of the
Fib ratio series that are a key to correction and trend price targets. Once you learn my
Dynamic Price Strategies in Chapter 4, you should be prepared not just for temporary
support and resistance levels, but for the specific price levels for trend and countertrend
reversals.
Market timing in its true sense—identifying specific time target zones for trend
change in any time frame—is rarely used by most traders. W. D. Gann taught many years
ago, “When time is up, change is inevitable.” Chapter 5 teaches you my unique Dynamic
Time Strategies I’ve developed over the past 20 years, which will allow you to project
the probable minimum and maximum time targets for trend reversal. You will also learn
how to project time bands in any time frame to target a relatively narrow time range with
a high probability for trend change. Practical market timing should be an important part
of every trader’s plan.
After you have learned these four key factors of market position that will prepare you
to recognize optimal trade conditions, Chapter 6 teaches you two completely objective
entry strategies and how to quickly determine the maximum position size for any trade.
The strategies you learn in Chapter 6 will completely eliminate any guesswork on what
price you should enter a market and what should be the stop-loss price. Most important,
you will learn what all successful traders know: The proper position size for any trade
setup on any time frame is one of the most important keys to long-term success for the
business of trading.
Earlier I promised that you would learn how to manage a trade from entry to exit.
Chapter 7 is the heart of this book, as far as I’m concerned. This is where you learn
to apply all of the practical strategies, from recognizing high probability trade setups,
to the specific entry strategy, stop-loss adjustment, and exit strategy. In other words,
Chapter 7 teaches you how to manage a trade from entry to exit. You will learn how to
make confident and logical decisions throughout the trade process.
Chapter 8 gives trade examples from students of my live and online workshops, educational CD programs, and other educational trading material I’ve produced over the
past 20 years. These examples by other real-world traders show you how what you learn
in this book has been put into practice every day in many different markets and many
different time frames.
Chapter 9 offers more insight into the business of trading, what it takes to be successful, and a whole lot more. A lot of misleading information and sometimes just plain
misinformation has been published about the business of trading. You’ll find in this chapter that I don’t pull any punches. If you thought I was a bit opinionated as you read
through the earlier chapters, wait until you get to Chapter 9. I want you to be successful, and Chapter 9 will help keep you on track on the road to a successful trading
business.
The video CD included with this book is an important part of the learning experience.
Again, do not play the CD until you have read the book cover to cover. It will be a valuable

P1: PIC/PIC
c01

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

8

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 17, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

HIGH PROBABILITY TRADING STRATEGIES FOR ANY MARKET AND ANY TIME FRAME

resource, but you will only get the full benefit if you have first familiarized yourself with
all the background material in the book.

LET’S GET STARTED
It’s time to get started and learn High Probability Trading Strategies: From Entry to
Exit for the Futures, Forex, and Stock Markets. We begin with a unique approach to
momentum strategies, the multiple time frame momentum strategy in Chapter 2.

P1: PIC/PIC
c02

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 18, 2008

6:40

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 2

Multiple Time Frame
Momentum Strategy
An Objective Filter to Identify High
Probability Trade Setups

The Multiple Time Frame (MTF) Momentum Strategy is the most
powerful approach I’ve discovered in over 20 years to filter any market and any time frame for trade direction and execution. The MTF
Momentum Strategy is a key factor to the trade plan that identifies
high probability trade setups with minimal capital exposure.

J

ust about every trading book or course will emphasize that you always want to
“trade with the trend.” It’s great advice. If you are always trading with the trend,
you should mount up some very impressive gains.
Two big questions are usually not clearly answered: “How do you objectively identify
trend direction?” and “Is the trend in the early or late stages?”
In almost every trading book and course I’ve seen over the past 20 or more years,
the trading educators show many after-the-fact examples of how their trend indicator
identified the trend direction long after the trend was established. It is easy to show
a trend on any chart long after the trend is established. But how do we identify trend
direction in the early stages? How do we identify when an established trend is in the
later stages and in a position to make a trend reversal? Without some approach to help
identify where within the trend the market likely is, typical trend analysis will usually be
too early or too late to be useful over time.
It is easy to fill a book with after-the-fact examples of trends. Trendlines, moving averages, channels, momentum indicators, and many other techniques can show the trend
on historic data. Unfortunately, none of these techniques can reliably alert you to the
beginning stages of a new trend or whether a trend is in its final stages. They can only
identify an established trend, usually long after the trend is established and the optimum
entry is long over.
I know, we could say that a trendline break indicates a trend is complete and a reversal has been made. For every trendline break that follows a trend reversal, I can show you
a trendline break fake-out that is followed by a continuation of the prior trend. Moving
average crossovers are notorious for false trend reversal signals.
9

P1: PIC/PIC
c02

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

10

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 18, 2008

6:40

Printer: Yet to come

HIGH PROBABILITY TRADING STRATEGIES FOR ANY MARKET AND ANY TIME FRAME

In fact, most methods of identifying a price trend are doomed to failure for practical
trade strategies with as many false reversal signals as confirmed ones. This is a bold
statement, but I believe it is true. It’s time to stop the madness and and deal with the
reality of trend position. I defy any trading educator to provide evidence that his socalled trend indicator consistently provides an accurate signal of trend position and trend
reversal in a timely manner that a trader can take advantage of.
How can I make this statement? Let’s defy the crowd and think for ourselves in a
logical manner. What does a trendline, channel lines, moving average, or other indicator
represent? Every moving average, channel, or indicator is based on historic price data.
It can only represent what has happened or what is the current market position relative
to the lookback period. It has little predictive value in and of itself. It will always be
a lagging indicator of the trend position, never a leading indicator of what is likely to
happen in the future.
Why are some of these techniques promoted over and over again as “trend indicators” with value for making practical trade decisions? Because it is easy to find lots of
chart examples that seem to illustrate how valuable are each of the author’s price trend
indicators. However, let me make you this promise and this challenge. Name a trend indicator and for any market or any time frame that you are given an example of how it
defines the trend, I will show you two examples where it quickly failed.
Every one of these techniques, whether a trendline, volatility channel, moving average crossover, or momentum indicator, can be a useful part of a comprehensive trading
plan, but none of them alone will be of much use in and of itself to identify the probable
trend direction for a future period. Over and over again, you will find that price reversals do not coincide with the trend indicator reversals. As I mentioned earlier, for every
after-the-fact, well-chosen example given, I will quickly find at least two where the trend
indicator did not work to identify a trend reversal in a timely manner.
However, there is a way to use some of these indicators to identify high probability
trade setups.
In this chapter, you will learn how to use just about any momentum indicator as a
trend indicator for trade direction in a unique but very logical way that you have probably
not been taught before. We are not concerned with identifying the exact price-swing
high or low of a trend. Rather, we are concerned with identifying trades in the direction
of the trend, including near the early stages of the trend and avoiding the later stages.
The Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy that you are about to learn is the most
powerful strategy to filter any market for trade direction and trade execution setups.
Not only do I believe the Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy is the best use of
an indicator for trading strategies, I believe it is the only practical indicator strategy for
real-world trading.
The Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy is not a stand-alone trade system (although it is probably much better than most “systems” that sell for thousands of dollars),
but when it is included as part of a trade plan with the time, price, and pattern strategies
you will also learn in this book, you will have a powerful trade plan that will not only
identify high probability trade setups with minimal capital exposure, but warn you when
a trend is near the end and a major trend reversal is likely.

P1: PIC/PIC
c02

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 18, 2008

6:40

Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy

Printer: Yet to come

11

I use the term capital exposure to describe what many trade educators call risk.
Risk is the probability of an event happening. Capital exposure is the amount of money
(capital) that may be lost if a market moves against you. I have much more to say about
capital exposure later in the book.
Let’s begin with the concepts of trend and momentum before we even look at a chart
or the dual time frame momentum strategy rules.

WHAT IS MOMENTUM?
In the world of trading, there are hundreds of momentum indicators (also called oscillators). Most of these indicators use the same information, the open-high-low-close of
a price bar, and represent about the same thing, the rate-of-change of price. There is
nothing mysterious, magical, or unique about this. All price indicators look back over a
given period, called the lookback period, crunch the price data, and compare the recent
price position with the price position of the lookback period. Different indicators manipulate and display the output differently, but all price-based indicators represent about
the same thing: the rate-of-change or how fast the price trend is moving. The indicator
reversals represent the change in momentum—the increase or decrease in the rate-ofchange of the price trend. That is why you can use almost any price based indicator for
the Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy you will learn in this chapter.
The first and most basic concept is this: Momentum indicators do not represent
price trends. Momentum indicators represent momentum trends. This should be
obvious, but I can’t tell you how many new traders over the years expect a price reversal
every time a momentum indicator reverses. It just doesn’t work this way, because the
indicator does not represent the price trend. If it did, this book would be about three
pages long because all we would have to do is reverse our trade position each time a
momentum indicator makes a reversal, and we would compound money faster than
rabbits on Viagra can reproduce.
Unfortunately, it is not that easy. Price and momentum do not always trend together.
For example, a momentum indicator may make a bearish reversal and decline while the
price trend continues to advance. How can it do this? The rate-of-change of the price
trend is decreasing even though price continues to advance. The bullish trend is just
slowing down, so the momentum indicator is bearish even though the price trend continues to be bullish. The outcome: The price trend and momentum trend run opposite of
each other.
Let me repeat this basic and very important concept about momentum indicators:
Momentum indicators represent momentum trends, not price trends. Never expect
price to reverse when the indicator makes a reversal. Often both price and momentum
reverse together, but sometimes they will diverge because the price trend is only slowing
down, forcing the indicator to reverse.
This point is important to clearly understand, and the vast majority of traders just
don’t get it. So let me repeat it one more time: Momentum indicators represent momentum trends, not price trends. Price and momentum may not trend in the same direction.
Not every momentum reversal will coincide with a price reversal.

P1: PIC/PIC
c02

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

12

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 18, 2008

6:40

Printer: Yet to come

HIGH PROBABILITY TRADING STRATEGIES FOR ANY MARKET AND ANY TIME FRAME

We can only make money on price trends, at least until someone comes up with a
momentum contract to trade! Even though momentum and price trends often do not
move in the same direction, you will soon learn how we can use momentum trends in a
simple and practical way as the primary indicator of trade direction and trade execution
setups. You will also learn how, by incorporating dual time frame momentum trends in a
comprehensive trading plan that also includes the time, price, and pattern position of a
market, you can identify whether the market is at or very near a price trend reversal.

MULTIPLE TIME FRAME MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
In over 20 years of trading and educating traders beginning in the mid-1980s, Multiple
Time Frame Momentum Strategies have become the most powerful trade direction and
execution approach I’ve added to my trading plan and taught my students.
For at least the first 10 years I traded, I never used an indicator. I was basically a pure
chartist using time, price and pattern position to identify trade setups and targets. My
strategy was based on Gann, Elliott, and Fibonacci. In 1989, I released what I believe was
the first futures trading home study course, called the W.D. Gann Home Study Trading
Course, based on Gann, Elliott, and Fibonacci trade strategies. This course is no longer
available.
It wasn’t until the late 1980s that I even had a computer with a charting program. I
studied a lot about indicators and discovered I could always find an indicator or make a
change in a lookback period or other setting for the indicator to confirm whatever price
trend bias I had. There was never an indicator on my charts, simply because everything I
read and tested on indicator strategies didn’t seem to work out, and I just could not find
a logical and practical application for indicators.
Around the mid-1990s, at the prompting of one of my students, I began to look at how
a momentum indicator could help confirm the pattern and price position. It took a couple
of years to work out practical strategies for a momentum indicator to be a part of a realworld trading plan. Then, several years ago, I started working with momentum strategies
using multiple time frames and was blown away with how valuable they could be as
part of the trading plan, to identify trade direction and trade execution and to confirm a
potential price reversal at price or time targets. Like everything I teach in this book, these
strategies can be used for any time frame and any market, from day to position trading.

THE BASIC DUAL TIME FRAME
MOMENTUM STRATEGY
I first teach the concept and application of a momentum strategy using two time frames.
Later I give examples of how to use more than two time frames, but two are all you need.
You will learn how to integrate this strategy into your trade plan.

P1: PIC/PIC
c02

P2: c/d

JWBK244-Miner

QC: e/f

T1: g

August 18, 2008

6:40

Printer: Yet to come

Multiple Time Frame Momentum Strategy

13

Let’s get down to the basic strategy for the Dual Time Frame Momentum Reversal
Strategy. It is so simple and logical, you’re going to wonder why you haven’t been using
this strategy since your first trade!
DUAL TIME FRAME MOMENTUM STRATEGY
Ĺ Trade in the direction of the larger time frame momentum.
Ĺ Execute the trade following the smaller time frame momentum reversals.

It is that simple and logical. It doesn’t matter what time frames you use. If you are
a position trader looking for trades that last from several weeks to months, you will use
weekly and daily momentum trends. If you are a swing trader looking for trades that last
a few days, you will use daily and hourly data. Day traders will probably use 60-minute
and 15-minute data or even smaller time frames.
Let’s break down the Dual Time Frame Momentum Strategy into its parts to identify
trade direction and trade execution setups.

Larger Time Frame Momentum Trend Identifies
Trade Direction
We know the momentum trend will not always be in the direction of the price trend.
But a good indicator with the right lookback period will usually trend in the direction of
price and reverse within a very few bars of the price reversal. When price and momentum
diverge, as in the case of a bullish price trend and bearish momentum trend, the larger
time frame bearish momentum will keep us out of trades when the price trend is slowing
down. The specific trade strategies you will learn in a later chapter will usually keep you
out of a trade when the momentum trend is diverging with the price trend, which, at the
least, will limit losses on losing trades. And remember, you will have losses, so a trade
strategy that minimizes losses on losing trades is essential for trading success.
Dual Time Frame (DTF) Momentum Rule 1: Only trade in the direction of the
larger time frame momentum trend unless the momentum position is overbought
or oversold.
I’ll define the overbought and oversold exceptions soon.
The larger time frame momentum position identifies the trade direction. It does not
signal that a trade should be executed; it only signals the direction of a possible trade,
long or short. The smaller time frame momentum reversals are the specific signal that
must be made before the trade is even considered. The smaller time frame momentum
reversal does not execute the trade, but completes the conditions that must be in place
before a trade execution may be considered.
