unrelated to core operations.

13

14

Chapter 1 | Historical Background

Banks and Broker-Dealers
Banks and broker-dealers (also known as prime brokers) account for $1.5
trillion in daily forex turnover. (The actual figure is certainly much higher,
since trading by other financial institutions is still facilitated by banks. This
figure represents trading volume in which a bank or broker-dealer served as a
counterparty.) CLS lists 69 broker-dealers among its members, accounting
for more than half of worldwide foreign exchange. As you can see from
Figure 1-5 below, trading activity across the world is dominated by a handful
of large banks.3 Deutsche Bank is by far the industry leader, followed closely
by Barclays Capital, UBS, and Citi.
What’s more, the leading banks have rapidly consolidated their positions.
The Bank for International Settlements attributes this to investment in
proprietary trading systems. In other words, as other sources of profit
(investment and commercial banking) have apparently dried up, banks have
moved to expand their trading operations, starting with forex. Regardless of
the reason, there are only half as many dominant forex broker-dealers (ten) as
there were a decade ago. This is true across every major trading center except
for Hong Kong.

3 Euromoney Magazine, “Euromoney FX Survey 2011,” May 2011.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 1-5. Concentration of trading volume among large banks

As a result of recent legislation, however, these banks are now prohibited
from trading for their own accounts, and are generally only permitted to
facilitate trades on behalf of their customers.

Other Financial Institutions
While almost all trades are ultimately routed through banks, the majority of
actual trading is conducted by financial institutions—such as hedge funds,
pension funds, investment management companies—which are engaged in
forex trading entirely for speculative purposes. These institutions trade

15

16

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
primarily through proprietary systems operated by individual banks or multibank trading systems.
Of course, some of this volume is transacted as legitimate cross-border
investment. When a corporation invests in an overseas project, it is practicing
what is referred to as foreign direct investment (FDI). When an investment
fund buys shares of stock or bonds that trade on an overseas exchange, this is
known as portfolio investment. Such investments necessarily involve foreign
currency exchange.
However, an increasing amount of institutional volume is being transacted in
the form of high-frequency and/or algorithmic trading. Hedge funds in
particular have become notorious for their reliance on placing millions of
rapid-fire trades every day, through systems that are largely automated. They
seek to profit from miniscule changes in exchange rates and minute
discrepancies in exchange rates across different trading centers, both of
which might occur in less than a second. Known as forex arbitrage, this
strategy typically involves buying a block of currency on one exchange and
immediately reselling it for a slight profit (less than one PIP) on another
exchange.
High-frequency trading already accounts for an estimated 30% of overall
forex volume (compared to 66% of equities trading volume) and is expected
to account for a majority of volume as soon as 2012.4 On some exchanges,
algorithmic (also known as computerized) trading accounts for 45% of total
volume. This volume has allowed high-frequency traders to place themselves
at the center of the market. (See Figure 1-6.)

4 Javier Paz,“Retail FX Comes of Age: Leveraged Trading Is Here to Stay,” Aite Group,

March 23, 2011.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 1-6. Relationship of forex participants

High-frequency trading might explain most of the growth in overall volume
that took place over the last three years, and its use may continue to set the
pace for growth going forward. Naturally, this has spurred an arms race
among market participants to develop the fastest networks and most
sophisticated software.
Many commentators have lamented this phenomenon. To be sure, highfrequency trading is probably responsible for increased volatility. In addition,
the sophistication of institutional trading algorithms has made it more
difficult for amateur traders to profit from technical analysis strategies. On
the other hand, hedge funds have become a great source of liquidity, driving
execution times and spreads down to record low levels. Besides, as I’ll
explain in the chapters that follow, it’s possible to craft a trading strategy that
takes this trend into account.

Retail Brokers and Retail Traders
As forex becomes increasingly mainstream, more amateur and professional
investors are rushing to join in. Households and small non-bank institutions
now account for an estimated $300 billion in global forex volume,
representing close to 10% of overall volume and market growth of 400%

17

18

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
from 2007! Japanese retail traders are especially active in the forex market
and may account for as much as 30% of trading in the Japanese yen. In fact,
this phenomenon has become so widespread that the media has begun to
paint a picture of Japanese women—referred to as Mrs. Watanabes—as
housewives that sit at home trading forex from their computers while their
husbands are at work.
Retail forex brokers have responded by becoming more sophisticated and
more transparent. They have developed proprietary systems that rival those
developed by broker-dealers, or engage in white label licensing of existing
multi-dealer systems. In fact, some retail brokers have been able to lure small
institutional customers away from broker-dealers. All have expanded their
operations to offer more currencies, better coverage, lower spreads, and more
tools for traders. In 2010, two forex brokers (FXCM and Gain Capital
Group) became the first in the industry to become publicly listed companies,
and a handful of others are reportedly considering a similar move.
Meanwhile, discount brokers have quietly expanded into forex. Ameritrade
entered the forex market through its purchase of ThinkorSwim in 2009.
Charles Schwab is using a similar strategy for gaining access to forex
customers, with its acquisition of OptionsExpress. Overall, the industry is
undergoing a period of rapid consolidation, which should ultimately produce
a dozen or so solid contenders.

Individuals
It could also be argued that individuals participate in the forex market on a
non-speculative basis. When consumer choices are framed in economic
terms, consumers often respond by buying whatever is cheapest. Thus,
fluctuations in exchange rates will cause important changes in travel and
consumption patterns. The silver lining of a battered exchange rate is often a
pickup in exports. Due to the recent multi-year decline of the US dollar, for
example, US prices became relatively cheaper in terms of other currencies.
As a result, US products became more attractive to foreign buyers, and
multinational companies responded by relocating assembly plants to the
United States. Overseas tourists have begun to visit the United States in
droves, and Canadian citizens (especially those that reside near the border)
have started taking short trips to the United States for the purpose of
shopping.

Forex for Beginners
Remittances, on the other hand, typically flow in the opposite direction.
Migrant workers in countries with strong currencies will remit part of their
salaries to countries whose currencies are relatively weak. In this way,
migrant workers are also tailoring their economic behavior so as to take
exchange rates into account. As I will show in Chapter 3, the pull that this
exerts on forex markets is not insignificant.

Central Banks
Most currency traders consider the role of central banks only insofar as their
policy actions indirectly influence exchange rates. In reality, however,
central banks are among the largest and most active participants in the forex
markets. During certain years, the world’s largest banks may buy hundreds of
billions of dollars worth of foreign currency.
Despite preaching laissez-faire economics, many central banks closely
monitor the value of their respective currencies. When exchange rates deviate
too far from a targeted value, some central banks will then go so far as to
intervene in forex markets. They do this by buying or selling their home
currency, causing it to appreciate or depreciate, respectively. These programs
of intervention inevitably fail over the long-term, but over the short-term
they can be very effective. That’s probably because central banks have
control over the money printing presses and nearly unlimited budgets.
Speculators understand this and may not wish to take positions that aren’t
consistent with the short-term goals of the central bank.
In the process, central banks may amass hundreds of billions of dollars in
foreign exchange reserves. The allocation of these reserves can have a direct
impact on forex markets, as will be discussed later.

Regulation
It was only in the wake of the financial crisis that governments became
serious about regulating the forex market—especially the retail side of the
market. Due to its regional fragmentation, the market naturally resists
regulation. A second problem is that forex is traded through a variety of
financial instruments, and each instrument is technically regulated by a
different government bureau.

19

20

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
The Dodd-Frank Consumer Protection Act of 2010 was intended to resolve
some of these jurisdictional issues. The Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC) has taken the lead and is now the official regulator of
the forex spot market. After several rounds of negotiations and a public
comment period, the CFTC formally released a set of new regulations in late
2010.
As a direct result of these new regulations, all forex firms are now required to
register with the National Futures Association (NFA), either as futures
commission merchants (FCMs) or as retail foreign exchange dealers
(RFEDs). Registering institutions are required to “maintain net capital of $20
million plus 5 percent of the amount, if any, by which liabilities to retail
forex customers exceed $10 million”5 in order to protect traders against the
possibility of broker bankruptcy. In addition, “persons who solicit orders,
exercise discretionary trading authority or operate pools with respect to retail
forex also will be required to register, either as introducing brokers,
commodity trading advisors, commodity pool operators (as appropriate) or as
associated persons of such entities.”6 Forex brokers must also “disclose on a
quarterly basis the percentage of non-discretionary accounts that realized a
profit and to keep and make available records of that calculation.”7 (Actually,
this calculation has become an excellent tool for first comparing and then
selecting a broker, as will be shown in Chapter 8.) Finally, American forex
firms are basically prohibited from offering commodities trading and
contracts for difference (CFD). Because of their derivative nature, there are
too many restrictions on trading them over-the-counter (OTC).
These new rules have also been accompanied by strict enforcement. Firms
that have failed to register are investigated and prosecuted. The NFA has also
been quick to bring high-profile cases against legitimate firms. In 2011,
FXCM was fined a record $8 million for illegally profiting from movements
in exchange rates, and ordered to pay an additional $8 million in restitution
to customers.8
5 “CFTC Releases Final Rules Regarding Retail Forex Transactions,” CFTC, August 30,

2010, www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr5883-10.
6 Ibid.
7 “Final Rule Regarding Retail Foreign Exchange Transactions,” CFTC, August 30,

2010,
www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@newsroom/documents/file/forexfinalrulefactsheet.pdf
.

Forex for Beginners
The majority of retail forex brokers have accepted the registration
requirements. (CitiFX is the only major forex broker that is exempt from
registering; as a bank, it is not under the same regulatory purview as forex
brokers.) In fact, many of the brokers lobbied aggressively for the new
regulations with the intention of raising the barriers to entry and helping
existing brokers consolidate their market share. The registration requirements
have also brought much-needed credibility to an industry severely lacking in
it and a framework for dispute resolution.
Exchange Traded Funds (including currency ETFs) are regulated by the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), while the
stockbrokers that facilitate their trading are governed by the National
Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) and to a lesser extent by the
Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC).
The one clause in the new regulations that was resisted by brokers and
traders alike prohibits leverage that exceeds 50:1 for major currency pairs
and 20:1 for other currencies. (It should be noted, however, that the CFTC
did not itself specify the currency pairs that fall into each category.) Brokers
were naturally upset that a direct source of profit (and a driver of volume)
was being curtailed. Traders argued that it was an encroachment of
government and threatened to move their accounts to offshore brokers.
Indeed, so-called regulatory arbitrage will always be an issue in forex, as
there will always be US account holders that wish to trade using leverage in
excess of what US brokers are legally allowed to offer. Not only are these
traders breaking the law, but they also lose any consumer protection afforded
by the US legal system. In fact, there have been a handful of cases of US
traders experiencing difficulty in withdrawing funds from UK brokers.
Forbes speculated, “These new rules will put a stop to Americans trading
retail forex offshore to evade CFTC rules. That trend picked up the pace in
recent years and it may need to be reversed quickly.”9
With the exception of the European Union, other locales are governed by
relatively lax forex regulation. Some have even used the lack of regulation as
a selling point to prospective traders. In some countries—such as
8 Chana R. Schoenberger, “FXCM to Pay $14 Million in Exchange-Rate Cases,” Wall

Street Journal, October 3, 2011.
9 Robert A. Green, “New CFTC Forex Trading Rules Call or 50:1 Leverage,” Forbes

Magazine, September 2, 2010.

21

22

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
Brazil—foreign investors must pay high tax rates in order to transfer funds
into local currency. In other countries—namely China—forex trading has
been banned completely, usually because it conflicts with the local monetary
policy.

Conclusion
As you can see, the system, structure, and rules of forex market distinguish it
from almost every other type of financial market. Currencies are traded
differently from other securities and governed by different regulations.
Participants behave differently and interact through unique, specialized
systems. With this foundation, let’s move ahead and examine some of the
specific vehicles that are used to capture currency fluctuations, and the
concrete ways in which traders seeking upside exposure to forex utilize them.

CHAPTER

2
What Are
Your
Options?
Currency Pairs and Investment
Vehicles
There are perhaps 160 different currencies in the world. While all currencies
necessarily have exchange value, the majority of them are not exchanged
outside of the territories where they are used. The Continuous Linked
Settlement Bank (CLS) settles trades in only 17 currencies, and liquidity is
greatest for an even smaller group of selected currencies. These so-called
major currencies account for more than 90% of global foreign exchange
volume and tend to be characterized by tight spreads and excellent liquidity.
Expanding this group to include 20 or so exotic currencies can account for
more than 97% of overall volume, as shown in Figure 2-1.

24

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

Figure 2-1. Major and exotic currencies, percent of overall trading volume: 2001–20101

Just like stocks have ticker symbols, currencies have three-letter
abbreviations, known as ISO (International Standards Organization) codes,
which simplify the quoting and trading of currencies. As you can see from
Table 2-1, ISO codes tend to be self-explanatory.
Table 2-1. ISO Codes for Major and Exotic Currencies
US dollar

USD

Polish zloty

PLN

Euro

EUR

Turkish lira

TLR

Japanese yen

JPY

South African rand

ZAR

British pound

GBP

Brazilian real

BRL

Australian dollar

AUD

Danish krone

DKK

Swiss franc

CHF

New Taiwan dollar

TWD

Canadian dollar

CAD

Hungarian forint

HUF

Hong Kong dollar

HKD

Chinese yuan renminbi

CNY

1 The total sum is 200% because every currency trade always involves two currencies.

Forex for Beginners

Swedish krona

SEK

Malaysian ringgit

MYR

New Zealand dollar

NZD

Thai baht

THB

Korean won

KRW

Czech koruna

CZK

Singapore dollar

SGD

Philippine peso

PHP

Norwegian krone

NOK

Chilean peso

CLP

Mexican peso

MXP

Indonesian rupiah

IDR

Indian rupee

INR

New Israeli shekel

ILS

Russian ruble

RUB

Colombian peso

COP

Remember that currencies fluctuate relative to other currencies, and that they
must necessarily be traded in pairs. There are hundreds of potential currency
combinations involving the 30 most popular currencies, but less than 100
pairs dominate trading in mainstream investment channels. Most retail forex
brokers offer about 50 pairs.
There are a few reasons for this. First, most exotic currencies are traded only
relative to major currencies, rather than against other exotic currencies. You
would never see a quote for the Czech koruna against the Thai baht, though
both currencies can easily be exchanged for euros or US dollars. That’s not
to say that Czech companies and individuals have no way to exchange
koruna for baht, but rather that volume is too small for international brokerdealers to profitably maintain a liquid market. Second, the forex market is
governed by the rule of triangular arbitrage, which dictates that for a set of
three currency pairs, only two of them can fluctuate independently. For
example, consider the following three currency pairs: dollar/euro, dollar/yen,
and yen/euro. If the dollar rises by 1% against the euro, and the dollar stays
flat against the yen, the yen must necessarily rise by 1% against the euro in
order for market equilibrium to be maintained. These days, computerized
trading systems can spot even the smallest discrepancies, and arbitrage them
away in mere milliseconds.
Besides, it has historically been the case that exotic currencies fluctuate
relative to the dollar, euro, or other major currencies. There simply isn’t

25

26

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
enough bilateral trade or cross-border investment between the Czech
Republic and Thailand for the market to be able to determine a reasonable
exchange rate between their respective currencies. Instead, both currencies
will trade relative to the US dollar, and triangular arbitrage will dictate the
cross rate for the koruna/baht (CZK/THB). For investors that nonetheless
want direct exposure to CZK/THB, the investment process is fairly
straightforward. By buying the USD/THB and simultaneously selling the
CZK/USD, the result is a synthetic CZK/THB position:

USD + CZK = CZK
THB
USD
THB

US Dollar
The US dollar (or Greenback) is easily the world’s most important currency.
The relative strength of the US dollar is largely attributable to the facts that
US economy is the largest in the world and its capital markets are the deepest
and most liquid. Some also attribute the dollar’s strength to political/military
factors, while others consider it an outgrowth of the old Bretton Woods
System. Regardless, the US dollar is the fulcrum of the forex markets, and all
other exchange rates are based in large part on market participants’
perceptions of the dollar.
In addition to its status as the world’s most important currency, the US dollar
is also the most liquid, and so it is unsurprising that it serves as the world’s
de facto reserve currency. In fact, roughly 65% of the world’s reserves are
denominated in US dollars, and as a result, central banks around the world
collectively hold many trillions of dollars worth of currency on their balance
sheets. From time to time, central banks will agitate for a new system that
would leave them less exposed to a sudden devaluation in the US dollar. For
a variety of reasons, however, they haven’t made much headway in this
quest. It can be seen from Figure 2-2 that the US dollar is represented in the
overwhelming majority of forex transactions.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-2. Breakdown of forex volume by currency pair

As I explained in Chapter 1, the US dollar’s defining feature is that it is a
safe-haven currency. During times of global financial, economic, or even
political uncertainty, the underlying value of the dollar will rise. This point
was underscored during the height of the global credit crisis in 2008–2009.
Even though much of the financial distress originated within the United
States (i.e., the bankruptcies of Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns, falling
real estate prices, etc.) the US dollar appreciated in value. That’s because
investors from the United States and around the world were suddenly
overcome with fear, and moved their cash to what is perceived as the world’s
safest location: US government securities. That the US financial system was
in many ways the source of instability was bizarrely of no concern to the

27

28

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
forex markets! In addition, whether or not Treasury bonds are actually a good
investment is certainly open to debate. What’s important is that they are
perceived as the safest investment in the world, a general sentiment that is
made clear every time there is even a minor crisis in the financial industry.
To be sure, the US dollar looks vulnerable on a number of fronts. As this
book goes to press, the US economic recovery remains precarious, and a
second recession is not out of the question. The unemployment rate is still
high, interest rates remain low, housing and stock prices are plummeting, and
commodity prices are rising. While the trade imbalance seems to have
stabilized, it is nonetheless tilted heavily towards deficit.
Some commentators argue that there is a glut of dollars in the money supply
as a result of two Federal Reserve Bank monetary stimulus programs. Left
unattended, this could lead to an inflationary surge. Meanwhile, both public
and private debts continue to reach record levels, and the US sovereign credit
rating was downgraded from the highest level of AAA in 2011. Due to
previously unseen levels of political infighting, federal and state
governments seem incapable of putting the United States on a sustainable
economic course. For this reason, there are a number of bears that insist the
period of dollar hegemony will soon come to an end.
For now at least, however, the dollar seems likely to hold on to its position
atop the forex markets, if only because of a lack of viable alternatives. (The
Wizard of Omaha Warren Buffett famously lost more than $1 billion in 2005,
when he bet on a long-term decline of the dollar.) As we’ll see later, most
other major currencies are racked by the same financial and economic
problems as the dollar. Emerging market economies represent the future of
the global economy, but it will still be many years before their currencies can
challenge the dollar and the rest of the world’s major currencies.
