
340

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.25 Patterns can sometimes be strangely shaped, but as long as the
basic rules are still applied for analysis, the pattern is valid.

FIGURE 13.26 Just because the right shoulder is higher than the left does not
negate the H&S pattern.

Head and Shoulders

341

FIGURE 13.27 The day that the price broke below this stock’s neckline would
have been, in retrospect, a perfect time to get in, because the very next day the
stock gapped down and never looked back.

ignored. Epix also illustrates how vital the neckline is to monitoring the
stock’s possible breakdown. On January 13, 2005, the stock fell below
its neckline. For those who did not want to wait for a possible retracement, this would have been an ideal time to enter a short position on the
stock, because the neckline was decisively violated. The very next day, the
stock gapped down in price, almost instantly demonstrating the validity
and strength of this pattern for this stock.
Subsequent to this break in price, the stock fell substantially before
regaining some strength. However, instead of retracing to the neckline,
it only retraced to the vicinity of the price gap before resuming its fall
(Figure 13.27). Those waiting for a retracement to the neckline would have
never taken a position in this stock, but those who executed their trades
on the day of the neckline break would have enjoyed handsome gains.
It isn’t practical, of course, to monitor hundreds of stocks to see what
necklines have been broken. There are many web sites that provide free
stock alert services on the Internet. Many online brokers also provide the
ability to enter a stock order contingent on a stock’s price. The neckline
for EPIX, for instance, was at $15.43. You might have entered an order to

342

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.28 Some H&S patterns can precede gigantic price declines, such as
this one, which led the stock almost to $0.

sell the stock short if the price went below, for instance, $15.40 (or some
other price low enough that you felt confident the neckline had indeed been
violated). This way, you could put the trade on automatic pilot if you were
confident enough in the pattern.
Generally speaking, it is indeed better for the right shoulder to be
lower in an H&S pattern. Given the choice between two otherwise identical H&S charts, one with a higher right shoulder and one with a lower right
shoulder, the latter is probably the more profitable choice. Fedders Corp
(Figure 13.28) sported a very high left shoulder, a head, and a much lower
right shoulder. The stock broke the neckline, retraced almost back to it,
and then spent many subsequent months plotting out a series of lower lows
and lower highs. The damage to the stock was tremendous, bringing the
price almost down to zero.
A decision you will face every time you find an H&S pattern is whether
to place a trade the moment the neckline is broken or instead wait for a
retracement. A variety of factors will contribute to your decision, such as
how high the potential profit is, how volatile the stock is, how well-formed
the pattern is, and your own past experience with similar patterns. There is
no one right answer, since every chart and opportunity are different. If you

Head and Shoulders

343

FIGURE 13.29 Entering a short position immediately upon the neckline break
can yield better proﬁts, but it also brings higher risk.

were looking at the chart shown in Figure 13.29, you might want to consider what you would do—short it at once, or wait to see what happened?
As Figure 13.30 shows, the best decision in this case would have been
to place the trade at once, perhaps using a contingent order with your broker to execute the trade the moment the price dipped beneath the neckline.
The stock never made a full retracement, but it did fall substantially. Only
those bold enough to make the trade without hesitation maximized their
profits.
Express Scripts (symbol ESRX) behaved quite differently, since its
retracement was orderly and didn’t even take very long to complete. The
arrows on the chart (Figure 13.31) simplify the stock’s behavior after the
trendline break, first moving from $80 to $64, a 20 percent drop in price,
and then returning to the neckline at $80 once more. It is possible that
the cleaner shape of the H&S pattern contributed to this more orderly
behavior.
A similar retracement can be seen with the small carrier Frontier
Airlines (symbol FRNT). Figure 13.32 shows the stock running up in price
from $3.75 to nearly $20. Between the $15 and $19 range, the stock built
a relatively clean H&S pattern, although the neckline is a little rough.

344

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.30 There are many occasions where a retracement is only partial, not
making its way all the way back to the neckline.

FIGURE 13.31 Here ESRX goes full circle from $80 down to $64 and then back
to $80 again.

Head and Shoulders

345

FIGURE 13.32 The typical movement seen here is a break beneath the neckline followed by a strengthening of the stock back to a point just underneath the
same line.

The stock broke down, falling rapidly for five days, then it spent the next
several weeks fighting its way back to the neckline.
The longer-term graph in Figure 13.33 reveals the aftermath of this
neckline break, with the arrow indicating the retracement point. This also
helps illustrate how valuable it is for an H&S pattern to be preceded by a
swift run-up in price, because there was virtually no meaningful support on
the way down. It took longer for the stock to fall than it did to rise, which is
somewhat unusual, but the downtrend was orderly as the stock lost about
60 percent of its value after the break.
Many of the examples used in this chapter are from companies that
perhaps you had not heard of before. Important technical patterns such
as the H&S certainly are not restricted to small stocks, however. In Figure 13.34, General Electric’s stock price carved out a very good H&S pattern with predictable results. Even though the H&S pattern is widely recognized, the vast majority of traders—even those involved with gigantic
stocks like GE—do not understand its power and application.
On some occasions you will see an H&S pattern form above a price
gap. A price gap is an instance, in this case, where a stock’s price opens

346

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.33 The arrow marks the retracement point of this pattern.

FIGURE 13.34 Even the largest cap stocks, such as gigantic GE, can fall badly
after an H&S pattern is complete.

Head and Shoulders

347

FIGURE 13.35 This neckline at $78 was just above the level where the price had
gapped up late the prior July.

at a price far above the prior day’s close and its trading remains at or
higher than the opening price, thus creating a gap in the price graph between where the previous day’s price has closed and where the current
day’s price had opened.
An H&S pattern will usually form a neckline at or above the high point
of the gap. An example of this is shown in Figure 13.35, where the $78 neckline is just above the price gap. It is not surprising that this level represents
support for the stock’s price, since whatever event caused the stock to gap
up in the first place must have been so powerful as to create tremendous
demand for the stock at that price level.
Since a break of the neckline can close the price gap, however, it won’t
matter that there was a prior gap in price. The result for this particular
stock, shown in Figure 13.36, is that a year’s worth of gains were destroyed
in just a month, and the stock went down to price levels that had not been
seen in years.
As with trendlines, necklines have the two-faced, Janus-like property
of representing both resistance and support. When a stock is climbing
up, it may find resistance at the neckline level (even though the neckline
hasn’t even been established yet). During the formation of the H&S, the

348

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.36 It took only a month to wipe out a year’s worth of price increase
this stock had enjoyed earlier.

neckline undoubtedly represents support, since that’s the very basis of the
pattern. Once the neckline is broken, the line changes again to be resistance, and if the buyers of the stock manage to push it up again in price, it
will likely reach a formidable level of resistance at the neckline once again.
Figure 13.37 shows the neckline acting in both manners, with the price
bouncing off resistance before the H&S was created.
If the price action before the H&S seems to treat the neckline as
resistance, it is more likely that the H&S pattern’s behavior will be more
predictable and orderly. Figure 13.38 shows that in early September this
stock, Hot Topic, backed away from the exact price level that would later
be the neckline. The H&S formed, and the stock began falling, not even
pausing to retrace.
Before turning our attention to some specific trading techniques, let
us examine three more examples of the H&S pattern. Figure 13.39 is the
stock for Juniper Networks (symbol JNPR), which had a fate similar to
Broadcom back in 2000 and 2001. As with Broadcom, the neckline that
formed was not perfectly clean. The price dipped below the neckline three
different times.
Again, as with Broadcom, the stock fell fantastically (Figure 13.40)
once the neckline was decisively broken. The drop is so severe that

Head and Shoulders

349

FIGURE 13.37 Notice how the neckline, which represented support during the
H&S formation, also represented resistance before the H&S even began forming.

FIGURE 13.38 Here we see an exceptionally well-deﬁned neckline at $25.50.

350

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.39 As with BRCM, the breakdown beneath the neckline of JNPR was
not perfectly clean.

FIGURE 13.40 One of the most visible and catastrophic falls of a big-name stock
from the Internet mania was predicted by an H&S pattern.

Head and Shoulders

351

FIGURE 13.41 The left and right shoulders are more diﬃcult to see here, since
they do not touch the neckline cleanly.

the H&S pattern, which in Figure 13.39 was quite substantial, appears as
just a tiny feature in Figure 13.40. You can see the small neckline in the
upper-left corner of the chart.
Trading experience based on the H&S pattern will give you more discernment when it comes to unusual pattern recognition. The stock for
Movie Gallery, Inc (Figure 13.41) formed a pattern that has the markings of
an H&S. It is not a perfect pattern by any stretch of the imagination, particularly since the neckline isn’t even contacted on either side of the pattern’s
head. In spite of the coarseness of this pattern, there are several signs that
this is a good stock to short—the right shoulder being lower than the left,
the clean retracement back to the neckline, and the substantial run-up in
price before the pattern formed.
Being able to see past the imperfections of Movie Gallery’s H&S pattern would have been a profitable observation (Figure 13.42). The stock
fell away from the pattern and didn’t stop making new lows until it was
beneath $2.
Sometimes the H&S pattern can express itself in a somewhat mutated
form, sporting more than one shoulder. This is sometimes referred to as
a Complex Head and Shoulders pattern. Figure 13.43, for instance, shows

352

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.42 This stock fell virtually non-stop to under $2 per share before the
selling was over.

FIGURE 13.43 This pattern isn’t quite as clean, as it has two shoulders on the
right side.

Head and Shoulders

353

FIGURE 13.44 The break beneath this neckline was extremely swift.

a pattern that has two right shoulders. Having a nonstandard pattern takes
away some of the validity, but it is still worth watching a chart like this to
see if the neckline is clearly broken. The fact that the rightmost shoulder is
lower than the earlier right shoulder is a positive sign for the bears, since
it emphasizes the general weakness of the stock.
It has been pointed out that trades made immediately upon a neckline
break are often the most profitable. It should be remembered that sometimes these breaks are so swift (Figure 13.44) you can find yourself at a
relatively bad entry point, in spite of your intentions to get into a short
position quickly. As of this writing, there is still an uptick rule in place for
selling a stock short, which means that if a stock is falling straight down,
your order will not be filled until the stock moves up a bit. For this reason,
you may want to limit the price you will accept when you construct the
order to enter the short position, since you do not want to sell it at too low
(and risky) a price.

TRADING ON THE H&S PATTERN
Because the H&S pattern is so reliant on its neckline for support, a breakdown in this pattern can happen more swiftly than others. If you are highly

354

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.45 A contingent order on this security would probably have produced a better execution for a person trying to short this stock.

confident about a particular trade, you might want to place a contingent
order on the stock you are following. This allows you to enter a market order to sell the stock short if it crosses below a certain price value
(Figure 13.45), which means you do not have to monitor the stock constantly for your entry opportunity.
The more difficult issue is when to take profits on your position. Any
position creates the two emotions that all traders know well: fear and
greed. The fear comes about because you are afraid of profits diminishing (or, even worse, changing into losses). And the greed comes into play
since you want to make as much as you can on the position. But there is
no way to know with certainty that when you close a position it will be at
the best possible time.
To understand some of the analysis that can help with the crucial issue
of when to close a position, we will examine the formation of the pattern
in the first place. Figure 13.46 shows how a typical H&S pattern is formed,
which is as a series of higher highs and higher lows. It is the cessation of
this series that creates the first shoulder, when the price sinks back down
to equal the prior low point, thus establishing what will be the neckline for
the pattern.

Head and Shoulders

355

FIGURE 13.46 A series of higher highs and higher lows is broken, which was the
beginning of the H&S pattern.

The nature of this ascent in price is what is so important in evaluating
your target price for the position. If the rise in price was rapid, the stock
is more prone to fall quickly. If the rise was steady and had a number of
plateaus in price along the way, it is more likely that the stock will pause
during its descent at those levels as well. Figure 13.47 shows a stock whose
climb in price prior to the pattern was devoid of much support, which is a
very positive sign for those taking a bearish position on the security.
If and when the stock does break below the neckline, it should form a
series of lower lows and lower highs (Figure 13.48). As long as it is in such
a mode, it is wise to hang onto the position. What you want to look for are
areas of meaningful support during the rise preceding the pattern. You do
not necessarily have to close out the position when it reaches those levels,
but you can expect the descent to slow, and you should be more vigilant
than normal about closing the position should the lower lows and lower
highs pattern be violated. Since it is usually impractical to watch a stock
chart all day, you can reset your stop-loss orders with your broker so that
the position is closed automatically if a certain price is violated. That price
can be determined by what would constitute a break in the lower lows,
lower highs cycle.

356

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.47 There is very little in the way of support beneath this stock’s
neckline.

FIGURE 13.48 A series of lower lows and lower highs followed this stock’s break.

Head and Shoulders

357

FIGURE 13.49 After a very clean break, the stock price pushes a little above the
neckline on the retracement.

If you enter a position immediately after the neckline break, the logical
place to put a stop is above the neckline. The question of how much to
put it above the neckline is important, because that is where you control
how much risk you will take. The most conservative stop-loss order would
be set a penny above the neckline, since the assumption is that once the
neckline is violated, any price action above the neckline renders the H&S
pattern moot. That is probably too draconian an approach. It is riskier,
but in a way more prudent, to give the stock a little wiggle room on the
stop-loss order (Figure 13.49), perhaps setting the stop-loss a couple of
percentage points above the neckline.
In the case of the stock shown in Figure 13.50, allowing a small amount
of overage above the neckline would have been a profitable decision, because even though the retracement went a little above the neckline, the
stock softened up again and fell dramatically, losing almost its entire value.
If a person had set a very tight stop just above the neckline, the position
would have been closed at a loss, and a marvelous profit would have been
abandoned.
One relatively remote possibility is that a stock will gap down in price
and break its neckline (Figure 13.51). For example, suppose a neckline was

358

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.50 Allowing for a small amount of safety margin during this retracement would have been a lucrative decision.

FIGURE 13.51 This stock broke its neckline suddenly with a gap down in price.

Head and Shoulders

359

FIGURE 13.52 A stock can often fall much faster in price than it took to climb
there in the ﬁrst place.

at $50, and a stock had a partially completed H&S pattern with a left shoulder, a head, and most of a right shoulder. Further assume that the stock
closed on Wednesday at a price of $60, and after the market closed, the
company announced very bad earnings. The next morning, on Thursday,
the opening price for the stock is $38. This is a gap down in price, because
there is no trading activity between $60 and $38, and all of that equity value
was instantly lost.
It is important to understand this if you plan to leave a contingent order
open for a stock. Although it is not very likely such a dramatic gap down
will occur, its chance of occurring makes it more prudent to enter the order
as a day-order each day, instead of a good-until-cancelled order, which will
remain until you specifically cancel it. This gives you a better measure of
control over your trading.
For the stock that was shown in Figure 13.51, the gap down in price
didn’t make the result of the H&S pattern any less valuable (Figure 13.52).
The general point, however, is that it is better to put in your contingent
orders at the start of each day on a day-only basis instead of having an open
risk of a radically different opening price triggering your standing order.

360

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.53 A price will sometimes bobble around a neckline before breaking
cleanly. It is safest to wait for a clean break.

Although being somewhat forgiving with how far a retracement will go
is a wise idea, you should be careful not to enter an order if the price of the
security seems to be clinging to the neckline instead of clearly breaking
beneath it (Figure 13.53). The neckline, after all, represents an important
level of support. In other words, this price level is a line of equilibrium
between bulls and bears, and it needs to be plainly violated to the downside
for the bears to be plausibly in control of the price action.
If a gap down in price takes place after the neckline has already been
violated, that is good news for those who are short the stock (Figure 13.54).
But it should also be noted that the chance of a retracement piercing
through that price gap is greatly diminished, so those waiting for a retracement to the neckline will probably be disappointed. Instead, the bottom of
the price gap should be respected as an important area of resistance that
should be heeded as much as the neckline would have been.
One final note on the H&S pattern is that the neckline doesn’t necessarily have to be horizontal. Although it is most logical as a horizontal line, since this represents an agreed-upon line in the sand dividing
bulls and bears, you can also recognize modestly angled necklines as legitimate definers of H&S patterns. In Figure 13.55, for instance, Hershey

Head and Shoulders

361

FIGURE 13.54 The gap-down following this neckline break indicated a retracement was probably not going to happen.

FIGURE 13.55 Necklines do not necessarily have to be horizontal to indicate a
valid H&S pattern.

362

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.56 The retracement of Hershey’s touched the sloped line perfectly.

(symbol HSY) sports an H&S pattern with an upward-sloping neckline. The
pattern is quite well formed, and after the break beneath the neckline, the
price moves neatly up to perfectly touch the underside of the neckline,
which has now changed from support to resistance.
As illustrated in Figure 13.56, Hershey’s price continued to move down
once the retracement was complete. The same rules apply to an H&S with
a slanted neckline as would apply to a horizontal one. The neckline is simply drawn differently, and the retracement (should it happen at all) will
correspondingly move to a slightly different level than if the line were
perfectly flat.

THE INVERTED HEAD AND SHOULDERS
PATTERN
Whereas the H&S pattern is a reliable bearish pattern, there is a version of
the H&S that is instead bullish; it is called the Inverted Head and Shoulders
pattern (for the sake of brevity, IHS). As the name implies, it is similar to
the H&S pattern, except that it is upside down. It has a left shoulder, a head,

Head and Shoulders

363

FIGURE 13.57 This chart shows, within a relatively short amount of time, an
inverted H&S and a regular H&S on the same stock.

and a right shoulder, all of which are topped by a neckline. The principal
difference is that the neckline represents resistance instead of support, and
bulls watching this pattern want to see the price break above resistance.
As an initial illustration of this pattern, Figure 13.57 shows a stock
with both an IHS pattern as well as, later, a regular H&S pattern. The inverted H&S, shown on the left side of the chart, precedes a dramatic rise in
price. The H&S pattern, shown on the right side of the chart, precedes a big
plunge in price. Even though this is the same stock, it offers both patterns
at different points in time, each of which had the expected result.
Instead of starting with a perfect example, let us look at a more typical,
real-life example in Figure 13.58. The neckline is drawn for the sake of clarity. There is a left shoulder, a very deep descent in price to create the head,
and then a right shoulder. Although the stock very briefly peaks above the
$3.40 neckline, it dips below it and spends a few months gaining strength.
When it finally breaks above the neckline for real, the stock enjoys a nearly
10-fold increase in price over the next six years.
Two rules have been mentioned about H&S patterns that apply to its
inverted cousin as well: (1) the longer the pattern, the more powerful it is,
and (2) the price action prior to the pattern should be significant (to the
