adjustment and uncertainty. It often manifests itself as a crisis in which several urgent and
contradicting demands are placed upon the individual, who is forced to set priorities and
choose between desire and necessity. When approached positively, this may lead to a
redefinition of the person’s goals or to a reassessment and improvement of working methods.

APPENDIX 3

Characteristics of the Twelve Zodiac Signs
The following is a list of the characteristics of the 12 zodiac signs.
Aries: defense, machinery, steel, tools, weapons, non-precious metals. Start-ups.
Keywords: pioneering, leading, new beginnings, strong willed
Taurus: bank accounts, tellers, and all things to do with banks, savings and loans.
Banking and financials. Bonds.
Keywords: ownership, dependability, sensuality, seeks harmony
Gemini: telecommunications, writing, speech, letters, mail, phone calls and phones,
documents, computers, cars, equipment and travel, truckers. Trading.
Keywords: mentality, versatility, communication, curiosity, dualism
Cancer: property, home, home products, home appliances, home furnishings, restaurants,
hotels, nurses, silver. Real estate.
Keywords: feeling, sensitivity, nurturing, quick to hurt, seeks security
Leo: investments, stocks, investment banks, people in charge, gold, biotechnology.
Large caps.
Keywords: willpower, creativity, expressing the heart, leader
Virgo: health services and health care plus items related to these, problems with workers or
personnel. Retail/department stores, vitamins, food. Technical analysis.
Keywords: service, self-improvement, purity, perfection, practicality
Libra: lawyers, lawsuits, negotiations, public relations, partnerships, cosmetics, and jewelry.
Investing.
Keywords: balance, harmony, justice, concern for others, relationships
Scorpio: pollution control, insurance, salvage operations, bioterrorism, mining, seismology,
plumbing supplies, environmental cleanup. Debt. Hostile takeovers. Stockbrokers. Mutual
funds.
Keywords: desire, transformation, power, intense, probing, passionate relationships, power
struggles
Sagittarius: publishing, teaching, universities, colleges, overseas travel, sports equipment,
casinos. International affairs.
Keywords: need to understand, exploration, enthusiasm, searching for truth

Capricorn: real estate, government, people in authority, bosses, management.
Mega corporation. Blue chips. Savings.
Keywords: achievement, structure, organization, ambitious, cold
Aquarius: computers, electrical equipment, appliances, radios, TV, planes, organizations and
clubs, airlines, aerospace, high technology. Contrarian investing.
Keywords: humanitarian, unique, revolutionary, idealistic, inventive
Pisces: drugs, medication, hospitals, institutions, alcohol, oil and gas, shoes, plumbing, water,
photography, chemicals, windmills, paint, bottled water, nurses, rubber, X-ray, poisons,
greeting cards. Socially responsible investing.
Keywords: compassion, universality, inclusiveness, dreamer, intuitive

APPENDIX 4

Formulas in MetaStock Format

*

MOMENTUM TIMING OSCILLATOR AS USED IN
FIGURE 2.3
Length1:=Input("Base Unit",2,100,21);
Length2:=Input("First Period",2,100,13);
Length3:=Input("Second Period",1,100,8);
Length4:=Input("Third Period",1,100,8);
Cycle:=Input("Cycle",1,100,21);
plot:=Input("Select Plot, 1=OB Lines, 2=AutoLines 3=Cycle Zones", 1,3,3);
n:=(RSI(Length1)-LLV(RSI(Length1),Length2));
k:=(HHV((RSI(Length1)),Length2)-LLV(RSI(Length1),Length2));
k2:=If(k=0,0.000001,k);
Osc:=100*n/k2;
OscAvg1:=(2*Mov(Osc,Length3,S)-100);
OscAvg2:=Mov(OscAvg1,Length4,S);
StdP:=1.2*Stdev(oscavg2,89);
StdM:=Neg(1.2*Stdev(oscavg2,89));
n2:=(Fml("frhlc")-LLV(Fml("frhlc"),Cycle));
k2:=HHV((Fml("frhlc")),Cycle)-LLV(Fml("frhlc"),Cycle);
k22:=If(k2=0,0.000001,k2);
OscAvg12:=(2*Mov((100*n2/k22),Length2,S)-100);
RwUp:=(45+Stdev(OscAvg12,2));
RwDn:=Neg(45+Stdev(oscavg12,2));
Zone:=If(oscavg12>0,RwUp,If(oscavg12<=0,RwDn,RwUp));
If(plot=1,50,If(plot=2,StdP,Zone));
If(plot=1,Neg(50),If(plot=2,StdM,Zone));
OscAvg1; OscAvg2; 0;
{Frhlc: Function referred to in the formula Momentum Timing Oscillator}

frhlc:=(((RSI(HIGH,13))+(RSI(LOW,13))+(2*(RSI(CLOSE,13))))/4);
frhlc;

VOLUME ZONE OSCILLATOR AS REFERRED TO
IN
FIGURE 2.10
AND
FIGURE 5.8
VZO was developed by Walid Khalil and David Steckler. The following VZO is modified for
merging of plots of volume ratio compressed indicator and planetary aspects indicators.
prd:=Input("Period",1,200,13);
avg:=Input("Average",2,200,8);
y:=Input("Select Price 1=MP(),2=Typical(),3=Close",1,3,1);
plot:=Input("Select Plot, 1=vzo, 2=sma, 3=All",1,3,3);
y:=If(y=1,MP(),If(y=2,Typical(),CLOSE));
Change:=ROC(y,1,$);
x:=If(Change>0,VOLUME,-VOLUME);
vp:=Mov(x,prd,E);
tv:=If(Mov(VOLUME,prd,E)=0,0.000001,Mov(V,prd,E));
vzo:=(100+(100*vp/tv))/2;
vzo1:=Mov(vzo,avg,S);
If(plot=1,vzo,vzo1);
If(plot=2,vzo1,vzo);
70; 50; 30;

VOLUME RATIO COMPRESSED INDICATOR AS
REFERRED TO IN
FIGURE 5.3
Period1:=Input("Period1",1,144,2);
Period2:=Input("Period2",1,144,10);
x:=Input("Compressed",0,100,0.2);
VAvg1:=Mov(Abs(VOLUME),Period1,E);
VAvg2:=Mov(Abs(VOLUME),Period2,S);
z:=If(vavg2=0,0.0001,vavg2);
VolRatio:=100*(VAvg1/z);
VolRatio*x;

MOVING AVERAGE LINE WITH UPPER AND
LOWER MIRROR LINES AS REFERRED TO IN
FIGURE 7.8
Period:=Input("Period",1,500,89);
PCent1:=Input("Upper Pecentage",1,200,7);
PCent2:=Input("Lower Percentage",1,200,7);
x:=Input("Select Price, 1=mp(),2=typical(),3=close",1,3,3);
plot:=Input("Select Plot,1=RMA+Mirror, 2=Mirror,3=RMA",1,3,1);
x:=If(x=1,MP(),If(x=2,Typical(), C));
RMA:=Mov(x,Period,E)+LinRegSlope(x,Period)*(1);
MirrorP:=RMA+(RMA*PCent1/100);
MirrorN:=RMA-(RMA*PCent2/100);
Mirror:=If(LOW>RMA,MirrorP,If(HIGH<RMA,MirrorN,RMA));
{Plot PMA on price chart, signals in own window}
If(plot=1,RMA,If(plot=2,Mirror,RMA));
If(plot=1,Mirror,If(plot=3,RMA,Mirror));

MID-TERM PERIOD MOVING AVERAGE LINES
AS REFERRED TO IN
FIGURE 2.5
Fast:=Input("Fast MA",1,300,9);
y:=Input("Select Price 1=MP(),2=Typical(),3=Close",1,3,3);
plot:=Input("Plot [1]Disparity [2]Two Lines [3]All",1,3,2);
y:=If(y=1,MP(),If(y=2,Typical(),C));
Ind1:=Mov(y,Fast,S)+LinRegSlope(y,Fast)*3;
Ind2:=Mov(y,9,S)+LinRegSlope(y,9);
iDiff:=(1.382*(Ind1-Ind2)+0.618*Ref(Ind1-Ind2,-1))/2;
Ind3:=If(Cross(Ind1,Ind2),(Ind1+iDiff),If(Cross(ind2,ind1), (Ind1-iDiff),ind1+idiff));
If(plot=1,Ind3,If(plot=2,Ind1,Ind3));
If(plot=2,Ind2,If(plot=1,Ind3,Ind2));
If(plot=3,Ind1,If(plot=1,Ind3,Ind1));
*

For educational purposes only and not for the purposes of encouraging trading.

Glossary
A-B-C correction Alphabetical labeling for a three-wave structure in a correction pattern. Wave
A is the first wave moving against the prevailing trend of the five-wave structure. Wave B is a
corrective wave to Wave A. Wave C is the final wave to complete the three-wave structure
movement. In a zigzag, Wave C exceeds the extreme of Wave A, but not in an irregular A-B-C
correction.
alternate count An alternate interpretation of wave counts that is equally applicable to a given
market situation.
Alternation, Rule of The alternation of patterns between Wave 2 and Wave 4 in a five-wave
structure. If Wave 2 is a simple pattern, then Wave 4 is expected to be a complex pattern. In a
complex correction, if the preceding corrective pattern is a flat, then the pattern following will
be of another formation.
confirmation Refers to two different factors agreeing with one another. Volume is said to
confirm the price action if volume is rising together with the price.
continuation pattern Refers generally to a corrective pattern such as a triangle, wedge,
pennant, or flag. Indicates a pause in the prevailing trend.
divergence Divergence occurs when the directional movement of the price disagrees with that
of the oscillator. Divergence generally indicates trend reversal.
dividend yield Dividend per share divided by the current price per share expressed as a
percentage.
double top/bottom Refers to a price pattern in an uptrend showing two conspicuous peaks. In
a downtrend, the price pattern is a double bottom, showing two distinct troughs. Double top is
generally caused by flats, double bottom by failures. Also known as “M” and “W” patterns.
Equality, Rule of When one impulse wave is extended in a five-wave structure, the remaining
two waves tend to be equal.
extended wave The longest wave in one of the three impulse waves of a five-way structure.
failure The inability of price to reach a new high in an uptrend or a new low in a downtrend. A
five-wave structure in which impulse Wave 5 fails to move above the end of Wave 3, or a
correction in which Wave C fails to move below the end of Wave A.
Fibonacci ratios The ratio between any two successive numbers in a Fibonacci sequence. After
the first four numbers of the sequence, the ratio of any number to the next highest number is
approximately 0.618 (known as the “Golden Ratio”), and to the next lower number
approximately 1.618. The important ratios are 0.382, 0.618, and 1.618.
Fibonacci sequence The sequence of numbers (1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89,144, 233, 377,
etc.), discovered by Leonardo de Pisa, where each successive number in the sequence is the
sum of the previous two numbers.
gap Refers to a trading day in which a daily range is completely above or below the previous
day’s range, displaying a gap between today’s low and yesterday’s high or today’s high and
yesterday’s low.
head and shoulder A price pattern that takes its name from the fact that it looks like the head
and shoulders of a person, either upright or inverted. The pattern often indicates a coming
move away from the established trading range.

hybrid oscillator An oscillator that is constructed by merging two kinds of components to
produce the result.
impulse wave Refers to Wave 1, 3, or 5 of a five-wave structure; a wave that takes an existing
trend further in the same direction.
inside day A day in which the range of price is within the range of the previous day’s price
range. It is a sign of consolidation while the market waits for more signals for a direction. If it
occurs after a market has had a big move, it is a signal that momentum is waning for that move.
irregular flat A corrective A3-B3-C5 pattern in which Wave B terminates beyond the start of
Wave A.
noise Price fluctuations that can confuse interpretation of the directional movement of the
market.
non-trending Price movements that lack any discernible movements in either direction.
outside day A day in which the previous day’s price range is within the range of today’s price
range. This is often a signal that the market is about to make a move in the direction of the
close.
overbought A market is said to be overbought when an oscillator reaches above the upper
limit.
oversold A market is said to be oversold when an oscillator reaches below the lower limit.
parameter A rule or condition that establishes the format for a trading system or indicator.
P/E Ratio Price/earnings ratio is a test of a stock’s risk and demand, and is reported as a
multiple calculated by having the price per share divided by earnings per share.
protective stops A risk management technique in which the trade is liquidated to stop further
loss.
Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers A bullish market is initiated when price crosses
above its respective averages (e.g., 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day moving average lines) and the
moving averages also follow in a sequential order with the shorter period moving average
crossing above the longer period. A bearish market is initiated when price crosses below its
respective averages and the moving averages also follow in a sequential order with the shorter
period moving average crossing below the longer period. If price and its respective moving
averages are not aligned in a sequential order, any short term rally or retracement will be
short-lived.
range The difference between the high and low price during a given period.
rectangle A price pattern formed in a relatively narrow horizontal price range. Rectangles are
usually complex corrections of double flats or triple flats.
resistance Refers to a price level at which prices stopped rising.
retracement A price movement in the opposite direction of the previous trend.
saucer A pattern depicting a stock whose price has reached bottom and is moving up. Similar
to a cup-and-handle formation, but the saucer base is shallower and rounder in shape. An
inverse saucer shows a top in the stock’s price and signals a downturn.
support Refers to a price level at which prices stop declining.
trading range Refers to the difference between the high and low prices traded during a period
of time.
trend Refers to the directional movement of prices, as in an uptrend when prices are making
higher highs and higher lows, and as in a downtrend when prices are making lower highs and

lower lows.
trend line A straight line that connects a series of highs or lows in a trend. An uptrend line
represents support and a downtrend line represents resistance. Horizontal trend lines generally
represent consolidation.
triangle Refers to a continuation pattern or sideways price pattern in which prices fluctuate
within two converging trend lines. There are contracting, ascending, descending, and diagonal
triangles. In an expanding triangle, the two trend lines will diverge.
true range The largest of the following: (1) Today’s high minus today’s low; (2) today’s high
minus yesterday’s close; or (3) today’s low minus yesterday’s close.
volatility A measure of the degree of price change from price in the previous period.
wedge A continuation price pattern that consists of two diverging trend lines, both of which
slope against the prevailing trend. In a bearish pattern, both trend lines slope upward. In a
bullish pattern, both trend lines slope downward. A wedge is generally a diagonal triangle.
whipsaws Losing trades on both sides of a price swing.
zigzag A correction that is subdivided into an A5-B3-C5 pattern. Wave B in a zigzag is noticeably
lower than the start of Wave A.

ASTROLOGICAL TERMS
applying aspect This term refers to a planet that is moving toward an exact aspect with a
slower-moving planet. An applying aspect can also take place as a planet applies toward a fixed
point, such as the Midheaven or Ascendant.
Arabic parts Arabic parts (or lots) are points that are arithmetical constructs of two or more
components such as planets or house cusps. They are used when a specific issue is being
examined in a chart. There are historically 32 different parts, but only the Part of Fortune is in
common use today.
ascendant The sign of the zodiac that is rising in the east at the moment of birth, and placed on
the cusp of the first house. Also referred to as the rising sign of a horoscope. One of the four
personal points in astrology, along with the Sun, Moon, and Midheaven. All are key indicators
of individual expression.
aspect The relationship between two planets, or the relationship between a planet and the
Ascendant or Midheaven. It is the angular distance between these two points.
birth chart The birth chart is also referred to as the horoscope or natal chart. The birth chart is
a circle divided into 12 parts, or houses, each of which describes a different area of life
experience. In financial astrology, they are referred to as first-trade charts.
conjunction Two or more planets are said to be “conjunct” when they are in the same part of
the sky. Their energies are combined.
cusp The cusp of a sign or house is the point at which it begins.
cycle A cycle is the planetary movement around the entire circle of signs. Pluto is the slowest
moving planet, and takes 248 years to cycle the entire zodiac. The Sun’s cycle takes one year.
degree The horoscope has 360 degrees and each sign has 30 degrees. Degrees are used to
measure exact positions of planets and other astrological factors.
eclipse An eclipse occurs when one celestial body obscures another; the term is generally used
to refer to the relationship between the Sun and the Moon. In this book, the Sun and the Moon
are referred to as planets, while in fact they are luminaries.
ephemeris A book of tables showing the exact positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets on a
daily basis.
financial astrology Financial astrology has been around for centuries. Nowadays, it often refers
to the practice of predicting cycles in the stock markets by correlating them with planetary
cycles, or by casting a first-trade horoscope for listed companies and financial markets and
analyzing them in terms of planetary influences to project future trends.
full moon The opposition between the Sun and the Moon. The time when the Moon is 180
degrees from the Sun.
geocentric The universe, as seen from the Earth. Astrologers are perfectly aware that the Earth
orbits the Sun. However, a geocentric (earth-centered) frame of reference often makes good
sense because we humans live on the Earth.
hard aspect Planets that are 90 degrees apart are called square aspects. Planets that are 180
degrees apart are called opposition aspects. These aspects are considered difficult and create
tension. Planets in conjunction can be considered either soft or hard, depending on the planets
involved.

heliocentric The universe, as seen from the Sun. It is the true picture of the solar system.
horoscope Another term for birth chart. The word horoscope comes from a Greek word
meaning “map of the hour.” A horoscope is also called a natal chart, which references the
unique time and place of an event, inauguration, first trade of a company, or the birth of a
person.
house cusp The first degree of any house in a horoscope or birth chart.
ingress In astrology, an ingress is when any planet enters a new sign and is 00 degrees, 00
minutes of that sign.
lunation A complete cycle between two new moons; also known as a synodic month. Lunations
may also refer to solar or lunar eclipses.
major aspect The major aspects in astrology are conjunction, sextile, trine, square, and
opposition.
midheaven The sign on the cusp of the tenth house of the horoscope is referred to as the
midheaven or medium coeli. It is the point at which the Sun is at midday at the time and place
the subject of the horoscope is born. It is one of the four cardinal points in a horoscope and the
second most powerful following the ascendant.
minor aspect Some minor aspects in astrology are the semi-square (45 degrees apart), the
semi-sextile (30 degrees apart), and the quincunx (150 degrees apart).
new moon The conjunction of the Sun and the Moon. The time when the Moon is at the exact
same degree as the Sun.
orb Refers to the range of degrees within which an aspect is considered to be operating. The
closer the two planets are in degree, or orb, the stronger or more potent the aspect will be. The
farther the two planets are in degree, the weaker the effect will be.
Part of Fortune An important Arabic part which benefits the house in which it is located at
birth.
ruler Certain planets have been given rulership over certain signs. For further details please
refer to Appendixes 1, 2, and 3.
separating aspect A separating aspect refers to a planet that is moving away from an exact
aspect with a slower-moving planet or a fixed point in a chart.
soft aspect These aspects are comfortable and harmonious, bringing ease and opportunity.
Sextiles and trines are considered to be soft aspects. Some conjunctions are considered soft
aspects, depending on the planets involved.
stellium Multiple conjunction of three or more planets in the same sign or house. A
conjunction describes the combined forces of the planets involved; therefore, the stellium
indicates a massive concentration of energies in the sign and house in question.
synodic period The term refers to the length of time during which a body in the solar system
makes one complete orbit of the Sun relative to the Earth; that is, it returns to the same
elongation.
transit Astrologers use a wide variety of timing techniques and a “transit” is the primary tool of
predictive astrology. Transits are the day-to-day movements of the planets and the aspects
they form to one another. They vary a great deal in their effect depending upon which planets
are involved.

Bibliography

SUGGESTED READING
Appel, Gerald.
Singalert, 1979.

The Moving Average Convergence-Divergence Method. Great Neck, NY:

Elder, Alexander. Trading for a Living: Psychology, Trading Tactics, Money Management. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
Gartley, H. M. Profits in the Stock Market. Pomeroy, WA: Lambert-Gann, 1981.
Khalil, Walid, and David Steckler. “In the Volume Zone.”
Commodities (May 2011).

Technical Analysis of Stocks &

Magee, John J., and Robert D. Edwards. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. New York: New York
Institute of Finance, 1966.
Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1986.
Prechter, Robert R., and Alfred John Frost. Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Stock Market Profits.
Gainesville, GA: New Classics Library, 1978.
Pring, Martin J. Technical Analysis Explained. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991.
Raschke, Linda Bradford, and Laurence A. Connors. Street Smarts, High Probability Short Term
Trading Strategies. Jersey City, NJ: M. Gordon Publishing Group, 1995.
Schwager, Jack D. The New Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders. Columbia, MD:
Marketplace Books, 2008.
Wee, Chow-Hou. Sun Zi Art of War: An Illustrated Translation with Asian Perspectives and
Insights. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2003.
Wilder, J. Welles, Jr. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Greensboro, NC: Trend
Research, 1978.

ASTROLOGICAL BOOKS
Farnell, Kim, ed. Astrology. London: Foundry Creative Media Company, 2002.
McEvers, Joan, ed. Financial Astrology. Woodbury, MN: Llewellyn Worldwide, Ltd., 1991.
Meridian, Bill. Bill Meridian’s Planetary Stock Trading–III. New York: Cycles Research, 2002.
Parker, Julia, and Derek Parker. Parkers’ Astrology. New York: DK Publishing, 1991.
Stathis, Georgia Anna. Business Astrology 101: Weaving the Web between Business and Myth.
Pleasant Hill, CA: Starcycles Publishing, 2001.
Michelsen, Neil F., and Rique Pottenger. The American Ephemeris for the 21st Century:
2001–2050 at Noon. Rev. ed. Epping, NH: ACS Publications, 1996.

CHARTING SOFTWARE PROGRAMS
MetaStock, Equis International, 90 South 400 West, Suite 620, Salt Lake City, UT 84101.
www.equis.com
TradeStation, Omega Research, 9200 Sunset Drive, Miami FL 33173.
www.tradestation.com
See also
http://fc-cd.com/omega.htm

ASTROLOGY SOFTWARE PROGRAMS
SolarFire8, Astrolabe

www.alabe.com

Astrowin123

www.astrowin.org/astro123.php

FINANCIAL ASTROLOGY SOFTWARE
PROGRAMS
AIR Software—The Market Trader/Titanium

www.alphee.com/

TimingSolution—Advanced/Terra Incognito
