swift upward move, and signal a potential exhaustion move (bearish reversal). The long bullish candle may actually be the last surge of buyers
into the stock and may be followed by a sell-off.

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 17 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

17

Constructing Candlestick Lines

FIGURE 2.7 Long bullish candle

FIGURE 2.8 Long bearish candle

The reverse is true for a long black candle (Figure 2.8). Price opens near
the high and closes near the low, indicating strong bearish sentiment during
the session. The same two scenarios mentioned above may be applicable, but in
reverse:
1. A long black candle may form after an uptrend
and signal a potential bearish reversal. One or
more long bearish candles may form as a new
downtrend emerges. It may be the start of a selloff that corrects the prior uptrend.
2. A long black candle may form near the end of a
downtrend, or after a sharp downside move, and
signal capitulation. A final last blast of selling
pressure is often followed by a bullish reversal.
In Western analysis, the shadows would be included in a reference to a bar’s being long. A long bar
would be referred to as a wide-range bar, regardless of the
difference between the open and closing prices. In Japanese candlestick charting, reference to a long candle
should be interpreted as a long real body. Therefore, a
small-bodied candle with long shadows would qualify as
a wide-range bar in Western technical analysis; while to
the Japanese it would not qualify as a long candle because its real body is small. Such a candle would be given
a different name, for example, a high-wave candle.
Most long candles have short upper and lower
shadows. Periodically you’ll see a candle that has a long
body, and long upper and/or lower shadows (see the
candle numbered 2 in Figure 2.14 for an example). As

capitulation
A phenomenon
in which
investors “give
up” and are
willing to sell a
declining stock
at almost any
price in order to
exit their long
positions. True
capitulation
involves very
high volume
and a sharp
decline as panic
selling occurs.
Capitulation is
often followed
by a change in
the direction of
the trend.

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

18

Page 18 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

long as the real body is extended, such a candle may still be considered long.
However, the smaller the shadow(s), the more obvious the domination of the
prevailing side (bulls or bears).
Short Candles

If the length of the real body is undersized, it is referred to as a short, or small,
candle (Figure 2.9). What qualifies as short is subjective; it may vary from one
stock or index to another. The real body of a short candle would be noticeably
shorter than that of an average real body when looking back over the past few
weeks of price data. A short candle will have small upper and lower shadows or,
in some cases, no shadows. If the real body is small, but there are longer upper
and/or lower shadows, it will be distinguished by a specific name, such as a
spinning top or a high-wave candle.
Unlike a long candle, which shows clear leadership for the session, a short
candle shows a lack of leadership. The stock trades in a narrow range all day
with neither the bulls nor the bears making much headway.
A short candle is a component of several bullish and bearish reversal
patterns. For example, if, after the formation of a long bullish candle, price
gaps up during the next session and forms a short candle, it is called a bearish star.
In Western technical analysis, a short candle may be referred to as a narrowrange (NR) bar.
Shaven Candles

If there is no shadow extending from either the top or bottom of the candle’s
real body, the candle is referred to as shaven or shaved. Some traders may call
these candle lines flat tops and flat bottoms. The Japanese often refer to them as
marubozu, meaning “close cropped.”
If there is no upper shadow present, regardless of whether the real body is
black or white, the candle line is said to have a shaven head (Figure 2.10). If
there is no lower shadow present, regardless of color, it has a shaven bottom
(Figure 2.11). Periodically, you will see a candle line with both a shaven head
and a shaven bottom, as shown in Figure 2.12.

FIGURE 2.9 Short candles

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 19 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

19

Constructing Candlestick Lines

FIGURE 2.10

Shaven head

FIGURE 2.12

FIGURE 2.11

Shaven bottom

Shaven head and shaven bottom

Spinning Tops

A spinning top is a candlestick line that has a small real body. The real body can
be either black or white. According to some resources, the real body of this candle line should be small in comparison to its shadows. In other words, the upper
and lower shadows are longer than the candlestick’s real body. However, according to Steve Nison in his book Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New
York Institute of Finance, 2001, p. 26): “. . . the sizes of the shadows are not important. It is the small size of the real body that makes these spinning tops.”
By Nison’s definition, a short candle (mentioned previously) would be a
spinning top, as would a candlestick line with a small real body and shadows
that are longer than the real body (Figure 2.13). Regardless of which definition
you choose to follow, the appearance of a small real body after a directional
move, or after a long candle, represents a loss of momentum. (A directional
move refers to price moving either up or down, but not sideways.)

FIGURE 2.13

Spinning tops

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

20

Page 20 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

When price action is primarily one-sided, the real bodies in a directional move will generally be average-sized or longer and their color will reflect the trend’s direction. When the bulls are dominating while a stock is
rallying, for instance, the candlesticks will be primarily white. Conversely,
when the bears are dominating during a decline, the candles will be primarily black. Thus, when one or more diminishing bodies appear after a price
advance or decline, it indicates that the dominating party may be losing
control of the move. In fact, a spinning top is a component of several reversal patterns. For example, the star portion of a morning or evening star is a
spinning top (or a short candle), as is the second candlestick line in a
harami.

Example

FIGURE 2.14 Spinning top formed after an upswing warning of
a loss of momentum
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Figure 2.14 shows a swift upward price move (numbered 1–4) on the
chart of James River Coal Company (JRCC) from May 17 to 21, 2007.
(continues)

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 21 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Constructing Candlestick Lines
Example

21

(continued)

Note that the candlestick line numbered 1 opened near its low and
closed near its high, clearly indicating the bulls’ dominance during the
session. Candlestick 2 was another strong bullish candle. It had a long
real body and closed on its high, forming a shaven head. Candlestick
3 formed another bullish real body; however, the long upper shadow
indicates that price backed off from its high before the close of the
session. That was the first sign of caution. Candlestick 4 formed a
spinning top indicating that the rally’s momentum was fading.
Price consolidated for two weeks following the spinning top. The
combinations of candles 3 and 4 create a bearish star pattern, which
you will learn about in Chapter 3.

When the real body is small and the shadows are unusually long, the candle line is called a high-wave candle (Figure 2.15). This uncommon candlestick
line is similar to the long-legged doji, which will be covered in Chapter 3. The
difference is that the doji has no real body and the high-wave candle has a
small real body. Think of the high-wave candle as a long-legged spinning top.
Its long “legs” (shadows) indicate that there was quite a power struggle between the bears and bulls during the session, with neither side emerging as the
clear victor.
A long-legged candlestick line visually shows us that there was a lot of
volatility during the session.

FIGURE 2.15

High-wave candles

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

22

11:55 AM

Page 22 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Example

FIGURE 2.16 Daily high-wave candle overlaid on the 15-minute
chart demonstrates the session’s volatility
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Figure 2.16 shows a 15-minute chart of Ford Motor Company (F) on
July 26, 2007, which was a day where a high-wave candle formed on the
daily chart. The daily high-wave candle is overlaid on the intraday chart
for demonstration purposes. The dotted lines show where the open,
high, low, and closing prices from the daily chart correspond to intraday
price action. The intraday swings to the high and low points along the
vertical line resemble a roller coaster ride as the bulls and bears battled
throughout the day to maintain control. By the close of the daily
session, the result is basically a stalemate.

Candle Lines Evolve throughout
the Session
Viewing a closed candlestick line on a daily chart tells you how the day’s battle
ended. For instance, if the candlestick has a white real body, you know that

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 23 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Constructing Candlestick Lines

23

the bulls had control by the close of the session. However, that does not tell
you if the bulls had control during the entire session. If you want to see the
details of the day’s battle, you’ll need to view the price action on an intraday
chart.

Example

FIGURE 2.17 Shifting from a daily chart down to an intraday time
frame deﬁnes how the battle between the bears and bulls unfolded
throughout the session
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Figure 2.17 shows a chart of ACA Capital Holdings Inc (ACA) on
August 13, 2007. On the left side you can see how the daily bar
looked. It was a long white candle with a very small upper shadow.
One might think that after opening at the low (a shaven bottom) the
bulls just ran the stock up all day long. That was not the case. By
viewing the 15-minute chart on the right, you can see the intraday
activity. The up and down lines show the price trajectory throughout
the day. The bulls were in charge for the first 90 minutes of trading.
The bears took over for the next few hours, reversing the morning’s
rally almost entirely. The bulls then took over again and ran price back
up to close near the high.

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

24

Page 24 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

After a stock opens for trading, the opening price of the daily candlestick
line is set for the day. The open cannot change; however, the high, low, and
closing prices are subject to change throughout the session. A candlestick line
evolves throughout the trading session as buy and sell orders are filled. By the
close of the session, the daily candlestick line that you see may have looked significantly different at intervals during the session.

Smart Investor Tip
The closing price is called the last until the actual close of market.

Using the ACA example again from Figure 2.17, let’s take a look at how
the daily chart would have evolved. Figure 2.18 depicts the change in shape
of the daily candlestick line as the bulls and bears jockeyed for control throughout
the session. When price was run up during the first 90 minutes, at the high of
the session the daily bar would have been a long white candle with a shaven
head and bottom. As the stock started to sell off, an upper shadow began to
emerge. At the point where the bears had pushed price back to near the low of
the session, the daily bar would have had a long upper shadow and a small
white real body. As the bulls took over again, the real body became larger and
the upper shadow became shorter. By the close of the session, all that remained
of that long upper shadow from earlier in the session was its small tip between
the close and the high.
If, at the close of market, a daily candlestick line shows a small real body
near the high of the session with a long lower shadow, at some point during the
session it had a long bearish real body. Buyers stepped in, putting upward pressure on price, causing the once bearish real body to morph into a long lower
shadow (see Figure 2.19).
If, at the close of market, the daily candlestick line has both an upper and
a lower shadow and a small real body, at some time during the session the bar

FIGURE 2.18

Daily bar changes shape throughout the session

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 25 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Constructing Candlestick Lines

FIGURE 2.19 Long lower shadow
was previously a bearish candle

25

FIGURE 2.20 Spinning top had
both a longer bearish and bullish
real body during the session

was more bullish and more bearish but closed near the middle of the range (see
Figure 2.20). By the end of the session, the candlestick line formed a spinning top.
The same concept of drilling down from the daily bar to intraday time
frames to see the detail can be applied to higher time frames. For example, a
trader analyzing a weekly chart could shift down to the daily time frame to see
the intraweek price action. To see even more detail, he could shift down to the
hourly time frame.

Time Frames
The daily chart is the most widely viewed time frame. However, Japanese candlestick charting is applicable to all time frames. Investors who hold their positions
long term may use candlestick charting on weekly and daily time frames. Swing
traders, who hold for shorter periods, may use candlesticks on daily and hourly
time frames. Day traders may employ them on the lower intraday time frames.
Intraday Charts

Candlestick lines can be constructed for intraday charts ranging from 1-minute
to hourly. If you were to look at an hourly chart, for example, the opening price
would be the first price of that hour. The highest and lowest prices reached during that hour would define the high and low of the candlestick line. The close
would represent the final price of the hourly trading period.
Candlestick patterns may become less obvious on low intraday time
frames, such as 1- or 5-minute charts. With the exception of the open of the first
intraday bar, there is usually not much difference between the closing price of
one bar and the opening price of the next. As such, certain candlestick patterns
may not be as prevalent and some may not be as well defined on intraday charts,
such as those that have a gap between the bodies of two consecutive bars. When

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

26

Page 26 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

distinctive candle lines and patterns form on intraday charts, their interpretation
is the same as when they form on daily and higher time frames.
Recall from previous discussion the important events that occur during
the opening and closing hours of a trading day. Those same events will not be
applicable near the opening and closing times for each intraday period. Between the close of one day and the open of the next trading day, enough time
lapses for traders to digest news and other events that happened overnight or
over a weekend. Conversely, after the first intraday bar on lower time frames has
formed, there is no time lapse between the close of one bar and the open of the
next bar. The candlestick lines are formed from a steady stream of data. There is
not sufficient time between each bar for traders to assimilate news or change
their outlook. Therefore, there will not be as much emphasis on the opening
and closing prices from one bar to the next on intraday charts.
Weekly Charts

If you are analyzing candlestick lines on a weekly chart, the open will be the
opening price of the first trading day of the week. The high and low will be
the highest and lowest prices achieved during the trading week. The close will
be the closing price on the last trading day of the week.
It must be noted that some charting programs provide weekly data in the
form of a “rolling” week. In other words, if you view a weekly chart on any
given day, you are viewing the price action for the last five trading days. That
means if you are viewing the weekly chart on a Wednesday, you are seeing the
price action from Wednesday of the prior week to Wednesday of the current
week. Some charting services may provide a standard week of Monday through
Friday. In that case, if you view a weekly chart on a Wednesday, you are seeing
price action from Monday through Wednesday of the current week. In either
case, you won’t know until the close on the last trading day of the week how the
weekly candlestick line will appear.
The rolling week can be problematic in some cases because the current
week’s price bar, as well as the historical weekly bars, will adjust daily as the
week unfolds. If your charting service utilizes a rolling week, be cautious about
analyzing historical weekly charts mid-week because the candlesticks may look
different than they would if you were to analyze them after Friday’s close.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 27 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

3
Chapter

Candlestick Reversal
Patterns
n the previous chapter, you were shown how the candlestick line is constructed.
The term candlestick line is a nonspecific term used to refer to any single candlestick on a chart. There are certain candlestick lines, or combinations of lines,
that have specific names and criteria that identify them. They are referred to as
candlestick patterns. A candlestick pattern may consist of a unique single line, such
as a doji; or it may include two, three, or more candlestick lines. For example, an
evening star pattern includes three candlestick lines in its formation. Candlestick
patterns that provide reversal signals are the focus of this chapter.
Some traders may elect to simply make a shift to displaying data as candlestick lines instead of bar charts. That action alone should improve their
chart analysis since candlesticks make it quicker and easier to interpret price action. However, most traders who are interested in adding candlestick charting
to their technical arsenal will choose to delve deeper into the study of candlesticks by learning some, or all, of the candlestick patterns.
There are texts available by other fine authors on candlestick charting
(some are listed in the bibliography at the back of the book). Depending on the
resource you consult, anywhere from 55 to 68 candlestick patterns may be described. That includes reversal patterns, continuation patterns, and some distinctive variations of those patterns. Some of the patterns occur frequently,
while others are rare.
I have found, through my own experience when I first began learning the
candlestick patterns, and confirmed through discussions with dozens of my students, that trying to learn too many patterns at once can be counterproductive. After learning about half of those 55 to 68 patterns, it all starts to become sort of a
blur. The result may be some knowledge of a lot of patterns, but a lack of thorough
understanding and comprehension that allows you to put them all right to work.

I

27

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

28

Page 28 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

In Getting Started in Candlestick Charting, the number of patterns, along
with distinctive variations of certain patterns, will be limited to approximately
20 of the most common and best-known reversal patterns. The rare patterns are
excluded, with the exception of a few that are distinct variations of commonly
formed patterns. For example, a pattern called a gravestone doji is mentioned;
however, it is just a variation of a doji. In addition, continuation patterns are
not included. There is a reason the focus will be confined to reversal patterns.
According to Gregory L. Morris, in his book Candlestick Charting Explained
(McGraw-Hill, 2006, p. 312): “Reversal patterns occur about 40 times more often
than continuation patterns.” He goes on to say: “In this analysis, there were 65
reversal patterns and 23 continuation patterns, which make reversal patterns
account for about 74% of all patterns.”
Equally important, if not more so, to learning candlestick patterns is an
understanding of how to actually put them to work in the context of the
broader picture. That will be the primary focus of the chapters in Part II.
I believe that those of you who are new to this field of technical analysis will
appreciate the “learn less, but better” approach presented in this book. And once
you have that strong foundation in place, it will be easy for you to learn additional
patterns, should you choose to expand your study of candlestick charting.

Common Reversal Patterns
The candlestick patterns discussed in this chapter are listed in Table 3.1 As the
table illustrates, each bearish reversal pattern has a bullish counterpart. The patterns of the same name, for example, the engulfing pattern, can have either
bearish or bullish implications, depending on whether the pattern forms after
price has been rising or falling, respectively. There are also variations of some of
the patterns presented along with the primary pattern descriptions.
TABLE 3.1 Common Candlestick Reversal Pattern
Bearish Pattern

Bullish Pattern

Hanging Man

Hammer

Shooting Star

Inverted hammer

Doji (northen)

Doji (southern)

Dark Cloud Cover

Piercing Pattern

Bearish Engulﬁng

Bullish Engulﬁng

Bearish Harami

Bullish Harami

Evening Star

Morning Star

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 29 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

29

The reversal patterns all share one common trait:
they must follow a directional move. Bearish reversal
directional
patterns form after an upward move. They are considmove
ered to be bearish because they may be followed by a
A price move
shift in price direction from up to down, or from up to
that is either
lateral (sideways). Bullish patterns form after a price deup or down,
cline and may be followed by a change from down to up
but not
or from down to lateral.
sideways.
Don’t let the idea of having to learn several patterns
with their unusual names dissuade you. It is necessary to
move past that and instead focus on what is important—
to really understand what the candle formations tell you about the current psychology of market participants. Once you understand the value of the patterns,
I’m sure you’ll agree it is worth the time and effort.
Stocks and markets may vary in their price movement, as well as their
volatility. Therefore, you may discover that some patterns occur more or less
frequently in one market than another or from one stock to another.
Pattern Format
