
well within your means, and if you've the ability and discipline, you'll be on the road to real
success.
Even if in the end forex trading isn't for you, you'll have learned valuable ways to profit from forex
as a long-term investor.
In sum, I can't guarantee you success, but I can make you better, and put you miles ahead of the rest
of the unprepared suckers.

Notes
1. Neil Woodburn, “50 Year Anniversary of Europe on $5 a Day (Man, How Things Have
Changed!)” (May 2007), www.gadling.com/2007/05/02/50-year-anniversary-of-europe-on-5-aday-man-how-things-have/.
2. A personification of the Japanese housewife speculators, who are strong enough to affect
international markets, especially foreign exchange markets.
3. Vikas Baja and Graham Bowley, “S.E.C. Temporarily Blocks Short Sales of Financial Stocks,”
New York Times (September, 2008), www.nytimes.com/2008/09/20/business/20sec.html.
4. In an attempt to halt a run on their banking stocks, Spain, France Italy and Belgium banned short
selling them. Their plunge began because as holders of large quantities of Greek bonds they were
now being asked to take “voluntary” losses on these as part of the latest failed Greek rescue plan.
Markets understood that this set a precedent for similar partial defaults and losses on other
sovereign bonds of weak EU nations, which these banks also held in quantity. While wealthy and
sophisticated traders and institutions could find other ways to profit from the strong downtrend in
these shares, most private traders were now unable to exploit this move.
5. As was the case with holders of insurance against Greek default in July 2011, regulators ruled
that “voluntary” acceptance of 21 percent losses by banks holding sovereign Greek bonds did not
constitute default, even when it was obvious that these banks did so under official EU threats that the
banks would otherwise receive nothing and spark a global crisis.
6. Just do an online search using terms like “online forex brokers reviews.” You'll find plenty of
sources. The more reliable ones tend to be from established, professional looking websites that
obviously have a stake in protecting their reputation and offer their own in-house reviews.
Dailyforex.com runs its own in-house professional broker reviews, which are usually more credible
than those posted by unknown volunteers in trader forums, because Dailyforex.com's reputation is on
the line. Obviously, apply the “smell test.” If you see nothing but positive reports on a site with
broker reviews, and the site carries ads from those same brokers, seek second and third opinions.
There are also online forums, though you've no assurance on the reliability of the contributor. They
may be accurate, or just disgruntled losers blaming brokers for their own mistakes.
7. Javier E. David, “Global Forex Turnover Continues to Increase,” Wall Street Journal (July
2011), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111903999904576468211853284114.html.
8. David Woo is head of Global Rates and Currencies Research for Bank of America, Stephen Jen
is a former star forex trader at Morgan Stanley, BlueGold hedge fund, and at last report runs his own
hedge fund, SLJ Macro Partners.
9. http://www.forexfactory.com/showthread.php?t=120506.
10. Joshua M. Brown, “Inside the Currency Boiler Rooms” (April 2011),

www.thereformedbroker.com/2011/04/09/inside-the-currency-boiler-rooms/ and Michael
Greenberg, “U.S. Forex Brokers Account Profitability Comparison” (October 2010),
http://forexmagnates.com/us-forex-brokers-account-profitability-comparison/.
11. Brown, “Inside the Currency Boiler Rooms.”
12. For example, “…in the year 2000 state regulators in Massachusetts subpoenaed records which
showed that after 6 months only 16 percent of day traders (in equities) made money.…Brilliant day
traders do exist.…Sadly, it's a very small handful.” Quoted from one of the better trading books I've
read: Come Into My Trading Room: A Complete Guide to Trading, by Dr. Alexander Elder
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2002), 100–101.

CHAPTER 2
Forex Basics
This chapter covers:
Basics of Currencies and Currency Pairs
Currencies Trade in Pairs and Why That Matters
Size Matters: Types of Currency Pairs
Pips—The Universal Currency of Currencies
Leverage and Margin: Their Relationship and Impact on Risk
The Three Facets of Risk and Risk Control
The Core Four: The Most Important Skills for Success

BASICS OF CURRENCIES AND CURRENCY PAIRS
Here we are going to cover only what you really need to know about currency pairs in order to
understand the material that follows. At some point, perhaps even before you proceed to the next
chapter, you'll want to know more and can search the Internet to explore answers to such questions as:
What are the unique aspects of a given currency or pair?
What news is most important for a given currency or pair?
When is the best time to trade a given currency or pair?
What currencies or pairs do better in which situations?
What's carry trade and how do you use it to earn steady income?
How are currency markets changing and what do I need to know about that?

Trade Only the Most Liquid Currencies
Though most currencies are convertible and tradable, most traders stick to the eight major currencies
(known as majors) because they have the most liquidity or availability, meaning that lots of buyers
and sellers are usually present at any given time That means you're likely to get the best price and
avoid slippage (discussed in Chapter 1).
For example, if you want to buy or sell something, you'll get a better price if thousands of
counterparties are competing for what you have to offer, as opposed to just one or two.

The Major Currencies
Here are the eight major currencies, along with their symbols and nicknames, ranked in order of
liquidity:

Currency Labels Explained
Why these symbols? In general, the first two letters stand for the country, and the last letter signifies
the currency (see Figure 2.1).
FIGURE 2.1 Decoding Currency Symbols

Risk versus Safe Haven Currencies: Definition and Ranking
Depending on how they behave, these major currencies are classified as one of two kinds: risk and
safety or safe haven currencies. For now, just know that in general:
Risk currencies are those that appreciate in value in times of optimism and depreciate in times of
pessimism like other risk assets such as stock indexes or industrial commodities.
Safe haven or safety currencies depreciate in times of optimism and depreciate in times of
pessimism like other safety assets that are in demand when markets are fearful, such as
investment grade bonds.
Here's a table showing how these currencies rank on the risk-to-safety spectrum:

In other words, the AUD is the currency that tends to rise the most when markets feel optimistic and
want risk assets, and the JPY tends to fall the most. In times of fear, when risk assets are selling off,
the opposite occurs.
These labels refer solely to how these currencies behave relative to other assets. These
categories do NOT refer to the safety of these currencies as a store of value. For example, the
JPY generally behaves as the ultimate safety currency, however few would dispute that the CAD
is a better long term store of value given Canada's better fiscal health.
While the above general ranking works over a given period of days or weeks, it rarely applies
perfectly on a daily basis. For example, even if markets are feeling very optimistic, and classic
risk barometers like the S&P 500 are trending higher, currency specific news events can cause
lower ranked risk currencies to outperform the AUD and NZD.
We'll review the concepts of risk and safety currencies later, and cover them in more depth,
because they're critical for understanding and predicting how currencies and markets will interact in
different situations.

CURRENCIES TRADE IN PAIRS AND WHY THAT
MATTERS
Like everything else, currencies need to be priced in a currency, so currencies always trade in pairs.
This fact makes forex markets different from other markets in two critical ways.

Price Movements Are Always Relative to Another Currency
Here's the first big difference.
Thus, unlike how traditional asset markets price stocks or commodities in terms of a given
currency, foreign exchange (forex) prices are the product of the movement of one currency relative to
another.
For example, when traders talk about the price of the U.S. dollars (USD), they're referring to the
dollar value relative to another currency, depending on which pair they're considering.
This is a critical difference from other asset markets.
For example, on a given stock exchange, traders need only consider how share prices change
relative to the local currency, which is assumed to have an essentially fixed value regardless of
what's actually happening in forex markets. However, forex traders must consider how a
currency will move relative to multiple currencies, all of which are moving at the same time. For
example, it's common for a given currency to be up versus some currencies but down versus
others. That often complicates an assessment of its overall strength. There is no single definitive
index like the S&P 500 for currencies. Even popular currency indices like the USD index only
capture the USD's strength relative to a limited basket of currencies, and may not tell how the
U.S. dollar is faring relative to others. For example:
If traders wants to benefit from the USD's strength the most over a given period, they must also
choose the currency against which it will be strongest during the anticipated time span of the
trade, be it an hour, year, or anything in between.

Even when the New Zealand Dolar (NZD) is relatively weak, if the USD is doing even worse,
you can still profit from buying the NZDUSD.

It's Just as Easy to Profit in Bear Markets as in Bull Markets
This is such a huge advantage over other markets such as stocks that it alone justifies learning to trade
forex, because forex trading gives you an easier, more reliable way to play bear markets.
In other markets, there are often technical rules that make it harder to profit from downtrends.
These include the periodic outright bans on short selling (typically when that's most profitable),
and the Uptick Rule mentioned in Chapter 1, which often prevents less sophisticated traders from
catching the most profitable sharp downtrends, and keeps them away until the trend is moving
higher, thus making short selling riskier.
When you short stocks, your broker must borrow shares from someone who owns them. These
aren't always available when you want them, because other short sellers want to borrow them
too.
However, such bans are impossible in currency markets, because currencies trade in pairs, which
means you're always selling one in order to buy the other, that is, shorting (selling) one and going long
(buying) the other. Some currencies (safe haven currencies) rise in times of pessimism or bear
markets; others (risk currencies) rise in times of optimism or bull markets. Profiting from bear
markets is just a matter of buying safe haven currencies and selling risk currencies to pay for them. In
bull markets you do just the opposite. Unlike specific stock exchanges, currency markets are too
international and interlocked for anyone to ban selling a given currency at a given price. Even central
banks' attempts at manipulating prices are rarely sustainable for long.
Confused? Stay with me here—the details of how we're always buying one currency and selling
another, and how we profit from bear as well as bull markets, will be clarified further on when we
learn about the anatomy of a forex pair price quote and better understand what actually happens in a
forex trade.

How to Read a Forex Pair Price Quote
Table 2.1 shows a sample forex price quote that you'd see on your trading platform, with explanatory
notes added. To make the table easier to follow, I'm going to intentionally repeat definitions and
examples. It's important that you take the time to go through this carefully until all is clear.
Table 2.1 Sample Forex Price Quote

In other words:
Read the pair as the Euro-U.S. Dollar or the Euro-Dollar.
The currency on the left, the EUR, is called the base currency. That's because price movements of
the EURUSD are “based” on the base currency. The EURUSD price will rise on the charts if the
EUR is rising versus the USD. In other words, when this pair is trending higher, it means the
EUR is rising versus the USD (and vice versa, the USD is falling versus the EUR). When the
EURUSD is falling, that means the EUR is falling versus the USD, and the USD is rising versus
the EUR.
Thus, when you think the base currency will rise versus the counter currency, you buy or “go
long” the pair. For example, if you think the Great Britain Pound (GBP) will appreciate most

relative to the Japanese Yen (JPY), you would buy the GBPJPY. If you believe the opposite,
you'd sell the pair. Relax, we'll teach you how to determine that later.
The currency on the right, in this case the USD, is usually called the counter currency because the
price of the pair moves “counter” to the value of the USD versus the EUR. That is, if the
EURUSD is rising, the value of the USD relative to the EUR is falling. The currency on the right
is also called the quote or terms currency, because price movements of the EURUSD are
“quoted” in “terms” of the USD. Price is read as counter currency per base currency. In other
words, do not read the pair like a fraction. Instead, we read the EURUSD price as: U.S. Dollars
per Euro and not Euros per Dollar. For example, if the EURUSD price is 1.4000, that means the
price or exchange rate is 1.4000 USD per EUR, or, the EUR costs 1.4 USD.
The above price quote means you could do one of the following:
Buy the EURUSD pair at the (higher) ASK price.

OR Sell the EURUSD pair at the (lower) BID
price.

That Means:

That Means:

You buy Euros and pay for them buy selling dollars, paying the higher ask price. For
every 1 EUR you buy, you're selling $1.3924 USD, regardless of whether your
account is funded with JPY, GBP, EUR, and so on. Amounts are converted as
needed.

You sell Euros and get U.S. dollars in
exchange for them at the lower sell or bid
price. For every 1 EUR you sell, you're being
paid $1.3921 USD.

In sum, you're always buying at the higher price and selling at the lower price so that the broker
can earn the spread in lieu of fees or commissions.
When you buy or go long the EURUSD, you're long the base currency EUR and you're short the
USD. When you sell the pair, you're doing the opposite. Thus, you're always long one currency
and shorting the other, so it's as easy to short one currency versus another and, thus, benefit from
its downtrend as it is to be long that same pair.
When you enter or exit a position you buy at the higher ask price, and sell at the lower bid
price. Why? The difference or spread between the bid and ask prices is the profit the market
maker or broker earns for pairing buyers and sellers instead of charging a commission like stock
brokers.
Figure 2.2 shows how a price quote might appear on a typical trading platform.
FIGURE 2.2 Euro versus U.S. Dollar (USD)

Don't worry about understanding the details in the above order window. The only thing you really
need to know is that you buy at the higher price and sell at the lower price. To profit, you first need to
overcome the transaction costs, in this case the spread, as you would in any other kind of market,
whether they call it a commission or anything else.

Summary of Currency Pair Basics
You buy the EURUSD at the higher ask price if the following occurs:
You want to open a new buy position for the pair (go long the pair), you're betting that the
price of the EURUSD pair (in Dollars per Euro) will rise. In other words, you think the EUR
will rise in price versus the USD.
You want to close an existing short position in which you had bet the opposite, that the pair
would drop, (the EUR would fall versus the USD), either to take your profits or to cut your
losses on your short position.
You sell the EURUSD at the lower bid price if the following occurs:
You want to open a new sell position for the pair (go short the pair), betting the price of the
EURUSD pair (in Dollars per Euro) will fall. In other words, you think the EUR will fall
versus the USD.
You want to close an existing long position in which you had bet the opposite (that the pair
would rise in value, meaning the EUR would rise versus the USD), to either take profits or to

cut losses on your long position.

Why It's Just as Easy to Profit from Falling Prices
Do you see now how benefiting from a downtrend in a currency is no harder that riding an uptrend?
Let's review.
Whenever you buy or sell a currency pair, you're always buying (going long) one and selling (going
short) the other. In times of optimism (bull markets), you want to be long pairs that have risk
currencies as the base currency (one on the left) or short pairs that have safe haven currencies as the
base currency. In times of pessimism (bear markets), you want to do the opposite, because:
When you're long a currency pair, you're long (buying) the base currency and paying for it by
shorting (selling) the counter currency.
When you're short a currency pair, you're short (selling) the base and buying (going long) the
counter currency.
Pairs that have risk currencies as the base currency are called risk pairs. Those with safety or
safe haven base currencies are called safety or safe haven pairs.
For example, if you think markets will favor risk currencies and that the EUR (a risk currency) will
be strong relative to the USD (a safety currency), then you buy the EURUSD. When you do that, you
will be buying the EUR and paying for it by selling (shorting) the USD. If you believe the opposite,
sell the pair. That means you're selling the EUR and using the proceeds to buy U.S. dollars.
In sum, whether you buy or sell a currency pair, you're always buying (going long) one and selling
(going short) the other.
Thus, unlike other asset markets, profiting from a downtrend is as easy as profiting from an uptrend.
Currency traders are always long one currency and short the other. Regulators can't ban shorting one
currency without banning all forex trading of all pairs that include that currency. Even if there were
widespread will to do this, the lack of a single exchange would make such a ban difficult to enforce.
Even central banks have a hard time manipulating currency prices for more than a short time.

Remember: Currency Pair Prices Are “Based on” the Base Currency
Currency pair charts move in the direction of the base currency (the one on the left), and in the
opposite direction of the quote, terms, or counter currency. When you think the base currency will rise
versus the counter currency, you buy the pair because you're buying the base currency and paying for
it by selling the counter currency. When you believe the opposite, you sell the pair because then
you're selling the base currency to buy the counter currency.
Let's see this in action.

Pounds Sterling/U.S. Dollars (GBPUSD)
For example, in the GBPUSD chart shown in Figure 2.3, which currency is rising versus the other?
FIGURE 2.3 GBPUSD Daily Chart
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The GBP is the base currency. Overall the trend is up. That means:
The GBP has been rising versus the USD.
The USD is the counter, quote, or terms currency, so the prices are read as US dollars per British
pounds, and the USD has been falling versus the GBP.
The GBP trend is up versus the USD, the USD trend is down versus the GBP.

Analyze This!
Question: If you think the GBP will be stronger than the USD, would you buy or go long the
GBPUSD, or would you short it? Why?
Answer: You'd buy it. The GBP is the base currency, so the pair should rise.

U.S. Dollar/Japanese Yen (USDJPY)
Figure 2.4 shows another example. In the USDJPY chart, which currency is rising versus the other?
FIGURE 2.4 USDJPY Daily Chart, September 10 to November 4, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The USD is the base currency. Overall the trend is down. That means:
The USD has been falling versus the JPY.
The JPY is the counter, quote, or terms currency, so it has been rising versus the USD.
The JPY trend versus the USD is up, and the USD trend versus the JPY is down.

Analyze This!
Question: If you think the JPY will be stronger than the USD, would you buy or go long the
USDJPY, or would you short it?
Answer: You'd short it. If you thought the trend was reversing, you'd buy the pair.

SIZE MATTERS: TYPES OF CURRENCY PAIRS
Three types of pairs are available, categorized by the size of their average trading volume or
liquidity:
1. The majors
2. The crosses
3. The exotics

The Major Currency Pairs: The Most Liquid
The most liquid pairs, that is, those that have the highest average daily trading volume (and lowest
risk of slippage), are generally some combination of the USD and one of the other majors, that is, the
EUR, JPY, GBP, Swiss Franc (CHF), CAD, NZD, and the Australian Dollar (AUD). Specifically,
here are the major currency pairs, ranked by trading volume: EURUSD, USDJPY, GBPUSD,
AUDUSD, USDCHF, USDCAD, and NZDUSD.

More on Risk and Safe Haven Currencies
Virtually all widely traded financial assets can be categorized as risk or safe haven (or safety) assets.

Basically, risk assets are those that rise in times of optimism and evidence of accelerating growth,
like stocks, industrial commodities, real estate, and so on. In contrast, safety assets appreciate in
times of pessimism and fears of slowing growth, like investment grade bonds.
As noted above, there are also two basic types of currencies: risk and safe haven (or safety)
currencies. Those that tend to move up or down with other risk assets like stocks, and move in the
opposite direction of safe haven assets like bonds, are referred to as risk currencies. Those that move
in the same direction as safe haven assets and in the opposite direction of risk assets are called safe
haven currencies.
Again, here's how the major currencies rank on the risk spectrum:

In later chapters, you will learn more about these. Understanding this distinction is critical for
understanding and anticipating currency pair movements. For now, just know that the distinction
exists, that there are risk and safe haven (or safety) currencies.
Beware: Again, This labeling has nothing to do with the quality of a currency as a store of value. It
refers only to how these currencies and pairs behave relative to other asset types.
