
predecessor to the passions; Peter the Hermit collected a mob, while St. Bernard collected
an army. Both were endowed with equal zeal and perseverance, springing, in the one,
from impulse, and in the other from conviction, and a desire to increase the influence of
the church, that great body of which he was a pillar and an ornament.
One of the first converts he made was in himself a host. Louis VII. was both superstitious
and tyrannical, and, in a fit of remorse for the infamous slaughter he had authorised at the
sacking of Vitry, he made a vow to undertake the journey to the Holy Land. [The sacking
of Vitry reflects indelible disgrace upon Louis VII. His predecessors had been long
engaged in resistance to the outrageous powers assumed by the Popes, and Louis
continued the same policy. The ecclesiastical chapter of Bourges, having elected an
Archbishop without his consent, he proclaimed the election to be invalid, and took severe
and prompt measures against the refractory clergy. Thibault, Count de Champagne, took
up arms in defence of the Papal authority, and intrenched himself in the town of Vitry.
Louis was immediately in the field to chastise the rebel, and he besieged the town with so
much vigour, that the Count was forced to surrender. Upwards of thirteen hundred of the
inhabitants, fully one half of whom were women and children, took refuge in the church;
and, when the gates of the city were opened, and all resistance had ceased, Louis
inhumanly gave orders to set fire to the church, and a thousand persons perished in the
flames.] He was in this disposition when St. Bernard began to preach, and wanted but
little persuasion to embark in the cause. His example had great influence upon the
nobility, who, impoverished as many of them were by the sacrifices made by their fathers
in the holy wars, were anxious to repair their ruined fortunes by conquests on a foreign
shore. These took the field with such vassals as they could command, and, in a very short
time, an army was raised amounting to two hundred thousand men. At Vezelai the
monarch received the cross from the hands of St. Bernard, on a platform elevated in sight
of all the people. Several nobles, three bishops, and his Queen, Eleanor of Aquitaine,
were present at this ceremony, and enrolled themselves under the banners of the Cross,
St. Bernard cutting up his red sacerdotal vestments, and making crosses of them, to be
sewn on the shoulders of the people. An exhortation from the Pope was read to the
multitude, granting remission of their sins to all who should join the Crusade, and
directing that no man on that holy pilgrimage should encumber himself with heavy
baggage and vain superfluities, and that the nobles should not travel with dogs or falcons,
to lead them from the direct road, as had happened to so many during the first Crusade.
The command of the army was offered to St. Bernard; but he wisely refused to accept a
station for which his habits had unqualified him. After consecrating Louis with great
solemnity, at St. Denis, as chief of the expedition, he continued his course through the
country, stirring up the people wherever he went. So high an opinion was entertained of
his sanctity, that he was thought to be animated by the spirit of prophecy, and to be gifted
with the power of working miracles. Many women, excited by his eloquence, and
encouraged by his predictions, forsook their husbands and children, and, clothing
themselves in male attire, hastened to the war. St. Bernard himself wrote a letter to the
Pope, detailing his success, and stating, that in several towns there did not remain a single
male inhabitant capable of bearing arms, and that everywhere castles and towns were to
be seen filled with women weeping for their absent husbands. But in spite of this

apparent enthusiasm, the numbers who really took up arms were inconsiderable, and not
to be compared to the swarms of the first Crusade. A levy of no more than two hundred
thousand men, which was the utmost the number amounted to, could hardly have
depopulated a country like France to the extent mentioned by St. Bernard. His description
of the state of the country appears, therefore, to have been much more poetical than true.
Suger, the able minister of Louis, endeavoured to dissuade him from undertaking so long
a journey at a time when his own dominions so much needed his presence. But the king
was pricked in his conscience by the cruelties of Vitry, and was anxious to make the only
reparation which the religion of that day considered sufficient. He was desirous moreover
of testifying to the world, that though he could brave the temporal power of the church
when it encroached upon his prerogatives, he could render all due obedience to its
spiritual decrees whenever it suited his interest or tallied with his prejudices to so do.
Suger, therefore, implored in vain, and Louis received the pilgrim's staff at St. Denis, and
made all preparations for his pilgrimage.
In the mean time St. Bernard passed into Germany, where similar success attended his
preaching. The renown of his sanctity had gone before him, and he found everywhere an
admiring audience. Thousands of people, who could not understand a word he said,
flocked around him to catch a glimpse of so holy a man; and the knights enrolled
themselves in great numbers in the service of the Cross, each receiving from his hands
the symbol of the cause. But the people were not led away as in the days of Gottschalk.
We do not find that they rose in such tremendous masses of two and three hundred
thousand men, swarming over the country like a plague of locusts. Still the enthusiasm
was very great. The extraordinary tales that were told and believed of the miracles
worked by the preacher brought the country people from far and near. Devils were said to
vanish at his sight, and diseases of the most malignant nature to be cured by his touch.
[Philip, Archdeacon of the cathedral of Liege, wrote a detailed account of all the miracles
performed by St. Bernard during thirty-four days of his mission. They averaged about ten
per day. The disciples of St. Bernard complained bitterly that the people flocked around
their master in such numbers, that they could not see half the miracles he performed. But
they willingly trusted the eyes of others, as far as faith in the miracles went, and seemed
to vie with each other whose credulity should be greatest.] The Emperor Conrad caught at
last the contagion from his subjects, and declared his intention to follow the Cross.
The preparations were carried on so vigorously under the orders of Conrad, that in less
than three months he found himself at the head of an army containing at least one
hundred and fifty thousand effective men, besides a great number of women who
followed their husbands and lovers to the war. One troop of them rode in the attitude and
armour of men: their chief wore gilt spurs and buskins, and thence acquired the epithet of
the golden-footed lady. Conrad was ready to set out long before the French Monarch, and
in the month of June 1147, he arrived before Constantinople, having passed through
Hungary and Bulgaria without offence to the inhabitants.
Manuel Comnenus, the Greek Emperor, successor not only to the throne, but to the policy
of Alexius, looked with alarm upon the new levies who had come to eat up his capital and

imperil its tranquillity. Too weak to refuse them a passage through his dominions, too
distrustful of them to make them welcome when they came, and too little assured of the
advantages likely to result to himself from the war, to feign a friendship which he did not
feel, the Greek Emperor gave offence at the very outset. His subjects, in the pride of
superior civilization, called the Germans barbarians, while the latter, who, if semibarbarous, were at least honest and straight-forward, retorted upon the Greeks by calling
them double-faced knaves and traitors. Disputes continually arose between them, and
Conrad, who had preserved so much good order among his followers during their
passage, was unable to restrain their indignation when they arrived at Constantinople. For
some offence or other which the Greeks had given them, but which is rather hinted at
than stated by the scanty historians of the day, the Germans broke into the magnificent
pleasure garden of the Emperor, where he had a valuable collection of tame animals, for
which the grounds had been laid out in woods, caverns, groves, and streams, that each
might follow in captivity his natural habits. The enraged Germans, meriting the name of
barbarians that had been bestowed upon them, laid waste this pleasant retreat, and killed
or let loose the valuable animals it contained. Manuel, who is said to have beheld the
devastation from his palace windows without power or courage to prevent it, was
completely disgusted with his guests, and resolved, like his predecessor Alexius, to get
rid of them on the first opportunity. He sent a message to Conrad respectfully desiring an
interview, but the German refused to trust himself within the walls of Constantinople.
The Greek Emperor, on his part, thought it compatible neither with his dignity nor his
safety to seek the German, and several days were spent in insincere negotiations. Manuel
at length agreed to furnish the crusading army with guides to conduct it through Asia
Minor; and Conrad passed over the Hellespont with his forces, the advanced guard being
commanded by himself, and the rear by the warlike Bishop of Freysinghen.
Historians are almost unanimous in their belief that the wily Greek gave instructions to
his guides to lead the army of the German Emperor into dangers and difficulties. It is
certain, that instead of guiding them through such districts of Asia Minor as afforded
water and provisions, they led them into the wilds of Cappadocia, where neither was to
be procured, and where they were suddenly attacked by the Sultaun of the Seljukian
Turks, at the head of an immense force. The guides, whose treachery is apparent from
this fact alone, fled at the first sight of the Turkish army, and the Christians were left to
wage unequal warfare with their enemy, entangled and bewildered in desert wilds.
Toiling in their heavy mail, the Germans could make but little effective resistance to the
attacks of the Turkish light horse, who were down upon them one instant, and out of sight
the next. Now in the front and now in the rear, the agile foe showered his arrows upon
them, enticing them into swamps and hollows, from which they could only extricate
themselves after long struggles and great losses. The Germans, confounded by this mode
of warfare, lost all conception of the direction they were pursuing, and went back instead
of forward. Suffering at the same time for want of provisions, they fell an easy prey to
their pursuers. Count Bernhard, one of the bravest leaders of the German expedition, was
surrounded, with his whole division, not one of whom escaped the Turkish arrows. The
Emperor himself had nearly fallen a victim, and was twice severely wounded. So
persevering was the enemy, and so little able were the Germans to make even a show of
resistance, that when Conrad at last reached the city of Nice, he found that, instead of

being at the head of an imposing force of one hundred thousand foot and seventy
thousand horse, he had but fifty or sixty thousand men, and these in the most worn and
wearied condition.
Totally ignorant of the treachery of the Greek Emperor, although he had been warned to
beware of it, Louis VII. proceeded, at the head of his army, through Worms and Ratisbon,
towards Constantinople. At Ratisbon he was met by a deputation from Manuel, bearing
letters so full of hyperbole and flattery, that Louis is reported to have blushed when they
were read to him by the Bishop of Langres. The object of the deputation was to obtain
from the French King a promise to pass through the Grecian territories in a peaceable and
friendly manner, and to yield to the Greek Emperor any conquest he might make in Asia
Minor. The first part of the proposition was immediately acceded to, but no notice was
taken of the second and more unreasonable. Louis marched on, and, passing through
Hungary, pitched his tents in the outskirts of Constantinople.
On his arrival, Manuel sent him a friendly invitation to enter the city, at the head of a
small train. Louis at once accepted it, and was met by the Emperor at the porch of his
palace. The fairest promises were made; every art that flattery could suggest was resorted
to, and every argument employed, to induce him to yield his future conquests to the
Greek. Louis obstinately refused to pledge himself, and returned to his army, convinced
that the Emperor was a man not to be trusted. Negotiations were, however, continued for
several days, to the great dissatisfaction of the French army. The news that arrived of a
treaty entered into between Manuel and the Turkish Sultan changed their dissatisfaction
into fury, and the leaders demanded to be led against Constantinople, swearing that they
would raze the treacherous city to the ground. Louis did not feel inclined to accede to this
proposal, and, breaking up his camp, he crossed over into Asia.
Here he heard, for the first time, of the mishaps of the German Emperor, whom he found
in a woeful plight under the walls of Nice. The two monarchs united their forces, and
marched together along the sea-coast to Ephesus; but Conrad, jealous, it would appear, of
the superior numbers of the French, and not liking to sink into a vassal, for the time
being, of his rival, withdrew abruptly with the remnant of his legions, and returned to
Constantinople. Manuel was all smiles and courtesy. He condoled with the German so
feelingly upon his losses, and cursed the stupidity or treachery of the guides with such
apparent heartiness, that Conrad was half inclined to believe in his sincerity.
Louis, marching onward in the direction of Jerusalem, came up with the enemy on the
banks of the Meander. The Turks contested the passage of the river, but the French bribed
a peasant to point out a ford lower down: crossing the river without difficulty, they
attacked the Turks with much vigour, and put them to flight. Whether the Turks were
really defeated, or merely pretended to be so, is doubtful; but the latter supposition seems
to be the true one. It is probable that it was part of a concerted plan to draw the invaders
onwards to more unfavourable ground, where their destruction might be more certain. If
such were the scheme, it succeeded to the heart's wish of its projectors. The crusaders, on
the third day after their victory, arrived at a steep mountain-pass, on the summit of which
the Turkish host lay concealed so artfully, that not the slightest vestige of their presence

could be perceived. "With labouring steps and slow," they toiled up the steep ascent,
when suddenly a tremendous fragment of rock came bounding down the precipices with
an awful crash, bearing dismay and death before it. At the same instant the Turkish
archers started from their hiding-places, and discharged a shower of arrows upon the foot
soldiers, who fell by hundreds at a time. The arrows rebounded harmlessly against the
iron mail of the knights, which the Turks observing, took aim at their steeds, and horse
and rider fell down the steep into the rapid torrent which rushed below. Louis, who
commanded the rear-guard, received the first intimation of the onslaught from the sight of
his wounded and flying soldiers, and, not knowing the numbers of the enemy, he pushed
vigorously forward to stay, by his presence, the panic which had taken possession of his
army. All his efforts were in vain. Immense stones continued to be hurled upon them as
they advanced, bearing men and horse before them; and those who succeeded in forcing
their way to the top, were met hand-to-hand by the Turks, and cast down headlong upon
their companions. Louis himself fought with the energy of desperation, but had great
difficulty to avoid falling into the enemy's hands. He escaped at last under cover of the
night, with the remnant of his forces, and took up his position before Attalia. Here he
restored the discipline and the courage of his disorganized and disheartened followers,
and debated with his captains the plan that was to be pursued. After suffering severely
both from disease and famine, it was resolved that they should march to Antioch, which
still remained an independent principality under the successors of Bohemund of
Tarentum. At this time the sovereignty was vested in the person of Raymond, the uncle of
Eleanor of Aquitaine. This Prince, presuming upon his relationship to the French Queen,
endeavoured to withdraw Louis from the grand object of the Crusade -- the defence of the
kingdom of Jerusalem, and secure his co-operation in extending the limits and the power
of his principality of Antioch. The Prince of Tripoli formed a similar design, but Louis
rejected the offers of both, and marched after a short delay to Jerusalem. The Emperor
Conrad was there before him, having left Constantinople with promises of assistance
from Manuel Comnenus; assistance which never arrived, and was never intended.
A great council of the Christian princes of Palestine and the leaders of the Crusade was
then summoned, to discuss the future operations of the war. It was ultimately determined
that it would further the cause of the Cross in a greater degree if the united armies,
instead of proceeding to Edessa, laid siege to the city of Damascus, and drove the
Saracens from that strong position. This was a bold scheme, and, had it been boldly
followed out, would have insured, in all probability, the success of the war. But the
Christian leaders never learned from experience the necessity of union, that very soul of
great enterprises. Though they all agreed upon the policy of the plan, yet every one had
his own notions as to the means of executing it. The Princes of Antioch and Tripoli were
jealous of each other, and of the King of Jerusalem. The Emperor Conrad was jealous of
the King of France, and the King of France was disgusted with them all. But he had come
out to Palestine in accordance with a solemn vow; his religion, though it may be called
bigotry, was sincere; and he determined to remain to the very last moment that a chance
was left, of effecting any good for the cause he had set his heart on.
The siege of Damascus was accordingly commenced, and with so much ability and
vigour that the Christians gained a considerable advantage at the very outset. For weeks

the siege was pressed, till the shattered fortifications and diminishing resistance of the
besieged gave evidence that the city could not hold out much longer. At that moment the
insane jealousy of the leaders led to dissensions that soon caused the utter failure, not
only of the siege, but of the Crusade. A modern cookery-book, in giving a recipe for
cooking a hare, says, "first catch your hare, and then kill it;" a maxim of indisputable
wisdom. The Christian chiefs on this occasion had not so much sagacity, for they began a
violent dispute among themselves for the possession of a city which was still
unconquered. There being already a Prince of Antioch and a Prince of Tripoli, twenty
claimants started for the principality of Damascus, and a grand council of the leaders was
held to determine the individual on whom the honour should devolve. Many valuable
days were wasted in this discussion, the enemy in the mean while gaining strength from
their inactivity. It was at length, after a stormy deliberation, agreed that Count Robert of
Flanders, who had twice visited the Holy Land, should be invested with the dignity. The
other claimants refused to recognise him, or to co-operate in the siege, until a more
equitable arrangement had been made. Suspicion filled the camp; the most sinister
rumours of intrigues and treachery were set afloat; and the discontented candidates
withdrew at last to the other side of the city, and commenced operations on their own
account, without a probability of success. They were soon joined by the rest of the army.
The consequence was that the weakest side of the city, and that on which they had
already made considerable progress in the work of demolition, was left uncovered. The
enemy was prompt to profit by the mistake, and received an abundant supply of
provisions, and refortified the walls, before the crusaders came to their senses again.
When this desirable event happened, it was too late. Saph Eddin, the powerful Emir of
Mousoul, was in the neighbourhood, at the head of a large army, advancing by forced
marches to the relief of the city. The siege was abruptly abandoned, and the foolish
crusaders returned to Jerusalem, having done nothing to weaken the enemy, but every
thing to weaken themselves.
The freshness of enthusiasm had now completely subsided; -- even the meanest soldiers
were sick at heart. Conrad, from whose fierce zeal at the outset so much might have been
expected, was wearied with reverses, and returned to Europe with the poor remnant of his
host. Louis lingered a short time longer, for very shame, but the pressing solicitations of
his minister Suger induced him to return to France. Thus ended the second Crusade. Its
history is but a chronicle of defeats. It left the kingdom of Jerusalem in a worse state than
when it quitted Europe, and gained nothing but disgrace for its leaders and
discouragement for all concerned.
St. Bernard, who had prophesied a result so different, fell after this into some disrepute,
and experienced, like many other prophets, the fate of being without honour in his own
country. What made the matter worse, he could not obtain it in any other. Still, however,
there were not wanting zealous advocates to stand forward in his behalf, and stem the tide
of incredulity, which, unopposed, would have carried away his reputation. The Bishop of
Freysinghen declared that prophets were not always able to prophesy, and that the vices
of the crusaders drew down the wrath of Heaven upon them. But the most ingenious
excuse ever made for St. Bernard is to be found in his life by Geoffroi de Clairvaux,
where he pertinaciously insists that the Crusade was not unfortunate. St. Bernard, he says,

had prophesied a happy result, and that result could not be considered other than happy
which had peopled heaven with so glorious an army of martyrs. Geoffroi was a cunning
pleader, and, no doubt, convinced a few of the zealous; but plain people, who were not
wanting even in those days, retained their own opinion, or, what amounts to the same
thing, "were convinced against their will."
We now come to the consideration of the third Crusade, and of the causes which rendered
it necessary. The epidemic frenzy, which had been cooling ever since the issue of the first
expedition, was now extinct, or very nearly so, and the nations of Europe looked with
cold indifference upon the armaments of their princes. But chivalry had flourished in its
natural element of war, and was now in all its glory. It continued to supply armies for the
Holy Land when the popular ranks refused to deliver up their able-bodied swarms.
Poetry, which, more than religion, inspired the third Crusade, was then but "caviare to the
million," who had other matters, of sterner import, to claim all their attention. But the
knights and their retainers listened with delight to the martial and amatory strains of the
minstrels, minnesangers, trouveres, and troubadours, and burned to win favour in ladies'
eyes by showing prowess in Holy Land. The third was truly the romantic era of the
Crusades. Men fought then, not so much for the sepulchre of Jesus, and the maintenance
of a Christian kingdom in the East, as to gain glory for themselves in the best, and almost
only field, where glory could be obtained. They fought, not as zealots, but as soldiers; not
for religion, but for honour; not for the crown of martyrdom, but for the favour of the
lovely.
It is not necessary to enter into a detail of the events by which Saladin attained the
sovereignty of the East, or how, after a succession of engagements, he planted the
Moslem banner once more upon the battlements of Jerusalem. The Christian knights and
population, including the grand orders of St. John, the Hospitallers, and the Templars,
were sunk in an abyss of vice, and torn by unworthy jealousies and dissensions, were
unable to resist the well-trained armies which the wise and mighty Saladin brought
forward to crush them. But the news of their fall created a painful sensation among the
chivalry of Europe, whose noblest members were linked to the dwellers in Palestine by
many ties, both of blood and friendship. The news of the great battle of Tiberias, in which
Saladin defeated the Christian host with terrible slaughter, arrived first in Europe, and
was followed in quick succession by that of the capture of Jerusalem, Antioch, Tripoli,
and other cities. Dismay seized upon the clergy. The Pope (Urban III.) was so affected by
the news that he pined away for grief, and was scarcely seen to smile again, until he sank
into the sleep of death. [James of Vitry -- William de Nangis.] His successor, Gregory
VIII. felt the loss as acutely, but had better strength to bear it, and instructed all the clergy
of the Christian world to stir up the people to arms for the recovery of the Holy
Sepulchre. William, Archbishop of Tyre, a humble follower in the path of Peter the
Hermit, left Palestine to preach to the Kings of Europe the miseries he had witnessed, and
to incite them to the rescue. The renowned Frederick Barbarossa, the Emperor of
Germany, speedily collected an army, and passing over into Syria with less delay than
had ever before awaited a crusading force, defeated the Saracens, and took possession of
the city of Iconium. He was unfortunately cut off in the middle of his successful career,
by imprudently bathing in the Cydnus [The desire of comparing two great men has
