
This chapter outlines a number of these basic principles using the ROC
as an example. Remember that it is only one type of price momentum indi-
cator. Chapters 11, 12, 23, and 24 will discuss other oscillators for price and
breadth momentum.

It should be noted that the type of trend reversal signaled by a momen-
tum indicator depends upon the time span over which it has been calcu-
lated. It is accepted practice to use daily data for identifying short-term
trends, weekly data for intermediate trends, and monthly data for primary
trends.

It is very important to note that the use of momentum indicators assumes
that the price of the security is experiencing a normal cyclic thythm, which
is expressed in price action by rallies and reactions. However, in some
instances, countercyclical reactions are almost nonexistent. Price movement
is then reflected as a linear uptrend or downtrend. This is an unusual phe-
nomenon, and when it develops momentum, oscillators fail to work. This
is why the following principle is so very important.

The ROC Indicator

The simplest way of measuring momentum is to calculate the rate at which
4 security price changes over a given period of time, which is known as an
ROC indicator. If itis desired, for example, to construct an ROC using a 10-
Week time span, the current price is divided by the price 10 weeks ago. If
the latest price is 965 and that 10 weeks ago was 985, the ROC or momen-
‘um indicator will read 98.0, that is, 965 divided by 985. The subsequent
reading in the indicator will be calculated by dividing next week's price by
the price 9 weeks ago (see Table 10-1). The result is a series that oscillates
‘round a central reference point. This horizontal equilibrium line repre-
Sents the level at which the price is unchanged from its reading 10 weeks
480 (see Fig. 10-1). If an ROC calculation were made for a price that
remained unchanged, the oscillator would be represented by a horizontal
Straight line.



182

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Table 10-1 Ten-Week ROC Calculation
DIJA 10 weeks 10-week rate of change
Date DJIA (1) ago (2) (col. I divided col. 2) (3)
Jan.1 985,
8 980
15 972
22 975
29 965
Feb. 5 967
12 972
19 965
26 974
Mar. 5 980
12 965 985 98.0
19 960 980 98.0
26 950 972 97.7
Apr. 2 960 975 98.5
9 965 965 100.0
16 970 967 100.3
23 974 972 100.2
30 980 965 101.6
May 7 985 974 101.1
Price
i

03 M

02 lomentum

00 Equi {\ {\

00 exEguitibrium IN

of 7 V VV \/ V4

98

97

Figure 10-1 ROC using percentage scaling.

Momentum Principles 183

When an ROC is above the reference line, the market price that it is mea-
suring is higher than its level 10 weeks ago. If the ROC is also rising, the
difference between the current reading of the price and its level 10 weeks
ago is growing. If it is above the central line but declining, the price is still
above its level 10 weeks ago, but the difference between the two readings is
shrinking. When the ROC is below its central line and falling, the price is
below its level 10 weeks ago, and the difference between the two is growing.
If the indicator is below its central line but rising, the price is still lower than
its level 10 weeks ago, but its rate of decline is slowing.

In short, a rising ROC implies expanding velocity, and a falling one a loss
of momentum. Rising momentum should be interpreted as a bullish factor,
and declining momentum as a bearish one.

The ROC may also be calculated by the subtraction method; that is, the
current price is subtracted rather than divided by a price Nperiods ago. This
indicator is called the momentum indicator on several charting packages,
but it is really a rate of change. My own preference is strongly for the divi-
sion calculation since it expresses proportionate moves in a similar manner
to the ratio scale. This means that the indicator will not be distorted in
longer-term charts, as will an ROC calculated with the subtraction method.

There are two methods of scaling an ROC chart. Since the choice does
not affect the trend or level of the indicator, the method used is not impor-
tant, but a brief explanation is in order because the two alternatives can be
confusing. The first method is the one described previously and shown in
Fig. 10-1, where 100 becomes the central reference point. In the example,
100 (this week’s observation) divided by 99 (the observation 10 weeks ago)
is plotted approximately as 101, 100 divided by 98 as 102, 100 divided by
102 as 98, and so on.

The alternative is to take the difference between the indicator and the
100 level and plot the result as a positive or negative number using a ref
erence line of 0. In this case, 101 is plotted as +1, 102 as +2, 98 as —2, and
so on (see Fig. 10-2).

Selection of Time Span

Choice of the correct time span is important. For longer-term trends, a
12.month or 52-week time span is generally the most reliable, although a
24 or 18:month period can also prove useful. For intermediate trends, a
S-month, 26-week (6month), or 13-week (3-month) span works well. Price
Movements of even shorter duration are often reflected by a 10-, 20-, 25-,
or 30-day span. Reliable short/intermediate movements are often reflected
With a 45-day (9-week) and 65-day (13-week) span.



184 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Vo VON

ES WV

Figure 10-2 ROC using plus and minus scaling.

In this way, trendlines, price patterns, and divergences, which may not be
obvious in one period, are more apparent in another. The discovery of signs
of a trend reversal in several indicators constructed from different time
spans adds further fuel to the weight of the evidence. An example of this is
featured in Chart 10-1.

Principles and Applications of
Momentum Indicators

The following description of the principles and use of momentum indica-
tors applies to all forms of oscillators, whether constructed from an indi-
vidual price series or from an indicator that measures internal market
momentum, such as those described in Chapter 24.

These principles can be roughly divided into two broad categories:

Momentum Principles 185

Chart 10-1 Long's Drugs, 1996-1997, and three ROCs. (From www.pring.com.)

26 ~ Long's Drugs .
a eet aaa
205 Price confirms

ae Oe

yun * Wu a Sep’ loct

TT TTT 1-1-T

ey [Dec [1997 | [Feb

* Those that deal with overbought and oversold conditions, divergences,
and the like I will call these momentum characteristics. If you study momen-
tum indicators or oscillators, you will find that they have certain charac-
teristics that are associated with subsurface strengths or weaknesses in the
underlying price trend. It is rather like looking under the hood of an
engine. Most of the time you can identify mechanical trouble before it
becomes self-evident. Momentum and sentiment are closely allied, and
the relationship between them is discussed in Chapter 26, dealing with
market sentiment.

The identification of trend reversals in the momentum indicator itself
(momentum trend-reversal techniques) In this case, we are making the
assumption that when a trend in momentum is reversed, prices will
sooner or later follow.

Trend-determining techniques, such as trendline violations, MA cross-
Overs, and so on, when applied to momentum are just as valid as when uti-
ized with price. The difference, and it is an important one, is that a trend
reversal in momentum is just that, a reversal in momentum. Momentum
Ypically reverses along with price, often with a small lag, but just because
oscillators change direction doesn't always mean. that prices will too. Normally, a
Teversal in the momentum trend acts as confirming evidence of a price trend
f€versal signal. In effect, this momentum signal performs the act of



186 Part 1: Trend-Determining Techniques

supplementary “witness” in our weight of the evidence approach. I will have
more to say on this one a little later, but for now take special note of the

fact that actual buy and sell signals can only come from a reversal in trend of the
actual price, not the momentum series,

Interpreting Momentum
Characteristics

Overbought and Oversold Levels

Perhaps the most widely used method of momentum interpretation is the
evaluation of overbought and oversold levels. This concept can be compared
to a person taking an unruly dog for a walk. The leash is continually being
pulled from one side of the person to the other as the dog struggles to get
free. Despite all its activity, however, the dog can move no farther away than
the length of the leash.

The same principle holds true for momentum indicators in the market-
place, except that the market’s “leash” should be thought of as made of rub-
ber, so that it is possible for particularly strong or weak price trends to extend
beyond the normal limits known as overbought and oversold levels. These areas
are drawn on a chart at some distance above and below the equilibrium
level, as in Fig. 10-3. The actual boundaries will depend on the volatility of
the price being monitored and the time period over which the momentum
indicator has been constructed.

For example, an ROC indicator has a tendency to move to wider extremes
over a longer period than over a shorter one. It is highly unlikely that a price

Figure 10-3 Overbought and oversold zones.

Momentum Principles 187

will move 10 percent over a 10-day period; yet over the course of a primary
bull market extending over a 12-month period, a 25-percent increase would
not be uncommon. Some indicators, such as RSI and stochastics, have been
specially constructed to move within definite predetermined boundaries.

When a price reaches an overbought or oversold extreme, the probabil-
ities favor but by no means guarantee a reversal. An overbought reading is
a time to be thinking about selling, and an oversold one warns that the cur-
rent technical position may warrant a purchase. In many cases when a price
reaches an overbought extreme, the news is good, participants are opti-
mistic, and human nature tells us to buy. Unfortunately, the opposite is more
likely to be the case. On the other hand, an oversold reading is usually asso-
ciated with a negative news background. The last thing we want to do is raise
our shaking hand, pick up the phone, call our friendly broker, and tell him
or her to buy, but that is often a reasonable time to do it, provided the over-
all technical position is favorable.

In view of the variability of indicators such as the ROC, there is no hard
and fast rule about where the overbought and oversold lines should be drawn.
This can be determined only by studying the history and characteristics of
the security being monitored. The lines should be drawn such that they will
act as pivotal points that, when touched or slightly exceeded, are followed by
a reversal in the oscillator. When a particularly sharp price movement takes
place, these boundaries will become totally ineffective. Unfortunately, this is
a fact of life, but by and large it is usually possible to construct overbought
and oversold benchmarks that are price-sensitive. Again, the market leash is
made of rubber and can remain in overbought or oversold territory for long
periods. Consequently, it is essential to get confirmation from a reversal in
the trend of the price itself before taking any drastic action.

Oscillator Characteristics in Primary Bull and Bear Markets

I mentioned much earlier that the character of an oscillator alters accord-
ing to the price environment. In a bull market, oscillators tend to move into
an overbought condition very quickly and stay there a long time. In a bear
market, they can and do remain in an oversold condition for considerable
Periods.

In effect, an oscillator is not unlike a migrating bird in the Northern
Hemisphere. I have divided the price action in Fig. 10-4 into a bear mar-
ket, followed by a bull, and finally another bear market. As we enter the bear
phase, the true range of the oscillator shifts to the south, in a similar way to
a bird in the Northern Hemisphere migrating south to escape the cold
northerly winter. Then, when the bull market starts, the oscillator’s trading
Pattern migrates north again, just like the bird, finally shifting south again



as a new bear market begins. This is useful information in itself because if
it is possible to draw parallel horizontal lines like these against an oscilla-
tor, it provides a valuable clue as to whether the prevailing primary trend is
bullish or bearish.

The second point is that if you have an idea of the direction of the pri-
mary trend, you can anticipate what might come froma specific overbought
or oversold reading. In a bull market, the price is extremely sensitive to an
oversold condition. That means that when you are lucky enough to see one,
look around for some confirming signals that the price is about to rally. An
example might be the violation of a down trendline and so on. The reason
for this sensitivity lies in the fact that the oversold reading very likely reflects
an extreme in short-term sentiment. Market participants are focusing on the
latest bad news and are using that as an excuse to sell. Because this is a bull
market, they would be better served by remembering the positive long-term
fundamentals that will soon emerge and by using this weakness as an oppor-
tunity to buy.

The same thing happens in reverse during a bear market. Traders are
focused on bad news that sends the price down. Then some unexpectedly
good news hits the wires and the price rallies. However, when it is fully

te

Primary bull market
lasts 1 to 2 years

a .\
= a a see co
AWW A ee aAVAVAY

Vv ee
Figure 10-4 Changes in momentum characteristics in bull and bear markets.

Primary bear market
lasts 1 to 2 years

Momentum Principles 189

digested, most people realize that things really have not changed atall, and
the price declines again. Thus, the overbought reading more often than not
will correspond with the top of a bear market rally.

Looking at it from another perspective, during a bull market the price
will be far less sensitive to an overbought condition. Often it will be followed
by a small decline or even a trading Tange, as at point A in Fig. 10-4. The
rule then is do not count on a short-term overbought condition to trigger
a big decline in a bull market because the odds do not favor it.

Finally, people often point to an oversold condition and use that as their
rationale for a rally. Your favorite financial columnist might say, “Analysts
point out that the market is deeply oversold and a snap back rally is
expected.” Once again, it very much depends on the environment. In a
bull market, yes, that is true, but the columnist is more likely to say that
“despite a short-term oversold condition, analysts are expecting lower
prices because . . .” and then the columnist will go on to list a load of bear-
ish factors justifying his or her position. Remember, as a general rule, the
media reflect the crowd, which is usually wrong at turning points, and do
not make accurate forecasts, especially when quoting “experts.”

In a bear market, on the other hand, a market or stock is far less sensi-
tive to an oversold reading, often failing to signal a rally or possibly being
followed by a trading range, as at point Bin Fig. 10-4.

The maturity of the trend, whether primary or intermediate, often has
an effect on the limits that an oscillator might reach. For example, when a
bull market has just begun, there is a far greater tendency for an oscillator
to move quickly into overbought territory and to remain at very high read-
ings for a considerable period of time. In such cases, the overbought read-
ings tend to give premature warnings of declines. During the early phases
of the bull cycle, when the market Possesses strong momentum, reactions
to the oversold level are much more Tesponsive to price reversals, and such
Teadings therefore offer more reliable signals. It is only when a bull trend
is maturing, or during bear phases, that overbought levels can be relied
Upon to signal that a rally is shortly to be aborted. The very fact that an indi-
cator is unable to remain at, or even to achieve, an overbought reading for
a long period is itself a signal that the advance is losing momentum. The
pposite is true for a bear trend.

Overbought and Oversold Crossovers

In most cases, excellent buy and sell alerts are generated when the momen-
‘um indicator exceeds its extended overbought or oversold boundary and
then crosses back through the boundary on its way to zero. Figure 10-5
demonstrates this possibility. This approach filters out many premature buy



190 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Figure 10-5 Overbought and oversold recrossovers.

and sell signals generated as the indicator just reaches its overextended
boundary, but one should still wait for a trend reversal in the price itself
before taking action.

Mega-Overboughts and Oversolds

As discussed in Chapter 26, there is a close connection between market sen-
timent indicators and the characteristics of oscillators. Since market senti-
ment differs widely during bull and bear markets, it follows that such mood
swings are occasionally reflected in changing characteristics of momentum
indicators. Observing these changing characteristics through short-term
oscillators is one of the few techniques that enables us to identify primary
trend reversals at an early stage.

As discussed in previous chapters, I have termed some of these phenom
ena mega-overboughts and mega-oversolds. A mega-overbought is the initial
thrust in a bull market following the final bear market low. It is a reading
in the momentum indicator well beyond the normal overbought condition
witnessed in either the previous bull or bear market and should represent
a multiyear high. Such conditions are usually a sign of a very young and
vibrant bull market. The very fact that an oscillator is able to rally to such
a high level can be used, along with other trend-reversal evidence, to signal
that a new bull market has begun. It represents a sign that the balance

Momentum Principles 191

between buyers and sellers has unequivocally shifted in favor of buyers.
Think of a situation where a person uses all his or her strength to crash
through a locked door. It takes a tremendous amount of energy to achieve,
but once the door is finally shoved open, there is nothing to hold that per-
son back any longer. In the same way, a mega-overbought removes the price
from its bear market constraints, leaving it free to experience a new bull mar-
ket. An example is shown in Fig. 10-6.

A mega-overbought is about the only instance when opening a long posi-
tion from an overbought condition can be justified. Even so, it can only be
rationalized by someone with a longer-term time horizon. This is due to the
fact that whenever an oscillator experiences a mega-overbought, higher
prices almost always follow after a short-term setback or consolidation has
taken place. A highly leveraged trader may not be able to withstand the
financial pressure or the countertrend move, whereas the long-term investor
can. In most instances, you will probably find that the immediate correc-
tion following the mega-overbought is sideways, rather than downward, but
there are just enough exceptions to trip up the overleveraged trader.

Since a mega-overbought condition is associated with the first rally in a
bull market, it is a good idea to check and see if volume is also expanding.
If it takes the form of record volume for that particular security, the signal
is far louder, because record volume coming after a major decline is usu-
ally a reliable signal of a new bull market. Expanding volume is a more or
less necessary condition since it is consistent with the idea that buyers now
have the upper hand and that the psychology has totally reversed.

Primary bull market
lasts 1 to 2 years

Primary bear market
lasts 1 to 2 years

Mega-overbought ————p>

Figure 10-6 Mega-overbought.



192 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Having said that, there are occasions when a mega-overbought condition
is followed not by a reversal, but by a change in trend. In other words, the
previous bear market emerges into a multiyear trading range rather thana
full-fledged bull market. The point here is that the low preceding the mega-
overbought is not normally decisively violated for many years.

The same concept also appears in reverse for oversold extremes,
Consequently, when a price decline following a bull market high pushes a
momentum indicator to a multiyear extreme low, well beyond anything wit-
nessed either during the previous bull or bear market, the implication is that
sellers now have the upper hand. The fact that it is possible for the momen-
tum indicator to fall so sharply and so deeply is in itself a sign that the char-
acter of the market has changed. When you see this type of action, you
should, at the very least, question the bull market scenario. Look for tell-
tale signs that a new bear market may be underway. What are the volume
configurations on the subsequent rally? Does volume now trend lower as the
Price rises compared to previous rallies that were associated with trends of
rising volume?

The same possibilities of a change, as opposed to a reversal in trend, also
apply in the sense that a mega-oversold is typically the first decline in a bear
market, but occasionally it can also signal a change in trend from a primary
bull market to a multiyear trading range. An example of a mega-oversold is
shown in Fig. 10-7. Both mega-conditions are usually best observed in short-
term oscillators ranging from 10 to as many as 30 days in a time span. They
never develop from indicators whose construction constrains their fluctua-
tions between 0 and 100, such as the RSI and stochastic indicators. Examples
of a mega-overbought and a mega-oversold are shown in Chart 10-2.

Primary bear market
lasts 1 to 2 years

Primary bull market
lasts 1 to 2 years

AAS. FV A
- Li i wav, TA

Mega-oversold ———p>

Figure 10-7 Mega-oversold.

Momentum Principles 193

Chart 10-2 Beckon Dickenson, 1981-1985, and a mega-overbought and oversold. (From
www.pring.com.)

Rising peaks and troughs
Beckton Dickinson are signaled here
5-
20- Mega-overbought ———> |
14-day ROC] ;
40 y i | li j 4
0+
10+ t t +
Mega-oversold ——$p>

pea eases ad a

=a es

Extreme Swings

The extreme swing is another phenomenon that signals a dramatic shift in
psychology. It reflects the idea that some primary trend reversals are signaled
by a swing from unbelievable exuberance, as the bull market reaches its
Peak, to one of complete despondency and depression, as the first bear mar-
ket setback gets under way. The opposite is true of a transition from a pri-
mary bear to a primary bull market. In order for an extreme swing to
develop, it is necessary for the market to experience a prolonged up- or
downtrend. The extreme swing then appears in a momentum indicator by
an extremely strong move in the direction of the then-prevailing trend, as
shown in Fig. 10-8. This is followed by an extreme reading in the opposite
direction.
