
88

I

Theory

tory cycle became somewhat clearer to me in the course of writing
this book, although I cannot claim that the process of clarification
is complete. Nevertheless, I felt it was appropriate to summarize
it at this point. I shall now use the theoretical framework outlined
here to explain the course of events since 1972. The reader should
be advised that the writing of the explanation predates the formulation of this admittedly tentative theoretical framework.

P. S.,DECEMBER 1986

4

Having completed the explanation, I engaged in a real-time experiment from August 1985 to the end of 1986, trying to predict th.e
evolution of the credit and regulatory cycle. I came to a strange
conclusion. It appears that the cycle got stuck in 1982. If it had
not been for the successful intervention of the monetary authorities, the international debt crisis would have led to a collapse of
the banking system. As it is, the collapse has been avoided, but
the genuine trend reversal which it would have ushered in also
failed to take place. We now live in a system where we continually go to the brink and then recoil when we see the abyss opening up at our feet. The cohesion we manage to muster in the sight
of a disaster tends to disintegrate as soon as the danger recedes,
and the process then repeats itself in different forms. We can
observe it in international lending; in the U.S. budget deficit; in
the international monetary system; in OPEC;in the banking system; in financial markets; and 1987 will undoubtedly be the year
when protectionism drives the international trade system to the
brink of collapse but probably not beyond it.

PART TWO

THE INTERNATIONAL DEBT PROBLEM

The greatest problem in *eflexivity analysis is to decide what elements to single out for attention. In dealing with a financial market the problem is relatjvely simple. The critical variable is the
market price and the elements that need to be considered are
those that influence market prices. But even here the number of
factors that may come into play is almost infinite. Using just one
underlying trend and one predominant bias is an oversimplification that may be useful in demonstrating the dynamics, not to say
dialectics, of a historical process, but it is totally inadequate to
explain, let alone predict, the actual course of events?
When we venture outside the confines of a particular market,
the problem of selection is even more complex. We need a set of
interacting components that can explain the phenomenon we are
dealing with. But there may be different sets that could explain
the same phenomenon and we can have no assurance that we
have selected the right one. The plethora of potential components
is particularly troubling when we try to predict the future course
of events: we do not know which one will become significant.
The boom and bust in international lending is a case in point.
It is an indispensable element in the current economic situation.
Taken by itself, it constitutes an almost perfect example of a
boomhust sequence. Looked at in the context of the overall situation, it is just one of many elements that need to be taken into
account. To complicate matters, the international debt problem
has played a crucial role in the evolution of the banking system,
and the evolution of the banking system is also a reflexive process

.

92
I

I

Historical Perspective

that is significant in itself as well as being a significant element in
the overall situation.
What is, then, the best way to deal with international lending?
One has to consider the subject from at least three points of view:
as a reflexive phenomenon in its own right; as a factor in the
evolution of the banking system; and as part of the current economic situation. I shall try to consider all three at the same time
because that is the only way to avoid undue repetition. By choosing this route, I shall also provide a practical demonstration of
the complexity of reflexive processes in the real world. It goes
without saying that the analysis is not an easy one to follow; but
I shall try to keep the three points sf view separate as we go dong.
Some degree of distortion is inevitable: since we are interested in
the evolution of the banking system, we shall pay more attention
to the lenders than the borrowers. If we wanted to explore the fate
of the less developed countries, we would have to shift our focus.
The origins of the international lending boom go back at least
as far as the first oil shock in 1973; but to discuss the evolution of
the banking system we have to go back even farther, and to understand the economic cycle that has dominated recent history we
ought to start with the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system
in 1971. That would take us too far back; so I shall take early 1972
as my starting point, and I shall begin by looking at the banking
system in the United States. As it happens, that is the date of a
stock market report I wrote entitled "The Case for Growth Banks."
Banks at the time were considered the stodgiest of institutions.
Managements had been traumatized by the failures of the 1930s
and safety was the paramount consideration, overshadowing
profit or growth. The st~dctureof the industry was pracirical'ly
frozen by regulation. Expansion across state lines was prohibited
and in some states even branch banking was outlawed. A dull
business attracted dull people and there was little movement or
innovation in the industry. Bank stocks were ignored by investors
looking for capital gains.
Underneath the calm surface, changes were brewing. A new
breed of bankers was emerging who had been educated in business schools and thought in terms of bottom-line profits. The
spiritual center of the new school of thinking was First National
City Bank of New York, and people trained there were fanning
out and occupying top spots at other banks. New kinds of financial instruments were being introduced, and some banks were

The International Debt Problem

93

beginning to utilize their capital more aggressively and putting
together very creditabld earnings performances. There were some
acquisitions within state limits, leading to the emergence of larger
units. The larger banks typically leveraged their equity 14 to 16
times, with the Bank oflAmericarunning as high as 20 times. The
better banks showed a keturn on equity in excess of 13%. In any
other industry, such a ceturn on equity, combined with per-share
earnings growth of better than 10% would have been rewarded
by the shares selling at a decent premium over asset value, but
bank shares were selling at little or no premium. Analysts of bank
shares were aware of this relative undervaluation but they despaired of seeing the situation corrected because the underlying
changes were too gradual and the prevailing valuation too stable.
Yet, many banks had reached the point where they were pushing
against the limits of what was considered prudent leverage by the
standards of the time. 'If they wanted to continue growing they
would need to raise additional equity capital.
It was against this background that First National City hosted a
dinner for security analysts-an unheard-of event in the banking
industry. I was not invited but it prompted me to publish a report
that recommended purchase of a bouquet of the more aggressively
managed banks. It documented the situation I have described here
and it argued that bank stocks were about to come alive because
managements had a good story to tell and they had started telling
it. "Growth" and "banks" seemed like a contradicthn in terms, I
wrote, but the contradiction was about to be resolved by bank
' shares being awarded growth multiples.
Banks stocks did, in fact, have a good move in 1972 and we
made aSou4 50% on our bouquet. Some of the more alert banks
managed to raise some capital. If the process of raising capital at
a premium over book value had become established, banks could
have expanded on a sound basis and the evolution of the banking
system would have taken a different course. As it happened, the
process had hardly started when inflation accelerated, interest
rates rose, and a 13% return on capital was no longer sufficient to
enable banks to sell shares at a premium.
Then came the aftermath of the first oil shock and a tremendous
increase in the flow of funds to the oil-producing countries. These
countries did not know what to do with the money and it piled
up in the banks. A point was reached when some banks, like
Bankers Trust, felt obliged to turn away deposits. How to recycle

94

I

Historical Perspective

these so-called petrodollars became a major problem. There were
active discussions about intergovernmental schemes but nothing
much came out of them except for some increased Saudi contributions to the IMF and th;! World Bank. The governments of the
industrialized world failed dismally to rise to the occasion and it
was by default that the recycling of petrodollars was left to the
banks.
The banks stepped into the breech and fulfilled their function
all too well. Flush with funds, they became aggressive lenders,
and they found plenty of takers. Less developed countries without oil sought to finance their deficits by running up large debts;
thoss with oil embarked on an~bitiousexpansion programs,
which they financed by borrowing on the strength of their oil
reserves. This was the time of detente, which meant that Eastern
European countries borrowed huge amounts from Western banks
in the hope of repaying them using the products of the factories
they built with borrowed money. That is how the international
lending boom began.
At first, the banks were recycling the OPEC surplus. As time
passed, the oil-rich countries found other ways of utilizing their
new-found wealth: acquiring the most sophisticated armaments,
expanding their economy at a breakneck pace, buying diamonds
and real estate, and making other long-term investments. Meanwhile, demand for bank financing continued to build. Increasingly, the banks became the source of credit. Each loan created
deposits elsewhere so that the banks were able to generate the
funds they were lending by their own activity. Since the Eurodollar market was not regulated, banks did not have to maintain
minimum reserve raquirements against the liabilities of their offshore affiliates. There was nothing to stop those affiliates from
creating a seemingly unlimited supply of credit except self-restraint.
But international lending was too profitable to leave much
room for caution. Business could be transacted on a large scale,
the risk of adverse interest rate movements could be minimized
by the use of floating rates, and administrative costs were much
lower than in the case of corporate loans. Fierce competition kept
spreads between borrowing and lending rates quite narrow;
nevertheless, international lending became one of the easiest and
most profitable forms of banking activity, attracting many banks
with no previous experience in the field. The number of banks

The International Debt Problem

95

represented in London grew greatly during this period, and international lending became the fastest growing sector of the banking
industry. Naturally, if banks had set up reserves that would have
been appropriate in the light of subsequent experience, the
business would not hafre been as profitable as it seemed at the
time.
The external shape ,of the U.S. banking industry remained
largely stagnant duringlthis period. Expansion by way of mergers
and acquisitions was strictly circumscribed by regulation. But the
internal structure of banks underwent considerable transformation. The main corporate trend was the formation of bank holding
companies. The change of format allowed additional leveraging
at the holding company level so that the ratio of capital to total
assets continued to deteriorate. Moreover, the so-called Edge Act
subsidiaries escaped some of the regulatory restrictions imposed
on banks. The greatest scope was abroad. Accordingly, most of
the corporate moves were international with American banks expanding abroad and foreign banks establishing footholds in the
United States. For instance, more than a quarter of Citicorp's earns came from Brazil.
t was also a time oflrapid technological innovations. The use
of computers speeded up activities and permitted operations that
would have been previously inconceivable. Many new financial
instruments and financing techniques were invented and banking
became a much more sophisticated business than it had been only
a decade ago. These trends continue at an a c c e l e r a e pace to the
present day.
The task of the regulators was complicated both by the pace of
ianovation and by the international character of the competition.
It is not unfair to say that the regulators were always lagging a
step behind the practitioners and the industry became adept at
finding a way around whatever regulations were imposed.
In the international arena the authorities did not want to hinder
their own industry from competing on equal terms. With no regulatory constraints and individual banks competing for market
share, the market as a whole grew by leaps and bounds. Banks
were so anxious to obtain business that they asked very few questions. It is amazing how little information borrowing countries
had to supply in order to obtain loans. Lending banks did not
even know how much money the countries in question were borrowing elsewhere.
I

i7

96
I

I

Historical Perspective

Debtor countries preferred to deal with commercial banks
rather than go to the International Monetary Fund when they
were in balance-of-payments difficulties. Unwittingly, commercial banks took over one of the functions that the Bretton Woods
institutions-the IMF and the World Bank-had been designed
to fulfill. They tranferred resources to less developed countries
on a much larger scale than the Bretton Woods institutions would
have been willing to countenance, and with much less interference in the debtor countries' affairs. No wonder that less developed countries stayed away from the IMF! Mainly industrialized
countries like the United Kingdom asked for support from the
IMF; developing co~ntriescould do better with co~rm~ercial
banks. There was a veritable explosion of international credit between 1973 and 1979. It was the foundation of the worldwide
inflationary boom of the 1970s, which eventually culminated in
the second oil shock.
In retrospect it is obvious that the borrowers spent the money
unwisely. At best they built white elephants like the Itaipu Dam
in Brazil; at worst they spent it on armaments or used it to maintain unrealistically high exchange rates as in the "southern cone"
countries of Argentina and Chile. At the time, the folly was not
recognized. Indeed, Brazil was regarded as an economic miracle
and Chile was praised as a paragon of monetarist virtue.
International lending grew so rapidly that the banks involved
became overextended: their capital and reserves could not keep
pace with the growth of their balance sheets. But the quality of
their loan portfolios remained sound-at least outwardly. Indeed,
one of the most striking features of the situation was that the
borrowing countries continued t o meet the traditional yardsticks
used to determine their creditworthiness even as their overall
debt burden grew at an alarming rate.
Banks use ratios-such as external debt as a percentage of exports, debt service as a percentage of exports, and current deficits
as a percentage of exports-to measure creditworthiness. The international lending activity of the banks set in motion a self-reinforcing and self-validating process that increased the debtservicing ability of the debtors, as measured by these ratios, almost as fast as their debt.
The key to the process is to be found in the very low and,
eventually, negative real interest rates that prevailed during the
1970s. Since the Eurocurrency market was outside the control of

The International Debt Problem

97

the central banks, its growth did not directly influence monetary
policy in any country. As the banks graduated from recycling
OPEC surpluses to creating credit, the monetary policy of the
United States remained relaxed. The dollar started to depreciate,
and interest rates failed to keep up with the rise in prices. The
decline in real interesi rates lowered the cost of debt service and
rendered the borrowing countries more creditworthy. It also made
them more eager to bbrrow. The expansion of credit stimulated
the world economy and helped export performance all around.
The less developed countries enjoyed strong demand for the commodities they exported; thus their terms of trade also tended to
improve. The combination of declining real interest rates, expanding world trade, improving commodity prices, and the depreciating dollar enabled and encouraged the debtor countries to
increase their indebtedness.
The self-validating process of credit expansion-inflation for
short-was unsound in more ways than one. Prices and wages
rose at accelerating rates. Balance-of-payments deficits and surpluses were perpetuated. The balance sheets of the banks deteriorated. Much of the investment activity financed by bank lending
- was misdirected. The creditworthiness of the debtors was illus o w Yet, as long as the process validated itself, the world economy prospered. Consumption remained high while saving was
discouraged by low or negative interest rates. Investment was
stimulated by the availability of cheap loans,
there was a
flight from monetary to real assets. The combination of high consumption, high inventories, and strong investment activity created boom conditions.
The boom kept the demand for energy growing. The OPEC
countries grew richer and less in need of current income, while
negative real interest rates made it more attractive to keep oil in
the ground than cash in the bank. This provided the setting in
which the disruption of Iranian production in 1979 caused a second crisis and a second jump in the price of oil.
This time the response was different. Inflation had become a
dominant concern, especially in the United Kingdom and the
United States. Continental Europe and Japan had escaped the ravages of inflation by following a more restrictive monetary policy
and allowing their currencies to appreciate. Since the price of oil
is fixed in dollars, the cost of oil to Europe and Japan fell, and, in
the absence of inflation, their exports remained competitive de-

98

I

Historical Perspective

spite the appreciation of their currencies. The United Kingdom
and the United States, by contrast, developed large budgetary and
trade deficits, and inflation became a serious problem. Britain had
to turn to the IMF for help. The United States, controlling as it
did the reserve currency of the world, could inflate with impunity; nevertheless, the domestic and international consequences
of inflation led to a shift in political preferences. The specter of
accelerating inflation took precedence over the fear of recession.
In response to the second oil shock, monetary policy turned restrictive and remained so even after the economy started to decline.
Monetarism became the doctrine that guided eeonornic policy.
Previously, central banks sought to influence economic activity
by controlling interest rates; now the emphasis shifted to controlling the quantity of money. Interest rates were allowed to find
their own level. Unfortunately, the level they found was inordinately high. The main reason was that fiscal policy remained
stimulative, and it required a highly restrictive monetary policy
to keep the growth in money supply in check.
Fiscal policy was influenced by supply-side economics. It was
believed that lower tax rates would stimulate economic activity
to such an extent that the impact on the budget would be neutralized. The deficit could then be reduced by cutting government
spending. But the decision to increase defense expenditures at
the same time as taxes were cut made a balanced budget unattainable. The interaction between a swelling budget deficit and strict
monetary targets sent interest rates sky high. High interest rates
swamped the stimulative effect of the tax cuts. The budget deficit
widened, and the economy plunged into a deep recession.
The impact on the rest of the world was awesome. The debtor
countries were hit by a threefold increase in oil prices, plunging
commodity prices, soaring interest rates, a strong dollar, and a
worldwide recession. They engaged in a final binge of borrowing
that increased their total debt outstanding another 30%, but the
ratios measuring their creditworthiness rapidly deteriorated. The
situations in Poland and in the Falklands helped to undermine
confidence. There was a twilight period during which banks continued to lend, but reluctantly. Maturities were shortened, and
some countries developed liquidity problems. Then the Mexican
debt crisis erupted in 1982, and voluntary lending to the heavily
indebted countries came to a virtual standstill. The position of

The International Debt Problem

99

the debtors was much worse than most bankers had realized. For
instance, Brazil was using the interbank market to finance its
balance-of-payments deficit, unbeknownst to the correspondent
banks. The international lending boom turned into a bust.
We shall pause at this:point to analyze the international lending
boom as a reflexive process in its own right. The above description contains all the necessary ingredients of a boorntbust sequence. What are they? 'First, there must be a reflexive connection
between the underlying trend and the participants' perception.
Second, there must be a flaw in the participants' perception that
influences the underlying trend through a reflexive connection.
The trend reinfomes the bias until a point is reached where they
both become unsustainable. Typically, the trend appears to be
sound when it is first established and the flaws become apparent
only when the trend is already well advanced. There is a twilight
period during which the participants grow increasingly leery and
reluctant, and the trend loses momentum. Eventually, the realization that the trend is unsound and unsustainable comes crashing in. The prophecy is self-fulfilling and the trend is reversed,
often with catastrophic consequences.
In the case of international lending, there are a number of reflexive connections between the banks and the debtor countries.
Banks use debt ratios to measure a country's capacity to borrow.
These ratios were generally considered to be objective measurements, whereas in fact they are reflexive. As we k v e seen, both
exports and GNP are influenced by the volume of international
lending in a number of ways. Moreover, debt ratios measure only
a debtor country's capacity to pay, not its willingness. To measure
willingness a differentcalculation is needed vcrhich is essentially
political in character. The critical variable is not debt service but
net resource transfer, that is, the differencebetween debt service
and the inflow of new credit. As long as debtor countries can
borrow freely their willingness to pay is not in doubt: they can
always borrow the money they need to pay the interest. But as
soon as the flow of credit is interrupted, the willingness to pay
becomes the critical issue. Bankers refused to face the issue during the great lending boom. Walter Wriston of Citicorp asserted
that "sovereign nations don't go bankrupt. "
As we have seen, debt ratios remained largely satisfactory until
the second oil shock, and banks were eager to lend. When debt
ratios finally began to deteriorate, the banks started to worry and
