
D

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

J

F

M

A

M

FIGURE 130. “SMC” is a thin stock whose daily chart is usually “full of holes,”
but this large gap that appeared on its weekly chart in September 1946 evidently
possessed technical significance. Treated as a Runaway, and measuring from the
8-week Congestion at 68, it called for a downside objective of 44 or below, which
was duly fulfilled.

in a rapid advance or decline is a Continuation Gap. But each succeeding
gap must be regarded with more and more suspicion, especially if it is wider
than its predecessor.
We have referred to Exhaustion Gaps as wide gaps. Width is, of necessity,
relative in this study; it is impossible to lay down any exact rules to define
wide or narrow. Do not let this bother you too much. Recognition of what
constitutes an unusually wide gap for the particular stock you have under
observation soon comes with a little charting experience.
Runaway Gaps are usually not covered for a considerable length of time,
not, as a rule, until the market stages a swing of Major or full Intermediate
proportions in the opposite direction. But Exhaustion Gaps are quickly
closed, most often within 2 to 5 days, a fact which furnishes a final clue to

AU3772_book.fm Page 226 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

226

48

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

S

H

S
1946

G- G
44
40
38
36
Sales
100’s
50
40
30
20
10

BALTIMORE & OHIO PFD.
S
H

BO Pr

S

JANUARY FEBRUARY
MARCH
APRIL
JUNE
MAY
5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29

FIGURE 131. A small Island in the right shoulder of the Head-and-Shoulders Top
that marked this issue’s Major Reversal. The Island served only to emphasize the
chart’s Bearish implications.

28
LION OIL COMPANY

LNO

26
24
22

1947
G

20

G

19
Sales
100’s
50
40
30
20
10
MARCH
APRIL
MAY
JUNE
AUGUST
JULY
8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30

FIGURE 132. Island “shakeouts” are not uncommon in “thin” stocks. Why they
should develop as they do is hard to explain, but their forecasting implications are
obvious.

distinguish Exhaustion from Continuation, if it should still be needed at that
stage. (This, incidentally, upsets the common superstition that all gaps must
be closed before the trend can be trusted to continue very far. In the case of

AU3772_book.fm Page 227 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve:

Gaps

227

the Runaway Gap, it is not closed, but the trend moves right along nevertheless, and often for a surprising distance. In the case of the Exhaustion
Gap, the closing of it actually contributes to the signal that the trend has run
out.)
An Exhaustion Gap, taken by itself, should not be read as a sign of
Reversal, nor even, necessarily, of Reversal at all. It calls “stop,” but the halt
is ordinarily followed by some sort of area pattern development which may,
in turn, lead to either Reversal or Continuation of the move prior to the gap.
However, in practically every case, enough of a Minor Reaction or delay
ensues from the formation of an Exhaustion Gap, before a new trend is
established, to warrant closing out commitments at once. (One can always
reenter if it subsequently appears that the previous trend is to be resumed.)

The Island Reversal
We mentioned (at the end of Chapter 10) a Reversal Pattern, the Island, which
was to be taken up under the general study of gaps. The Island Pattern is
not common, and it is not, in itself, of major significance, in the sense of
denoting a long-term Top or Bottom, but it does, as a rule, send prices back
for a complete retracement of the Minor Move which preceded it.
An Island Reversal might be described as a compact trading range separated from the move which led to it (and which was usually fast) by an
Exhaustion Gap, and from the move in the opposite direction which follows
it (and which is also equally fast, as a rule) by a Breakaway Gap. The trading
range may consist of only a single day, in which event it normally develops
as a One-Day Reversal, or it may be made up of from several days to a week
or so of Minor Fluctuations within a compact price zone. It is characterized,
as might be expected, by relatively high volume. The gaps at either end occur
at approximately the same level (they should overlap to some extent) so that
the whole area stands out as an Island on the chart, isolated by the gaps
from the rest of the price path.
We have said that an Island does not, of itself, appear as a Major Reversal
Formation, but Islands frequently develop within the larger patterns at turning points of Primary or important Intermediate consequence, as for example
in the head of a dynamic Head-and-Shoulders Top. By the same token, they
appear occasionally at the extremes of the Minor Swings which compose a
Triangle or a Rectangle (in which event, of course, the gaps that set them off
are really better classified as Common or Pattern Gaps).
The reasons why Islands can and do develop — in other words, why
gaps can and do repeat at the same price level — will be more apparent
when we take up the general subject of Support and Resistance in a later
chapter. Suffice it to repeat at this point that prices can move most rapidly
and easily, either up or down, through a range where little or no stock
changed hands in the past, where, in other words, previous owners have no
“vested interest.”

AU3772_book.fm Page 228 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

228

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

128
BETHLEHEM STEEL

BS

120
112
104
G

G

96
88

80
76
72
68
64
1937
60
56
Sales
100’s
250
200
150
100
50
APRIL
MAY
JUNE
JANUARY
FEBRUARY MARCH
2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26

FIGURE 133. This Island Reversal Pattern at Bethlehem Steel’s Major Top in 1937
is a “classic,” yet it was followed by a curious and disturbing abnormality in the
strong rally that developed on March 30. Those who sold out on the Island’s signal
around 95 on March 19 or 20 were startled, and, if they had also sold short, justifiably
alarmed when prices jumped up a week later, not only through the second gap level,
but well above it. But eventually, as can be seen, everything worked out according
to the original forecast.
This incident will serve to illustrate a general principle: when a clear-cut technical
pattern of unquestionable significance has been completed on your charts, do not let
some apparently contrary development that occurs shortly thereafter lead you to
forget or neglect the previous plain signal. Give such situations time to work out.
Figure 123 on page 212 shows the sequel to the above chart and, incidentally,
another Island. Compare the volume.

Sometimes the second gap — the Breakaway that completes the Island —
is closed a few days later by a quick Pullback or reaction. More often it is
not. Rarely, the first gap — the Exhaustion Gap that starts the Island — is
covered in a few days before the second gap appears, in which event the
Island Congestion takes on a sort of V-Shape (if it is a Top), and there is no

AU3772_book.fm Page 229 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve:

44

Gaps

229

1936

G

G

40
XD .50

38
36
34
32
PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD

PA

30
28
Sales
100’s
125
100
75
50
25
JULY
AUGUST
SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBERDECEMBER
4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26

FIGURE 134. This looked like an Island in “PA,” but the second gap was actually
attributable to a 50-cent dividend which went ex on November 20, and had, therefore,
to be discounted technically. Because of this dividend, it was necessary to lower the
Support Line at 40 (see Chapter 13) by half a point. That Support, therefore, was not
violated in December, and prices subsequently advanced to above 50 the following
March.

clear “open water” across the chart horizontally between the Island and the
trends preceding and following it. In any of these variations, however, the
interpretation remains the same: the preceding Minor Move should be practically retraced.
An Island Pattern is not easy to trade on, unless it be for a short-term
“scalp,” as, obviously, a good share of the retracement may already have
been accomplished by the time the Island is charted and an order to buy or
sell on its indications can be executed. Of course, if the entering gap is
recognized as an Exhaustion Gap, the trader who is interested in the stock
presumably will take action before the second gap forms and before the
Island is in evidence. Perhaps, the greatest utility that Islands have for the
chart analyst is that of calling attention to a situation, of putting him on the
alert as to its potentialities.

Gaps in the Averages
Gaps appear also in nearly all Averages but, for obvious reasons, with rather
less frequency than in the charts of individual issues. While it is not necessary
for all of the stocks composing an average to make a gap simultaneously in

AU3772_book.fm Page 230 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

230

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

order to produce a gap in the Average figures, a majority of them must. As
might therefore be expected, Common or Pattern Gaps are particularly rare
in Average charts, but Breakaway and Runaway types are not uncommon,
although small as compared with the size of such gaps in single stocks.
Exhaustion Gaps, and, in consequence, Islands, again are rare. The conditions
that create an Exhaustion Gap seldom develop in a sufficient number of
individual issues at any one time to produce a counterpart in the Averages.
The technical interpretation of gaps in Averages is, in the main, the same
as in single stocks. The authors have not found that an Average gap possesses
any peculiar potency or significance over and above that attributable to a
gap in the chart of any actively and closely traded single issue.
The broader, and hence, most representative market indexes show the
fewest and smallest gaps. EN: On the other hand, the NASDAQ is quite volatile
and a good gap producer.
(It is suggested that the reader review this chapter after he has finished
studying the principles of Support and Resistance in Chapter 13.)
EN9: The truth is there is nothing more that need be said about gaps, and the
truth also is that no modern examples need be added. But gaps are fun, so see Figure
114.1 and Chapter 16.1 for modern examples.

AU3772_book.fm Page 231 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirteen

Support and Resistance
The phenomena that we shall study in this chapter are markedly different
in kind from those discussed in preceding sections. We shall look now at the
stock market from a new angle, and in so doing may find it possible to
develop some very practical additional rules to guide us in selecting stocks
for purchase or sale, in estimating their potential moves, in foreseeing where
they are likely to “run into trouble.” As a matter of fact, some experienced
traders have built their “systems” almost entirely on the principles of what
we here call Support and Resistance, paying no attention to the specific
pictorial patterns of price and volume action we have been investigating in
preceding pages.
But Support and Resistance phenomena are not, by any means, unrelated
to the various patterns and formations previously studied. We have already
had occasion to hint at a basic principle of Support and Resistance in our
explanation of gaps, and, as you read on, you will find that a number of the
other patterns of price behavior are explained thereby, or at least become
more readily understood.
The term Support is commonly used in the Street. In one or more of its
connotations, it must be fairly familiar to the reader. For example, we hear
that such-and-such a crowd is supporting XYZ at 50, or is prepared to
support the market by buying all stock offered on any 5-point concession.
For the purposes of this chapter, we may define Support as buying, actual or
potential, sufficient in volume to halt a downtrend in prices for an appreciable period. Resistance is the antithesis of Support; it is selling, actual or
potential, sufficient in volume to satisfy all bids and, hence, stop prices from
going higher for a time. Support and Resistance, as thus defined, are nearly
but not quite synonymous with demand and supply, respectively.
A Support Level is a price level at which sufficient demand for a stock
appears to hold a downtrend temporarily at least, and possibly reverse it,
i.e., start prices moving up again. A Resistance Zone, by the same token, is
a price level at which sufficient supply of a stock is forthcoming to stop, and
possibly turn back, its uptrend. There is, theoretically, a certain amount of
supply and a certain amount of demand at any given price level. (The relative
amount of each will vary according to circumstances and determine the
trend.) But a Support Range represents a concentration of demand, and a
Resistance Range represents a concentration of supply.

231

AU3772_book.fm Page 232 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

232

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

According to the foregoing definitions, you can see that the top boundary
of a Horizontal Congestion Pattern such as a Rectangle is a Resistance Level,
and its bottom edge a Support Level; the top line of an Ascending Triangle
is unmistakably a Resistance Level, etc. But we are more interested now in
the reasons why Support or Resistance, as the case may be, can be anticipated
to appear at certain price ranges. Within reasonable limits, and with a certain
few exceptions which we will examine later, it is quite possible to do this.
Expert chart readers are able frequently to make some amazingly accurate
predictions as to where an advance will encounter Resistance (supply) or
where a declining trend will meet Support.
The basis for such predictions — the elementary data from which Support and Resistance theories are derived — is that turnover in any given
issue tends to be concentrated at the several price levels where a large
number of shares changed hands in times past. Since any level at which a
great volume of transactions takes place usually becomes a Reversal point
(Major, Intermediate, or Minor) in that stock’s trend, it follows naturally that
Reversal Levels tend to “repeat.” But, here is the interesting and the important fact which, curiously enough, many casual chart observers appear never
to grasp: these critical price levels constantly switch their roles from Support
to Resistance and from Resistance to Support. A former Top, once it has been
surpassed, becomes a Bottom zone in a subsequent downtrend; and an old
Bottom, once it has been penetrated, becomes a Top zone in a later advancing
phase.

Normal Trend Development
Perhaps we can make this plainer by citing a typical example of normal
trend development. Suppose a stock in a Bull Trend moves up from 12 to
24, and there runs into a large volume of selling. The result is a reaction that
may take the form of a full Intermediate Correction to, say, 18, or a series of
Minor Fluctuations forming a Consolidation Pattern between, say, 24 and
21, the effect being the same in either case. Following this Correction or
Consolidation, a new advance gets under way and carries price on up to 30
before running again into supply in sufficient concentration to stifle the
move. Now another reaction is evidently due. Again, it may take the form
of a sideways Consolidation Pattern or an Intermediate Correction. If the
latter, where will that corrective setback be reversed; where, in other words,
will it meet Support? The answer is at 24, the level of the first Top in the
trend. That is the level (below current quotations) where a large turnover
had previously occurred. Then it functioned as Resistance, producing a halt
or Reversal in the first upswing; now it functions as Support, stemming and
reversing, at least in a Minor sense, the latest downswing.
Why should this be? It will be easier to suggest an answer to that
question if we first go on with a similar example of typical action in a
downtrend. This time, suppose our stock makes a Major Top and declines
from, say, 70 to 50. There, at 50, a temporary Selling Climax occurs; there is

AU3772_book.fm Page 233 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen:

Support and Resistance

233

a large turnover, prices rally, perhaps slip back for a “test” of 50, and then
stage a good recovery to 60. At 60, buying peters out, the trend rounds over,
turns down, and accelerates in renewed decline which carries to a new low
at 42. Again a wave of buying comes in, and a second recovery swing gets
under way. We can confidently expect that this recovery (from 42) will run
into strong Resistance at 50. The price level which functioned as a Support
for the first phase of decline, now that it has been broken through downside
by the second phase, will reverse its role and function as Resistance to the
second recovery move. The former Bottom level will now become a Top level.
Here, we may ask again why this should be so, and now we can suggest
an answer. In the example of downtrend action cited in the preceding paragraph, our stock first dropped to 50, ran into considerable volume there,
reversed its trend and rallied to 60 with activity dwindling on the rise. A lot
of shares changed hands at 50, and for every seller, there was, of course, a
buyer. A few of those buyers may have been covering short positions and,
having done so, had no further interest in the issue. Others, short-term
traders and professionals, may have purchased simply because they sensed
a temporary Bottom in the making and hoped to scalp a few points on the
ensuing rally; presumably, they (or at least some of them) took their profits
and were out before prices broke very far on the next decline But a majority
of those who acquired shares at 50, it is safe to say, did so because they
thought the stock was cheap at that price, because they figured it had gone
low enough. Only a few months ago, it was selling above 70; surely it was
a bargain at 50 and could be picked up and put away “for the long term.”

The Explanation
Imagine yourself, for the moment, in the place of those new owners. They
see prices turn up, reach 55, 58, 60. Their judgment appears to have been
vindicated. They hang on. Then the rally peters out, and prices start to drift
off again, slipping to 57, 55, 52, finally 50. They are mildly concerned but
still convinced that the stock is a bargain at that price. Probably there is
momentary hesitation in the decline at 50, and then prices break on down.
Briefly, there is hope that the break is only a shakeout to be recovered quickly,
but that hope vanishes as the downtrend continues. Now our new owners
begin to worry. Something has gone wrong. When the stock gets down below
45, the former bargain doesn’t look so good. “Well, I guess I picked a lemon
that time, but I won’t take a loss in it. I’ll just wait until it gets back up to
50 some day where I can get out even (except for expenses), and then they
can have it.” (Does it sound familiar, by any chance?)
Take the opposite side of the picture — the uptrend process. You, along
with many others, bought XYZ at 12, carried it up to 24, decided that was
plenty high for it, and cashed in. Thereupon XYZ reacted to 20, and you
congratulate yourself on your astuteness. But then, unexpectedly, it turns
around and rushes up to 30. Now you don’t feel so smart; that was a better
stock than you gave it credit for being. You wish you had it back. You will

AU3772_book.fm Page 234 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

234

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

52
JONES & LAUGHLIN JL

1944–1947

48
44
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20

Sales
100’s
500
400
300
200
100
1944

1945

1946

1947

FIGURE 135. Why now was so much time spent, so much “work” done during
mid-1945 under 33–34? We cannot see it on this chart, but the previous monthly
history shows that the Bottoms of long Congestion Areas were made in this zone in
late 1939 and late 1940. These old Bottoms, representing Support, originally, were
able to produce some supply (Resistance) 5 years later. Once prices had worked
through that supply, however, they were able to rise quickly to 44, and then their
subsequent reaction found Support just where you might have expected — at 33–34.
Support had turned to Resistance and then to Support again.
We can skip over the next few swings which “followed the rules” and go on to
the change in the picture which came with the first notable violation of a Support
Level in 1946. Prices had pushed up the first of February nearly to 54, well out above
the Tops around 46, formed the previous November. The late February reaction
should have “caught Support” around 46 — but it didn’t; it crashed on down to the
“round figure” 40. This was an ominous (although not necessarily “fatal”) development. Thereafter, a massive Symmetrical Triangle was formed and broke downside
in September.
The first Panic Decline in the Bear Market is no respecter of Support Levels. This
one was no exception, although it is noteworthy that prices “bounced” several times
from the important old 33–34 zone. By November, the Top Triangle’s measurement
had been exactly fulfilled.
You should turn back to this record and study it again after you have read the
next 10 or 11 pages.

AU3772_book.fm Page 235 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen:

Support and Resistance

235

not pay more for it, but if it comes back down to 24, the price at which you
sold, you’ll “reinstate your position.”
Perhaps you have never been in either of these situations. Perhaps your
own reactions wouldn’t, in such cases, have been the same as those we have
indicated. But, if you have had a fair amount of experience in the market —
have some knowledge of the psychology of the “average investor” — you
know that the pictures we have described are typical.
At this point you may not be satisfied that we have succeeded in giving
an adequate explanation for our basic principle of Support and Resistance
Levels. Remember, however, that the supply and demand balance in the
market is nearly always a delicate thing. Only a moderate oversupply at any
one price will suffice to stifle an advance; only a little extra demand concentrated at a certain level will stem a decline. And remember, further, that other
traders are watching the tape — will be quick to sense any change in the
situation, and quick to join the parade whenever a change in trend appears
to be developing. Consequently, orders to buy or sell a few hundred shares
may induce the transfer of several thousand.
Another point worth bearing in mind is that the traders and investors
who (because, as we have presumed, of their previous mistakes in either
selling or buying prematurely) created Support and Resistance Levels are
not necessarily ignorant or inexperienced. On the contrary, we must list them
among the wiser and more alert of those who operate in the market. To make
one more use of our previous theoretical example of typical downtrend
action, those who bought at 50 were certainly smarter than those who bought
at the top (70) or on the way down to 50, even though the latter price was
broken later on. Giving them credit for somewhat superior judgment, it
follows that they may be expected to appraise later developments pretty
carefully and display something better than a wooden and stubborn determination to “get out even” when it comes to selling on a Recovery Move.
Hence, in a marked Bear Trend “overhanging supply”; i.e., stock bought
at higher levels by holders now waiting for a good chance to unload, will
begin to come on the market below the theoretical Resistance Level. Wise
owners will be willing to sacrifice a point or so to avoid getting caught in
a worse loss.
By the same token, “sold-out Bulls,” when a Major Uptrend is under
way, may be willing to pay a point or two more in order to replace the shares
they had previously cashed in too soon. Thus, it is characteristic of reactions
in well-established (second phase) Bull Markets to drop back only to the
very uppermost limits of a Support Range — and for recoveries in established Bear Markets to reach only the lowest edges of Resistance Zones, or
perhaps even fail of that by an appreciable margin. We shall have more of
this sort of thing to point out later on, but first we must take up two other
matters — how to estimate the potential importance of Support and Resistance Zones, and how to locate, more exactly, the centers of axes of such
zones.
