
Time to expiration, like all inputs in the Black-Scholes Model, is entered as an
annualized number. If we are entering raw data directly into the model we must make
the appropriate annualization. With 91 days remaining to expiration, we would enter
an input of .25 (91/365 = .25). With 36 days remaining, we would enter .10 (36/365
= 10). However, most option evaluation computer programs already have this transfor-
mation incorporated into the software so that we need only enter the correct number
of days remaining to expiration.

It may seem that we have a problem in deciding what number of days to enter into
the model. We need the amount of time remaining to expiration for two purposes, to
calculate the interest considerations and to calculate the likelihood of movement in the
underlying contract. For volatility purposes in assessing the “speed” of the market we
are only interested in trading days. Only on those days can the price of the underlying
contract actually change. This might lead us to drop weekends and holidays from our
calculations. On the other hand, for interest rate purposes we must include every day.

6. It ds true that an exchange may adjust the exercise price of a stock option if there is a stock split. In
practical terms this is not really a change in the exercise price because the exercise price retains the
same relationship to the stock price. The characteristics of the option contract remain essentially
unchanged.


Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 47

If we borrow or lend money we expect the interest to accrue every day, no matter that
some of the days are not business days.

It turns out that this is not really a problem. In calculating the “speed” of the market
we observe only the price changes that occur on business days. But we can make slight
changes to this observed value and annualize the number before feeding it into the
theoretical pricing model, The result is that we can feed into our model the actual
number of days remaining to expiration knowing that the model will interpret the
number correctly.

PRICE OF THE UNDERLYING

Unlike the exercise price and time to expiration, the correct price of the underlying is
not always obvious. At any one time there is usually a bid price and an asked price, and
it may not be clear whether we ought to use one or the other of these prices, or perhaps
some price in between.

We have noted that the correct use of an option’s theoretical value requires us to
hedge the option position with an opposing trade in the underlying contract. Therefore
the underlying price we feed into our theoretical pricing model ought to be the price at
which we believe we can make the opposing trade. If we intend to purchase calls or sell
puts, both of which are long market positions, we will have to hedge by selling the
underlying contract. In that case we ought to use the bid price since that is the price at
which we can sell the underlying. On the other hand, if we intend to sell calls or buy
puts, both of which are short market positions, we will have to hedge by purchasing the
underlying contract. Now we ought to use the asked price since that is the price at
which we can buy the underlying,

In practice, the bid and offer are constantly changing, and many traders will simply
use the last trade price as the basis for theoretical evaluation. But the last trade price
May not always reflect the present market. Even the settlement price quoted in a
newspaper may not accurately reflect the market at the close of business. The last trade
price may show 751% for a contract, but the market at the close may have been 75%
bid, 7514 offered. A trader who hoped to buy at 7514 would have very little chance of
being filled because of the difficulty of buying at the bid price. Even a purchase at some
middle price, say 7594, may be unlikely if the market is very unbalanced with many
more contracts being bid for at 75'/4 than offered at 751. For all of these reasons, an
experienced trader will rarely enter an option market without knowing the exact bid
and offer in the underlying market.

INTEREST RATES

Since an option trade may result in either a cash credit or debit to a trader’s account,
the interest considerations resulting from this cash flow must also play a role in option
evaluation. This is a function of interest rates over the life of the option.

The interest rate component plays two roles in the theoretical evaluation of options.
First, it may affect the forward price of the underlying contract. If the underlying


48 Chapter 3

contract is subject to stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we raise the
forward price, increasing the value of calls and decreasing the value of puts. Secondly,
the interest rate may affect the cost of carrying the option. If the option is subject to
stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we decrease the value of the option. In
spite of the fact that the interest rate plays two roles, in most cases the same rate is
applicable and we need only input one interest rate into the model. If, however,
different rates are applicable, such as would be the case with foreign currency options
(the foreign currency interest rate plays one role, the domestic currency interest rate
plays a different role) the model will require the input of two interest rates. This is the
case with the Garman-Kohlhagen version of the Black-Scholes Model.

The fact that interest rates play a dual role also means that the relative importance
of interest rates will vary, depending on the type of underlying instrument and the
settlement procedure. For example, interest rates have a much greater impact on the
value of stock options than on futures options. As we raise interest rates, we increase
the forward price of stock, but leave the forward price of a futures contract unchanged.
At the same time, assuming stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we decrease
the value of options. The option price, however, is usually very small in relation to the
price of the underlying contract.

What interest rate should a trader use when evaluating options? Most traders
cannot borrow and lend at the same rate, so the correct interest rate will, in theory,
depend on whether the trade will create a debit or a credit. In the former case the trader
will be interested in the borrowing rate, while in the latter case he will be interested in
the lending rate. In practice, however, the most common solution is to use the risk-free
interest rate, i.e., the most secure rate. In the United States, the government is usually
considered the most secure borrower of funds, so that the yield on a government
security with a term equivalent to the life of the option is the general benchmark. For a
60-day option, use the yield on a 60-day treasury bill; for a 180-day option, use the yield
on a 180-day treasury bill.

DIVIDENDS

We did not list dividends as an input in Figure 3-4 since they are only a factor in the
theoretical evaluation of stock options, and then only if the stock is expected to pay a
dividend over the life of the option.

In order to accurately evaluate a stock option, a trader must know both the amount
of the dividend which the stock will pay and the ex-dividend date, the date on which a
trader must own the stock in order to receive the dividend. The emphasis here is on
ownership of the stock. A deeply in-the-money option may have many of the same
characteristics as stock, but only ownership of the stock carries with it the right to collect
the dividend.

In the absence of other information, most traders tend to assume that a company
will continue the same dividend policy it has had in the past. If the company has been
paying a 75¢ dividend each quarter, it will probably continue to do so. However, this
is not always a certainty. Companies sometimes increase or decrease dividends, and


Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Modets 49

occasionally omit them completely. If there is the possibility of a change in a company’s
dividend policy, a trader has to consider its impact on option values. Additionally, if the
ex-dividend date is expected just prior to expiration, there is the danger that a delay of
several days will cause the ex-dividend date to fall after expiration. For purposes of
option evaluation, this is the same as eliminating the dividend completely. In such a
situation a trader ought to make a special effort to ascertain the exact ex-dividend date.

VOLATILITY

Of all the inputs required for option evaluation, volatility is the most difficult for traders
to understand. At the same time, volatility often plays the most important role in actual
trading situations. Changes in our assumptions about volatility can have a dramatic
effect on an option’s value, and the manner in which the marketplace assesses volatility
can have an equally dramatic effect on an option’s price. For these reasons, we will
devote the next chapter to a detailed discussion of volatility.


J 4%

Volatility

What is volatility and why is it so important to an option trader? The option trader, like
a trader in the underlying instrument, is interested in the direction of the market. But
unlike the trader in the underlying, an option trader is also extremely sensitive to the
speed of the market. If the market for an underlying contract fails to move at a sufficient
speed, options on that contract will have less value because of the reduced likelihood
of the market going through an option’s exercise price. In a sense, volatility isa measure
of the speed of the market. Markets which move slowly are low-volatility markets;
markets which move quickly are high-volatility markets.

One might guess intuitively that some markets are more volatile than others.
Between 1980 and 1982, the price of gold moved from $300 per ounce to $800 per
ounce, more than doubling its price. Yet few traders would predict that the S&P 500
Index might more than double in a similar period. A commodity trader knows that
precious metals are generally more volatile than interest rate instruments. In the same
way, a Stock trader knows that high-technology stocks tend to be more volatile than
utility stocks.

If we knew whether a market was likely to be relatively volatile, or relatively quiet,
and could convey this information to a theoretical pricing model, any evaluation of
options on that market would be more accurate than if we simply ignored volatility.
Since option models are based on mathematical formulae, we will need some method
of quantifying this volatility component so that we can feed it into the model in
numerical form.

RANDOM WALKS AND NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS

Consider for a moment the pinball maze pictured in Figure 4-1. When a ball is dropped
into the maze at the top it moves downward, pulled by gravity, through a series of nails.
When the ball encounters each nail there is a 50% chance the bail will move to the right,
and a 50% chance it will move left. The ball then falls down to a new level where it
encounters another nail. Finally, at the bottom of the maze the ball falls into one of the
troughs.

The path the ball follows as it moves downward through the maze of nails is known
as a random walk. Once the ball enters the maze nothing can be done to artificially alter
its course, nor can one predict ahead of time the path the ball will take through the
maze,

51


52 Chapter 4

Figure 4-1: Random Walk

If enough balls are dropped into the maze, we might begin to get a distribution of
balls similar to that in Figure 4-2. Most of the balls tend to congregate near the center
of the maze, with a decreasing number of balls ending up in troughs further away from
the center. The distribution which results from dropping many balls into our maze is
referred to as a normal, or bell-shaped, distribution.

If we were to drop an infinite number of balls into the maze we might approximate
the distribution with a normal, or bell-shaped, curve such as the one overlaid on the
distribution in Figure 4-2. Such a curve is symmetrical (if we flipped it from right to left
it would look the same), it has its peak in the center, and its tails always flare down and
away from the center.

Normal distribution curves are used to describe the likely outcomes of random
events. For example, the curve in Figure 4-2 might also represent the results of flipping
acoin 15 times. Each outcome, or trough, would represent the number of heads which
occurred after each 15 flips. An outcome in trough zero would represent zero heads and
15 tails; an outcome in trough 15 would represent 15 heads and zero tails. Of course,
we would be surprised to flip a coin 15 times and get all heads or all tails. Assuming the


Volatility 53

Figure 4-2: Normal Distribution

coin is perfectly balanced; some outcome in between, perhaps 8 heads and 7 tails, or 9
heads and 6 tails, seems more likely.

Suppose we change our maze slightly by closing off a row of nails so that each time
a ball encounters a nail and goes either left or right, it must drop down two levels before
it encounters another nail. If we drop enough balls into the maze we may end up with
a distribution represented by the curve in Figure 4-3. Since the sideways movement of
the balls is restricted, the curve will have a higher peak and narrower tails than the curve
in Figure 4-2. In spite of its altered shape, this curve still represents a normal distribution,
although one with slightly different characteristics.

Finally, we might block off some of the spaces between nails so that each time a
ball drops down a level it must move two nails left or right before it can drop down to
4 new level. Again, if we drop enough balls into the maze we may get a distribution
Which resembles the curve in Figure 4-4. This curve, while still a normal distribution
Curve, will have a much lower peak and its tails will spread out much more quickly than
the curves in either Figure 4-2 or 4-3.


54 Chapter 4

Figure 4-3: Low Volatility Distribution

[lig itl

[lig (ETI

Suppose we now think of the ball’s sideways movement as the up and down price
movement of an underlying contract, and the ball’s downward movement as the
passage of time. If we assume that each day the underlying contract can move up or
down $1, the price distribution after 15 days might be represented by the curve in Figure
4-2. If we assume the price can move up or down $1 every two days, the price
distribution after 15 days might be represented by the curve in Figure 4-3. And if we
assume that each day the price can move up or down $2, the price distribution might
be represented by the curve in Figure 4-4.

With the underlying contract presently at $100 and 15 days to expiration, how
might we evaluate a $105 call? One way is to assume that prices follow a random walk
through time and that one of the curves in Figures 4-2, 4-3, or 4-4 represents the likely
distribution after 15 days. The comparative value of the $105 call under these three
scenarios is shown in Figure 4-5. If we assume a distribution similar to Figure 4-3, we
can see that the underlying contract has very little chance of reaching $105. Conse-
quently, the value of the $105 call will be low. If we assume a distribution similar to
Figure 4-2, there is an increased probability of the underlying reaching $105, and this
will increase the value of the $105 call. Finally, if we assume a distribution similar to


Volatility 55

Figure 4-4: High Volatility Distribution

on =e
ag —

Figure 4-4, there is a very real likelihood that the $105 call could finish in-the-money.
Asa result, the value of the option will increase dramatically.

If we assume only that the price movement of an underlying contract follows a
random walk, and nothing about the likely direction of movement, the curves in Figures
4-2, 4-3, and 4-4 might represent possible price distributions in a moderate-volatility,
low-volatility, and high-volatility market, respectively. In a low-volatility market, price
Movement is severely restricted, and consequently options will command relatively low
Premiums. In a high-volatility market the chances for extreme price movement is greatly
increased, and options will command high premiums.

Since the different price distributions in Figure 4-5 are symmetrical, it may seem
that increased volatility should have no effect on an option’s value. After all, increased
volatility may increase the likelihood of large upward movement, but this should be
offset by the equally greater likelinood of large downward movement. Here, however,
there is an important distinction between an option position and an underlying position.
Unlike an underlying contract, an option’s potential loss is limited. No matter how far
the market drops, a call option can only go to zero. In our example, whether the market
finishes at $80 or $104 at expiration, the $105 call will be worthless. However, if we
buy the underlying contract at $100, there is a tremendous difference between the


56 Chapter 4

Figure 4-5: Price Distribution at Expiration

present price
of underlying

low volatility

distribution —~

moderate volatility
distribution ~.

exercise
price

high volatility
distribution ‘
o .
Os NTs
ao _ _——
| oa NT en

market finishing at $80 or $104. With an underlying contract all outcomes are
important; with an option, only those outcomes which result in the option finishing
in-the-money are important. In Figure 45, we are only concerned with price outcomes
to the right of the exercise price. Everything else is zero.

This leads to an important distinction between evaluation of an underlying contract
and evaluation of an option. If we assume that prices are distributed along a normal
distribution curve, the value of an underlying contract depends on where the peak of the
curve is located, while the value of an option depends on how fast the curve spreads out.

MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION

Suppose we want to use the concept of price movement based on normal distribution
curves in a theoretical pricing model. To do this we need a method of describing the
characteristics of the curve to the model. Since the model is based on mathematics, we
need to describe the curve in numerical! terms so that we can feed the numbers into the
model.

Fortunately, a normal distribution curve can be fully described with two numbers,
the mean and the standard deviation. If we know that a distribution is normal, and we
also know these two numbers, then we know all the characteristics of the distribution.

Graphically, we can interpret the mean as the location of the peak of the curve, and
the standard deviation as a measure of how fast the curve spreads out. Curves which


Volatility 57

spread out very quickly, such as Figure 4-4, have a high standard deviation; curves
which spread out very slowly, such as Figure 4-3, have a low standard deviation.

While the mean is nothing more than the average outcome, and therefore a familiar
concept for many traders, the standard deviation may not be quite so familiar. Indeed,
one need not know how either of these numbers are calculated in order to successfully
trade options. (For those who are interested, a more detailed discussion appears in
Appendix B.) What is important to an option trader is the interpretation of these
numbers, in particular what a mean and standard deviation suggest in terms of likely
price movement.

Let’s go back to Figure 4-2 and consider the troughs numbered 0 to 15 at the
bottom. We suggested that these numbers might represent the number of heads
resulting from 15 flips of a coin. Alternatively, they might also represent the number of
times a ball went right at each nail as it dropped down through the maze. The first
trough is assigned zero since any ball which ends there must have gone left at every
nail, The last trough is assigned 15 since any ball which ends there must have gone right
at every nail.

Suppose we are told that the mean and standard deviation in Figure 4-2 are 7.50
and 3.00, respectively. What does this tell us about the distribution? (The actual mean
and standard deviation of 7.51 and 2.99 are calculated in Appendix B. Here, for
simplicity, we will round to 7.50 and 3.00.} The mean tells us the average outcome. If
we add up all the outcomes and divide by the number of occurrences, the result will De
7.50. In terms of the troughs, the average result will fall half-wey between troughs 7
and 8. (Of course this is not an actual possibility. However, we noted in Chapter 3 that
the average outcome does not have to be an actual possibility for any one outcome.)

The standard deviation not only describes how fast the distribution spreads out; it
also tells us something about the likelihood of a ball ending up in a specific trough or
group of troughs. In particular, the standard deviation tells us the probability of a ball
ending up in a trough which is a specified distance from the mean. For example, we
May want to know the likelihood of a ball falling down through the maze and ending
up in a trough lower than 5 or higher than 10. We can answer the question by asking
how many standard deviations the ball must move away from the mean, and then
determine the probability associated with that number of standard deviations.

The exact probability associated with any specific number of standard deviations
can be found in mathematical tables in most books on statistics. Alternatively, such
probabilities can be closely approximated using an appropriate formula (see Appendix
B). For option traders the following approximations will be useful:

+1 standard deviation takes in approximately 68.3% (about 24) of all occurrences

+2 standard deviations takes in approximately 95.4% (about !9%o) of all occur-
rences

+3 standard deviations takes in approximately 99.7% (about 369470) of all occur-
rences


58 Chapter 4

Note that each number of standard deviations is preceded by a plus or minus sign.
Because normal distributions are symmetrical, the likelihood of up movement and down
movement is identical.

Now let’s try to answer our question about the likelihood of getting a ball in a
trough lower than 5 or higher than 10. We can designate the divider between troughs
7 and 8 as the mean of 7!/. If the standard deviation is 3, what troughs are within one
standard deviation of the mean? One standard deviation from the mean is 714 +3 =
4 to 104%. Again interpreting 14 as the divider between troughs, we can see that
