
1. Several exchanges have recently introduced flex options, which permit the buyer and seller to negotiate
both the exercise price and expiration date. These are still considered exchange traded options since
the contracts are guaranteed by the exchange.


The Language of Options 3

Figure 1-1: Contract Specifications

Crude Oil* October 2i1 Call
| Expiration Exercise |

Underlying Date Price Type
GE March 80 Put

*If this is a futures option, the underlying is a futures contract rather than the physical commodity.

Figure 1-2: An Option Buy Order

BUY |c fo) GTC

JAN APR

10 |GE "eal “| 40 3

Con JUL OCT
AUG NOV
ext SEP DEC
FALLS
OPEN CusT EX TIME
CLOSE FIRM Fa/BB

TAKEN BY RNR FIRM
M/M ACCT #



4 Chapter I

Figure 1-3: An Option Sell Order

SELL|©] late
Q5 JOEX Pe Powe [25] 4

MAR JUN | EXPX PREM
con JUL oct
ns
om. SEP DEC
FILLS
OPEN cUST EX. TIME
CLOSE FIRM F/B

TAKEN BY RNR FIRM
M/M ACCT#

EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT

A trader who owns a call or a put option has the right to exercise that option prior to
its expiration date, thereby converting the option into a long underlying position, in the
case of a call, or a short underlying position, in the case of a put. A trader who exercises
a crude oil October 21 call has chosen to take a long position in one October crude oil
futures contract at $21 per barrel. A trader who exercises a GE March 80 put has chosen
to take a short position in 100 shares of GE stock at $80 per share. Once an option is
exercised it ceases to exist, just as if it had been allowed to expire unexercised.

A trader who intends to exercise an option must submit an exercise notice to either
the seller of the option, if purchased from a dealer, or to the guarantor of the option, if
purchased on an exchange. When a valid exercise notice is submitted, the seller of the
option is assigned. Depending on the type of option, he will pe required to take a long
or short position in the underlying contract at the specified exercise price.

In addition to its underlying contract, exercise price, expiration date, and type, an
option is further identified by the conditions of exercise. An option is either American,


The Language of Options

Figure 1-4: The Exercise and Assignment Process

[
Clearing firm notifies the

clearing house that the
buyer wishes to exercise

_
Buyer's Clearing Firm

Buyer notifies his clearing firm

that he wishes to exercise his
option thereby taking @ long
(call) or short (put) position
in the underlying instrument

at the exercise price

'

Holder of a Long
Option Position

Clearing House |) —————

Clearing house chooses a

seller at random and notifies
the seller's clearing firm that
the seller has been assigned

| Seller's Clearing Firm

Seller is notified by his clearing
firm that he has been assigned,
and that he now has a short
(call) or long (put) position

in the underlying instrument

at the exercise price

Y

Holder of a Short
Option Position

(Buyer) (Seller)
Figure 1-5: An Exercise Notice
DATE EXERCISE TIME STAMP
NOTICE
PUT CALL
STRIKE (CALL)
QTy STK/COMM MONTH PRICE TODAY
YE! NO
| 10. DM Mor Se ° x Initials: —SHN
Account #
Firm #
Broker #
Per



6 Chapter I

Figure 1-6: An Assignment Notice

DATE ASSIGNMENT
NOTICE
ary STK/COMM MONTH ORICE PUT CALL
15 [Gude Ort} Oct te) x
Initials: RIN
5 |7-Bonds | Dec 1 |X Account #
Firm #

whereby the holder can exercise the option at any time prior to expiration, or European,
whereby the holder can exercise the option only on expiration day.2 The great majority
of exchange traded options throughout the world are American options, carrying with
them the right of early exercise. Indeed, all U.S. exchange traded stock and futures
options are American?

As in any competitive market, an option’s price, or premium, is determined by
supply and demand. Buyers and sellers make competitive bids and offers in the
marketplace. When a bid and offer coincide, a trade is made. The premium paid for an
option can be separated into two components, the intrinsic value and the time value.
An option’s intrinsic value is the amount which would be credited to the option holder’s
account if he were to exercise the option and close out the position against the
underlying contract at the current market price. For example, with gold trading at $435
per ounce, the intrinsic value of a $400 call is $35. By exercising his option, the holder
of the $400 call can buy gold at $400 per ounce. If he sells gold at the market price of

2. Since exchanges need time to process exercise and assignment notices, the holder of an exchange
traded option must usually submit an exercise notice no later than the close of business on the day prior
to expiration.

3. Certain index options, such as the S&P 500 traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange, and the
Major Market traded on the American Stock Exchange, are European. Some foreign currency options
traded on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange are also European.



the Language of Options 7

$435 per ounce, $35 per ounce will be credited to his account. With a certain stock

trading at $62, the intrinsic value ofa $70 put is $8. By exercising his option, the holder

of the put can sell the stock at $70 per share. If he then buys the stock back at the market
rice of $62, he will show a total credit of $8.

A call will only have intrinsic value if its exercise price is less than the current
market price of the underlying contract. A put will only have intrinsic value if its exercise
price is greater than the current market price of the underlying contract. The amount
of intrinsic value is the amount by which the call’s exercise price is less than the current
underlying price, or the amount by which the put’s exercise price is greater than the
current underlying price. No option can have an intrinsic value less than zero.

Usually an option’s price in the marketplace will be greater than its intrinsic value.
The additional amount of premium beyond the intrinsic value which traders are willing
to pay for an option is the time value, sometimes also referred to as the option’s time
premium or extrinsic value. As we shall see, market participants are willing to pay this
additional amount because of the protective characteristics afforded by an option over
an outright long or short position in the underlying contract.

An option’s premium is always composed of precisely its intrinsic value and its time
value. If a $400 gold call is trading at $50 with gold at $435 per ounce, the time value
of the call must be $15, since the intrinsic value is $35. The two components must add
up to the option’s total premium of $50. If a $70 put ona stock is trading for $9 with
the stock at $62, the time value of the put must be $1, since the intrinsic value is $8.
The intrinsic value and the time value must add up to the option’s premium of $9.

Even though an option’s premium is always composed of its intrinsic value and its
time value, it is possible for one or both of these components to be zero. If the option
has no intrinsic value, its price in the marketplace will consist solely of time value. If the
option has no time value, its price will consist solely of intrinsic value. In the latter case,
We say that the option is trading at parity.

While an cption’s intrinsic value can never be less than zero, it is possible for an
option, if it is European, to have a negative time value. (More about this when we look
at early exercise in Chapter 12.) When this happens the option can trade for less than
parity. Usually, however, an option’s premium will reflect some non-negative amount
of intrinsic and time value.

Any option which has a positive intrinsic value is said to be in-the-money by the
amount of the intrinsic value. With a stock at $44, a $40 call is $4 in-the-money. With
Deutschemarks at 57.75, a 59 put is 1.25 in-the-money. An option which has no
intrinsic value is said to be out-of-the-money. The price of an out-of-the-money option
Consists solely of time value. In order to be in-the-money, a call (put) must have an
exercise price lower (higher) than the current price of the underlying contract. Note
that if a call is in-the-money, a put with the same exercise price and underlying contract
Must be out-of the-money. Conversely, if the put is in-the-money, a call with the same
exercise price must be out-of-the-money.

Finally, an option whose exercise price is identical to the current price of the
Underlying contract is said to be at-the-money. Technically, such an option is also
OUt-of the-money since it has no intrinsic value. We make the distinction between an


8 Chapter |

Figure 1-7: In- and Out-of-the-Money Options

Current
Underlying
Price

Lower Exercise Prices Higher Exercise Prices

~~? >
In-the-Money Calls Out-of-the-Money Calls

Out-of-the-Money Puts In-the-Money Puts

~—_? _

at-the-money and out-of-the-money option because an at-the-money option has the
greatest amount of time premium and is usually traded very actively.

If we want to be very precise, the exercise price of an option must be identical to
the current price of the underlying contract for the option to be at-the-money. However,
for exchange-traded options, the term is commonly applied to the call and put whose
exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying contract. With a stock at
$74 and $5 between exercise prices ($65, $70, $75, $80, etc.), the $75 call and the
$75 put would be considered the at-the-money options. These are the call and put
options with exercise prices closest to the current price of the underlying contract.

MARKET INTEGRITY

An important consideration for every market participant is the integrity of the market.
No trader will want to trade in a market where there is a chance that the opposing trader
will default on a contract. If a trader purchases an option, he wants to be certain that
the seller will fulfill the terms of the contract if the option is exercised.

In order to guarantee that the integrity of the market will be maintained, each
options exchange has established a progression of responsibility for the fulfillment of the
terms of an option. The primary responsibility falls to the individual trader. If the seller
of an option is assigned, he must be prepared to take the required long or short position
in the underlying contract at the specified exercise price. In practical terms, this means
a trader must have access to capital at least equal to the option’s intrinsic value.

If an individual trader is unable to fulfill the terms of the contract, the responsibility
falls to the trader’s clearing firm. A clearing firm isa member firm of the exchange which
processes trades made by an individual, and which agrees to fulfill any financial
obligation arising from those trades. No individual may trade on an exchange without
first becoming associated with a clearing firm.

If the clearing firm cannot fulfill the terms of the contract, the final responsibility
rests with the clearing house. Each exchange has established, or has become a member
of, a clearing house which guarantees the integrity of all trades. Once an option trade
has been made, the connection between the buyer and seller is severed, with the


The Language of Options 9

clearing house assuming the role of buyer from every seller, and seller to every buyer.
jf there were no central clearing house, the buyer of an option would be totally
dependent on the good faith of the seller or the seller’s clearing firm to fulfill the terms
of the option in the event of exercise, Because the clearing house guarantees every trade,
all buyers can be certain there will be an opposing party prepared to make or take
delivery if an option is exercised. The clearing process is shown in Figure 1-8.

This system of guarantees has proven effective in ensuring the integrity of options
exchanges. While individual traders and clearing firms occasionally fail, a clearing house
has never failed in the United States.

MARGIN REQUIREMENTS

When a trader makes an opening trade on an exchange, the exchange may require the
trader to deposit with the clearing house some amount of margin, or good faith capital.4
Such deposits ensure that if the market moves adversely, the trader will still be able to
fulfill any future financial obligations resulting from the trade.

In lieu of cash, margin requirements may often be met by depositing government
treasury instruments or, less commonly, commercial securities. Clearing firms collect
these margin requirements from their traders and forward the funds to the clearing

Figure 1-8: The Clearing Process

If reports from both clearing
firms match, the trade
becomes official.

| = | Clearing House +7

If the reports do not match,
they are returned to each
clearing firm, and from there
to the individual traders

Buyer's clearing firm Seller's clearing firm
teports trade to aan reports trade to
clearing house. for rectification. clearing house.

t | t

Buyer's Clearing Firm Seller's Clearing Firm

Buyer reports trade Seller reports trade
to his clearing firm. to his clearing firm.

t ~~" Trading Floor | ———_—_}fj 4

Buyer and seller agree
on acontract, quantity,
and price.

Margin requirements for a professional trader in an equity option market are referred to as a Aaircut


10 Chapter 1

house. In theory, margin deposits at the clearing house still belong to the individual
trader and, as such, any interest or dividends accruing to the margin deposit also belongs
to the trader. Some clearing firms, however, do not return this interest to the trader,
claiming that it is part of the fee paid by the trader for the clearing services of the member
firm. This can occasionally become a sensitive point between trader and clearing firm,
and should be settled before an individual begins to trade.

Margin requirements for both options and underlying contracts are set by the
clearing house, using as guidelines the current value of the position as well as the
potential risk. While an underlying position, particularly ifit is a futures contract, usually
has a fixed margin requirement, the margin for an option position can change over time
since the margin for an option often depends on the amount by which it is in- or
out-of-the-money. Positions consisting of a combination of options, or options and
underlying instruments, may have reduced margin requirements because the risk to one
contract may be partially offset by the value of another contract. Additionally, traders
who are exchange members may receive professional consideration in the form of
reduced margin requirements. Every trader should become familiar with the margin
requirements for the market in which he is trading. Doing so will ensure that he has
sufficient capital to initiate and hold positions as long as he deems necessary.

SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES

New option traders are often confused because settlement procedures may vary from
one exchange to another. Indeed, settlement procedures for an option and its underlying
contract may differ. Two methods are commonly used to settle exchange-traded
contracts—stock-type settlement and futures-type settlement.

Suppose a trader buys 100 shares of a $50 stock. The value of the stock is $5,000,
and the buyer is required to pay the seller the full amount. If the stock rises to $60 per
share, the owner of the stock will show a profit of $10 per share, or a total profit of
$1,000. Even so, he won't be able to actually spend this $1,000 profit until he formally
liquidates the position by selling his 100 shares at $60 per share. This type of settlement
procedure, where purchase requires full and immediate payment, and where profits or
losses are unrealized until the position is liquidated, is known as stock-type settlement.

In contrast to stock-type settlement, futures-type settlement requires no initial cash
payment from the buyer to the seller. Moreover, all profits or losses are immediately
realized, even if the position is not liquidated. If a trader buys a gold futures contract
covering 100 ounces of gold for $450 per ounce, the full value of the contract is
$45,000. The buyer, however, is not required to pay the seller the full $45,000 value
of the contract. The buyer does not have to pay any money at all. He is only required to
deposit with the clearing house some amount of good-faith margin. At the end of each
trading day both the buyer and the seller will immediately realize any profits or losses
resulting from movement in the price of the gold futures contract. If gold rises from $450
to $470 per ounce, $2,000 ($20 x 100) will be credited to the buyer’s account, and he
will have immediate use of these funds even if he does not liquidate the position. Of
course, if the price of gold drops to $430 per ounce, he will realize an immediate loss


The Language of Options I]

of $2,000. If he does not have sufficient funds in his account to cover this loss, the
clearing house will issue a variation call.

There is an important distinction between a margin call and a variation call. A
margin Call is issued by the clearing house to ensure that a trader can fulfill future
financial obligations should the market move against him. Margin calls can be met with
funds which, even though deposited at the clearing house, still belong to the trader and
consequently can earn interest for the trader. A variation call is issued in order to fulfill
current financial obligations in the form of realized losses. A variation call must be met
with a cash payment which is immediately deducted from a trader’s account. If a trader
has deposited securities with the clearing house as margin and receives a variation call,
he must either deposit the additional variation amount in cash, or the clearing house
will sell the securities in his account to generate enough cash to meet the variation call.
If the remaining securities and cash in the account is not sufficient to meet the current
margin requirements, the trader may be forced to liquidate his position.

We make this very important distinction between stock- and futures-type settle-
ment because some options are settled like stock and some options are settled like
futures. It is important for a trader to know which he is trading. Currently all
exchange-traded options in the United States, whether options on stock, futures,
indices, or foreign currencies, are settled like stock. Options must be paid for immedi-
ately and in full, and profits or losses are unrealized until the position is liquidated. In
stock option markets this is both logical and consistent, since both the underlying
contract and options on that contract are settled using identical procedures, However,
on U.S. futures options markets, the underlying contract is settled one way (futures-type
settlement} while the options are settled in a different way (stock-type settlement). This
can sometimes cause problems when a trader has bought or sold an option to hedge a
futures position. Even if the profits from the option position exactly offset the losses from
the futures position, the profits from the option position, because the options are settled
like stock, are only paper profits. On the other hand, the losses from the futures position
will require an immediate cash outlay to cover a variation call. If a trader is unaware of
the different settlement procedures, he can occasionally find himself with unexpected
cash flow problems.

The settlement situation on many exchanges outside the U.S. has been simplified
by making option and underlying settlement procedures identical. If the underlying is
Subject to stock-type settlement, then so are the options on the underlying. If the
Underlying is subject to futures-type settlement, then so are the options. Under this
Method a trader is unlikely to get a surprise variation call on a position which he thinks
1S well hedged.

Before concluding this chapter, it will be useful to define the terms long and short
a8 they are used in option trading versus their use in trading an underlying contract. In
4 long underlying position a trader will profit if prices rise and lose if prices fall. In a short
Underlying position a trader will profit if prices fall and lose if prices rise. There is a
tendency to carry this terminology over into the option market by referring to any
Position which will profit from a tise in the price of the underlying contract as a long
Position, and any position which will profit from a fall in price as a short position.


12 Chapter |

More generally, however, the terms long and short refer to the purchase or sale of
a contract, and this is the sense in which we apply these terms to option trading. A trader
who has purchased an option is long the option, and a trader who has sold the option
is short. There is no confusion when we refer to a long call position because the trader
who is longa call also has a long market position. Calls will, in theory, rise in value if
the underlying market rises. But a long put position is a short market position. A trader
who has purchased a put wants the underlying market to decline because a put will
theoretically increase in value as the market declines. Throughout the text, whenever
there is the possibility of confusion, an attempt will be made to distinguish between a
long or short market position versus a long or short option position.


wo 2 &

Elementary Strategies

The trader who enters an option market for the first time may find himself subjected to
a form of “contract shock.” Unlike a trader in equities or futures, whose choices are
limited to a small number of instruments, an option trader must often deal with a
pewildering assortment of contracts. With at least three different expiration months,
with each month having several different exercise prices, and with both calls and puts
available at each exercise price, it is not unusual for an option trader to be faced with
as many as 40 different contracts.

Even if we eliminate the inactively traded options, a new trader may still have to
deal with 15 or 20 different options. With so many choices available, a trader needs
some logical method of deciding which options actually represent profit opportunities.
Which should he buy? Which should he sell? Which should he avoid altogether? The
choices are so numerous that many prospective option traders give up in frustration.

For the trader who does persevere, a certain logic in the pricing of options begins
to emerge. As he becomes familiar with this logic, he can begin to formulate potentially
profitable strategies. Initially he will concentrate on the purchase or sale of individual
options. From there he will go on to combination strategies. Eventually he will become
comfortable with complex strategies involving several different contracts.
