202 A WINNING SYSTEM
Why Is Skilled, Careful Market Observation So Important?
A Harvard professor once asked his students to do a special report on fish.
His scholars went to the library, read books about fish, and then wrote their
expositions. But after turning in their papers, the students were shocked
when the professor tore them up and threw them in the wastebasket.
When they asked him what was wrong with the reports, the professor said,
“If you want to learn anything about fish, sit in front of a fishbowl and look at
fish.” He made his students sit and watch fish for hours. Then they rewrote
their assignment solely on their observations of the objects themselves.
Being a student of the market is like being a student in this professor’s class:
if you want to learn about the market, you must observe and study the major
indexes carefully. In doing so, you’ll come to recognize when the daily market
averages are changing at key turning points—such as major market tops and
bottoms—and learn to capitalize on this with real knowledge and confidence.
There’s an important lesson here. To be highly accurate in any pursuit,
you must observe and analyze the objects themselves carefully. If you want
to know about tigers, you need to watch tigers—not the weather, not the
vegetation, and not the other animals on the mountain.
Years ago, when Lou Brock set his mind to breaking baseball’s stolen base
record, he had all the big-league pitchers photographed with high-speed
film from the seats behind first base. Then he studied the film to learn what
part of each pitcher’s body moved first when he threw to first base. The
pitcher was the object that Brock was trying to beat, so it was the pitchers
themselves that he studied in great detail.
In the 2003 Super Bowl, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers were able to intercept five Oakland Raider passes by first studying and then concentrating on
the eye movements and body language of Oakland’s quarterback. They
“read” where he was going to throw.
Christopher Columbus didn’t accept the conventional wisdom about the
earth being flat because he himself had observed ships at sea disappearing
over the horizon in a way that told him otherwise. The government uses
wiretaps, spy planes, unmanned drones, and satellite photos to observe and
analyze objects that could threaten our security. That’s how we discovered
Soviet missiles in Cuba.
It’s the same with the stock market. To know which way it’s going, you
must observe and analyze the major general market indexes daily. Don’t
ever, ever ask anyone: “What do you think the market’s going to do?” Learn
to accurately read what the market is actually doing each day as it is doing it.
Recognizing when the market has hit a top or has bottomed out is frequently 50% of the whole complicated investment ball game. It’s also the

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

key investing skill virtually all investors, whether amateur or professional,
seem to lack. In fact, Wall Street analysts completely missed calling the market top in 2000, particularly the tops in every one of the high-technology
leaders. They didn’t do much better in 2008.
We conducted four surveys of IBD subscribers in 2008 and also received
hundreds of letters from subscribers that led us to believe that 60% of IBD
readers sold stock and raised cash in either December 2007 or June 2008
with the help of “The Big Picture” column and by applying and acting on
our rule about five or six distribution days over any four- or five-week
period. They preserved their capital and avoided the brunt of the dramatic
and costly market collapse in the fall of 2008 that resulted from excessive
problems in the market for subprime mortgage real estate loans (which had
been sponsored and strongly encouraged by the government). You may
have seen some of our subscribers’ comments in IBD at the top of a page
space titled “You Can Do It Too.” You’ll learn exactly how to apply IBD’s
general market distribution rules later in this chapter.

The Stages of a Stock Market Cycle
The winning investor should understand how a normal business cycle
unfolds and over what period of time. The investor should pay particular
attention to recent cycles. There’s no guarantee that just because cycles
lasted three or four years in the past, they’ll last that long in the future.
Bull and bear markets don’t end easily. It usually takes two or three tricky
pullbacks up or down to fake out or shake out the few remaining speculators. After everyone who can be run in or run out has thrown in the towel,
there isn’t anyone left to take action in the same market direction. Then the
market will finally turn and begin a whole new trend. Most of this is crowd
psychology constantly at work.
Bear markets usually end while business is still in a downtrend. The reason is that stocks are anticipating, or “discounting,” all economic, political,
and worldwide events many months in advance. The stock market is a leading economic indicator, not a coincident or lagging indicator, in our government’s series of key economic indicators. The market is exceptionally
perceptive, taking all events and basic conditions into account. It will react
to what is taking place and what it can mean for the nation. The market is
not controlled by Wall Street. Its action is determined by millions of
investors all across the country and thousands of large institutions and is a
consensus conclusion on whether it likes or doesn’t like what it foresees—
such as what our government is doing or about to do and what the consequences could be.

203

204 A WINNING SYSTEM
Similarly, bull markets usually top out and turn down before a recession
sets in. For this reason, looking at economic indicators is a poor way to
determine when to buy or sell stocks and is not recommended. Yet, some
investment firms do this very thing.
The predictions of many economists also leave a lot to be desired. A few of
our nation’s presidents have had to learn this lesson the hard way. In early 1983,
for example, just as the economy was in its first few months of recovery, the
head of President Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisers was concerned that
the capital goods sector was not very strong. This was the first hint that this
advisor might not be as sound as he should be. Had he understood historical
trends, he would have seen that capital goods demand has never been strong
in the early stage of a recovery. This was especially true in the first quarter of
1983, when U.S. plants were operating at a low percentage of capacity.
You should check earlier cycles to learn the sequence of industry-group
moves at various stages of the market cycle. If you do, you’ll see that railroad
equipment, machinery, and other capital goods industries are late movers in
a business or stock market cycle. This knowledge can help you get a fix on
where you are now. When these groups start running up, you know you’re
near the end. In early 2000, computer companies supplying Internet capital
goods and infrastructure were the last-stage movers, along with telecommunications equipment suppliers.
Dedicated students of the market who want to learn more about cycles
and the longer-term history of U.S. economic growth may want to write to
Securities Research Company, 27 Wareham Street, #401, Boston, MA
02118, and purchase one of the company’s long-term wall charts. Also, in
2008, Daily Graphs, Inc., created a 1900 to 2008 stock market wall chart
that shows major market and economic events.
Some charts of market averages also include major news events over the
last 12 months. These can be very valuable, especially if you keep and
review back copies. You then have a history of both the market averages and
the events that have influenced their direction. It helps to know, for example, how the market has reacted to new faces in the White House, rumors of
war, controls on wages and prices, changes in discount rates, or just loss of
confidence and “panics” in general. The accompanying chart of the S&P
500 Index shows several past cycles with the bear markets shaded.

You Should Study the General Market Indexes Each Day
In bear markets, stocks usually open strong and close weak. In bull markets,
they tend to open weak and close strong. The general market averages need
to be checked every day, since reverses in trends can begin on any given few

S&P Scale

S&P Scale

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000

800
600

S&P 500 Index
1941–2009

800
600
400

200
180
160
140
120
100

200
180
160
140
120
100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

Volume
(millions)

100,000
30,000

NYSE Monthly Volume
Volume
(millions)

300
100

(in millions)

10,000
3,000
1,000
300
100

30
30
10
10
1940 1942 1944 1946 1948 1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

205

400

206 A WINNING SYSTEM
days. Relying on these primary indexes is a more direct, practical, and effective method for analyzing the market’s behavior and determining its direction.
Don’t rely on other, subsidiary indicators because they haven’t been
proven to be effective at timing. Listening to the many market newsletter
writers, technical analysts, or strategists who pore over 30 to 50 different
technical or economic indicators and then tell you what they think the market should be doing is generally a very costly waste of time. Investment
newsletters can create doubt and confusion in an investor’s mind. Interestingly enough, history shows that the market tends to go up just when the
news is all bad and these experts are most skeptical and uncertain.
When the general market tops, you must sell to raise at least some cash
and to get off margin (the use of borrowed money) to protect your account.
As an individual investor, you can easily raise cash and get out in one or two
days, and you can likewise reenter later when the market is finally right. If
you don’t sell and raise cash when the general market tops, your diversified
list of former market leaders can decline sharply. Several of them may never
recover to their former levels.
Your best bet is to learn to interpret daily price and volume charts of the
key general market averages. If you do, you can’t get too far off-track, and you
won’t need much else. It doesn’t pay to argue with the market. Experience
teaches that second-guessing the market can be a very expensive mistake.

The Prolonged Two-Year Bear Market of 1973–1974
The combination of the Watergate scandal and hearings and the 1974 oil
embargo by OPEC made 1973–1974 the worst stock market catastrophe up
to that time since the 1929–1933 depression. The Dow corrected 50%, but
the average stock plummeted more than 70%.
This was a big lesson for stockholders and was almost as severe as the
90% correction the average stock showed from 1929 to 1933. However, in
1933, industrial production was only 56% of the 1929 level, and more than
13 million Americans were unemployed. The peak unemployment rate in
the 1930s was 25%. It remained in double digits throughout the entire
decade and was 20% in 1939.
The markets were so demoralized in the prolonged 1973–1974 bear market that most members on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange were
afraid the exchange might not survive as a viable institution. This is why it’s
absolutely critical that you study the market averages and learn how to protect yourself against catastrophic losses, for the sake of your health as well as
your portfolio. You can learn to do this. Anyone can do it, if they get serious
and apply themselves. Is your money important to you?

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

A 33% Drop Requires a 50% Rise to Break Even
The importance of knowing the direction of the general market cannot be
overemphasized. If you have a 33% loss in a portfolio of stocks, you need a
50% gain just to get to your breakeven point. If, for example, you’ve allowed
a $10,000 portfolio to drop to $6,666 (a 33% decline), it has to rise $3,333
(or 50%) just to get you back where you started. In the 2007–2008 bear market, the S&P 500 fell more than 50%, meaning that a 100% rebound will be
needed for the index to fully recover. And how easy is it for you to make
100%? Maybe it’s time for you to learn what you’re doing, adopt new rules
and methods, and stop doing things that create 50% losses.
You positively must always act to preserve as much as possible of the
profit that you’ve built up during the bull market rather than ride your
investments back down through difficult bear market periods. To do this,
you have to learn historically proven selling rules. (See Chapters 10 and 11
for more on selling rules.)

The Myths about “Long-Term Investing”
and Being Fully Invested
Many investors like to think of, or at least describe, themselves as “longterm investors.” Their strategy is to stay fully invested through thick and
thin. Most institutions do the same thing. But such an inflexible approach
can have tragic results, particularly for individual investors. Individuals and
institutions alike may get away with standing pat through relatively mild
(25% or less) bear markets, but many bear markets are not mild. Some, such
as 1973–1974, 2000–2002, and 2007–2008, are downright devastating.
The challenge always comes at the beginning, when you start to sense an
impending bear market. In most cases, you cannot project how bad economic conditions might become or how long those bad conditions could
linger. The war in Vietnam, inflation, and a tight money supply helped turn
the 1969–1970 correction into a two-year decline of 36.9%. Before that,
bear markets averaged only nine months and took the averages down 26%.
Most stocks fall during a bear market, but not all of them recover. If you
hold on during even a modest bear correction, you can get stuck with damaged merchandise that may never see its former highs. You definitely must
learn to sell and raise at least some cash when the overall environment
changes and your stocks are not working.
Buy-and-hold investors fell in love with Coca-Cola during the 1980s and
1990s. The soft-drink giant chugged higher year after year, rising and falling
with the market. But it stopped working in 1998, as did Gillette, another
favorite of long-term holders. When the market slipped into its mild bear

207

208 A WINNING SYSTEM
correction that summer, Coke followed along. Two years later—after some
of the market’s most exciting gains in decades—Coke was still stuck in a
downtrend. In some instances, stocks of this kind may come back. But this
much is certain: Coke investors missed huge advances in 1998 and 1999 in
names such as America Online and Qualcomm.
The buy-and-hold strategy was also disastrous to anyone who held technology stocks from 2000 through 2002. Many highfliers lost 75% to 90% of
their value, and some may never return to their prior highs. Take a look now
at Time Warner, Corning, Yahoo!, Intel, JDS Uniphase, and EMC, former
market leaders in 1998–2000.

Protecting Yourself from Market Downturns
Napoleon once wrote that never hesitating in battle gave him an advantage
over his opponents, and for many years he was undefeated. In the battlefield that is the stock market, there are the quick and there are the dead!
After you see the first several definite indications of a market top, don’t
wait around. Sell quickly before real weakness develops. When market
indexes peak and begin major downside reversals, you should act immediately by putting 25% or more of your portfolio in cash, selling your stocks at
market prices. The use of limit orders (buying or selling at a specific price,
rather than buying or selling at market prices using market orders) is not
recommended. Focus on your ability to get into or out of a stock when you
need to. Quibbling over an eighth- or quarter-point (or their decimal equivalents) could make you miss an opportunity to buy or sell a stock.
Lightning-fast action is even more critical if your stock account is on margin. If your portfolio is fully margined, with half of the money in your stocks
borrowed from your broker, a 20% decline in the price of your stocks will
cause you to lose 40% of your money. A 50% decline in your stocks could
wipe you out! Never try to ride through a bear market on margin.
In the final analysis, there are really only two things you can do when a
new bear market begins: sell and retreat or go short. When you retreat, you
should stay out until the bear market is over. This usually means five or six
months or more. In the prolonged, problem-ridden 1969–1970 and
1973–1974 periods, however, it meant up to two years. The bear market that
began in March 2000 during the last year of the Clinton administration
lasted longer and was far more severe than normal. Nine out of ten investors
lost a lot of money, particularly in high-tech stocks. It was the end of a
period of many excesses during the late 1990s, a decade when America got
careless and let down its guard. It was the “anything goes” period, with
stocks running wild.

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

Selling short can be profitable, but be forewarned: it’s a very difficult and
highly specialized skill that should be attempted only during bear markets.
Few people make money at it. Short selling is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 12.

Using Stop-Loss Orders
If you use stop-loss orders or mentally record a selling price and act upon it,
a market that is starting to top out will mechanically force you, robotlike, out
of many of your stocks. A stop-loss order instructs the specialist in the stock
on the exchange floor that once the stock has dropped to your specified
price, the order becomes a market order, and the stock will be sold out on
the next transaction.
It’s usually better not to enter stop-loss orders. In doing so, you and other
similarly minded investors are showing your hand to market makers, and at
times they might drop the stock to shake out stop-loss orders. Instead,
watch your stocks closely and know ahead of time the exact price at which
you will immediately sell to cut a loss. However, some people travel a lot and
aren’t able to watch their stocks closely, and others have a hard time making
sell decisions and getting out when they are losing. In such cases, stop-loss
orders help compensate for distance and indecisiveness.
If you use a stop-loss order, remember to cancel it if you change your mind
and sell a stock before the order is executed. Otherwise, you could later accidentally sell a stock that you no longer own. Such errors can be costly.

How You Can Learn to Identify Stock Market Tops
To detect a market top, keep a close eye on the daily S&P 500, NYSE Composite, Dow 30, and Nasdaq Composite as they work their way higher. On
one of the days in the uptrend, volume for the market as a whole will
increase from the day before, but the index itself will show stalling action (a
significantly smaller price increase for the day compared with the prior day’s
price increase). I call this “heavy volume without further price progress up.”
The average doesn’t have to close down for the day, but in most instances it
will, making the distribution (selling) as professional investors liquidate
stock must easier to see. The spread from the average’s daily high to its daily
low may in some cases be a little wider than on previous days.
Normal liquidation near the market peak will usually occur on three to
five specific days over a period of four or five weeks. In other words, the
market comes under distribution while it’s advancing! This is one reason so
few people know how to recognize distribution. After four or five days of

209

210 A WINNING SYSTEM
definite distribution over any span of four or five weeks, the general market
will almost always turn down.
Four days of distribution, if correctly spotted over a two- or three-week
period, are sometimes enough to turn a previously advancing market into a
decline. Sometimes distribution can be spread over six weeks if the market
attempts at some point to rally back to new highs. If you are asleep or
unaware and you miss the topping signals given off by the S&P 500, the
NYSE Composite, the Nasdaq, or the Dow (which is easy to do, since they
sometimes occur on only a few days), you could be wrong about the market
direction and therefore wrong on almost everything you do.
One of the biggest problems is the time it takes to reverse investors’ positive personal opinions and views. If you always sell and cut your losses 7%
or 8% below your buy points, you may automatically be forced to sell at least
one or two stocks as a correction in the general market starts to develop.
This should get you into a questioning, defensive frame of mind sooner. Following this one simple but powerful rule of ours saved a lot of people big
money in 2000’s devastating decline in technology leaders and in the 2008
subprime loan bear market.
It takes only one of the indexes to give you a valid repeated signal of too
much distribution. You don’t normally need to see several of the major
indexes showing four or five distribution days. Also, if one of the indexes is
down for the day on volume larger than the prior day’s volume, it should
decline more than 0.2% for this to be counted as a distribution day.

After the Initial Decline off the Top,
Track Each Rally Attempt on the Way Down
After the required number of days of increased volume distribution around
the top and the first decline resulting from this, there will be either a poor
rally in the market averages, followed by a rally failure, or a positive and
powerful follow-through day up on price and volume. You should learn in
detail exactly what signals to look for and remain unbiased about the market. Let the day-by-day averages tell you what the market has been doing
and is doing. (See “How You Can Spot Stock Market Bottoms” later in this
chapter for a further discussion of market rallies.)

Three Signs the First Rally Attempt May Fail
After the market does top out, it typically will rally feebly and then fail. After
the first day’s rebound, for instance, the second day will open strongly but
suddenly turn down near the end of the session. The abrupt failure of the

M = Market Direction: How You Can Determine It

market to follow through on its first recovery attempt should probably be
met with further selling on your part.
You’ll know that the initial bounce back is feeble if (1) the index advances
in price on the third, fourth, or fifth rally day, but on volume that is lower than
that of the day before, (2) the average makes little net upward price progress
compared with its progress the day before, or (3) the market average recovers
less than half of the initial drop from its former absolute intraday high. When
you see these weak rallies and failures, further selling is advisable.
