
Anything stand out as your best trade ever?
[He thinks for a while.] I usually don't get excited about winners; I'm
too busy looking for the next trade.
What lessons have you learned about investment?
Do the research and believe in your research. Don't be swayed by
other people's opinions.

Anything else?
You have to invest without emotions. If you let emotions get involved,
you will make bad decisions.
You can't be afraid to take a loss. The people who are successful in
this business are the people who are willing to lose money.

One of the most common trading blunders cited by the Market
Wizards is the folly of listening to others for advice—a mistake that
proved very costly to some (Walton and Minervini for example).
Steve Watson was lucky: He learned the lesson of not listening to
others' opinions from a college course instead of with his own money.
Watson begins his investment selection process by focusing on

stocks that are relatively low priced (low price/earnings ratio), a characteristic that limits risk. A low price is a necessary but not sufficient
condition. Many low-priced stocks are low for a reason and will stay
relatively depressed. The key element of Watson's approach is to
anticipate which of these low-priced stocks are likely to enjoy a
change in investors' perceptions. In order to identify potential
impending changes that could cause a shift in market sentiment,

Watson conducts extensive communication with companies and
their competitors, consumers, and distributors. He is also a strong
proponent of such commonsense research as trying a company's
product, or in the case of a retailer, visiting its stores. Finally, Watson
looks for insider buying as a confirmation condition for his stock
selections.

Shorting is considered a high-risk activity and is probably inappropriate for the average investor. Nevertheless, Watson demonstrates that if risk controls are in place to avoid the open-ended
losses that can occur in a short position, shorting can reduce portfolio risk by including positions that are inversely correlated with the
rest of the portfolio. On the short side, Watson seeks out high-priced
companies that have a flawed business plan—often one-product
companies that are vulnerable either because the performance of
their single product falls far short of promotional claims or because
there is no barrier to entry for competitors.
Watson achieves risk control through a combination of diversification, selection, and loss limitation rules. He diversifies his portfolio sufficiently so that the largest long holdings account for a
maximum of 2 to 3 percent of the portfolio. Short positions are
capped at about 1.5 percent of the portfolio. The risk on long positions is limited by Watson's restricting the selection of companies
from the universe of low-priced stocks. On the short side, risk is limited by money management rules that require reducing or liquidating
a stock that is moving higher, even if the fundamental justification
for the trade is completely unchanged.
Watson has maintained the pig-at-the-trough philosophy he was
exposed to at Friess Associates. He is constantly upgrading his portfolio—replacing stocks with other stocks that appear to have an even

better return/risk outlook. Therefore, he will typically sell a profitable long holding even though he expects it to go still higher,
because after a sufficient advance, he will find another stock that
offers equal or greater return potential with less risk. The relevant
question is never, "Is this a good stock to hold?" but rather, "Is this a
better stock than any alternative holding that is not already in the

DANA GALANTE

Against the Current

portfolio?"

Imagine two swimmers a mile apart on a river who decide to have a race,
each swimming to the other's starting point. There is a strong current.
The swimmer heading downstream wins. Is she the better swimmer?
Obviously this is a nonsensical question. An Olympic swimmer could
lose to a novice if the current is strong enough.
Now consider two money managers: one only buys stocks and is up an
average of 25 percent per year for the period while the other only sells
stocks and is up 10 percent per year during the same period. Which manager is the better trader? Again, this is a nonsensical question. The
answer depends on the direction and strength of the market's current—
its trend. If the stock market rose by an average of 30 percent per year
during the corresponding period, the manager with the 25 percent return
would have underperformed a dart-throwing strategy, whereas the other
manager would have achieved a double-digit return in an extraordinarily
hostile environment.
During 1994—99 Dana Galante registered an average annual compounded return of 15 percent. This may not sound impressive until one
considers that Galante is a pure short seller. In reverse of the typical
manager, Galante will profit when the stocks in her portfolio go down and
lose when they go up. Galante achieved her 15 percent return during a
period when the representative stock index (the Nasdaq, which accounts
for about 80 percent of her trades) rose by an imposing annual average of
32 percent. To put Galante's performance in perspective, her achievement is comparable to a mutual fund manager averaging a 15 percent
annual return during a period when the stock market declines by an aver75

DANA GALANTI

age of 32 percent annually. In both cases, overcoming such a powerful
opposite trend in the universe of stocks traded requires exceptional stock

selection skills.
Okay, so earning even a 15 percent return by shorting stocks in a
strongly advancing market is an admirable feat, but what's the point?
Even if the stock market gains witnessed in the 1990s were unprecedented, the stock market has still been in a long-term upward trend since
its inception. Why fight a trend measured in decades, if not centuries?
The point is that a short-selling approach is normally not intended as a
stand-alone investment; rather, it is intended to be combined with long
investments (to which it is inversely correlated) to yield a total portfolio
with a better return/risk performance. Most, if not all, of Galante's
investors use her fund to balance their long stock investments. Apparently, enough investors have recognized the value of Galante's relative
performance so that her fund, Miramar Asset Management, is closed to
new investment.
Most people don't realize that a short-selling strategy that earns more
than borrowing costs can be combined with a passive investment, such
as an index fund or long index futures, to create a net investment that has
both a higher return than the index and much lower risk. This is true
even if the returns of the short-selling strategy are much lower than the
returns of the index alone. For example, an investor who balanced a Nasdaq index-based investment with an equal commitment in Galante's
fund (borrowing the extra money required tor the dual investment)
would have both beaten the index return (after deducting borrowing
costs) and cut risk dramatically. Looking at one measure of risk, the two
worst drawdowns of this combined portfolio during 1994—99 would have
been 10 percent and 5 percent, versus 20 percent and 13 percent for the
index.
Galante began her financial career working in the back office of an
institutional money management firm. She was eventually promoted to a
trading (order entry) position. Surprisingly, Galante landed her first job as
a fund manager without any prior experience in stock selection. Fortunately, Galante proved more skilled in picking stocks than in picking
bosses. Prior to founding her own firm in 1997, Galante's fourteen-year
career was marked by a number of unsavory employers.

•AGAINST THE CUR«

Galante likes trading the markets and enjoys the challenge of trying to
profit by going the opposite of the financial community, which is long the
stocks that she shorts. But the markets are an avocation, not an allconsuming passion. Her daily departure from the office is mental as well
as physical, marking a shift in her focus from the markets to her family.
She leaves work each day in time to pick up her kids up at school, a routine made possible by her western time zone locale, and she deliberately
avoids doing any research or trading at home.
The interview was conducted in a conference room with a lofty,
panoramic view of the San Francisco skyline. It was a clear day, and the
Transamerica building, Telegraph Hill, San Francisco Bay, and Alcatraz
stretched out in front of us in one straight visual line. The incredible view
prompted me to describe some of the palatial homes that had served as
the settings for interviews in my previous two Market Wizard books.
Galante joked that we should have done the interview at her home.
"Then," she said, "you could have described the view of the jungle gym in
my backyard."
Note: For reasons that will be apparent, pseudonyms have been used for
all individuals and companies mentioned in this interview.

When did you first become aware of the stock market?
My father was a market maker in the over-the-counter market. When
I was in high school, I worked with him on the trading desk during
summer vacations and school breaks.
What did you do for him?
In those days, although we had terminals, we didn't have computers.
Everything was done by hand. I posted his trades while he was trading.
Did you find yourself trying to anticipate market direction?
I don't really remember, but I was never really obsessed with the market, like a lot of the people that you have written about. 1 like the market, and I think it's exciting and challenging, but I don't go home and
think about it.

What was your first job out of college?
I worked for Kingston Capital, a large institutional money manage-

IGAINST THE C U R R E N T

ment firm. 1 started out doing back office and administrative work.
Eventually, I was promoted to the role of trader, and I did all the trading for the office, which managed one billion dollars.
By trader, I assume you mean being responsible for order entry
as opposed to having any decision-making responsibility?
That's right, I just put in the orders.
What was the next step in your career progression?
In 1985, Kingston was taken over in a merger. The acquiring firm
changed everyone's job description. They told me 1 couldn't do the
trading anymore because it all had to be done out of New York. They
wanted me to move into an administrative role, which would have
been a step back for me.
Henry Skiff, the former manager of the Kingston branch office,
went through an analogous experience. He was shifted to a structured
job that he couldn't stand. He and another employee left Kingston
after the merger to form their own institutional money management
firm. Henry offered me a job as a trader and researcher. Although
Henry was a difficult person to work for, I liked the other person, and
I didn't want to go back to an administrative position.
I left with Henry and helped him start the office for his new firm.
I did research and trading for him for two years. Although it was a
good experience, I realized my future was limited, since Henry was
not willing to give up much control over the portfolio. Around the
time I decided that I had to leave, my husband got a good job offer in
another city, and we decided to move. I found a job at Atacama
Investment, which at the time was an institutional money management firm. I started out as a portfolio manager, comanaging their
small cap fund [a fund that invests in companies with small capitalization], which had a couple of billion dollars in assets.
Had you had any experience before?
Not picking stocks.
Then how did you get a job as a portfolio manager?
I originally started out interviewing for a trading job. But the woman
who had been managing the portfolio, Jane, was on maternity leave.
She only had about six months' experience herself, and they needed
someone to fill the slot. Mark Hannigan, who ran Atacama, believed

that anyone could do that job. He called us "monkeys." He would tell
us, "I could get any monkey to sit in that chair and do what you do." He
also used to tell me that I think too much, which really annoyed me.

Mark's philosophy was that if a stock's price was going up on the
chart, earnings were growing by 25 percent or more, and if a brokerage house was recommending it, you would buy it. There was minimal fundamental analysis and no consideration of the quality of
earnings or management. This is the origin of why I ended up trading
on the short side of the market.
Did being a woman help you get the job because you were
replacing another woman?
No, I probably got the job because they could pay me a lot less.
How little did they pay you?
My starting salary was twenty-five thousand dollars a year.
What happened to Jane?
After two months, she returned from maternity leave, and we worked
together. She was a perennial bull. Everything was great. She was
always ready to buy any stock. I was the only one who ever thought
we should wait a minute before buying a stock or suggested getting
out of a stock we owned before it blew up.
Were you and Jane working as coequals, or was she your boss
because she was there before?
We were comanagers. I actually had more experience than she did,
but she joined the company six months earlier. We worked as a team.
Either one of us could put a stock in the portfolio.
Was it a problem having to comanage money with another person?
Not really, since neither one of us had much experience. I would pick
a stock and say, "Look at this," and Jane would say, "Yeah, that looks
good; let's buy 100,000." The real problem was the trading desk.
Once we gave them a buy order, we had no control over the position.
The trade could be filled several points higher, or days later, and there
was nothing we could do about it.
Do you mean that literally? How could there be such a long
delay in a trade being filled?
Because the trader for the company was front-running orders [placing
orders in his own account in front of much larger client or firm orders

A G A I N S T THE C U R R E N T

to personally profit from the market impact of the larger order he was

about the place]. If a stock we wanted to buy traded 100,000 shares
that day and we didn't get one share, he would say, "Sorry, but I tried."
Since I was a trader, I knew enough to check time-and-sales [an elec-

tronic log of all trades and the exact time they were executed]. If you
questioned him, however, he would just rip you in front of everybody.
(We all worked in one large room.)

Rip you in what way?
He would scream at me, "You don't know anything about fucking
trading. Just go back and sit at your desk."
Did you realize he was crooked back then, or did you just find
out later?
He was the highest-paid person there. He was probably making several hundred thousand dollars a year. But he lived well beyond even
his salary. He had a huge house, and he was always taking limousines
everywhere. Everyone suspected that something was going on. It
turns out that there was; it all came out years later when the SEC
investigated and barred him from the industry.
It's rather ironic that as a trader who was merely responsible for
entering orders, he was making ten times what you were making
as the portfolio manager. I assume this is fairly unusual.
Yes it is. Normally, the traders always make much less.
When did you get your first inclination to start shorting stocks?
I sat close to Jim Levitt, who ran Atacama's hedge fund. I was very
interested in what he was doing because of his success in running
the fund.
Was Jim a mentor for you on the short side?
Yes he was, because he had a knack for seeing reality through the
Wall Street hype. I jokingly blame him for my decision to go on the
short side of the business. When things are going badly, I'll call him
up and tell him it's all his fault.
What appealed to you about the short side vis-a-vis the long side?
I felt the short side was more of a challenge. You really had to know
what you were doing. Here I was, just a peon going up against all
these analysts who were recommending the stock and all the managers who were buying it. When I was right, it was a great feeling. I

felt as if I had really earned the money, instead of just blindly buying
a stock because it was going up. It was a bit like being a detective and
discovering something no one else had found out.

When did you start shorting stocks?
In 1990 after Jim Levitt left Atacama to form his own fund because
he was frustrated by the firm's restrictions in running a hedge fund.

What restrictions?
The environment wasn't very conducive to running a hedge fund. One
of the rules was that you couldn't short any stock that the company
owned. Since the firm held at least a thousand different stocks at any
time, the universe of potential shorts was drastically limited. They also
had a very negative attitude toward the idea of shorting any stocks.
When Jim Levitt quit, I was on vacation in Lake Tahoe. Mark
called me and told me that I would be taking over the hedge fund
because Jim had left the firm. Mark's philosophy was that anyone
could short stocks. He ran computer screens ranking stocks based on
relative strength [price change in the stock relative to the broad market index] and earnings growth. He would then buy the stocks at the
top of the list and sell the stocks at the bottom of the list. The problem was that by the time stocks were at the bottom of his list, they
were usually strong value candidates. Essentially you ended up long
growth stocks and short value stocks—that approach doesn't work too
often. But he had never been a hedge fund manager, and he thought
that was the way you do it.
Did you use his methodology?
No, I really didn't.
How were you picking your shorts then?
I looked for companies that I anticipated would have decreases in
earnings, instead of shorting stocks that had already witnessed
decreases in earnings.
How did you anticipate when a company was going to have
decreased earnings?
A lot of it was top down. For example, the year I took over the hedge
fund, oil prices had skyrocketed because of the Gulf War. It was a
simple call to anticipate that the economy and cyclical stocks would
weaken.

DAHA 6 A L A N T E

Why did you leave Atacama?
In 1993 Atacama transformed their business from an institutional
money management firm to a mutual fund company. Also, both my
husband and I wanted to move back to San Francisco. I spoke to a
number of hedge funds in the area, but none of them were interested
in giving up control of part of their portfolio to me, and I didn't want
to go back to working as just an analyst after having been a portfolio
manager.
With some reluctance, I had dinner with Henry Skiff. It was the
first time I had seen him in five years. He said all the right things. He
assured me that he had changed, and he agreed with everything I
said. He had formed a small partnership with about one million dollars. He told me I could grow it into a hedge fund, run it any way I
wanted, and get a percent of the fees.
What, exactly, was it about Henry that you didn't like when you
had worked with him five years earlier?
I didn't have a whole lot of respect lor him as a portfolio manager.
I'll tell you one story that is a perfect example. During the time I
worked for him, junk bonds had become very popular. Henry had a
friend at a brokerage firm who offered to give him a large account if he
could manage a junk bond portfolio. We had no clue. Henry gave us
all a book about junk bonds and told us to read it over the weekend.
The following Monday we began trading junk bonds; Henry was the
manager, and I was the trader. The book had said that the default rate
was 1 percent, which turned out to be completely bogus. The whole
thing ended up blowing up and going away. Also, although I didn't find
out about it until years later, Henry had embellished his academic
credentials in the firm's marketing documents, falsely claiming undergraduate and Ph.D. degrees from prestigious universities.
Anyway, Henry convinced me that rejoining him was a great
opportunity. He offered to give me a large raise over what I had been
making. He even offered to pay for my move. I figured the job would
give me a way to move back to San Francisco and that if it didn't work
out I could always find another job. Henry had a great marketing guy,
and we grew the fund to $90 million. But Henry hadn't changed; he
second-guessed everything 1 did.

A G A I N S T THE C U R R E N T

Henry would see a stock go up five dollars and get all excited and

say, "Hey Dana, why don't you buy XYZ." He wouldn't even have any
idea what the company did. I would buy the stock because he
wanted me to. The next day the order would be on the trade blotter,
and he would ask me, "Hey, Dana, what is this XYZ stock?" That
was another experience that turned me off to the long side of
stocks.
There was tremendous turnover at the firm because Henry treated
his staff so poorly. We had a meeting every morning where the managers talked about the stocks in their portfolio. Henry would just rip
the managers apart. One of his employees, a man in his fifties, committed suicide. Henry would tear the confidence out of people, and
this poor guy just didn't have it in him to take it. I had worked with
him for a while, and he was a broken man. I can't say he killed himself
because of the job, but I wouldn't be surprised if it was a factor.
Was Henry critical with you as well?
He was constantly second-guessing me and arguing with me every
time I put on a trade he didn't agree with.
Then how much independence did you have?
I had independence as long as I was doing well, but every time the
market rallied, he wanted me to cover all my shorts. We fought a lot
because I didn't give in. One thing I did is that if Henry insisted I buy
a stock, I would buy it, but then immediately short another stock
against it. That way I would negate any effect he was trying to have on
the portfolio. I did well, but after two years, I couldn't take it anymore
and quit.
Did you start your own firm after you left Henry the second time?
No. After I quit, I was hired by Peter Boyd, who had a hedge fund
that had reached $200 million at its peak. He told me that he'd heard
. a lot of good things about me and was going to give me a portion of his
fund to manage. He said that I could run it any way I wanted. I told
him that I thought I could add the most value by trading strictly on
the short side because that was something he didn't do. Fie started
me out with $10 million and gave me complete discretion. It was
great for me because it was like having my own business without any
of the administrative headaches.
