
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

124

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

pairs instead of the major currency pair, even though the economy of the
major currency pair is strong. These are influences on the market that leave
a fundamental retail trader wondering, “What just happened? Why isn’t the
market going the way the fundamentals say it should go?”
What I often hear from inexperienced traders, and that includes prominent analysts on television, is a list of fundamental reasons why the market
price of a currency or currency pair might go up or down. These are some
from recent memory:

r The sovereign debt crisis in Greece, Spain, and Ireland will only get
worse and this will lead to the EURUSD going to parity.

r There is a war brewing in the Middle East with reports that the military
is building up for an attack, which will lead to the U.S. dollar moving
sharply higher.
r We are just a terrorist attack away from investors fleeing or moving
into the U.S. dollar.
r All the fiscal spending will lead to a sharply lower U.S. dollar. (There is
no escaping this fact.)
r The BRIC nations (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) do not want the
U.S. dollar as the reserve currency. They want to diversify into the
euro.
r The BRIC nations are fleeing the euro and are looking into diversifying
into the Canadian and Australian dollar.
r Inflation is just around the corner, and when it comes, investors will
flee the U.S. bond and stock markets and the U.S. dollar.
r Gold will go to $2,000/$3,000/$4,000 and the U.S. dollar will plunge.
r Gold will go to $2,000/$3,000/$4,000 and the euro will plunge.
r Nonfarm Payroll will be stronger than expectations on Friday and this
will lead to the USDJPY and the other risk pairs soaring higher.
r Gisele Bundchen, the super model, is demanding to be paid in euros as
her earnings in the dollar are being eroded day by day. More and more
people will be doing the same thing given the weak dollar policy the
U.S. government is following.
These types of traders will have a fundamental view based on one or
more stories or analyses. In addition, they will often add an addendum to
their view that, “If the euro goes higher, it will just be an opportunity to sell
more.” In other words, “If the price is trending higher, I will sell even more
against the trend.”
That type of thinking is one sure way to not attack the trend. It also
is a recipe for your account to lose value. Remember our game plan is to
trade the trends; it is also to keep fear (and risk) to a minimum. It does not
sound like either is being addressed by the purely fundamental trader.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

The Trader’s Toolbox

Printer: Yet to come

125

What I also often hear from inexperienced traders is the comment that
“Ultimately, the fundamentals will take over and win out.” What I like to
reply with is “When is ‘ultimately?’ ” Is it after 50 more pips, 100 more pips,
200 more pips, or 300 more pips? How far does “ultimately” have to go before fear is too high and a large loss is booked, or before the account blows
up? How far is “ultimately” until you realize that the fundamental reason
for taking the position is now reversed and that some other fundamental
story in the cauldron is driving the market? In other words, how do you
define risk and control fear when there is no basis for knowing when you
are wrong? The answer is “You can’t.”
Fundamental news is important, but it is not a tool retail traders should
use to base trades on. Although, in the long run, the fundamentals may do
what was expected, there are technical tools that will also be right in the
long run. I guarantee those technical tools will catch and ride the trend
if and when the EURUSD goes to parity. They will catch the trend in the
euro (or the U.S. dollar) as a result of gold going to $2,000 an ounce. Those
technical tools will catch the trend if overspending fiscally in the United
States leads to a sharply lower dollar.
Those same technical tools will also be able to prevent the trader from
losing when the market does not do what it is “fundamentally” supposed
to do in the mind of the trader. It will not necessarily prevent losses, but
if used properly technical tools will limit losses more effectively than fundamentals. The good news is they will also confirm your fundamental view
when both are in synch.
Fundamentals can be ambiguous and because of that, traders should
not base trading decisions solely or even principally on them. They should
be a secondary tool in your trading decision-making process. Fundamentals can then be used to explain yourself and your market conviction to
your dinner guests so you sound smart. Apart from that, follow the one
thing we all can agree on—the price—then, to provide the reasons to trade,
apply the right technical tools to that price. The combination, given the
right tools, should lead the way toward attacking the currency trends.

THE ONE THING WE CAN AGREE ON:
PRICE
I work for a retail currency broker, and at my firm we have tens of thousands of live accounts. We are just one firm in the world. There are many
others like us in the retail space around the world with a similar account
base.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

126

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

Take all those retail traders and add the institutional money managers,
hedge fund managers, international corporate treasurers, bank traders, insurance company portfolio managers, and so on and you can now imagine
why the currency market is the largest market in the world ($3 trillion to
$4 trillion a day is transacted).
Now understand that all those traders and investors are looking at
a relatively small number of currency pairs. As a retail broker we have
around 20 different pairs we quote our clients. The major pairs are against
the world’s reserve currency, the U.S. dollar. Those major pairs include
the euro versus U.S. dollar (EURUSD), the British pound versus the U.S.
dollar (GBPUSD), the U.S. dollar versus the Japanese yen (USDJPY), the
U.S. dollar versus the Swiss franc (USDCHF), the U.S. dollar versus the
Canadian dollar (USDCAD), the Australian dollar versus the U.S. dollar
(AUDUSD), and the New Zealand dollar versus the U.S. dollar (NZDUSD).
From these you get the cross-currency pairs including the EURJPY,
EURCHF, EURGBP, GBPJPY, and so on.
Of those currency pairs, roughly 40 percent of all trades are executed in
the EURUSD. Thirty to thirty-five percent are executed in the other major
pairs against the U.S. dollar, and the rest is in the cross currency pairs
including the EURJPY, EURCHF, and so on.
So there is a whole lot of volume, and that volume is traded in a relatively few currency pairs. Compare and contrast to the global equity market
with thousands of stocks and volume (and often thin volume) spread over
all those thousands of choices. I don’t know about you, but having so many
traders trading a relatively small amount of currency pairs is a comfort
to me. I like the idea that there is a huge amount volume with a whole
lot of traders big and small contributing to those currency pairs’ price
movement.
All the thousands of currency traders, focusing on a few currency pairs,
determine a price 24 hours a day from Sunday at 5 PM EST to Friday at
4 PM EST. That price has all the influences in our cauldron mixed up. All
the fundamentals are in the pot, the mergers and acquisition flows are in
there, the comments from central bankers, the economic expectations and
economic releases get mixed in, as do the option-related flows and the
flows from central banks. All these influences, and more, are in this huge
cauldron.
The net result is the price. The price is what all currency traders see.
It is what the global currency traders can all agree on. It is the score of the
game. It does not lie. Because of the global nature of the currency market
and the fact that it is an electronic market, the price is the same whether
you are in New York, Sydney, Tokyo, Dubai, Frankfurt, Paris, or London.
It is also largely the same for retail and institutional traders. As such, the
price is said to be transparent.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Trader’s Toolbox

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

127

