
Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 525

tion. The story develops because of excitement on the floor for that par-
ticular commodity and is reflective of the crowd reaching a short-term
extreme. When confirmed by a technical indicator such as a 1- or 2-day price
pattern, a trendline break, or a reliable MA crossover, this contrary position
is usually well rewarded.

Another example might come from a recently released government
employment report, which indicates that the economy is stronger than most
traders expected. Because bond prices react unfavorably to good economic
news, they could sell off sharply. Speculators now reverse sentiment from
positive to a state of discouragement. Not only are bond prices declining,
but rumors of a pickup in inflation cause prices to fall even further and sen-
timent to become even more bearish. The consensus mood amongst traders
is now quite negative. The chances are, though, that this is only a small top.
The alternative scenario in this case is to look through the gloom and exam-
ine the trend of employment and other economic numbers to see if the
recent report was likely to be an aberration.

Summary

* During the unfolding of a trend, the crowd is usually right. It is at the turn-
ing points that it is wrong.

* Three prerequisites for justifying a contrary position are the original
premise becomes a dogma, the premise loses its validity, and the market
becomes progressively more mispriced.

* Three steps to forming a contrary opinion are figuring out what the crowd
is thinking, coming up with alternative scenarios, and determining when
the crowd reaches an extreme.

* It is difficult to go contrary in practice because of competing forces
around us.

* When the crowd reaches an extreme the question is not whether, but
when and how much?

* Signs that the crowd is at an extreme include cover stories, best-selling
books, reactions by politicians, extremes in sentiment indicators, and gross
over- or undervaluations.

* Because mass psychology can move well beyond the norm, technical analy-
sis should be used as a triggering device for signaling when the crowd is
backing off from a bullish or bearish extreme.

* Contrary opinion analysis should be used as one more indicator in the
weight of the evidence approach.



is

28

Checkpoints for
Identifying Primary
Stock Market
Peaks and Troughs

Primary bull market tops and bottoms are elusive affaires, largely because
the points at which we expect them to develop are the ones that appear to
be the most unlikely at the time. When most people are lucky enough to
identify a bull market peak, they assume that prices will immediately decline.
This is not normally the case because of the numerous and confusing cross-
currents necessary for the development of true distribution. This topping-
out process usually requires a trading range environment, which reflects the
tremendous battle between bulls and bears. First one comes out on top and
then the other. By the time the distribution has been completed, both sides
are exhausted. Even though the bears eventually win, most lose their orig-
inal conviction because of the numerous false rallies that they did not anti-
cipate. These rallies develop under an environment of extreme optimism,
which also make them all the more convincing to those caught short or who
have already sold out.

We know that the news is good at market peaks, but when a typical top is
staring us in the face, the widespread contagion of optimism deludes mar-
ket participants to expect conditions to get even better. The opposite is true
of bottoms: The news is bad, but we expect it to get worse before prices hit
their low. Alternatively, we expect the other shoe to drop, just like trauma-
tized earthquake victims anticipating a killer aftershock.

526

Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 527

The Mechanics of a Peak

Typical market peaks, and we need to use the word “typical” very carefully,
should involve a battle between early- and late-cycle leaders. As the top
begins, liquidity-driven issues peak out and begin their bear market (see Fig.
28-1). On the other hand, late-cycle leaders are still in the terminal stages
of a bull market and are helping to push the averages higher. If strength in
the earnings-driven sectors outweighs weakness elsewhere, the averages
move to new bull market highs. This is the principal reason why breadth
divergences are so prevalent at market peaks. In 1973, the commodity boom
had the effect of prolonging the bull market, as far as the averages were con-
cerned, but the NYSE A/D line had peaked 9 months earlier. In 2000, it was
the unprecedented strength in technology stocks, another lagging sector,
that propelled the averages higher, but under the surface the average stock
peaked 2 years earlier in 1998.

What Is a Peak?

The objective of this chapter is to offer a checklist of characteristics present
at a typical market top or bottom. In reality, there are no “typical” turning

Bear market rally for most
stocks: some late-cycle stocks
reach bull market peaks

Late-cycle leaders at
new highs: bear market
rally for other stocks —=_>

Early-cycle leaders and
some others peak out

Early-cycle leaders have either
bottomed, or experienced —=>
superior relative strength

Figure 28-1 Sector rotation in the cycle


528 Part Hl: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

points because no two situations are exactly the same. However, there are
enough characteristics to enable us to identify the intricate tapestry of a mar-
ket top or bottom.

There are really three types of market peak. The most important are those
that develop after a prolonged bull market, extending over several business
cycles. Around the time of the peak, it is possible to point to some kind of
speculative bubble, often concentrated in a few sectors. At such times old
rules are thrown out and virtually everyone becomes an overnight invest-
ment genius. Such peaks are very hard to pinpoint at the time because they
have defied virtually every traditional rule. Eventually, new rules or ratio-
nalizations are developed to justify the final ascent to the equity summit. In
this way traditional valuations are surpassed by several degrees. Normal
extreme technical benchmarks are also exceeded, and divergences are so
plentiful that they are ignored because they no longer work. Finally, con-
trarian positions based on observation of normal crowd behavior prove
futile, as the majority march on to new extremes of irrationality. Old rules
are thrust aside and ridiculed as new-era thinking predominates. The ral-
lying cry of the bulls is almost always inculcated in the mantra that “this time
it is different.” In all cases, the leveling factor that brought investors back
to reality was a good dose of rising short-term interest rates, Two such peaks
possessing at least some of these characteristics developed in 1929 and 1966.
The 1990 peak in Japanese equities also qualifies. In 1929, stocks lost close
to 90 percent of their value in 3 years. The bear market that followed the
1966 peak lasted a lot longer and consisted of several minibull and minibear
markets. When stocks are adjusted for inflation, the bottom, as measured
by the major averages, did not take place until 16 years later in 1982. The
top established in 2000, at least as far as technology stocks are concerned,
could turn out to be one of similar importance to the 1929 and 1966 expe-
riences, since many of the valuation, sentiment, and technical characteris-
tics cited previously were present. :

There are really two factors that cause the ensuing bear market to be so
devastating or lengthy. The first is a direct result of the long and persistent
bull trend and falls under the title “careless investment decisions.” It is the
function of the bear to cleanse the system of these poorly thought-out and
precariously financed positions. Such is true of every market peak. It is just.
far more prevalent at these supercycle turning points. Second, it appears
that the pendulum of human emotions, the ultimate arbitrator of prices,
moves to an extreme of extremes. If such a level is reached on one side, a7
extreme of an extreme is likely to develop on the other. It almost appears

as if a prerequisite for a huge bear market is a huge speculative bull mar-

ket. These enormous changes in sentiment either come relatively quickly

Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 529

as prices are dramatically cut or take many years as the bulls, exhausted,
finally give up.

The second level of peak is what we might term a recession-associated top
(RAT). It is the most common and best fits the primary trend description
described in Chapter 1. In such situations, the unwinding of distortions in
the economy brought about by the recovery are sufficient to trigger an
actual recession where profits in general are under attack. In each cycle,
the sector responsible for the distortion will be different. In the early 1970s,
it tended to be real estate; in 1974, bloated inventories from the commodity
boom were the primary culprit. In 1990, the financial sector was under
pressure, and so forth. Since these RAT-type bear markets are associated
with economic contraction and recovery, which tend to take time to
accomplish, they usually last 1 to 2 years, are broadly based and can be
quite sharp.

The third kind of peak precedes so-called growth recessions or double-
cycle peaks as described in Chapter 2. They are usually followed by shallower
and shorter bear trends. Growth recessions involve the slowing down of the
economy but not an actual contraction. In this process, several industrial
sectors will experience recessionary conditions, but strength elsewhere will
offset this weak activity so that the overall economy escapes the indignity of
the “R” word. These weak sectors, therefore, experience a true 1- to 2-year
bear market, whereas others merely experience a major trading range.

Examples of double-cycle bears are 1984 and 1994. Other bear trends are
associated with a slowing in some of the economic indicators and are pre-
ceded by an unhealthy level of speculation. They take the form of severe
technical corrections, but are so dramatic that the change in psychology is

"sufficient to correct much of the speculative juice. The 1962 and 1987

declines come to mind as good examples.

All the characteristics listed in the following section do not appear at every
market peak, and neither is their intensity of the same magnitude. They are
presented solely as a guide for things to watch out for at major highs.

Characteristics of

. Primary Market Peaks

1. In order for a bull market top to form, it must be preceded by a bull
market. Thus, it must be possible to look back and identify a rally of at
least 9 months’ duration.



530 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Monetary and Sector Rotation Factors

2 Almost all market peaks are preceded by a trend in rising short-term
interest rates. The lead times vary from a couple of months to many
years. If interest rates have not begun their ascent, the odds of a top are

greatly reduced. For examples, refer to Charts 25-1 i
Chapter 25. 7 ete mad OR

3. Watch out for hikes in the discount rate. Has the three-step-and-stum-
ble rule, discussed in Chapter 25, been triggered? If so, the distribution
process may well be under way, and the reward of owning stocks is now
usually outweighed by the risk.

4. In many instances, market tops are preceded by a peak in the DJ Utility

Average. This is because this is a very interest-rate-sensitive market
sector. :

5. Observation of the long-term relative momentum for a selection of
early- and late-cycle leaders often points up a bull market peak. This will
be true if the long-term smoothed relative momentum for financials,
utilities, and consumer nondurables peaked out some time ago. By the
same token, a characteristic of a market peak is either continued
strength in late-cycle leaders, such as basic industry and resource stocks,
or an actual peaking of their smoothed momentum.

Technical Factors

6. When interest rates start to rise, this adversely affects financials and pre-
ferreds. Consequently, it is normal for the NYSE A/D line to peak out
ahead of the DJIA and S&P Composite. The length of the divergence
often has a related effect on the size of the ensuing bear market.

7. If the NYSE daily A/D line and or the Value Line Arithmetic Index are
below their 200-day MAs, this indicates that the broad market is prob-
ably in a bear market. Even if the DJIA and S&P Composite are at new
highs, this weak breadth position is telling us that the market has
become very selective. Under such an environment, it is more difficult
to find stocks that are advancing. Cutting back on equity exposure,
therefore, makes excellent sense because your odds of success are less.

The opposite would be true in a declining market, but where the A/D
line is advancing.

8. An alternative way of looking at the technical position of market breadth ES

is net new high data. Has the number of net new highs diverged nes*
tively with the major averages? If it has not, this may not be a top- fit

Pes

Nee

Tee

ss Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 531

has, then fewer stocks are driving the market higher, and this is a sign
of weakness. If the number of new highs has shrunk considerably, it
means that it is very difficult to make money because the selection
process is becoming progressively more difficult.

9. Momentum typically leads price, especially at market tops. Occasionally,
it is possible to identify multiyear tops or trendline violations in several
long-term ROC indicators. For example, if you can spot trendline
breaks in the 12-, 18-, and 24-month ROGs, this indicates that the cycles
they reflect are all starting to turn. Sometimes an individual ROC
moves between specific benchmarks, and these have traditionally
offered good timing points for major tops or bottoms. In Chapter 18
Chart 18-5 offers some useful benchmarks for a 9-month ROC of the
S&P Composite.

10. Another way in which momentum can signal a maturing bull trend is

with the use ofa long-term smoothed oscillator such as the KST. Market
tops are typically signaled by the indicator reversing to the downside
from an overbought condition. This is represented in Chart 28-1 by the
vertical lines, where the KST crosses below its 9-month MA. The chart
shows that this approach works well when a normal cyclical bull market
is experienced. However, during a secular bull market, such as that
which developed in the 1990s, this indicator will give premature sell sig-
nals. All the more reason to make sure that such signals are confirmed
by a trend break in the price. Alternatively, short-term oscillators may
be registering mega-oversold or extreme swing conditions.

. If the DJIA and the S&P Composite have just crossed below their
12-month MAs, there is a good chance that a bear market is under way,
provided, of course, that other indicators are in agreement. Quite
often a negative 7-month MA crossover will work as well as a 12-month
time span. Also, in the trend-reversal department, monitor the current
position of the Industrials and Transports as called for in Dow theory.

Psychological Factors

12. If key companies report excellent earnings and the stocks decline, this
adverse response to good news indicates extreme technical weakness.
Whenever a stock or market index fails to respond to good news, this
is a sign of technical weakness. Remember, if good news cannot senda
security higher, what will?



532 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Chart 28-1 The S&P C
www. pring.com,) ‘omposite, 1950-2001, and a long-term KST. (From

1000 ~ , eam
| Le

ey ra aE go pe ee

13. On the sentiment side, a reading in the Investor's Intelligence percentage
of bears would be in the 10-20% range. Also, a public short ratio in
excess of 52 and a 5-week insiders buy/sell ratio of 70 offer a flag of a
market top, especially if the insiders have already diverged negatively
with the price. Finally, in the sentiment area, if the level of margin debt
has recently crossed below its 12-month EMA, this tells us two things.
First, it indicates that traders are losing confidence. Second, it indicates
that an expansion in margin debt will no longer support higher prices,
but its contraction will put downward pressure on stock prices. A
— downward EMA cross is usually an excellent long-term sell
signal.

14. If the media are full of optimistic news and stories of huge returns are
being publicized, this is the type of atmosphere associated with a top.
Additional signs might be cover stories on the market itself, especially
ones citing a new paradigm, or concerning companies or groups that
have been leaders in the bull market.

15, As the market is rallying, there is always a substantial amount of doubt.
However, as equities approach a peak, the question of whether stocks

are a good investment is not even debated. Instead, the debate revolves
around which sectors will do well or how high the market will go. In

Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 533

16.

such an environment, forecasts that would previously have been
ridiculed for their excessive optimism are given widespread publicity
and credibility.’

Since brokerage companies thrive on bull markets, they become very
prosperous. If you see reports of any of these companies moving into
larger and more expensive office accommodations, this is often a sign
that the uptrend is in a very mature stage. Alternatively, this could show
up in the exchange or the back office of brokers being overwhelmed
with backlogged orders.

Chronological and Cycle Factors

17.

. A quick review of the three markets in relation to their 12-month MAs
will offer a quick reference for the current stage of the cycle. A market
top should see the 3-month commercial paper yield above its 12-month
MA. The three-step-and-stumble rule (Chapter 25) will probably have
been triggered as well. Bond yields in the corporate and governmental
sectors should be in a similar position. The S&P Composite should be
above its average, and the CRB Spot Raw Industrials should be above
its average as well. In cases where stocks have fallen quite some way from
their peak, it is possible that the S&P would already be below its 12-
month MA. If the CRB Spot RM Index has also recently crossed below
its average, then little support from commodity-based equities is likely,
and at the tail end of the cycle, this usually means a bear market.

18. Since the 4-year stock cycle has been extremely reliable by offering a

buying opportunity once every 4 years, it follows that if the current year
is 2 or 3 years from the previous 4-year low, the odds favor a bull mar-
ket peak. If some of the other signs discussed here are present, this will
obviously increase the probability of a top.

19. Is it possible to observe three identifiable intermediate advances that

have already taken place? If this is the top of the third, it may be a pri-
mary peak. This is by no means infallible, because some bull markets
consist of two advances and some more than three. However, when com-
bined with others, these signs can be quite a useful benchmark.

'For one of the best discussion centers on the Web for automated systems and system design-

ing software, go to wealth-lab.com.


534 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Primary Market Bottoms

Bear market bottoms develop under exactly the opposite conditions as tops.
The news is bad, sentiment is extremely bearish, and the long-term momen.
tum indicators are usually extremely oversold. Perhaps the key difference
between a major low and a major high is that in almost all cases, bear mar-
kets are shorter than bull markets. We have to say in almost all cases
because the 1929-1932 bear market lasted for 3 long years, whereas the
average primary decline has mercifully been much shorter. Characteristics
of a major low are as follows.

Monetary and Sector Rotation Factors

1, Almost all bear market lows are preceded by a peak in short-term inter-
est rates. I say “short-term rates,” but in almost all cases, a peak in long-
term rates also precedes an equity low. It is just that changes in the level
of short-term rates have a much larger influence on equities than yields
at the long end. The lead time varies from cycle to cycle, but generally
speaking, the longer the lead, the greater the ensuing bull market. In
1966, for instance, interest rates and equity prices reversed almost
simultaneously, whereas the lead was almost a year in 1920 and 1982.
The 1967-1968 bull market was tame in comparison to the bull mar-
kets of the 1920s and 1980s. This is not the same thing as saying that
every time the lead is a year or more the market will experience a mega-
rally, merely that there is a rough tendency for that to be the case.

2. The industry group structure at market bottoms should reveal an
improving trend of relative strength and relative smoothed long-term
momentum favoring early-cycle leaders, such as utilities, most financials,
and most consumer nondurables. At the same time there should be a
pattern of deteriorating relative strength and relative smooth momen-
tum in several lagging groups, such as resources, basic industry, and
technology. Quite often when the long-term smoothed relative momen-
tum of the S&P Financial Index bottoms, this is quite close to a market
bottom. The weakness in earnings-driven stocks is used more as a COD-
firmation.

Technical Factors

3. Positive divergences between the A/D line and the major averages are
much rarer than negative ones at market tops. Indeed, the line often

Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and Troughs 535

lags at most bear market lows. However, when divergences do develop,
they are usually followed by an above-average bull market. That was true
of the divergence between the (Bolton) weekly A/D lines at the 1942
and 1982 lows (see Chart 242).

4. Net new highs also rarely diverge with the averages, but on a 6-week MA
basis, this was the case again in 1982 and on a 5-day basis at the 1974
bottom (see Chart 24-1).

5, Other confirming signs would be record volume coming off the low, as
in 1978, 1982, and 1984. Also, most bottoms involve a rally and subse-
quent test of the low. When the second rally surpasses the first, a series
of rising peaks and troughs is signaled. This approach was one of the
few in the 1929-1932 bear market that had not previously experienced
a whipsaw. It is generally a reliable signal, especially when combined with
Dow theory buy signals. Another confirming but extremely important sig-
nal is the ability of the S&P Composite to rally above its 12-month MA.
