
65

When your mind is open, start reading about the markets. I
strongly recommend almost any book written by Jack Schwager.
It’s probably best to start with Market Wizards2 and The Nezu Market
Wizards. They are two of the best books available on trading and
investing. Two new books by Schwager, Fundamental Analysis and
Technical Analysis, are also excellent.
Computer Analysis ojthe Futures Market, by Charles LeBeau and
David Lucas, is one of the best books available on the systematic
process of developing a trading system. Indeed, I’ve learned a lot
from reading that book and from conducting regular seminars with
Chuck. I’d also recommend Perry Kaufman’s book, Smnrter Trading;
Cynthia Kase’s book, Trading z&h fhe Odds; and William O’Neil’s
book, How to Make Money in Stocks. Tuschar Chande’s book, Beyond
Technical Analysis,” is also good in that it gets the reader to think
about concepts that are beyond the scope of this volume.
The psychological side of trading and investing is also critical.
Here, I’d recommend my home-study course-The Peak
Performance Course for Traders and Investors. Two other excellent
,books are by James Sloman--Nothing and When You’re Troubled. The
first book is about going with the flow-an extremely important
concept when playing the markets. The second book is about getting rid of many personal issues that could prevent you from working at an optimal level. In addition, 1 also recommend Mindtraps:
Mastering the Inner World of Investing by Roland Barach. It’s all
about how we’re wired-both culturally and biologically-to lose
a great deal of money in the market. The good news is that we can
overcome those tendencies.
The suggested readings will give you the appropriate background required to develop useful beliefs about yourself and the
markets that will support you in the game ahead of you. They will
,answer a lot of the pressing questions about trading that might be
cluttering your mind. More detailed information about the read,,$gs is given in Appendix 1 at the end of this book.
Once you’ve completed your reading, write down your beliefs
:,about the market. Every sentence in this book represents one or
;,more of my beliefs. You might want to find the ones you agree with
having to do with the market. They will be a good starting point for
:Your task of finding your beliefs about the market. This step will

CHAPTER 4

66

prepare you for the tasks you will have to tackle in exploring the
markets and developing your own system for making a lot of
money
3.

DETERMINE

YOUR

OBJECTIVES

You cannot develop an adequate system for making money in the
market unless you totally understand what you are trying to
accomplish in the markets. Thinking about your objectives and getting them clearly in mind should be a major task in system development. In fact, it probably should occupy 20 to 50 percent of your
time in designing a system. Yet most people totally ignore this task
or spend just a few minutes doing it. For example, how much time
did you spend working on the exercise in Chapter 3?
Give Chapter 3 a lot of time and a lot of thought. If you took
only 15 to 30 minutes to answer the same questions I asked Tom
Basso, then you are not doing an adequate job. It’s one of the tasks
that most people want to avoid, but if you want to develop a great
system for trading or investing, then you must give this task adequate attention. Remember how important it is to keep an open
mind? Doing an adequate job with your objectives is part of being
open.
4. DETERMINE YOUR TIME FRAME
FOR TRADING
Your fourth task is to decide how active you want to be in the market. What is your time frame for trading? Do you want to have a
very long-term outlook, probably only making a change in your
portfolio once a quarter? Do you want to be a stock trader or alongterm futures trader where your positions last 1 to 6 months? Do
you want to be a swing trader who might make several trades each
day with none lasting more than a day or two? Or do you want the
ultimate in action-being a day trader who makes three to ten
trades each day and is always out by the close of the market?
Table 4-l shows the advantages and disadvantages of longterm trading. Long-term trading or investing is simple. It requires
little time each day and has minimal psychol~ogical pressures each

Steps to Developing a System

TABLE 4-l
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Long-Term Trading

Advantages

Disadvantages

NO need lo watch the market all day-you
can use stops or options to
protect yourself.
Psychological pressure of the market is
lowest in this type of system.

You can have large equity swings on
a single position.

Transaction costs are low.

You must be patient.

It only takes one or two trades lo make
your whole year profitable.

It usually has a reliability (number of
winning trades) of less than SO
percent.

You could have an expectancy (see
Chapter 6) well over a dollar per dollar
risked.

Trades tend to be infrequent, so you
must capitalize by trading many
markets.

You can use a simple methodology to
make a lot of money.

It requires a lot of money to palticipate
if you want to trade big liquid markets.
If you miss one good trading opportunIty, It can turn a winning year into a
losing year.

You theoretically have an infinite profit
opportunity, it opportunity with each trade
or investment.

You can be whipsawed by intraday
market mcwes each day.

Costs of data and equipment are minimal.

day-especially if you take advantage of your free time to work or
pursue your hobbies. You can typically use a fairly simple system
and still make a lot of money if you adequately size your positions.
I think the primary advantage of long-term trading or investing is that you have an infinite profit opportunity (theoretically at
ieast) on each position in the market. When you study many of the
people who’ve gotten rich through investments, you’ll find that in
many instances wealth occurs because people have bought many
Stocks and just held onto them.’ One of the stocks turns out to be a
gold mine-turning an investment of a few thousand dollars into
pli+ons over a lo- to 20-year period.
:;‘:
The primary disadvantage of long-term trading or investing is
that you must be patient. For example, you don’t get a lot of oppor,tities, so you must wait for them to come along. In addition, once

68

PART

2

Conceptualization of Your System

you’re in a position, you must go through fairly extensive equity
swings (although you can design something that minimizes them)
and have the patience to wait them out. Another disadvantage of
longer-term trading is that you generally need more money to participate. If you don’t have enough money, then you cannot adequately size your positions in a portfolio. In fact, many people lose
money in the markets simply because they don’t have enough
money to practice the type of trading or investing that they are
doing.
Shorter-term trading (which might be anything from day trading to swing trading of 1 to 3 days) has different advantages and
disadvantages. These are illustrated in Table 4-2. Read through the
list and then compare it with the long-term table. Once you’ve done
so, you can then decide for yourself what best fits your personality.
I once met a short-term foreign exchange trader who made

TABLE 4-Z

.-~

The Advantages and Disadvantages of Short-Term

Trading

CHAFTER 4

Steps to Developing a System

69

about six trades a day. No trade would last more than a day or two.
However, the fascinating thing about what he was doing was that
his gains and losses were about equal and he made money on 75
percent of his trades. This is a fantastic trading methodology. He
had $500,000 to trade with and a $10 million credit line with a bank.
When you understand position sizing, as discussed in Chapter 12,
you’ll realize that this system is a potential Holy Grail system. He
could easily have made a hundred million each year with that system and the capital he had.5
However, that’s not the case with most short-term systems.
Most of them seldom have a reliability much higher than 60 percent,
and their gains are usually smaller than their losses-sometimes
even leading to a negative expectancy.6 Sometimes, one big loss can
ruin the whole system and psychologically devastate the trader. In
addition, the psychological pressures of short-term trading are
I
mtense. I’ve had people call me who will say something like:
I make money almost every day, and I haven’t had a losing week in
almost 2 years. At least until now. Yesterday, I gave back all my profits of the last 2 years.
Keep that in mind before you decide that short-term trading is for
you. Your profits are limited. Your transaction costs are high. Most
,,.Importantly, the psychological pressures could destroy you.

Transaction costs are high and can add up.

Most day traders get many opportunities each day.
This type of trading is very exciting
and stimulating.

Excitement usually has nothing to do with
making money-it’s a psychological need!

If you have a methodology with an
expectancy Of 50 cents or more
per dollar risked, you may never
have a losing month-x even week.

Profits are limited by time, so you must
have a reliability well over 50 percent to
make money. However, I’ve seen some
notable exceptions to this rule of thumb.

You don’t have overnight risk in day
trading, so there is little or no margin
required even in big markets.

Data costs are very high because most
short-term traders need live quotes.

High-probability entry systems. which
most people want, work with shortterm trading.

Many high-probability entries have
losses that are bigger than the gains.

There’s always another opportunity
to make money.

Short-ten systems are subjeti to the
random noise of the markets.
The shorwerm
a
r
e

psychological pressures
mtense. ~,

5. DETERMINETHEBESTHISTORICAL
MOVESINTK4TTlMEFRAMEANDNOTICE
WijATTHOSEMOVESHAVEINCOMMON
Once you decide upon the time frame that you want to trade, determine what the best possible moves are within that time frame. Find
many of them, in many markets, so that you have a large sample.
,:probably you want to collect a minimum of 50 to 100 sample market moves. Also be sure you include both up moves and down
,moves.
For example, if you subscribe to Daily Graphs, there is always
::F example of a stock in a pattern from which it moved more than
$00 percent. You could collect many examples from past issues of
@wily Graphs. However, William O’Neil has already done tasks 5
@d 6 for you. You can read all about it in his book, How to Make

CHAPTER 4 Steps to Developing a System

Money in Stocks. Unfortunately, most people will have trouble using
O’Neil’s CANSLIM system, in my opinion, to make money in bear
markets. You will be much better off if you can make money from
both good up moves and good down moves.
Once you have a collection of great moves, notice what they
have in common. You might observe that all of them show a strong
up move, establish a base, and then break out of that base.
However, be willing to look at a lot more than just price conditions.
For example, you might notice important volume conditions that
occur with the moves. You might notice that the moves only occur
under certain market conditions (e.g., most up moves in stocks may
only occur when the stock market is in a major bull market). Are
there fundamental conditions that seem to be necessary for such
moves to occur? Are there certain timing relationships present?
Many of these are setup conditions that are important for you to
notice.
Also notice how these moves develop and how they tend to
end. Do they end suddenly and sharply? Do they end gradually?
How would you want to get out of those moves?
Chapter 5 includes a number of concepts that you might consider when you make your observations. However, if you can come
up with something new, then so much the better.
6.

WHAT’S THE CONCEPT BEHIND THOSE
MOVES AND HOW CAN YOU OBJECTIVELY
MEASURE YOUR CONCEPT?

What is the concept that you’ve observed? The first part of your
concept should tell you the conditions under which the move
occurs. How can you objectively measure that part of the concept?
Typically, your answer to this question will give you two elements
of your system-the setup conditions that you might want to use
and the timing or entry signal. These topics are discussed extensively in Chapters 7 and 8, respectively.
Your setup and timing signal are important for the reliability
of your system-how often will you make money when such a
move occurs. The entry should be~tested independently from all the
other components of your system.

71

LeBeau and Lucas in their book, cited earlier, have an excellent
method for testing such signals. What they do is determine the reliability (i.e., what percentage of time is it profitable) of Ihe signal
after various time periods. You might try an hour, the end of the
day, and after 1,2,5,10, and 20 days. A random entry should give
you a reliability of about 50 percent (i.e., generally between 45 and
55 percent). If your concept is any better than random, then it
should give you a reliability of 55 percent or better---especially in
the I- to 5-day time periods. If it doesn’t do that, then it is no better
than random, no matter how sound the concept seems to be.
When you do your entry testing, if entry reliability is your
objective, then the only thing you are looking at is how often it is
profitable after the selected time periods. You have no stops, so that
is not a consideration. When you add stops, the reliability of your
system will go down because some of your profitable trades will
probably be stopped out at a loss. You also do not consider transaction costs (i.e., slippage and commissions) in determining its reliability As soon as you add transaction costs, your reliability will go
down. You want to know that the reliability of your entry is significantly better than chance before these elements are added.
Some concepts seem brilliant when you first observe them.
‘,you might find that you have a hundred examples of great moves.
: Your idea is common to all of them. As a result, you get very excited
about it. However, you also must consider the false-positive rate.
:,How often is your concept or idea present when there is not a good
+ove? If the false-positive rate is very high, then you don’t have a
‘@eat concept and it might not be much better than chance.
One precaution you should keep in mind in using this kind of
testing is that reliability is not the only consideration in your sysJem. If your concept helps you capture giant moves, then it may be
valuable. See step 9.
Some people would argue that I’ve neglected an important
step in system development-optimization. However, optimization really amounts to fitting your concept to the past. The more
,YoU do this, the less likely your system is to work in the future.
~hstead, I believe that you should work toward understanding your
concept as much as possible. The more you understand the real nature
Ofyour concept, the less historical testing you will have to do.

72

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

7. ADD YOUR STOPS AND
TRANSACTION COSTS
An important part of your concept is to understand when it is not
working. Thus, the next step is to understand the effect of adding a
protective stop.7 Your protective stop is that part of your systenz that
tells you when to get out ofa trade in order to protect your capital. It is a
key portion of any system. It’s that point at which you should get
out in order to preserve capital, because your concept doesn’t seem
to be working. The way you’ll know your concept is not working
depends upon the nature of your concept.
For example, suppose you have some theory that says there is
“perfect” order to the market. You can pinpoint market turning
points to the day-sometimes to the hour. In this case, your concept
would give you a setup which is the time at which the market is
supposed to move. Your entry signal should be a price confirmation that the market is indeed moving, such as a volatility breakout
(see Chapter 8). At this point, you need a stop to tell you that your
concept isn’t working. What might you select? If the market goes
through the time window, when you expected a turn, without your
making a significant profit, then you’d probably want to get out. Or
you might consider the average daily price range (such as the average true range) of the last 10 days to be the amount of noise in the
market. If the price moved against you by that amount (or some
multiple of that amount), you might want to get out.
Examples of protective stops are discussed extensively in
Chapter 9. Read that chapter in detail and pick one (or more) that
best suits your concept. Or perhaps your concept leads to a logical
stop point that isn’t discussed in that chapter. If so, then use that
logical stop point.
Think about what you are trying to accomplish with your
entry. Is it fairly arbitrary-you simply think a major trend should
be starting? If so, then you’ll probably want to give the market lots
of room so that the trend will develop. Thus, you’ll want to use a
very wide stop.
On the other hand, perhaps your concept is very precise. YOU
expect to be wrong a lot, but when you are right, you don’t expect
to lose money on the trade. If that is the case, &en you can have very
close stops that don’t lose much money when they are executed.

CHAPTER 4 Steps to Developing a System

7.3

Once you’ve decided on the nature of your stop, add your
stop plus transaction fees (i.e., slippage and commissions) to the
calculations you did in the previous step and redo them. You’ll
probably find a significant drop in the reliability of your entry signal when you add in these values. For example, if your initial reliability was 60 percent, it will probably drop to 50 to 55 percent
when you add on your stop and transaction costs to each trade.
8. ADD YOUR PROFIT-TAKING EXITS AND
DETERMINE YOUR EXPECTANCY
The third part of your concept should tell you when the move is
over. As a result, the next step is to determine how you will take
your profits. Exits are discussed extensively in Chapter 10, where
you’ll learn about what exits are most effective. Read through that
chapter and determine what exits best fit your concept. Think
about your personal situation-what you’re trying to accomplish,
what your time frame is for trading, and what your concept isbefore you select your exit.
Generally, if you’re a long-term trader or investor who is trying to capture a major trend or enjoy the rewards of long-term fundamental values, then you want a fairly wide stop. You don’t want
to be in and out of the market all the time if you can help it. You’ll
only make money on 30 to 50 percent of your positions, so you
want your gains to be really big-as much as 20 times your average
risk. If this is the case, your exits should be designed to capture
some big profits.
On the other hand, if you are a short-term trader who is in and
out quickly, then you’ll want fairly tight stops. You expect to be
fight on better than 50 percent of your positions-in fact, you must
be because you are not in the market long enough for huge
rewards. Instead, you’re looking for small losses with a reward-torisk ratio of about 1. However, it is possible to make money 50 to 60
percent of the time, have your losses at minimal levels, and still
capture a few trades that will give you big profits.
Overall, what you are looking for when you determine your
exits is to make the expectancy on your system as high as possible.

Expectancy is the average mom t of money you’ll make in your system-

74

PART 2 Conceptualization of Your System

over many, many trades-per d&r risked. The exact formula for

expectancy, plus the factors that go into it, is discussed extensively
in Chapter 6. At this point in the model, however, your goal is simply to produce as high an expectancy as possible. You are also looking for as much opportunity as possible to trade (within a limited
time frame) to realize that expectancy.
In my opinion, as discussed later in this book, expectancy is
controlled by your exits. Thus, the best systems have three or four
different exits. You’ll need to test the exits you select one at a time.
You’ll probably want to select them logically, based upon your
trading or investing concept. However, you’ll want to test them
with everything in place (up to this point) to determine what they
do to your expectancy
Once you determine your expectancy, look at your system
results trade by trade. What is the makeup of the expectancy? Is it
mostly made up of a lot of 1:1- or 2:1-reward-to-risk
ratio trades?
Or do you find that one or two really big trades make up most of
the expectancy? If it’s long term and you don’t have enough contribution from big trades, then you probably need to modify your
exits so that you can capture some of those big trades8
9.

CHAPTER 4 Steps to Developing a System

75

Bar Chart f% LC85-95

Figure 4-l Breakouts in September and October 1992 in live cattle result
in small losses, but eventually a large gain is possible

LOOK FOR HUGE REWARD TRADES

Step 9 is an alternative to steps 6 through 8, but it is a difficult step
for most people. Step 9 is simply to look to capture huge rewards in
comparison with the size of your losses. Another way of stating this
is to look for huge R-multiple trades, where your payoff is many
times the size of the potential loss you will suffer if you are stopped
out at your initial risk (called R). The concept of R multiples is discussed much more extensively in Chapter 6.
Look at Figure 4-1. There is a long, narrow consolidation
period (September-November) before the market starts to move.
Let’s say you entered the market three times during that consolidation period. Each time you are stopped out at a loss of about
$0.75 per position. You now get into the market and make a $10
profit (a 12.5-R multiple) per position. Would you like that kind of
system?
Most people would hate it ~because they dare “wrong” too

many times. In fact, in the example, we assume you are only “right”
one out of four times, or 25 percent of the time. Yet look at your bottom line. You have a $10 profit from which you must subtract three
$0.75 losses, or $2.25. The net result is a profit of $7.75-or over
three times the size of your total losses. This kind of trading can be
very profitable. It is not easy for most people, however, because
they would typically give up after three or four losses.
If this type of trading appeals to you, then substitute this step
,for steps 6 through 8 of the model. Essentially, your job is to look
for ways to capture huge R-multiple trades (10 R or bigger).
!Remember that one 10-R trade can be profitable with as many as 7
:1-R losses-even when you take transaction costs into consideration.
If you decide to look for these trades, then your emphasis
:must be on (1) picking entry points from which the markets might
