
Q.- any parting words?

A : Yes, one thing. I seriously dislike it when I hear people say that
they've been taught they should trade only with money that they

73


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

can afford to lose. I might be the only guy saying this out there,
but I seriously believe that that phrase is enormously damaging
because it teaches people that the money they're using to trade
is not significant enough to be protected. The first and last and
most important thing is that I’m a defensive trader. So I feel that
there is no excuse for losing the entire amount of trading capital,
meaning if that’s money that people can afford to lose, then I’d
rather have them give it to me and I can take them to the movies
and we can take a long walk on the beach, hang out together, and
we still have something to show for it later. But it is not money
that people can afford to lose. It represents somebody’s financial
future. We would never move into a house that we could afford to
have burn down. We would never buy a car and only buy it if we
could afford to have it smashed into a semi-truck. But we regularly
open our trading accounts with money that we say we can afford
to lose, and so it’s as if we’re from the beginning saying: “Well,
this money wasn’t very important to me.” I think to certain degree
that the money that we’re entrusted with to trade is sacred money
that not only represents the amount that’s in the account today, it
represents what it could be later on in life—the quality of life that
it could provide for someone. So it’s much more important than
just money that someone can afford to lose.

LESSONS FROM ROB BOOKER
Fit Trading to Your Personality

In this interview, Rob Booker has shared with us some of his fa-
vorite trading techniques. However, we feel that the key lesson to
learn from this interview is that knowing yourself is more impor-
tant than any particular trading strategy that you may choose. You
need to make sure that your style of trading is in syne with your
personality. If you are a short-term trader, you should focus on
short-term profits. If you are long-term trader, you should focus
on longer term or bigger profits. Furthermore, you should never
trade a strategy with a significant amount of capital without back
testing and forward testing it first.

74


THE 100-PIP TRADER

Test Everything

Before Rob Booker implements any strategy, he will spend hours
and hours studying the mechanics of the strategy to understand
when it works and when it doesn’t. He feels that his job is to be a
back tester first and a trader second. Therefore, his cardinal rule is
to never trade a strategy unless he can first prove that it has been
profitable in the past. For new traders, back testing may sound
daunting. However, it does not need to be as complicated as it
seems. There are a lot of different ways to back test. The fancy way
is go out and learn a programming language to generate results
systematically. However even though Rob Booker knows how to
code now, at the beginning he back tested everything manually.
One easy way for new traders to start is to simply review the charts
going back in time to look for instances when your setup triggered a
buy or sell signal and to record the actual performance of the trade
At bare minimum, we encourage traders to first look for at least 20
to 50—this depends on the timeframe you are trading—samples
of the pattern and only after that do we recommend traders move
into forward or live-testing phase. This means that the strategy is
actually traded in current market conditions using either a demo
or mini-account. The reason why this is important is because the
psychological element of trading can always alter results by reveal-
ing the difficulty of reacting to live market conditions. Along the
same lines, a minimum of 20 to 30 winning trades needs to be
made before the strategy is ready for prime time.

Don’t Fall Victim to “Possum Trading”

Rob Booker believes that you should never let yourself fall victim
to what he calls “possum trading.” When a trade is going bad, it
may be very tempting to shut off the computer and hope that it
will all get better if you stop watching the market. However, this
almost never happens. Instead, more often than not, the losses will
only become greater. Therefore, it is important that we all focus on
trading defensively. Trading is a game of survival. If you can protect
your capital, you can always live to trade another day. This is why
Rob Booker’s first goal is to not lose money and his second goal is to

7S


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

find a way to grind out profits consistently. He feels that one of the
biggest mistakes is to trade only with money that you can afford to
lose. Of course, he is not suggesting that everyone should mortgage
their houses and trade with money that they cannot afford to lose,
but what he is telling us is that every dollar, yen, pound or euro is
hard earned. If you are trading with money that you can afford to
lose, then it means that you are trading with money that you feel
is not important enough to be protected. The money you trade
should be viewed as potential wealth later on in life. Therefore,
before risking it in the market, you need to make sure that you are
risking it in a smart way. You only want to apply it to strategies that
have already been battletested rather than just jumping into the
markets on a whim.

76


CHAPTER 4

THE COOLEST GUY
IN THE ROOM

CHUCK HAYS

Or all the traders we've interviewed, Chuck Hays is one of the
coolest guys around both in temperament and in style. He makes
his living in the highly chaotic world of e-mini stock index futures
where the difference between fortune and failure can be measured
in seconds. Yet Chuck rarely loses control and he often wins by
violating some of the most sacrosanct rules of trading. Brutally hon-
est, Chuck believes traders should first understand their individual
strengths and limitations and trade accordingly. A very generous
trader, Chuck has counseled and coached scores of futures traders
in his own free time. Due to his natural Midwestern modesty and
nonchalance, Chuck tends to downplay his accomplishments. He
is, however, one of the best risk takers in the retail trading game.
We had the pleasure to interview Chuck from his home office in
Minnesota.

77


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: were you exposed to the markets in your childhood?
A: Oh, much later in life. I didn’t do any trading until 1999.

: What about investing prior to that? Did you have any expe-
rience with stocks at all?

A : No. None.

Q.: what did you do prior to that?

A : I used to take some distressed businesses, some of them
were convenience stores and a nightclub, and I would try to fix
them up and resell them. Then I worked as a product manager for
companies designing automotive test products.

Q.: 80 what made you switch to trading? Did you just like that
industry?

A : You know I went to a seminar where they were talking about
trading options on stocks, and I actually did that a little bit while I
was still employed, but it wasn’t very long after that where I figured
out that the options markets was really not the way go. It was too
expensive. They didn’t trade nearly enough, there were a lot of
disadvantages, so I decided to stop working and go strictly to day
trading.

Q.: The seminar you went to, that was your first exposure to fi-
nance, what really tickled your fancy? Why did you get so interested
in that subject?

Qui think it’s the same reason that people would love to do
what I do, which is the lure of short days, high profits, high risk.
Unfortunately, that’s not really the reason people should go into
what I do, but that is what the allure is.

78


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q.: How long did you trade options on the side before you came
to the conclusion that this was a pretty losing proposition for a
retail trader?

Q. : About a year.

: How was that process? Did you break even? Did you lose
some money? What was the end result?

A : You know, I think that, looking back, I probably did all right
for a while. But like a lot of beginning traders, I ended up losing
all of my profits on one or two trades by getting stubborn.

Q.. Were you trading news events? Would you buy options in
anticipation of some positive news?

A : Lwas probably more of a technical trader. I never considered
myself very good at interpreting news, even today.

Q.: How did technical trading come into your skill set? How did
you gravitate to that right away?

A: Oh, that is a great question. Well, let me add to that a little bit.
I think that almost every trader whom I mentored as far as stocks
or futures go wants to make it a science. They want to be able
to look at a chart, study, work hard, find some magic indicator of
solving the market. In the end, I don’t think that’s how successful
traders trade. But in the beginning, it seems that everyone goes
through that process.

Q. They try to engineer a profit, right?

A : Absolutely, and I see it all time with new traders. And no
matter what you tell them, you can tell them up front that this is

79


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

not a science. It’s very beneficial to be a good chartist. But that’s
not what will make you money in the long run. Coming from my
technical background, I wanted to make it a science protocol, and
I think that probably for the better part of my first two years of
trading NASDAQ stocks I still tried to make it a science. I was
very fortunate the first couple of years because I traded after the
tech bubble burst of early 2000. We had some great down markets
and I was a much better short trader than I was a long trader. It
was really later on when I decided that the reason there are so
many technical indicators out there is because none of them work
very well.

Q: How did you even find out about technical analysis, and what
did you do to teach yourself the basics of chart reading?

A : Lread the book Trading for a Living by Elder.

: That was the foundation, and then obviously you looked at
thousands and thousands of charts?

A : Yes. I was fortunate in the beginning to realize that you couldn’t
go out and trade a lot of different instruments and be good at them.
In the beginning, I only traded three or four stocks, and I didn’t
deviate from that.

Q.. what stocks did you trade in the beginning?

A : In the beginning we had Rambus and CMGI and Yahoo! and
QCOM. All those stocks that were skyrocketing $10 to $20 a day.
We don’t have great stocks like that today.

Q.- you entered the day trading business around 1999?
A: July of 1999.

80


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q . Tell us a little bit about that, what did you do? Did you
join a firm, and what was that like? What was your experience just
walking in that first day?

A : We were real fortunate here in Minneapolis to have a firm
called NBX Trading, and they catered to and specialized in day
traders. So we used the firm’s hardware and traded strictly for
commissions.

Q.: What were the commissions like for you in stocks?

A : They were three cents—per side.

Q.- 80 it cost you more than a nickel to just get in and out of a
stock?

A: yes.

Q.: This was before decimalization, so you were still trading in
sixteenths and eighths and quarters, right?

A. Yes. It was interesting. I was looking forward to decimalization,
but it really ruined the markets for day trading stock.

: Because it narrowed the bid-ask spread and made the markets
very, very thick? [Authors’ note: Decimalization greatly reduced
the difference between bid and ask by reducing the spread to
sometimes just a penny. Therefore, a trader who bought on the
bid and sold on the ask saw his profit margins squeezed by more
than 90%, from 12.5 cents (1/8 of a dollar) to just 1 cent.]

A : Exactly.

81


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q_; 1909. This was the go-go years of the Internet phase, stocks
moving $10 to $20 a day. You say that you're a better short, trader
than you are long trader. But this was still the last of the long run.
How did you manage to succeed in that environment?

A : I think it was really tough for the first six months. I was
fortunate that in 2000 the market started to go down. But that time
I had been at it for seven or eight months and I had a pretty good
idea what I was good at, and then for the next couple of years we
had wonderful, down markets. And it was easy to make money,
it really was. But I have found out from being around successful
traders that almost all of those successful traders are better one
way or the other. Theyre either better long or better short, and
they know that.

Q. when you first started out, what was you initial capitalization?
A: I started with $150,000.

OQ: s0 you were pretty well capitalized, and then did you give
yourself capital aside from this to live on? So this wasn’t a situation
where you had to make money right away?

A : Exactly. I think it’s a real handicap for people if they are in
a situation with the high cost of living and a lot of payments. It
is very, very difficult to make money. As a matter of fact, I found
with traders who are struggling that if they absolutely have to make
money on some particular day, they will lose money.

Q.: How much time did you give yourself internally? Did you say

I'm going to give myself six months or a year before I succeed?

A : You know, I don’t really remember. I do remember in the first
year that I lost $50,000, and that was pretty good actually.

82


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

: So you were realistic enough to understand that this was
going to be difficult and you had to just stay in the game?

A : Today I tell brand new traders that you are not going to make
money in first year. I’ve only seen one trader do that who traded
futures. But he had a huge amount of experience trading markets
prior to moving to futures.

Q.: when you first started trading, what was your basic strategy?

A : The same thing as today, although I would love to be a better
swing trader I know now and—it took me a couple years to figure
this out—that I was a great scalper. I like to play a lot of contracts,
sell a lot of shares, for very small profits over and over again.

Q: you would basically fade extremes right from the beginning?

A : Yes, and if you had first seen me trade, I was no different then
than I am now.

Q.:s0 you've really stayed very consistent right from the get go.

You remained in syne with your core personality?

A: Yes.

Q.: The first year you lost $50,000, why do you think that
was? Was it a matter of just learning how to have better timing?
Better risk control? What were you doing wrong then that you’ve
improved since?

A : | think it’s a matter of seeing an entire year’s worth of markets
where you to go through earnings season. You need to go through
slow times. You need to see a holiday season. You need to see

83


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

all those kinds of markets. At the beginning, you make too many
mistakes. I think the first goal for all traders is to learn how to
stop losing money. For me that means not trading in the middle
of the day and realizing that the very last hours of the day trade
differently than the first hour of the day. It’s a process where you
learn to stop making so many mistakes.

Q :can you give a more detailed idea of how the first hour of the
day sets up and then the last hour of day? What are the differences
between the two and what are the unique characteristics of each
one of those particular parts of the day?

A : | think the first hour is when we see a lot of retail customers
and volume. We also have a lot of news early in the day that gives
us kneejerk reactions to play. When you get in the middle day,
where the volume drops off, there are different forces at work. I’m
not great at sensing those. Fade trades do not work nearly as well
in the middle of the day. When you get into the last part of the
day, when you have funds balancing their positions it is much more
difficult to fade the market within the last half hour, and that’s what
I’m best at. After doing this for seven years now, I know that. I
understand that about myself, and I try to be more careful of the
trade at the end of the day. I also trade much smaller sizes at the
end of the day.

Q_: 80 your most confident trades are at the beginning of the
day?

A : Absolutely.

: If we were going to distill it to one simple sentence, and
obviously it’s much more complex than that, but the overarching
philosophy is this. You tend to have lots of news flow at the begin-
ning of the day. Lots of excited retail order flow, lots of what we in
the business call dumb money, which is just sort of money chasing

84


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

news. Your basic modus operandi is that once it reaches an extreme
you begin to fade it because then you're going to get some retrace-
ment and rebalancing, which provide you with profit opportunities.

A : Yes, absolutely. That’s what I have made my money doing,

: Of course, that sounds a lot simpler than it is because finding
the top or the bottom during those times is much more difficult in
real life. Timing is everything.

A : Timing is everything and I also understand that I am unlikely
to get the best entry when I first take the position. I almost always
expect to add to the position when I take it.

OQ: s0 you are always a scale-up, scale-down trader. Your first
trade is almost always probative, right?

A : Yes, I firmly expect to add to it anyway. It increases your
chance of success a great deal when you understand that because
trying to make perfect entries and book them—if that’s what it
takes for you to make money—then the market’s going to take
your money and you're going to lose.

: Ona day-to-day basis that’s a great strategy. However, we
all know that it comes at a very, substantial cost because in a one-
way market that kind of a scale-up strategy can just decimate your
profits. You can lose sometimes a week’s worth of profits in one
trade, right?

A : Yes, that’s true. But I wouldn’t say it takes a week’s worth
of profits. It certainly can be hard on you for one day. We've
experienced some of those markets right now, where the Dow
wants to go up to all-time highs and the rest of the market kind
of creeps up with it. If it trends, it’s very difficult to make money.
However, we are not in that sort of trending market very often.

85


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

: Do you have a mental limit to how many times you will add
into a trade? When you just say, “That’s it. It’s a one-way market,
I'm getting out. I have to cut my losses.”

A : You know, a lot of people ask me that, a lot of traders around
here ask me that. I don’t look at it that way. If we have an average
of an 11-point swing in the ER [a daily move from low to high
in the Russell 2000 of 110 ticks], everyday you know you might
be able to take a point and a half or two and be fine. But if we
have a 20-point normal range, you might get three point shake
outs and you need to trade accordingly. If you simply trade by hard
and fast scientific-type rules, eventually the market will take your
money.

Q.: could you explain that a little more? Let’s say the average
trading range in the Russell 500 is 10 points, just using 10 as an
equal number. If you’re using stop losses of a point and half that
are within the noise level, you'll just get stopped out continuously.
Is that what you're saying?

A : What I’m saying is ifa spread goes against me a point, or
point and quarter, I may add to it there, and do very well on the
trade. What I’m saying is there are some markets where we had an
average range of about 18 or 19 points a day like this summer, in
which case, a point and a quarter or point and a half stop probably
won't work.

Q:s0 when you have this massive range expansion, and obviously
you never know that it’s going to occur, you never know you're in
the midst of hurricane until everything swirls around you. What
kind of risk control do you apply to yourself? Do you have a hard-
and-fast rule? Or is it always matter of feel?

A : I think it’s always a matter of feel for me.

86


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

: Is there a monetary limit where you'll say, “You know, I just
dropped $50,000, that’s it. I’m not staying in this trade anymore”? Is
there an absolute uncle point for you? Or are you always assessing
the dynamic of the market?

A : Yes. Days I quit trading are the days where I just don’t have a
good feel for what’s going on. It’s like a pitcher having a bad day.
You have to walk away and come back the next day with a zero on
my P&L and start over.

Q.: when you first started doing that, obviously you would have
many, many successful days and then you would have some very
bad, big hits to your equity. How did you deal with that psycholog-
ically?

A: I think that’s the key to being a survivor in this business versus
some people who are still sitting on the sidelines now. Oftentimes
people ask how did you do today after the markets closed, and I
usually know. Every once in a while I can’t remember. It’s just a
game, and I get to start over again tomorrow and do the best I can.
I don’t have to worry about yesterday.

Q.: you basically come in everyday with a clean slate?
A : Absolutely.

Qe tes like having no memory, and that helps you to have no

emotion because you're not carrying all those scars around with
2

yout

A : Absolutely. And if people looked at me without looking at
my P&L they could not tell from my actions, activity, or emotions
whether I’m up or down.

87


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Do you look at the P&L during the day and let it guide you?
Or have you now learned to just look at the numbers, whether
you're down 20,000 or up 50,000 and not really get too emotional?

A : I don’t care—no. My goal is to make another good trade based
on what’s going on in the market. It doesn’t have anything to do
with last trade or the trade before or my P&L.

Q.: obviously that’s great principle to aspire to. But in real life,
what’s the maximum amount of bad trades during the day that
you've run into? Did you ever make four or five consecutive bad
trades where you would either short, short, short, long, long, long
and it would go completely against you?

A : You know, I can tell from experience that if I make four or five
bad trades in row what the day is like. It’s a day where it’s creeping
up all the day long. It always looks toppy to me, and after making
four or five bad trades, I'll just come back the next day.
