
r A ﬁxed exchange rate regime
r Monetary policy independence
r High capital mobility
The ﬁrst assumes the targeting of the exchange rate, while the second assumes the targeting of
inﬂation and interest rates. The discovery of this rule was the stuff of brilliance, the monetary
equivalent of the discovery of penicillin, yet history is littered with examples of policymakers
who ignored it to their cost. While the example of Asia and the subsequent Asian currency
crisis may spring to mind, there are also examples within the developed world, notably that
of the ERM crises of 1992–1993. Here, there was indeed a commitment to a type of ﬁxed
exchange rate regime under conditions of high capital mobility. At the same time however,
ERM members were allowed monetary independence. In practice, some, notably the Benelux
countries, appeared to all but abandon monetary independence in favour of adopting the harsh
benchmark of Bundesbank monetary policy. Others, such as the UK, Italy and Spain, sought a
greater degree of monetary independence. Is it any coincidence that these were either forced out
of the ERM altogether or forced to devalue within it? While the argument is frequently made
that the UK pound sterling went into the ERM at an overvalued level to the Deutschmark, a
contrary argument could be made that sterling would have been forced out of the ERM no matter
what its entry level because the UK authorities refused to relinquish monetary independence
to the Bundesbank.
1.2.5 Implications for EU Accession Candidates
This simple rule of being able to maintain two policy focuses but not three has potentially
important implications for the EU accession candidate countries such as Poland, Hungary, the
Czech Republic and Slovakia, particularly during their transition phase between membership
of the EU and entry into the Euro. During that period, it is assumed that these countries will be
part of an “ERM II” grid, featuring a narrow exchange rate band, whose limits are defended
by the commitment of the central bank to intervene.
For example, if in January 2005 Poland becomes a member of the EU and as a result the
Polish zloty enters the ERM II grid, Poland must renounce its monetary independence at the
same time. If Poland does not, it must either put limits on capital, which would be against
both the spirit and the letter of the treaties of Maastricht and Nice, or eventually be forced to
relinquish its ﬁxed exchange rate peg. The only way to avoid this is for ERM II to have a very
wide band, otherwise at the very least EU accession candidate currencies are (once again) in
for an extremely wild — and potentially unpleasant — ride.

1.3 THE INTEREST RATE APPROACH
A further approach to trying to determine or predict exchange rates is that involving the analysis
of interest rate differentials (the Interest Rate Approach). This involves a number of different
principles and we shall go through them brieﬂy and in turn. The ﬁrst principle involves the
basic interest rate parity theory, which is that:
An exchange rate’s forward % premium/discount = its interest rate differential

32

Currency Strategy

Thus, for instance, the traditional forward discount on the dollar–yen exchange rate should
equal the interest rate differential between the two currencies. This is seen as the equilibrium
reﬂecting the relationship between the exchange rate and interest rates. Because forwards are a
traded instrument and thus subject to supply and demand, the forward premium or discount can
vary brieﬂy from this equilibrium, but should always revert to norm. After all, if for argument’s
sake the forward premium/discount for some reason did not equal the interest rate differential
between the two currencies an arbitrageur could in theory make risk-free proﬁts by borrowing
in one currency, investing in the securities of the other currency and simultaneously opening
a forward contract in the exchange rate for the same period as the initial loan. This is called
covered interest rate arbitrage.
The theory of interest rate parity is a guiding principle for several economic and ﬁnancial
models. Under this theory, it is assumed that the expected (interest rate) returns of a currency
should be equalized through speculation in another country once converted back to the ﬁrst
currency. This may sound like gibberish, but basically this is an interest rate version of PPP —
and like PPP its results are decidedly mixed. Indeed, there can be signiﬁcant violations of the
interest rate parity theory for substantial periods of time without the immediate reversal that
covered interest rate arbitrage might suggest. Not too surprisingly, this is a dismal predictor of
exchange rates.
Indeed, before we go further into the theory, it is important to point out a practical ﬂaw
in the theory involving incentive, which is undoubtedly a key contributing factor to its poor
predictive track record — the theory supposes an automatically causal relationship between
interest rates and the exchange rate, yet in practice most currency market practitioners trade
currencies with directional rather than interest rate considerations in mind. Even this statement
is a generalization. On a simple numerical basis, the majority of currency market practitioners
are made up of interbank dealers, thus it is important and necessary to look at their motivation
for trading. Spot traders for the most part care not one whit about a currency’s interest rate, in
part because they hold positions for too short a time for it to matter, in part because they are
seeking to predict direction — and thus make capital gains on their position, not primarily to
make interest income. Forward traders are a different breed entirely and more akin to money
market or interest rate traders. Indeed, the way they hedge out their forward exposure frequently
involves an array of interest rate-related instruments. Eventually, interest rate parity violations
will be reversed, but there is little incentive to do so in the immediate term if you don’t care
about the interest rate in the ﬁrst place.
Returning to the theory for now, interest rate parity theory states that the difference between
a spot and forward exchange rate expressed as a percentage should equal the interest rate
differential between the two currencies. Yet, we know from the PPP principle that exchange
rates and inﬂation rates are linked. Can we not link these also with interest rates? Indeed we
can, thanks to the seminal work of the economist Irving Fisher. Thus, according to what has
become known as the “Fisher effect:”
The difference in interest rates = the difference in expected inﬂation rates
Thus, we have gone from the difference between the spot and the forward exchange rate
equating to the interest rate differential through the interest rate parity theory, which in turn
equates to the difference in expected inﬂation rates through the Fisher effect. Yet, PPP tells
us that absolute or relative price growth levels can be used to forecast future exchange rates.

Fundamental Analysis

33

Thus, through PPP we can extrapolate this one stage further to suggest that:
The difference in expected inﬂation rates = the expected exchange rate change
Bringing all these together, we get:
(1) The difference in spot and forward rates = the difference in interest rates
(Interest rate parity theory)
(2) The difference in interest rates = the difference in expected inﬂation rates
(Fisher effect)
(3) The difference in expected inﬂation rates = the expected change in spot exchange rate
(Purchasing Power Parity)
Logically from this, one may conclude that the difference between the spot and forward rates
expressed as a percentage should equal the expected change in the spot exchange rate. This is
known as the expectations theory of exchange rates.
Finally, there is the theory that:
(4) The difference in interest rates = the expected change in the spot exchange rate
(International Fisher effect)
On the face of it, the ideas presented above seem logical and follow a clear and persuasive
train of thought. There is only one small problem — this clear train of thought rarely works
in practice. More speciﬁcally, the difference in interest rates or expected inﬂation rates may
be equal to the theoretical construct of the “expected change in the spot exchange rate”, but
in practice it is of the future exchange rate. In line with this, the forward rate is also a very
poor predictor of the future exchange rate, a fact that economists have labelled “forward rate
bias” or the “forward premium puzzle”. As Bansal and Dahlquist (2000)2 conﬁrmed in their
exhaustive study, in contrast to the theory, empirical evidence suggests that in fact current
interest rate differentials and future spot exchange rates are frequently negatively correlated.
This is particularly the case within the developed economies, though the picture is somewhat
more mixed within emerging market economies.
Over the long term, the interest rate parity theory is seen to work as enough market participants can be found to “discover” the opportunities available for covered interest rate arbitrage
between currencies and interest rates, thus in the process eliminating such disparities. However,
there are much longer lags than the theory might suggest is possible. Here again, the issue
of incentive must be a focus. As noted earlier, it should behove the theorists to know that the
majority of currency market practitioners are currency interbank dealers and moreover that
the main incentive for these to trade is directional gain rather than interest income. Currency
markets do focus on interest rate differentials for extended periods of time, but equally they
focus on other factors, in many cases completely disregarding interest rates.
1.3.1 Real Interest Rate Differentials and Exchange Rates
Currency strategists do however use models comparing the real interest rate differential with
either the nominal or the real exchange rate between two countries. The logic behind this relates
2
Ravi Bansal and Magnus Dahlquist, The forward premium puzzle: different tales from developed and emerging economies,
Journal of International Economics 51 (2000) 115–144.

34

Currency Strategy
2.50

1.35

1.50

1.25

0.50

1.15

−0.50

1.05

−1.50

0.95
Real Gov’t Bond Yield Differential
(EU-US)

−2.50

0.85

EUR/USD (RHS)
Source: Bloomberg

−3.50
Jan-96

0.75
Jan-97

Jan-98

Jan-99

Jan-00

Jan-01

Jan-02

Figure 1.1 Euro–dollar exchange rate vs. 10-year bond yield differential

to both the international Fisher effect and to PPP, where on the one hand the difference in interest
rates should, if not be exactly equal to an expected change in the spot exchange rate, at least
be an important driver of it, and on the other hand where nominal interest rate differentials are
adjusted for inﬂation (i.e. domestic price growth) and thus relate to the exchange rate through
the law of one price.
The link or correlation between real interest rate differentials and the exchange rate appears
to have grown exactly in line with the gradual move since the end of the Bretton Woods
exchange rate system to liberalize capital ﬂows globally. As barriers to capital movement have
fallen, so the overall importance of capital ﬂow has grown exponentially relative to that of
trade ﬂow. Exchange rate models that focused solely on the current account no longer seemed
appropriate in such a world, those that focused on capital ﬂows seemed increasingly so. As
capital ﬂows have gained in importance, so their importance within overall currency market
ﬂows has grown and thus the correlation between the two increased. Thus, currency strategists
across the market continue to track this relationship between real interest rate differentials and
nominal exchange rates as one of many useful and important indicators of currency over- or
undervaluation. Figure 1.1 compares the Euro–dollar exchange rate against the 10–year bond
yield differential from 1996 through to the end of January 2002.

1.4 THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS APPROACH
The core idea behind the Balance of Payments Approach is that changes in national income
affect both the current and the capital account and through this cause a predictable reaction in
the exchange rate in order to restore balance of payments equilibrium. The best way of looking

Fundamental Analysis

35

at this is to examine the transmission mechanism from the change in national income through to
the exchange rate reaction. When considering the Balance of Payments Approach to exchange
rates, it is good to keep in mind the classic accounting identity for economic adjustment:
S−I =Y −E = X−M
where:
S = Savings
I = Investment
Y = Income
E = Expenditure
X = Exports
M = Imports
Within economics, this is an unequivocal law which governs how economies adjust to changes
in economic dynamics.
1.4.1 A Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
Under a ﬁxed exchange rate regime where capital mobility is extremely limited, the focus is on
the current account rather than the capital account. Assume for the purpose of this exercise that
national income is rising. As national income rises, so stronger demand sucks in an increasing
amount of imports, which in turn causes current account balance deterioration. The exchange
rate cannot be the transmission mechanism for restoring balance of payments equilibrium since
the exchange rate is ﬁxed. Hence, the monetary authority has the choice of either selling its
foreign exchange reserves in the market to alleviate pressure on the exchange rate or more
practically tightening monetary policy in order to dampen domestic demand, thus reducing
import demand and restoring the balance of payments equilibrium.
Equally, within that same ﬁxed exchange rate regime, say national income was falling. This
would imply that weaker domestic demand would cause a decline in import demand, which
would paradoxically cause an improvement in the current account balance. Because the capital
account would not be a consideration given our premise that capital mobility is highly restricted
and the exchange rate is ﬁxed, equilibrium in the balance of payments can only be restored
through a reversal of that current account balance improvement. Such an improvement would
pressure the ﬁxed exchange rate to appreciate. The monetary authority could either absorb
this pressure by increasing its foreign exchange reserves and selling the domestic currency in
the market to do so, or by loosening monetary policy. Either way, this would cause market
interest rates to fall, spurring domestic demand and thus import demand, which in turn would
cause the current account balance to move back to a position such that the balance of payments
equilibrium would be restored.
The dynamic whereby a change in national income is transmitted within a ﬁxed exchange
rate regime through the current account balance is expressed in the following diagram:
Change in national income → Change in current account balance → Monetary reaction →
Reversal of current account balance change → Balance of payments equilibrium restored
In theory, a ﬁxed exchange rate regime should automatically be in balance as left to its own
devices it should be self-correcting through changes in capital ﬂows and interest rates. An
@Team-FLY

36

Currency Strategy

imbalance of one kind or the other should automatically be corrected, albeit after a lag. Yet, in
reality, ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regimes have faced an increasingly turbulent time during
the 1990s to the extent that many of them have collapsed in the face of seemingly irresistible
speculative pressure. Why has this been the case? Many of the reasons for this are case-speciﬁc.
However, the underlying theme is that frequently countries simply have not been prepared to
maintain the degree of economic discipline that is required to maintain the ﬁxed exchange
rate regime. In addition, many appeared to forget the core rule established by the Mundell–
Fleming example that you can have only two but not all three outcomes with a ﬁxed exchange
rate regime, high capital mobility and an independent monetary policy. Under the misguided
inﬂuence of the ofﬁcial community in Washington, many emerging market countries, which
had ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regimes, opened up their economies to high capital mobility
at the same time they sought to maintain some degree of monetary independence. Looked at
from this perspective, the result was inevitable.
Maintaining a ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regime within a world of high capital mobility
requires a considerable degree of economic discipline given that the transmission mechanism
for restoring imbalances to the equilibrium of the balance of payments cannot be the exchange
rate but instead must be the real economy. Furthermore, global ﬁnancial markets must be
convinced that the monetary authority of this ﬁxed exchange rate regime will hold the line come
what may. In the case of Asia, countries like Thailand, Indonesia and Korea were ultimately
either unwilling or unable to maintain that discipline. Interestingly, China, Hong Kong and
Taiwan were all able to weather the storm, not least because they upheld the principles of the
Mundell–Fleming rule. In the case of China and Taiwan, both had monetary independence and
a ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regime (Taiwan’s cannot be called a freely ﬂoating exchange
rate regime by any stretch of the imagination), but maintained signiﬁcant restrictions on capital
mobility. In the case of Hong Kong, on the other hand, it had very high capital mobility and
a ﬁxed exchange rate regime in the form of a self-balancing currency board, but its monetary
authority, at least in theory, abandoned monetary independence in favour of following the
monetary policy of its peg currency, namely that of the Federal Reserve. Granted, Hong Kong,
China and Taiwan perhaps had both greater resolve and ability to resist speculative pressures,
but the structure of their exchange rate regimes was crucially more secure. As the example
of Argentina shows in 2002, following this two-but-not-three model is not a guarantee of
success. However, one could well say that not following it is more or less a guarantee of
failure.
1.4.2 A Floating Exchange Rate Regime
Under a ﬂoating exchange rate regime, we have to consider the capital account as well as the
current account. Here, as national income rises, so import demand rises, in turn causing the
current account balance to deteriorate. So far, this is just like the ﬁxed exchange rate regime.
However, in the case of the ﬂoating exchange rate regime, the exchange rate is able to be the
transmission mechanism for restoring the balance of payments to equilibrium. On the capital
account side, a rise in national income, causing the current account balance to deteriorate,
must be accompanied by a rise in real interest rates. The higher real interest rate will dampen
import demand, which will in turn cause the current account balance deterioration to reverse.
As that happens, national income will fall back, causing real interest rates also to fall back.
If we start off with national income falling, we achieve the same transmission mechanism,
only in reverse, with real interest rates falling, causing capital account outﬂows and current

Fundamental Analysis

37

account balance improvement to the extent that these developments cause on the one hand
a revival in domestic demand and on the other a loss in export competitiveness. Thus, the
current account improvement reverses and real interest rates rebound. We can express this
transmission mechanism from a change in national income through the balance of payments
within a ﬂoating exchange rate regime with the following diagram:
Change in national income → Change in current account balance → Change in real
interest rates → Change in capital ﬂows → National income change reversed → Current
account reversed → Capital ﬂows reversed → Real interest rates reversed → Balance of
payments equilibrium restored

1.4.3 The External Balance and the Real Exchange Rate
Similar to the Balance of Payments Approach to exchange rates is that which focuses on
the relationship between a long-term equilibrium value for the real exchange rate and the
external balance. Under this, the long-term equilibrium exchange rate is that which generates
both internal and external balance, where internal balance is deﬁned as full employment and
external balance as the current account. Since the creation of this model, the emphasis has
shifted away from focusing on full employment to concentrating on achieving a sustainable
current account balance — not necessarily zero — which will achieve a perceived economic
and exchange rate equilibrium.
As with the Balance of Payments Approach, the current account is seen as the transmission
mechanism for the exchange rate, albeit this time under both ﬁxed and ﬂoating exchange rate
regimes. If the current account balance is showing an unsustainably high deﬁcit relative to
historic deﬁcit levels, this will require a real exchange rate depreciation to restore equilibrium.
Conversely, if it is showing a very high current account surplus, this will require a real exchange
rate appreciation to restore equilibrium.
The example that is often used with regard to this is Japan, which has had a structurally high
current account surplus. Using the external balance approach, if that current account surplus
is seen as unsustainably high relative to historical norms, it requires a rise in the yen’s real
exchange rate to restore equilibrium. Barring periodic reversals, this is what we saw from 1971
to 1995. Since then, the yen has reversed course, not least because the strengthening of the
nominal yen exchange rate to a record dollar–yen low of 79.85 caused such a real shock to the
current account balance that it in turn required a signiﬁcant real exchange rate depreciation to
restore equilibrium once more.
Within the emerging markets, another good example is that of Russia. Before the Russian
rouble crisis of August 1998, Russia continued to record signiﬁcant current account deﬁcits.
The external balance approach suggested that at some point a real exchange depreciation would
be required to restore equilibrium. However, the Russian rouble was pegged to the US dollar
and in order to maintain that peg real interest rates were kept high. Eventually, the costs of
defending the Russian rouble peg — yet another case of trying to have all three of monetary
independence, reasonably high capital mobility and a ﬁxed exchange rate regime — proved
too much and the rouble was de-pegged and devalued, and for good value Russia defaulted on
its domestic debt.
