
Exercising the option
You can exercise an option any time prior to its expiration date, as long as
you’re trading in American-style options. You don’t have to wait until the
exercise date to exercise an American-style option. (Some option contracts
sold in the United States are European-style, which can be exercised only on
the expiration date.) Exercising an option means:
✓ Buying the underlying asset when you own a call
✓ Selling the underlying asset when you own a put

299

300 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
In general, call options are exercised only when the trader plans to hold the
underlying asset, and put options are exercised only when the trader owns
the underlying asset and wants to sell it. Option traders are more likely to
realize any gains or losses by closing their option positions rather than exercising them.

The Risks of Trading Options and Futures
Trading in options and futures is risky business, and regulations governing those trades are stringent, even with regard to allowing you to open an
account. Before opening an account for you, a broker must provide you with
a disclosure document that describes the risks involved in trading futures
and options contracts. The document gives you the opportunity to determine whether you have the experience and financial resources necessary to
engage in option trading and whether option trading is appropriate for meeting your goals and objectives.
Topics that must be covered in the disclosure statement include the risks
inherent in trading futures contracts or options and the effect that leveraging
your account can have on potential losses or gains. The statement also must
include warnings about trading futures in foreign markets, because those
types of trades carry additional risks from fluctuations in currency exchange
rates and differences in regulatory protection.
Commodities options and futures also can be risky, because many of the factors that affect their prices are totally unpredictable, such as the weather,
labor strikes, inflation, foreign exchange rates, and governmental policies.
Because positions in futures and options are so highly leveraged, even a
small price movement against your position can result in at least the loss of
your entire premium payment and possibly even much greater liability for
additional losses.
After you begin trading options and futures, you can’t close your account
until all open positions are closed, if, that is, you’re trading through an
account with a commodities exchange. This restriction does not apply to
options traded in a stock brokerage account. Any accruals on futures contracts are paid out daily. Any funds in your margin account that are beyond
your required margin or account-opening requirements can be withdrawn,
but other such funds have to remain in the account until all your positions
are closed. Any restrictions on the withdrawal of your funds are stated in the
original disclosure document. Be sure that you understand those restrictions
before committing your funds.

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
After opening your account, your broker usually mails or emails confirmation
of all purchases and sales, a month-end summary of transactions that show
any gains or losses, and an evaluation of your open positions and current
account values. You need to be able to get information from your broker on a
daily basis after you begin to trade.
Brokers are required to segregate any money you deposit in your account
from the brokerages’ own funds. The amount that is segregated either
increases or decreases depending on the success of your trades. Even if the
brokerage firm segregates your funds, you still may not be able to get all your
money back if the brokerage firm becomes insolvent and is unable to cover
all the obligations to its customers. In other words, the money you put into
your brokerage account is not insured.
Whenever problems with your broker arise and you can’t resolve them without help, you have several dispute-resolution options. You can contact the
reparations program of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
and ask for an industry-sponsored arbitration, or you can take your broker to
court. Before deciding how you want to proceed, you must consider the costs
involved with each option, the length of time it may take to resolve the problem, and whether you want to contact an attorney. You can get more information about dispute-resolution alternatives by contacting the CFTC at www.
cftc.gov/customerprotection/redressandreparations/index.htm,
or by calling 202-418-5250.

Minimizing Risks
In a nutshell, the best way to minimize the risks of derivatives trading is
to take the time to find out as much as you can about the inherent risks of
the derivatives you’re trading and how others have dealt with them. The
first step you can take is to check out the firms or individuals with whom
you plan to trade. All firms and individuals that offer to trade options or
futures must be registered with the CFTC (www.cftc.gov) and be members of the National Futures Association (NFA — www.nfa.futures.org).
You can check out firms and individuals online at the NFA site by using its
Background Affiliation Status Information Center (BASIC). On BASIC, you’ll
find the status of the firm or individual and any disciplinary actions taken by
the NFA, the CFTC, or any U.S. exchanges.
Next be sure that you’re familiar with the firm’s commission charges and how
they’re calculated. Compare one firm’s quotes with those of other firm you’re
considering. Whenever a firm has unusually high commission charges, ask
for a detailed explanation for the higher charges and what additional services
justify the higher cost.

301

302 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Always make sure that you calculate the break-even price for any option
you’re thinking about purchasing, because you have to know at what point
the option you’re planning to buy will be profitable and whether the data
you’ve collected justifies the option’s premium costs.
You also need to understand the market for the underlying asset of the
option or future you plan to buy and what can impact the market price of
that asset. Be sure that your expectations for the potential profits from the
option or futures contract you choose are reasonable.
You don’t ever want to buy an option without first coming to a full realization
that you can lose the entire value of your trade. If you want to take the riskier
position as an option writer, be sure you can accept the possibility that your
losses may exceed the premium you initially received for the option. Option
writing comes with the potential of unlimited losses, as does futures trading.
Just as with stock trading, you can limit your losses by carefully setting your
risk limits before you start to trade. Don’t let yourself get caught up in the
emotions of futures and options trading. Develop a plan before you buy that
first option or future and stick with that plan, and be sure to diversify your
holdings not only by asset types but also by time of expiration.
After you determine how much capital you want to put into trading derivatives, make sure that you know how much you can afford to lose on just one
trade to be able to stay in business. You don’t want to overexpose your cash
position on one trade and risk the possibility that you won’t have the money
you need when the next opportunity comes along. By exposing your capital to
a variety of markets, you also have a better chance that some of your trades
will end up succeeding — how bad can that be?
Be wary of firms that lead you to believe you can make lots of money trading options or futures with very little risk. That’s never true. If a firm is using
high-pressure tactics to get you to trade, that’s a sure sign of a problem, so
don’t allow yourself to be rushed into a trading decision. If you aren’t being
given enough time to construct your own fundamental and technical analyses
before you make a purchase, walk away from the deal.
The risks associated with trading futures and options can be more than you
initially paid for the trade, so be careful out there! We’ve given you an overview of the options and futures trading arena, but before you jump in, be sure
you get significantly more training.

Chapter 19

Going Foreign (Forex)
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding foreign exchange markets
▶ Using money market instruments
▶ Trading with money
▶ Discovering risks of money trading

T

rading money in the global markets can be a great way to make more of
it, but beware that it also can be a lesson in how to lose money quickly.
More than $4 trillion is traded every month on the foreign currency exchange
(Forex), and yet no centralized headquarters or formal regulatory body exists
for this form of trade. London is the main trading center, but New York,
Tokyo, Hong Kong, and Singapore are important trading centers as well.
Foreign currency exchange is regulated through a patchwork of international
agreements between countries, most of which have some type of regulatory
agency that controls what goes on within their respective borders. Thus, the
foreign currency exchange actually is a worldwide network of traders who
are connected by telephone and computer screens.
Although more international policing of money trading has occurred in
recent years, authorities have had some successes exposing scams and
frauds that victimize traders, especially newer ones. So if you want to try
this wild world of trading, you need to be wary and not depend entirely on
what we discuss here in this chapter. Sure, we explain the workings of foreign
exchange markets and how the language of the Forex and its risks are unique,
but you need to do a whole bunch more training before you ever consider
entering this extremely risky trading arena.

304 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Exploring the World of Foreign
Currency Exchange
If you’ve ever traveled outside the United States, you’ve probably traded in
a foreign currency. Every time you travel outside your home country, you
have to exchange your country’s currency for the currency used in the country you’re visiting. If you’re a U.S. citizen shopping in England, and you see a
sweater that you want for £100 (100 pounds — the pound is the name of the
basic unit of currency in Great Britain), you’d need to know the exchange
rate. In January 2008, for example, the rate was $1.4515 U.S. for £1 (one
pound). So a £100 sweater would cost you $145.15 in U.S. dollars.
We include this example here to show you how foreign currency exchange
is used by the average shopper, but foreign currency traders trade much
larger sums of money thousands of times a day. The majority of trades take
place in three main centers of currency trading — the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Japan. The rest of the trading takes place primarily
in Singapore, Switzerland, Hong Kong, Germany, France, and Australia. The
United Kingdom manages the largest share — about 32 percent. The United
States is second with 18 percent, and Japan is third with 8 percent.
Currency trading is ongoing, 24 hours a day, with some countries just getting
started as others are finishing up their business day. For example, when the
trading day opens at 8 a.m. in London, the trading day is ending for Singapore
and Hong Kong. When New York opens its trading doors, it’s already 1 p.m. in
London. Thus, traders must be alert around the clock, because a major event
at an off hour anywhere in the world can shake the markets at any time.
Individual trades in the range of $200 million to $500 million are not uncommon. In fact, the U.S. Federal Reserve estimates that approximately $3.2 trillion dollars are traded every month. In fact, estimates indicate that quoted
price changes occur as frequently as 20 times per minute, and the most
active currency rates can change as many as 18,000 times in a single day,
according to the Federal Reserve.

Types of currency traders
Traders can be grouped into one of four basic types — bankers, brokers, customers, and central banks. Each plays a different role in the foreign currency
exchange market.

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)
✓ Bankers, banks, and other financial institutions do the lion’s share of
trading. They make profits buying and selling currency to each other.
Approximately two-thirds of all Forex transactions involve banks dealing
directly with each other.
✓ Brokers or dealers sometimes act as intermediaries between the banks,
helping them, or other traders looking for a good deal, find out where
they can get the best currency trade. Buyers and sellers like working through brokers or dealers, because they can trade anonymously
through intermediaries. Brokers make profits on currency exchanges by
charging a commission for the transactions they arrange.
✓ Customers, which primarily are major companies, trade currency so
they can operate globally or invest internationally. For example, if a U.S.
car manufacturer buys parts from a manufacturer in Japan, then the U.S.
car manufacturer needs to buy and pay for the parts in Japanese yen.
Companies that trade currencies regularly have their own trading desks,
while others conduct their currency trading through brokers or banks.
✓ Central banks, like the U.S. Federal Reserve, that act on behalf of their
governments, sometimes participate in the Forex market to influence the
value of the currencies of their respective countries. For example, if the
Federal Reserve believes the dollar is weak, it may buy dollars and even
encourage central banks of other countries to do the same in the Forex
market, to boost, or increase, the value of the dollar.

Why currency changes in value
Among the many factors that impact the value of a nation’s currency are
✓ Business cycles
✓ Political developments
✓ Changes in tax laws
✓ Stock market news
✓ Inflationary expectations
✓ International investment patterns
✓ Policies adopted by governments and central banks
Traders must monitor all these potential factors so they can stay on top of
political or economic changes that impact the value of the currencies they
hold. Currency trading, like other forms of trading, is affected by the basic
economic principle of supply and demand. When a whole bunch of one type
of currency is available for sale, the market can be flooded with it, and the

305

306 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
price of that currency drops. When the supply of currency is low and the
demand for it is high, then the value of that currency rises. Governments
influence the value of their respective currencies by flooding the market
whenever they want the value to fall or making the supply scarce (by buying
their own currency) whenever they want the value of their currencies to rise.

What traders do
Currency traders look for a currency that offers the highest return with the
lowest risk. For example, if a nation’s financial instruments, such as stocks
and bonds, offer high rates of return with relatively low risk, then traders
who are foreign to that nation want to buy that currency, thus increasing
the demand. Currency is also in demand when its country is going through a
growth segment in its business cycle highlighted by stable prices and a wide
range of goods and services available for sale. Forex traders who speculate
on the values of currencies to earn their keep look for specific signs to indicate when exchange rates may change, including the following:
✓ Political instability: Unrest in a country drives up demand for currency
in safer markets, such as U.S. dollars, as speculators race to find safe
havens.
✓ Rising interest rates: Higher interest rates encourage foreign investments in countries where native investors are seeking better rates of
return than they can get at home.
✓ Economic reforms: Economic reforms in developing countries may
help improve their currencies. As a result, investors see new opportunities for investing in the currencies of those successfully developing
countries.
Traders try to predict these moves in advance, so they can get in or out of
a currency before others. Correctly guessing where a currency is going and
taking a position in that currency at the beginning of the trend can mean
huge profits for a trader. Traders make money either by buying the currency
at a lower price and then selling it later at a higher price or by selling their
holdings in currencies of other countries at higher prices before they have
time to react negatively to improvements in the first currency. After the markets for their original holdings fall, they simply reestablish positions in them
at bargain prices.
When a trader purchases a large amount of a particular currency, then he or
she is long on the currency. Conversely, when a trader sells a large amount of a
currency, then he or she is short on the currency.

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)
The Forex market is dominated by four currencies, which account for 80
percent of the market — the U.S. dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen, and
the British pound. These currencies always are liquid, which makes finding
someone willing to buy or sell any of them easy for traders. Other currencies
are not as liquid, and as is true with the stocks of small companies, you’re
sometimes unable to find any buyers or sellers when you’re ready to trade
for the currency of a smaller country. Currencies of developing countries are
softest, usually facing lower demand than the currencies of developed countries. Soft currencies at times can be difficult to convert.

Understanding Money Jargon
The world of foreign currency exchange has a unique language of its own.
Prices are quoted two ways, meaning that when one trader talks price with
another, they state their respective prices in terms of what exchange rate
they’ll pay to buy it and what they’ll take when selling it. Bid and ask price
differences, or spreads, usually are stated in pips or hundredths of a currency
unit. Spreads normally are no more than ten pips.
Pips are the smallest incremental price movement permitted in the currency
market. Although most transactions deal in thousands or millions of dollars,
yen, euro, or other currencies, and a one-cent spread can equal thousands of
dollars, most currency price quotes nevertheless are extended out four decimals (1.5432, for example). Many times traders quote only the last two digits,
or the small numbers, such as 32 exchange for 22, because the incremental
changes are so small only the last two digits matter.
As a trader, you need to think in terms of the host currency when receiving a quote for direct exchange, which would be an exchange based on the
value of the host country’s currency. For example, quotes given to traders
on the CME Group (formerly three separate exchanges: Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, Chicago Board of Trade, and NYMEX) are based on the U.S. dollar,
because it’s the host currency for the CME Group. You can see how that
exchange works at www.cmegroup.com. Quotes for indirect exchange are
just the opposite. They’re based on the foreign currency for which you are
seeking a trade rather than on the host currency. For example, if you’re in
the United States and receive an indirect price quote, you’d be getting a
price based on buying a set amount of foreign currency in exchange for U.S.
dollars. Most exchanges take place on the interbank market — currency
exchanges among the world’s banks — and are based on the U.S. dollar. The
one exception to the rule is the British pound sterling.

307

308 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Traders use three different types of trades to exchange currency. They’re
known as spot, forward, and option transactions.

Spot transactions
Spot transactions account for about a third of all Forex transactions and
involve trades in which two traders agree on an exchange rate and then trade
currencies based on that rate. These transactions usually start with one
trader calling another and asking for a price on a particular type of currency
without specifying whether he or she wants to buy or sell. The trader on the
receiving end of the call gives the caller a two-way price — one if he or she
wants to buy and the other one if he or she wants to sell. If they agree to do
business, the two exchange their respective currencies.

Forward transactions
Forward transactions are used when traders want to buy or sell currency at
some agreed-upon date in the future. A buyer and a seller set an exchange
rate for the transaction, and the transaction occurs at the set price at the
appointed time regardless of what the current market price is for the currencies. Forward transactions can be only a few days or even years in the future,
although most futures contracts are for 30, 60, or 90 days. The two types of
forward transactions are futures and swaps.
✓ Futures: Futures are forward transactions that have standard contract
sizes and maturity dates. These types of transactions are traded on an
exchange set up for this purpose.
✓ Swaps: A swap, the more common type of forward transaction, is a private contract through which two parties exchange currencies for a specific length of time and then agree to reverse the transaction at a later
date, which is set at the time of the initial contract.
The risk that traders take in using forward transactions is that market rates
can change, turning the contract to which they’ve just agreed into a losing
trade. They still have to fulfill the contract at the fixed price, because after
the contract is signed the price cannot be revised.
Companies that place orders for products from foreign firms usually use this
type of transaction so they can lock in an exchange rate at some time in the
future when their orders are ready. Companies placing these orders don’t
want to lay out the cash upfront to exchange currencies, but they nevertheless want to be able to budget set amounts for their purchases. As such,

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)
they’d rather risk missing a better rate for the currency exchange in the
future than a major shift in the price of the product (perhaps brought on by
a currency shock) that’s going to end up costing them much more than they
intended to pay.

Options
Option contracts were added to the Forex world to give traders a bit more
flexibility than a forward transaction affords them. Like forward transactions,
the owner of an option contract has the right to either buy or sell a specified
amount of foreign currency at a specified rate up to a specified date. The big
difference with option contracts is that traders who hold a contract are not
obligated to fulfill the transaction. They can, instead, simply decide to let it
expire.
Option buyers have to pay for the right to buy or sell these transactions
on or before a specified date. The set price at which the currencies are
exchanged is called the strike price. When the date for the exchange arrives,
the option holder determines whether the strike price is favorable. If it is,
the option owner completes the transaction and earns a profit, but if it isn’t
favorable, the option owner allows the option to expire and absorbs the
cost of purchasing the original option, which is less of a loss than actually
exchanging the currencies. The two types of options currency traders deal
with are
✓ Call options, which are options to buy currency at some set price in the
future
✓ Put options, which are options to sell currency at some set price in the
future
For example, suppose a trader purchases a six-month call option on one million euros at an exchange rate of 1.39 U.S. dollars to the euro. During that sixmonth period, the trader can (has the option to) either purchase the euros at
the $1.39 rate, buy them at market rate, or do nothing at all. As market rates
for currencies fluctuate, options in those currencies can be sold and resold
many times before the expiration date. Companies operating overseas use
options as insurance against major unfavorable market shifts in the exchange
rate and thus avoid locking their companies into guaranteed exchanges.
Trades are made using various currency symbols that are similar to the ones
you need to know for stocks when seeking price quotes. Some of the more
common currency symbols are listed in Table 19-1.
