
304 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Some people confuse investing with day trading, though, and these two
disciplines are not the same. I list tons of information on the differences in
Chapter 4, but here’s the condensed version: Day trading involves rapid
buying and selling of securities to take advantage of small movements in
prices. This can be a successful strategy for part of your investment account,
but day trading with all your money is not a good idea.
Buying and selling securities on your own without being a day trader
is entirely possible. And if you don’t know another good term for “selfemployed person managing her own money,” just tell people you run your
own hedge fund. You’ll get better tables at restaurants that way.

You Love Fundamental Research
Fundamental research, discussed in Chapter 7, is the process of analyzing a
company to see how good its business is and what the company’s securities
are worth. Fundamental analysts crunch numbers, build forecasts, check out
products, and look for stocks that are going to do well over the long term.
They dream of uncovering the next Google or the next Walmart and holding
the stock all the way up.
Fundamental research is antithetical to day trading. Day traders look for
profit opportunities in short-term price movements. They often do not know
what industry a company is in, nor do they care. If you love the
fundamentals, you’re probably too analytical to be a good day trader.

You’re Short on Time and Capital
Getting started in day trading is a lot like buying a small business. It takes
commitment of both time and of money. If you don’t have enough time, learning technical patterns is difficult. If you don’t have the money, you won’t be
able to work through rough cycles. And there will be rough cycles. That’s day
trading’s only sure thing.
Some day traders are able to trade part time. If you are disciplined, you can be
successful as a part-time trader. The key is to close out your positions at the
end of your designated trading period as though the market day were ending.
If your plan is to trade for two hours a day, then trade for two hours a day and
no more. Use an alarm clock as your personal trading bell.

Chapter 19: Ten or So Good Reasons to Avoid Day Trading

You Like Working As Part of a Group
A decade ago, most large cities had day trading offices, called trading
arcades, where traders could go each day to buy and sell securities. The big
advantage these firms offered was high-speed Internet access. Now almost
everyone can get high-speed Internet access at home, so there’s little need
for day traders to go elsewhere, and most of these offices are closed.
Working at home is great for some people. If you prefer camaraderie during
the day, like the support of a team, and want friendly faces around you,
you’re likely to be miserable day trading. It’s just you and the market, and the
market doesn’t have a great sense of humor.

You Can’t Be Bothered with the Details
of Running a Business
Day traders are small-business people, and their entrepreneurial flair goes
beyond making their own buy and sell decisions. They also buy equipment,
shop for supplies, and maintain careful income tax records. To some, this is
exhilarating. No more mean office manager who decides how many and what
kind of pens must be used. No more going through hoops and bringing in letters from a doctor to get a fancy ergonomic chair. You’re the boss, and if you
want it, you can have it.
But to others, all this responsibility is overwhelming. Picking out pens?
Creating backup procedures? Worrying about accounting software? It’s too
much. If the mere thought of standing at the office-supply store gives you the
heebie-jeebies, you may want to consider trading as an employee rather than
trading for your own account.

You Crave Excitement
Trading seems so exciting. You’ve seen the stereotypical picture of the people
on the floor at the Chicago Board of Trade, wearing bright-colored jackets
and loud ties, screaming and waving their arms. It gets my blood running to
just think about it. Of course, they were probably shouting out coffee orders
and waving their arms in a debate over the Cubs versus the Sox. And anyway,
floor trading is mostly obsolete. Most of the large stock, bond, and derivative
exchanges have gone through mergers and reduced the square footage of
their trading floors because of changes in how people trade. Nowadays, most

305

306 Part IV: The Part of Tens
traders sit in offices in front of computer screens. They have to stay focused
on the little blips in front of them, and it can be deathly dull. Some days few,
if any, opportunities come up to trade using your system.
If you crave excitement and have trouble staying focused, you may find that
day trading is too boring for you. It can involve intense stress with few
opportunities to work it off during the day.

You’re Impulsive
With the frenzy of trades and the rapid-fire decisions involved, day trading may
seem like a perfect career for an impulsive person. It’s all about instinct, about
acting on your hunches, about pulling the trigger and seeing what happens.
Right? Uh, no. To be a good day trader, you have to trust your trading system
more than your hunches. Sometimes you’ll make trades when it doesn’t seem
right and you’ll sit out periods even though you are itching to get in. Good day
traders are quick thinkers, but they do think. If you like to act now and deal
with the consequences later, day trading isn’t a good idea for you.

You Love Going to the Casino
Do you get a big rush out of gambling? Do you love trying to beat the odds?
Does day trading seem just like a visit to Vegas without the airfare? Then you
shouldn’t be day trading. Unlike at a casino, no one is going to give you free
drinks or Celine Dion tickets in exchange for your massive losses.
A lot of traders like to gamble. Every trader has some crazy story about playing Liar’s Poker using the serial numbers on dollar bills instead of with cards,
or about a friend of a friend who bet on whether the person walking in front
of him would turn right or left. And that’s fine, if they keep their gambling in
perspective and bet no more than they can afford to lose.
Trading isn’t necessarily gambling, but it can be, especially if you get carried
away with the market and don’t stick to your trading and money-management
systems. But remember this: In gambling, the odds always favor the house.
When you cross the line, you hand your profit potential over to someone else.
The line between day trading and gambling is thin. Check the questions at
www.gamblersanonymous.org/ga/content/20-questions to see
whether you may have a gambling problem. Substitute day trading for gambling and see what you come up with. And by all means, get help if you have a
problem. Don’t take up day trading.

Chapter 19: Ten or So Good Reasons to Avoid Day Trading

You Have Trouble Setting Boundaries
Successful day traders are disciplined. They have set trading hours that they
stick to and set systems they use to plan trades and manage their money.
They took the time to carefully test their trading strategy (see Chapter 16
for more on how you can do that). They understand that if they don’t have
a system and manage their risk, they are more likely to become one of those
numerous day traders who lose everything early on.
The whole idea behind day trading is that you limit risk by closing out your
positions at the end of the day. The financial markets are global, though, so
in theory, the trading day never ends. If you have a hard time turning off the
lights at the end of the day, you may not be the best day trader. If you resent
rules, you may rebel against the rules that you’ve set for yourself.
Good day traders know that they are cut out for day trading before they even
begin. They’ve taken the time to assess how their personality and psychological makeup mix with the demands of the job. And one key trait is discipline.

You Want to Get Rich Quick
Day traders look for short-term profit opportunities, so it follows that day
trading leads to big, fast profits, right? Wrong. Day traders make money by
collecting a large number of small profits. Those who make money usually do
it through patience and persistence. Yeah, one or two day traders out there
may have managed to make a killing in a week, but they’re the exception.
Research shows that 80 percent of day traders lose their capital and are gone
from the business within one year. Instead of getting rich, you are more likely
to go broke quick from day trading. If you don’t like those odds, try something
else with your money.

The Guy on the Infomercial Said It
Would Work
A lot of money can be made in day trading, but sometimes it seems like more
money is made selling day-trading training systems. Some of these systems
are heavily marketed, even through television infomercials. The sales pitch
makes day trading seem like an easy, safe, fun way to make money using your

307

308 Part IV: The Part of Tens
own smarts. These commercials leave out pesky details about researching
and testing systems, high levels of risk, and the pressure trading can place on
a person. And the wash-sale rule (it’s a tax thing; refer to Chapter 15) is never
mentioned.
Day trading is great for some people. But like anything, if it sounds too good
to be true, it probably is. Don’t let a strong-arm sales pitch cost you your
hard-earned money.

Chapter 20

Ten Common Day-Trading
Mistakes
In This Chapter
▶ Avoiding other people’s trading mistakes
▶ Steering clear of psychological and preparation mistakes

D

ay trading is tough. Many popular markets are zero-sum games, meaning that for every winner, there’s a loser. Other markets, such as the
stock market, have a positive bias, meaning they have a tendency to increase
in value over time, but you may rarely see big moves in any one day. And the
whole point of day trading is to close your positions each night. Most day
traders lose money, in part because they make obvious, avoidable mistakes.
This list of ten mistakes can help you avoid the most serious ones. Avoiding
these mistakes is no guarantee that you’ll make money trading, but it can
certainly reduce your risk and improve your odds. And that’s half the battle.

Starting with Unrealistic Expectations
Most day traders lose money. Some research shows that 80 percent of day
traders wash out in the first year. Brokerage firms that deal with day traders
are constantly figuring out ways to attract new customers, because it is so
hard to retain the ones they have for the long term.
Yes, some traders make money. A few make a lot of money. But they are the
exception. Making money day trading is tough, making enough money to
cover the value of your time is even tougher. If you go into trading knowing
that it’s hard, that you should only risk money that you can afford to lose, and
that you need to think about it as a business, you’ll have a leg up on those
who think that they’ve found an easy way to make millions from the comfort
of their own home — and who are then stunned to discover they are broke.

310 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Starting without a Business
and Trading Plan
Trading is a business. When you decide to day trade, you are committing
capital to an entrepreneurial business with a high risk of failure. You are no
different from your brother-in-law who decided to open a sandwich shop
franchise, your neighbor who joined a startup company for little salary and
lots of equity, or your college buddy who has been trying to make a go of it as
a full-commission life insurance salesman. You are all out on your own, risking your capital in the hope of great success but knowing that many others
doing the same thing fail.
Successful businesses have business plans, and your trading business is no
different. You need to specify what you are going to trade, when you’re going
to trade, how you’re going to trade, and with how much money — before you
get started. You need to determine what equipment you need, what services
and training you want, and how you will measure your success. Chapter 2 can
help you with a business plan, and the rest of the book can help you fill in the
appropriate sections of it. Having the plan will keep your expectations in line
and create a professional starting point for your new trading venture.
You also need to supplement your business plan with a plan for your trading. How are you going to trade? What signals will you watch for? Under what
conditions will you enter a position, and under what conditions will you
close it? That’s your trading plan. Good traders have trading plans so that
they know exactly what they want to do when they see opportunities in the
market. This plan reduces the fear and doubt that can unsettle most traders,
and it heads off the panic that destroys more than a few. Read Part II of this
book for ideas on how to trade.
In addition, good trading plans have to be tested and evaluated. Chapter 16
has good information on testing and evaluation so that you have enough confidence in your system to follow it, even when the market gets squirrelly on you.
Failing to plan is planning to fail, as the cliché goes. You are risking too much of
your hard-earned money to skip careful upfront planning. Take responsibility
for your trading.

Ignoring Cash Management
Because financial markets can be volatile, you can easily get wiped out.
Good cash management can help you stay in the game. Because you never
commit all of your capital to any one trade, no one trade can shut you down.

Chapter 20: Ten Common Day-Trading Mistakes
At times — like when you know you’ve got a great idea — holding back some
cash may not seem right, but if you plan to trade for the long run, you need
to follow your money-management strategy. Otherwise, you’ll never be able
to get a winning trade that can offset your losses.
You need to have your wits about you to day trade, but you also need to have
capital. Chapter 6 has some great information on cash management, so don’t
skip it!

Failing to Manage Risk
Day trading is risky business, and most day traders quit because of losses.
(Have I told you that already?) Even traders who stick with it have many losing
trades. That’s why they have risk-management systems in place. Their trading
plans include stops, which automatically execute buy or sell orders when securities reach predetermined levels. (Stops are discussed in Chapter 2.)
The day trader looking for trouble places orders without thinking about how
much of a security to buy or sell at any one time, and she thinks that she’ll
just know when to sell. And then she second-guesses herself and finds herself
with bigger losses than she intended.
If you’re going to day trade, be safe. You know what the risks are (that’s why
you picked up this book), so use the protection offered by stops and sound
money management.
Most day traders lose money. Don’t risk money you can’t afford to lose, and
plan for the risks that you take.

Not Committing the Time and Money
to Do It Right
Day trading is a job. It’s a small-business endeavor that requires research and
training well in advance of the first trade. It’s not something you can squeeze
into an hour a day as a hobby. To do well, you need to set regular hours and
have enough money to generate reasonable returns without unreasonable risks.
Many people think day trading is something that they can easily enter into
and that they can generate profits while their kids are napping. That thinking
is a mistake. If you can’t dedicate the time necessary to study the markets
and understand how you react to them, you will have trouble staying in the
trading business.

311

312 Part IV: The Part of Tens
Day trading is a business of frequent trades with small percentage gains and a
high potential for loss. If you have days of losses, a small account will quickly
end up with too little money to meet minimum order sizes. Therefore, successful traders start with enough money to last through periods of drawdown
and are still able to generate meaningful dollar returns. Consider this:
A 1 percent return on $1,000 is equal to $10, but a 1 percent return on
$100,000 is $1,000.
If you have more money to begin with, the dollars you make from day trading
will seem more real to you. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and
the National Association of Securities Dealers define day traders in part as
customers with $25,000 in their accounts. If you have $25,000 you can afford
to lose, you are more likely to be a successful day trader than if you have only
$2,500 — and you’ll be considered to be a day trader, not a dilettante.
You are going to lose money. All day traders have bad days, and they are more
likely to lose money early in their trading careers before they get a feel for the
markets and their own reactions to it. If you have enough money when you
begin, you can consider these losses to be part of your apprenticeship.

Chasing the Herd
Everyone in the market is looking at the same data and the same technical indicators (like those discussed in Chapter 7). Good day traders follow
market trends but with the goal of being early or on time. Those who get in
late get crushed: They buy too high, or they sell too low. Chasing the herd is
tempting, because it’s so hard to watch the market move away from you.
Day trading requires quick reactions. It’s video games and psychology, some
people joke, because the trader who can figure out what others in the market
are doing and then click on the mouse button fastest has a huge advantage.
The trader who hesitates or goes along for the ride is likely to be ruined.
There’s no easy solution for this. It helps if you know that you are psychologically cut out for day trading (covered in Chapter 14) and have confidence in
the long-term performance of your trading system (covered in Chapter 16).
But to a big extent, you just have to have some experience in the markets to
know how your trading system matches what’s in your head.

Switching between Research Systems
Day traders lose money, at least part of the time. And losing money can cause
a day trader to lose trust in his trading system. And many do what seems
logical, which is move to a trading system that seems to be working. The

Chapter 20: Ten Common Day-Trading Mistakes
problem is that no system works all the time; if one did, everyone would use
it. And sometimes things look worst before they turn. By switching systems
whenever things look bad, the trader never learns the nuances of how a given
system works for him. And he’s likely to get stuck on another downtrend,
picking up the new system right when the old one starts to work again.
Markets go in cycles. No system works all the time, but if you panic and start
trying new things without doing a lot of upfront work, you’re likely to make
things worse. Chapter 16 covers performance evaluation and system testing
in great detail. The more you understand your system and how it works, the
less likely you are to be brought down by floundering around for new
systems all the time.
Bottom line: Anyone who has a magic trading system that works in all
markets is retired and living on a beach in Maui. Everyone else has to live
through a few rough stretches.

Overtrading
Because day traders don’t hold positions for long periods of time, they rarely
enjoy big and profitable price moves. Instead, they make money from lots of
transactions with small profits. They are crazy people, moving in and out for
short periods. But believe it or not, the day trader who trades too much loses
out. She won’t be in the market for large intra-day moves, and she’ll get killed
on commissions and other transactions costs.
As paradoxical as it seems, many day traders do better by making fewer
trades each day. That way, commissions and fees take a smaller bite of the
profit. One way to profit from fewer trades is with better money management,
discussed in Chapter 6. A trader who puts money to work appropriately can
often make more money than one who trades frenetically.

Sticking Too Long with Losing Trades
Day traders are often overcome with fear, doubt, greed, and hope. They are
afraid to recognize a loss. They wonder whether they’re good traders. They
don’t want to pay the commission to get out of the loser. And if the security
was a good buy at the higher price, it’s surely a better buy now that the price
has gone down. These traders think that if they just keep a positive mental
attitude, everything will work out all right in the end.
Good traders have systems in place to limit their losses. They use stop
orders (Chapter 2) to force themselves out of bad trades. They would rather
put the money to work on a good trade than stick out a bad one.

313

314 Part IV: The Part of Tens
The market doesn’t know your position; even if it did, it wouldn’t care.
Therefore, no amount of wishing and hoping will cause the market to reward
you for your patience. If a trade isn’t working, get out. As the man in the
musical sings, tomorrow is a latter day.

Getting Too Emotionally Involved
Trading is a stressful business. You’re up against an impersonal market that
moves seemingly at random (and many academics would say that it moves
truly at random). It involves money, which to some people is a way to keep
score in life and to others is their primary source of security. Losing trades
mean a loss of status and a loss of safety. It’s no wonder that so many traders
are head cases when the entire market sometimes seems to be conspiring
against you — you specifically.
The best traders are almost Zen-like in their lack of attachment to the market.
They are able to remove themselves from the frenzy of the trading day so
that they’re not susceptible to fear, doubt, greed, and hope. Chapter 14 has
some advice that can help you approach the trading day in a calmer manner.
Only you know whether you are capable of that.

Chapter 21

Ten Tested Money-Management
Techniques
In This Chapter
▶ Using simple techniques to limit losses
▶ Determining the right size to trade
▶ Finding statistics to plan trades
▶ Realizing the dangers of ignoring money management

T

he key to success in day trading is discipline. That starts with good
money management: determining how much money you will trade, when
you will cut your losses, and when you will walk away with money in your
pocket. If you don’t manage your money, you won’t be trading long.
Here, you get an overview of the key money-management techniques that
you should consider as well as one that is a very bad idea. Some of these
techniques are simple; no calculation is required, and you can use them right
away. Others involve a little workout with your calculator. A few of these
techniques need your performance history to work, so you can’t use them
right away, but you can experiment with them as you build your trade data.
(And yes, this is one of the many reasons that traders should keep records of
trading activity; see Chapter 16.)
These days, many brokers include money-management calculators and apps in
their trading systems, so you can enter the parameters that reflect your trading style and your account balance to get the right amount to trade, right away.
These calculators remove the guesswork and mystery associated with some of
these techniques — if you use them. Chapter 11 has more information.
