
 Rather strange, frankly, to me, to think of having a business that employs close to $4 billion of equity capital and not knowing exactly who is using what. 48 

 In the midst of the battle over bonuses, Jack Byrne’s son Patrick, a doctoral student in economics and philosophy at Stanford, stopped off to see Buffett, and the two had a long chat about motivation. Buffett encouraged young Byrne to question the dogma of his textbooks. People—at least some people—he maintained, were not the purely economic creatures depicted by economists. They could also be motivated by loyalty. 
 To put it mildly, this was less than obvious on Wall Street. People became investment bankers to make money. If you didn’t pay them they would leave. Nick Brady, himself a former investment banker, thought Buffett was out of his element: “It’s like running an opera. You’re dealing with people with big egos, with prima donnas. I don’t think he understood the business completely.” 49 
 Many shared this view, some adding the twist that Buffett was putting on his Midwestern morals for public relations purposes. Yet their criticism betrayed a level of discomfort that Wall Street had always felt with Buffett. Rub the critics deeply enough and they, too, were uneasy about their profession’s pay and overall behavior. The CEO of a major, nonpublic Wall Street competitor sarcastically remarked that Buffett “came in as Mr. Clean, the open-eyed boy from Omaha.” 

 The guy was anything but. He’s a canny, shrewd operator. But his attempt to rationalize pay was naïve. [Then a nervous giggle.] Some—a lot of it made sense. I agree, the compensation isn’t rational. I’d hate for my pay to be on a public proxy. [Another giggle.] He was quite right—you’ve got to run it like a business. 

 As Howie had predicted, people who had been waiting for the chance to take a shot at his father came out of the woodwork. Business Week , citing “lemons” such as Wells Fargo and Salomon (and omitting Coca-Cola), asserted early in 1992 that Buffett had lost his touch as an investor. 50 Three weeks later, Business Week decided that Buffett had also blown the job at Salomon. While acknowledging that he had, in fact, saved it, the magazine slammed him for “a series of mistakes.” He had embittered employees, backtracked on pay, killed the firm’s taste for risk, and, interestingly, was lacking in “leadership and trust.” 51 
 Some of the criticism was intensely personal. A Wall Street Journal profile played up Buffett’s mistress and implied that his folksy image was something of a fraud. 52 In this revisionist view, Buffett crafted his annual letters so as to deflect “tough questions”; he levitated his stock by manipulating his image; he owed his success to his nonpareil circle of contacts. The Journal , quoting Michael Price, a competing money manager, saw Buffett as “one of the biggest invisible market operators going, big arbitrages and all, getting better market information than anybody—and all people see is this homespun, down-to-earth guy.” 
 Buffett, who had been used to the press fawning over him, “was really upset” by the article, according to Peter, who added, “I was with him. He was obsessed with it.” Buffett wrote a letter to the Journal contesting numerous points in the article, but he was typically unwilling to show his hurt publicly and insisted that the letter not be published. 
 Next, Michael Lewis, the author of Liar’s Poker , smeared Buffett in The New Republic . 53 In “Saint Warren: Wall Street’s Fallen Angel,” Lewis charged Buffett with a series of investing and ethical flaws so all-encompassing that an unknowing subscriber might have supposed that he was reading of one of the century’s great swindlers—and one of its great failures, to boot. Lewis took the Efficient Market Theory as gospel and dismissed Buffett’s career as a run of lucky coin flips. That aside, “Fallen Angel” was rife with actual errors. * 
 Buffett was livid over the Lewis piece. Morey Bernstein, the author of The Search for Bridey Murphy and a Ben Graham devotee who had known Buffett casually, wrote Buffett a sympathetic note, damning Lewis’s article, apparently in profane terms. Buffett—ever careful with words—responded: “Morey—Thanks for the empathy re the Michael Lewis piece. He is everything you say he is.” 54 
 The interesting question is, what was Lewis’s gripe with Buffett? There is a clue in Liar’s Poker , and it reflects on Wall Street’s discomfort with Buffett as well. In the book, Lewis, describing his life as a young bond salesman, seems to celebrate his unloading of $86 million of unwanted Olympia & York bonds on a gullible client. Yet he admits to a hint of embarrassment over it. He has stuck his “best customer,” and one who trusted him, with bonds that Lewis “probably wouldn’t touch with a barge pole”—save for the “glory” that will redound to him at Salomon. 

 I knew it was awful. But I feel much worse about it now than I did at the time. 55 

 Now, the conclusion of his essay on Buffett: 

 You can frighten people into behaving themselves for a while. But in the long run he’s wrong.… Thus we arrive at what might be called Buffett’s Dilemma: the choice between doing good and making money. 

 In fact, it was Lewis who had made that choice. Buffett, under extremely trying circumstances, was attempting to do both. Buffett’s repeated exhortation—“Good profits simply are not inconsistent with good behavior” 56 —was a challenge to Lewis’s (and other cynics’) rationalizations. 
 By the time of Lewis’s piece, mid-February 1992, Salomon was in limbo. The stock had recovered to 30. Customers such as the World Bank and state pension funds had returned. The management had been overhauled, and Buffett was spending most of his time in Omaha. 
 But Salomon’s corporate business continued to bleed. Morale was suffering from speculation that Salomon was losing its core viability, and by rumors that Buffett was planning to return the firm to its bond-trader “roots” and close up everything else, such as its investment bank. One hundred employees defected in February alone. Of those who had been on the payroll in August, a third of the people in equities and a fourth of the bankers were gone. 57 Even Denis Bovin, who had been Buffett’s banker in his first dealing with Salomon, in the early seventies, and who had been a fan of Buffett’s personally, jumped to Bear Stearns. 
 As painful as such betrayals were, Buffett relentlessly insisted that Salomon was on track. When the dust settled, he maintained, Salomon would be stronger, in all areas, than ever. No one on the staff saw him waver, even in the slightest. This was Buffett’s essential virtue—the courage to stick to his course. Don Howard, the chief financial officer, said, “He conveyed to me that every problem was surmountable.” 
 Inwardly, it was killing him. Perhaps the most stressful aspect was that Buffett was not used to working with people who were not personally loyal to him. “It’s agony,” Munger said that spring. “It’s just bloody murder. Salomon is losing key employees even as we speak.” For as long as the Treasury case remained open, there was scant hope of stemming the tide. 
 IV—First Love 
 It had dawned on Buffett that the government was punishing Salomon by making it wait. He pleaded with the Treasury to bring the case to a head, though he was careful as always not to pressure anyone. “Take your shots,” he would say. “We just don’t want to bleed to death while you’re making up your mind.” 58 
 The Justice Department and the SEC were demanding that Salomon plead to a felony and pay $400 million in fines. Gary Naftalis, Salomon’s criminal lawyer, considered that to be shockingly stiff. Kidder Peabody, which Naftalis had defended in the 1980s, had paid only $25 million, and had not been charged with a crime, after Martin Siegel, its star deal-maker, had confessed to pervasive insider trading. All the government had on Salomon was phony bidding. (The more serious charge of manipulating the market in the squeeze had been dropped for lack of evidence.) 
 The boyish-looking Naftalis even kidded government lawyers about the case’s seeming smallness, remarking, “What baby died over this?” 
 An assistant U.S. attorney replied, “You lied to the government. That’s worse than insider trading.” 
 The decision was up to Otto G. Obermaier, the U.S. attorney in Manhattan. Unlike his predecessor, Rudolph Giuliani, who had handcuffed investment bankers in daylight, Obermaier was a legal scholar and thought to be dovish. But prosecutors live in a world of deterrents. Obermaier wanted a guilty plea. 
 As Naftalis and the U.S. attorney’s office began to negotiate, Naftalis realized that Buffett had presented him with a subtle weapon. In August, Buffett had promised to cooperate. In the government’s view, he had kept his word. If Obermaier were to prosecute Salomon now, Naftalis argued, Buffett’s openness would be seen as naïve. In effect, the prosecution would then deter not future crimes but future cooperation. Buffett had made his own behavior—not Mozer’s or Gutfreund’s—the issue in the case. 
 In April, as the case was nearing a climax, Naftalis played his ace. He, Denham, and attorney Ron Olson brought Buffett to the U.S. attorney’s office, a squat, brownish building by the federal courthouse, for a meeting with Obermaier. As this was to be Buffett’s show, the lawyers held their tongues. 
 Buffett began unassumingly, giving Obermaier a sense of his career. 59 He didn’t argue the case, and yet, like a country lawyer who may defend a man accused of murder by pointing out the upstanding nature of his client’s family, he was arguing it all the same. He sketched in the milestones in his relationship with Salomon—how it had once raised money for Berkshire, how it had continued to be his broker ever since, how Gutfreund had bailed out GEICO. In Buffett’s experience, Salomon was a proud firm, of which his own twenty-year tie to it was emblematic. Though not belittling the moral and financial depths to which Salomon had fallen at the hour of Gutfreund’s desperate call to him, Buffett argued that, in both senses, the firm had recovered. “The firm is totally different than it was in August,” Buffett insisted. 
 Obermaier asked just one question: how long would Buffett be around? 
 Now, Buffett talked about his philosophy of investing for the long term—of treating his companies like partners—as he had done in his early years and right through the rip-roaring eighties. He hadn’t just sucked the blood out; he had stuck with them. And now and in the future he would be on Salomon’s board, invested in the company and watching over it. As on the Sunday when he had pleaded with Brady—as in the entire Salomon episode—Buffett presented the case in personal terms. 
 Obermaier would insist that the facts were sufficient to indict. 60 Nonetheless, in May he announced that he would not bring charges. Concurrently, the various federal agencies announced a civil settlement with Salomon. To a man, the top officials had been personally won over. Powell, the assistant Treasury secretary, said, “I think every Salomon shareholder should have a little picture of Warren Buffett by their night table.” 61 
 The settlement cost Salomon $290 million (including $100 million set aside for private suits)—then the second-largest penalty ever levied against a U.S. securities firm. 
 The final SEC complaint detailed ten “extremely serious” bidding violations. Breeden gravely noted that he had issued four hundred subpoenas and taken thirty thousand pages of testimony to ferret them out. Yet the SEC had done more to prove Salomon’s integrity than its guilt. Its exhaustive probe had turned up no evidence of affirmative wrongdoing other than that by Mozer—the full extent of which Salomon had uncovered and disclosed itself. 
 In June, Buffett stepped down from the chairman’s post he had held for nine months. The stock was at 335⅝—25 percent higher than in August 1991. Buffett stunned the Street by picking Bob Denham, his tightlipped lawyer, to succeed him. 
 The bland, soft-spoken Texan was a Wall Street outsider whose loyalty was to Buffett, and whose mission would be to preserve Buffett’s reforms. Deryck Maughan would continue to run the business, but the power behind the throne was unchanged; it would be Buffett himself. 
 Having ridden into Salomon with fanfare, Buffett slipped away with none. Merely a note, scribbled by Bill McIntosh: 

 “I’m with Salomon” has always been said with pride, and thanks to you it will be for many years to come. 

 Buffett bought more stock in Salomon, raising Berkshire’s stake in it to 20 percent. After rising to 50, the stock fell sharply after Buffett’s purchase, but it remained above its high for the period that he had been chairman. 
 The Treasury market underwent modest reform. The Fed retained Salomon as one of its primary dealers, but post-scandal changes diluted the club’s importance. The wooden box at the Fed went the way of the horse and buggy. 
 Paul Mozer admitted that he had lied to the Treasury. He served four months in a low-security jail, paid $1.1 million in various fines, and was permanently banned from the securities business. 
 The SEC brought an action against Gutfreund for failing to supervise Mozer. He settled for a $100,000 fine and a stipulation that he would not run another securities firm. In exile, he grew bitter at what he considered his unjust railroading and at the loss of his social standing. His friendship with Buffett dissolved. In an ugly aftermath, Gutfreund brought a claim against Salomon for money and stock he said he was owed in severance, options, and bonuses—an amount that swelled with Salomon’s rising share price to $55 million. In an effort to hash it out, Gutfreund met Buffett and Munger, in California, and lost his temper with them. 62 An arbitration panel ruled against Gutfreund—leaving him with zero. 
 Gutfreund was commonly depicted as a managerial giant with an ethical flaw. Ironically, that was doubly off the mark. He was an upright but weak manager who built little of enduring value for stockholders. His procrastination over Mozer was simply one more management failure. 
 Salomon recouped some, though not all, of its market share in underwritings and rebuilt its staff. Though the swagger was gone, it made gains in investment banking and reestablished itself as a player in worldwide markets. 
 In the two years following the scandal, Salomon had record profits. Then, during the tumultuous bond market of 1994, it suffered wrenching losses. It was increasingly apparent that some of the damage from the scandal had lingered. The best of Meriwether’s former traders, including the talented Eric Rosenfeld, defected to join Meriwether in a new arbitrage venture. Salomon’s own arbitrage group was decimated. And, after a couple of years of sanity in the payroll, bonuses again exploded out of control, forcing Buffett to eat humble pie and again overhaul the compensation system—triggering a new round of defections. Salomon eventually returned to profitability, but as an investment for Buffett it was distinctly mediocre. In sum, the jury remained out on Buffett’s decision to rebuild the entire firm and to entrust it to a colorless administrator such as Maughan, rather than return Salomon to its bond trader “roots,” which had always been its strength. Moreover, Buffett had yet to answer Tisch’s question: who, if anyone, could replace Gutfreund as Salomon’s “risk-taker”? 
 When he stepped down, though proud of having rescued the firm, Buffett was rather eager to have the burden lifted. Peter spoke to him after the settlement and thought he sounded like a different person. Soon after, Warren and his wife flew into Buffalo for a Buffalo News picnic, where Warren stood for a pie-throwing contest. Then Stan Lipsey, the publisher, led Warren and Susie on a tour. It had just rained, and Lipsey turned to make sure that his guests were dodging the puddles and saw them walking arm in arm. They went through an old graveyard, where Warren gazed at the headstones, and to the foot of the Albright-Knox Art Gallery, where a jazz band was playing. After a while, Lipsey and Susie went to see the art, and a relaxed Warren stood on the steps, listening to the jazz. Then they met Lipsey’s girlfriend and the editor Murray Light and his wife for steaks—which Lipsey had ordered from Omaha. 
 Buffett was thrilled to get his life back. The Salomon escapade, he wrote, was “interesting and worthwhile,” but “far from fun.” 63 Now the sanctuary of Kiewit Plaza beckoned. To his shareholders, Buffett left no doubt: “Berkshire is my first love and one that will never fade.” 64 

 * Lewis said, “In the middle of 1988 [Buffett] broke with his strict rule of long-term investing and became an arbitrageur.…” In fact, Buffett had done arbitrage since 1954 and had often written of it. Lewis said Buffett had offered to finance the RJR Nabisco deal; in fact, he had refused to back it. Lewis, making light of Buffett’s disclaimer, said: “He even once suggested, in 1985, that his bogey was merely to outstrip the average returns of corporate America.” Buffett did not “suggest it once,” he had explicitly stated it in each annual report for years. Lewis said Buffett invested in bonds of RJR, “nearly … the largest bankruptcy in history.” That was true—but Buffett had invested after the bonds had fallen, and had made a killing on them.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

   Chapter 23 BUFFETT’S TROLLEY 

 Forecasts may tell you a great deal about the forecaster; they tell you nothing about the future . 
 W ARREN B UFFETT , B ERKSHIRE H ATHAWAY I NC ., 1980 A NNUAL R EPORT 

 Buffett’s moves of the early nineties may be quickly sketched. After the Soviet Union collapsed, there was talk of a peace without end, and defense stocks were cheap. Buffett scooped up 14 percent of General Dynamics at 11 a share. 1 Rather soon, a civil war raged in the former Yugoslavia, utopia was put on hold, and General Dynamics went to 59⅛. * 
 Buffett raised his stake in Wells Fargo. When the recession in real estate ended, the bank recovered. Its earnings soared, and Buffett’s much-maligned investment, acquired at an average of 62 a share, took wing to 216. 
 Buffett also bought big stakes in two familiar-type companies-Guinness, the distiller of Johnnie Walker and other consumer brands; and, most recently, newspaper empire Gannett. 
 Finally, Buffett bought three New England shoe manufacturers for about $600 million—a little-known but huge addition to Berkshire’s portfolio. H. H. Brown and Dexter Shoe, the two bigger companies, had resisted the onslaught of imports by adhering to Rose Blumkin work habits and by developing specific product niches, such as work shoes and outdoor shoes. Both were well-managed, family-style companies up Buffett’s alley. 
 Mrs. B herself made a détente with her grandsons and admitted publicly that she had made a mistake. Remarkably, she sold her new store to Berkshire for $5 million and returned to the fold. 2 At ninety-nine, she continued to work at the new locale, in charge of her own carpet business, seven days a week. “I am delighted that Mrs. B has again linked up with us,” Buffett reported happily. “Her business story has no parallel.” 3 
 Among Buffett’s other holdings, Gillette soared to 52⅛ and Coca-Cola climbed to 74¼, a quadrupling and near-septupling, each in six years’ time. † Gannett quickly surged 25 percent and Buffett cashed out Champion at a profit. 
 American Express fired Jimmy Robinson. True to form, Buffett ploughed another billion dollars into this old favorite. By the end of 1995, his investment was up 47 percent. 
 USAir’s total losses following Buffett’s investment mounted to $3 billion. In 1994, it suspended its preferred dividend to Berkshire. After an upturn the following year, Buffett decided to cut his losses and bail out. 
 None of these stocks moved as dramatically as Berkshire itself. In June 1992, when Buffett stepped down from Salomon, Berkshire was at $9,100. In November, it broke $10,000. Late in the year, Buffett redeemed Berkshire’s zero-coupon bonds—a signal that he thought the stock was cheap. During 1993, it was as if traded by the gods. By Valentine’s Day, Berkshire had risen to $12,400. It soared, like a messenger to Olympus, through spring and summer, whence it reached a peak of $17,800. Then it gave some ground and closed at $16,325. 
 The young man who had once put pinball machines in barbershops was proclaimed by Forbes to be the richest fellow in the land. 4 In 1994, Buffett relinquished the crown to the young Bill Gates. However, he did not exactly lose ground. Berkshire rose 25 percent (in a year in which the Standard & Poor’s 500 inched up 1 percent.) Then, during the euphoric bull market of 1995, Berkshire rose a phenomenal 57 percent. The stock, which Buffett had begun buying at precisely $7.60 a share, finished at the astonishing figure of $32,100. At that price, Buffett was worth $15.2 billion, surpassing Gates. 
 Over thirty-one years, his stock has appreciated at a rate of 27.68 percent a year, compounded. Over the same span, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, including dividends, has a growth rate of 10.31 percent a year, and the Standard & Poor’s 500 of 10.7 percent. 5 Put differently, if in 1965 one had put $10,000 into Berkshire and like amounts into the S&P 500 and crude oil, the Berkshire at year-end 1995 would have been worth $17.8 million, the S&P portfolio $224,000, and the crude oil $72,000. 
 If one tacks on the record of Buffett Partnership, Buffett has been doing it for four decades, without much leverage, without speculating or taking undue risks, and without suffering a single down year. 6 Although nay-sayers continue to greet his each new investment with a chorus that “this time” Buffett has finally blown it, no one else has a record over a similar span that compares. Arguably, no one is close. 
 Among history’s great capitalists, Buffett stands out for his sheer skill at evaluating businesses. What John D. Rockefeller, the oil cartelist, Andrew Carnegie, the philanthropic steel baron, Sam Walton, the humble retailer, and Bill Gates, the software nerd, have in common is that each owes his fortune to a single product or innovation. Buffett made his money as a pure investor: picking diverse businesses and stocks. 
 When he took over Berkshire, in 1965, the once-great yarn mill was fading. He redeployed its capital into insurance, candy, department stores (a mistake), banking, and media. These were followed by tobacco, soft drinks, razor blades, airlines (another mistake), and various whole businesses from encyclopedias to shoes. In sum, he built an industrial empire now worth $38 billion entirely from what miserable trickle of cash he could wrest from a dying textile mill, before that mill was sold for scrap. Though still run by a corporate staff of twelve, Berkshire, ranked by market value, is now the nineteenth-largest company in the United States, worth more than household names such as American Express, Citicorp, Dow Chemical, Eastman Kodak, General Mills, Sears Roebuck, Texaco, and Xerox. 7 
 Investors counting on Buffett to stay in orbit should keep in mind his perennial complaint about the burden of size. So far, it has not affected him. Over the last decade, Berkshire’s rate of appreciation has been a whisker better than Buffett’s overall rate of 29.2 percent. But the depressing truth is that allocating capital will get tougher as Buffett’s assets grow. 
 Also, the themes that have provided his biggest winners—consumer franchises and newspapers and television—could be getting long in the tooth. The societal trend toward discount, private-label shopping poses a real challenge to brand names. In 1994, Buffett discovered that Guinnesse’s well-known drinks were not so impervious to competition as he had figured—and he abruptly sold the stock, taking an estimated 15 to 20 percent loss. In the not-too-distant future, it is not unthinkable that Coca-Cola and Gillette, in which Buffett has much bigger investments, will face serious threats to their profit margins. 
 Similarly, if the futurologists are even partly right, newspapers and networks will have to contend with a proliferation of new outlets, and even with new forms, of news and entertainment. Though it is far too early to single out winners and losers, it is a good bet that once-safe media companies will find their “toll bridges” under attack. 
 Perhaps that helped to explain Buffett’s quick response to Michael Eisner, chairman of Walt Disney, in summer 1995. Buffett and Eisner were guests at investment banker Herb Allen’s annual retreat for entertainment moguls and family members in Sun Valley, Idaho. Eisner was packed and ready to leave the pristine resort, but on his way to the parking lot he bumped into Buffett and blurted out, “What do you think about selling ABC for cash?” 
 Buffett had sworn never to abandon Tom Murphy, his friend and the Cap Cities/ABC chairman. But Buffett’s instincts told him that Murphy, who had resisted such overtures in the past, might be ready, particularly if Eisner could be persuaded to pay in stock. And Buffett himself thought the company was ripe. Though still Cap Cities’ biggest shareholder, he had recently sold some of his stock at $63 a share. ‡ By the time he saw Eisner in Sun Valley, the stock, benefiting from a cyclical upturn in advertising, had vaulted to $102. 
 “Sounds good to me,” Buffett shot back. “Why don’t we talk to Murph?” Coincidentally, Buffett was on his way to play golf with Murphy and also with Bill Gates, and suggested that Eisner come along. 
 Murphy seemed unsure. But at the right price, the prospect of combining ABC’s network with Disney’s famous brand name and product line was irresistible. After the retreat, Eisner and Murphy, counseled as usual by Buffett, began to negotiate in earnest. Murphy’s main concern was that his own shareholders get a chance to participate going forward—what he called a “ticket on the horse race.” 
 Incredibly, they cut a deal in only two weeks. Disney would acquire Cap Cities/ABC for $19.5 billion—the second biggest deal in history, trailing only RJR Nabisco. Cap Cities shareholders—Berkshire included, of course—got $127 a share, seven times Buffett’s going-in price of 17¼. (As Murphy and Eisner had compromised and made it a part-stock, part-cash acquisition, Berkshire became a big investor in Disney, one of the best of Buffett’s early stocks in the 1960s.) Buffett’s total profit from investing with Murphy, long his favorite CEO, was just over $2.5 billion. 
 And Buffett had a big idea for what to do with his profit—to finally close the loop with GEICO, the investment that had bewitched him literally from the start of his career, in Ben Graham’s investment class. As a salesman starting out in his father’s brokerage, he had bought the stock for himself and touted it to customers. In 1951, the Commercial and Financial Chronicle had published Buffett’s write-up of GEICO next to a mug shot of the buttoned-down, cherubic twenty-one-year-old under the apt title “The Security I Like Best.” 8 By the 1980s, Berkshire owned half of GEICO. 
 Buffett had occasionally given thought to buying the rest, which traded publicly. But in the 1990s, GEICO had been a disappointment. Its success had been based on direct marketing to low-risk automobile drivers, but it had stumbled by going into new areas such as finance, home insurance, and aviation insurance. And William Snyder, the CEO who succeeded Jack Byrne, had bought a couple of insurance companies that weren’t direct marketers. Its profit slumped, due partly to Hurricane Andrew; worse, GEICO seemed to have lost its focus. 
 Buffett, plainly unhappy, aired his concern with two influential GEICO directors, Samuel Butler and Lou Simpson. 9 Buffett even said he was thinking of selling his stock—a comment certain to alarm them. Butler and Simpson, who had been worried about GEICO even before, now decided that Snyder should be eased out as CEO a year ahead of his planned retirement. Buffett backed them and Snyder did step aside. Buffett’s silent coup complete, GEICO began to reform itself to Buffett’s liking. It quickly moved to dump its unsuccessful and distracting sidelines and to put more capital into its core auto lines. 
 By 1994, Buffett was sufficiently pleased that he opened merger talks with Butler and Simpson. A year later—just after the Disney deal—Buffett struck again, agreeing that Berkshire would acquire the rest of GEICO for $2.3 billion. Superficially, it was a rich price, but given Buffett’s time horizon and GEICO’s renewed growth prospects, it was not so rich as it seemed. And Buffett now owned all of the security he had “liked best” for forty-four years. Jack Byrne said it was “predestined.” 
 Even before the GEICO deal, Buffett had been sending signals of his renewed enthusiasm for insurance—the game of odds that so suits him. In particular, Berkshire’s in-house insurance operation, which will be increasingly important to Berkshire’s future, has for some time been writing special reinsurance policies, known as “super-cats,” which is Buffett-speak for super-catastrophics. 
 Insurance companies buy super-cats for protection against a mega-disaster that would require them to pay claims on a great number of policies. Berkshire got into the business in 1989, after the twin calamities of Hurricane Hugo and the World Series-shattering earthquake in San Francisco. With insurers devastated and premiums soaring, Buffett sensed the sort of bad news-cum-opportunity that has always aroused his interest. 
 Since then, Berkshire’s super-cat business has grown to be enormous. In most years, it is extremely profitable. But in an unusually bad year, one with a series of big disasters or a single blow such as a Hurricane Andrew, Berkshire could be stuck with gigantic losses, possibly as much as $600 million. 10 (Few insurers write super-cats, because the stakes are so big.) 
 Buffett and Ajit Jain, the Indian-born, Harvard-educated star of Berkshire’s super-cat business, who works in Connecticut, frequently chat about the odds of a major earthquake in New Zealand, a flood in the Midwest, or a radical change in long-term climatic patterns. 11 But super-cats occur too infrequently for the odds to be figured with precision, so Buffett and Jain must rely on judgment and on an informed reading of history. 
 Who would have guessed, Buffett recently wrote, that the United States’ most serious quake would occur in New Madrid, Missouri? It did, in 1812—an estimated 8.7 on the Richter scale. “Now you know why I suffer eyestrain: from watching The Weather Channel.” 12 
 Thanks largely to super-cats, Berkshire’s insurance float has multiplied tenfold over a decade. In 1995, the float was $3.6 billion, a figure which will nearly double with the addition of GEICO. This money may be thought of as a low-interest loan, which is Buffett’s to play with until claims are made. In recent years, Buffett has had the use of this immense sum at an effective cost that is lower than the rate on long-term government bonds. This gives Buffett a huge advantage. 
 Though normally reluctant to talk up the future, Buffett has been predicting a rosy one for his insurance operation. He has said that he and Munger expect it to be their “main source of earnings for decades to come,” and has hinted that he thinks its value is enormous. 13 But as Buffett freely admits, it will be hard to evaluate his bet on super-cats until decades of loss experience can be toted up. 
