
309

310 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Table 19-1

Common Currency Symbols

Currency Symbol

Country & Currency Name

AUD

Australian Dollar

GBP

British Pound

CAD

Canadian Dollar

CNY

China Yuan Renminbi

EUR

Euro

GRD

Greek Drachma

JPY

Japanese Yen

MYR

Malaysian Ringgitt

MXP

Mexican Peso

NZD

New Zealand Dollar

RUR

Russian Ruble

SGD

Singapore Dollar

USD

U.S. Dollar

You can find current exchange rates for most major currencies online at
the Universal Currency converter (www.xe.com/ucc). You merely set an
amount, the type of currency you want to convert, and the type of currency
to which you want to convert to find out the exchange rate and how much
the set amount of your currency is worth when converted or exchanged.
Although this site won’t give you a rate at which you’re guaranteed to find a
trade, it certainly gives you a decent estimate that’s in the ballpark of what
you can expect to find to within six decimal points.

How Money Markets Work
The currency exchange market is made up of about 2,000 dealer institutions
that are particularly active in foreign currency exchanges. Most of the players are commercial or investment banks that are geographically dispersed in
the key financial centers around the world. Among these 2,000 dealers, about
100 to 200 members carry on the core trading and market-making activities.
Major players are fewer still.
When a dealer buys a U.S. dollar, regardless of where in the world the transaction takes place, the actual deposit is located either directly in a U.S. bank
or in a claim of a foreign bank on a dollar deposit located in the United States.
The same is true of the currency of any other country.

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)

Different countries, different rules
The actual infrastructures of the various currency markets and how they
operate are determined by each separate nation. Each country enforces its
own laws, banking regulations, accounting rules, and tax codes. The method
of payment and the settlement system also are determined separately by
each country. Yikes, doesn’t that mean you have to know a lot about international monetary laws to be able to trade? Yup. Especially if you want to be
successful.
Luckily, considerable global cooperation exists among exchange regulators,
which minimizes differences and helps protect Forex traders from fraud and
abuse. In the United States, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) sets rules and investigates any problems involving U.S. currency
trades. The CFTC reaches agreements, or Memoranda of Understanding
(MOUs), with most major nations that have active currency exchanges, and
these MOUs form a method of cooperation between regulatory and enforcement authorities across international borders that combats fraud and other
illegal practices that can harm customers or threaten market integrity.
If you plan to become involved in foreign currency exchange, be sure to visit
the CFTC’s Web site at www.cftc.gov to bone up on your knowledge of international laws and find information about recently exposed scams and other
illegal activities. You certainly don’t want to get caught up in a fraudulent deal
and lose all your money.

The almighty (U.S.) dollar
The U.S. dollar by far is the most widely traded currency. Based on a Federal
Reserve survey, the dollar is one of two currencies that are involved in more
than 85 percent of all global foreign exchange transactions. The U.S. dollar
wears many hats, serving as an investment currency in many capital markets,
a reserve currency for many central banks, a transaction currency for many
commodity trades, an invoice currency for many contracts, and a currency of
intervention used by countries that want to influence the values of their own
currencies.

Organized exchanges
The money market is largely unregulated as a defined market. By that, we
mean that a commercial bank in the United States doesn’t need any special
authorization to trade or deal in foreign currencies. Securities and brokerage

311

312 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
firms don’t need special permission from the SEC or any other regulatory
body to carry out foreign exchange activities.
Transactions can be carried out based on whatever terms the law permits and
using whatever provisions are acceptable to the two parties, subject to the
commercial law governing business transactions. Of course that means the
money market is the closest thing to the Wild West you’ll find in the trading
world. Almost anything goes. Institutions that participate are not inspected
specifically for their exchange practices, but regulatory authorities nevertheless look into trading systems as part of their regular examinations of financial
institutions, just to be sure they’re operating under the country’s commercial
banking or securities laws.
Although no official rules or restrictions govern the hours or conditions of
trading on this over-the-counter (OTC) market in the United States, trading
conventions developed mostly by market participants are in place. The OTC
market for foreign currency trading is any currency trading done outside
the confines of an exchange, such as the CME Group. You can find out what
those rules are by contacting the Federal Bank of New York, which produces
and regularly updates the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Trading. These
guidelines clarify common market practices and offer “best practice recommendations.” Before you become a trader, protect yourself by making sure
you’re working with a dealer or a broker that follows these guidelines. You
can access the most current version, published in 2004, at www.newyorkfed.
org/fxc/2004/fxc040713b.pdf. The New York Federal Reserve regularly
issues updates to the guidelines, which you can find on its Web site at www.
ny.frb.org.
The OTC currency exchange market accounts for more than 90 percent of the
total U.S. foreign exchange market, including spot transactions, forwards, and
swaps. If you’re new to Forex trading, starting out is much safer on an organized exchange, where you can trade currency futures and certain currency
options. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) is one of the largest, and it
offers excellent educational materials to help you get started. Find out more
about the CME at www.cmegroup.com/education.
Organized exchanges and regulations governing them are considerably different from the OTC foreign currency market. Trading actually takes place
in a centralized location rather than through a network of computers, telexes, and telephones. Hours and trading practices are regulated by each of
the respective exchanges, and their products are standardized. Organized
exchanges also are equipped with central clearinghouses for payments and
cash settlements.

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)

The Risks of the World Money Market
Leverage, which means borrowing money to trade, is the number one risk to
your portfolio when trading in money markets. Success on the foreign currency exchange market means having to trade in large sums, because profits
are made at exchange-rate differences of only fractions of a cent. Banks or
brokers determine the leverage they want to offer you, but you won’t find
strict regulations like the ones that govern stock margin accounts.
After you’re approved for trading, customers are given a set amount or allowance on which they can trade on margin. A common starting allowance for
trading on margin is 5 percent (see Chapter 14 for more about margins),
which means that if you put $100,000 in the bank, you’re allowed to execute
transactions of up to $2 million. As you gain success with more experience,
that margin may be lowered to 1 percent, which means you’d be allowed to
trade as much as $10 million on your $100,000 deposit.
When trading at those high margin levels, even a minor mistake can wipe out
your entire deposit.
The most conservative of banks require full margin, meaning you have to
deposit $1 million to be able to trade $1 million. Be sure that you understand
the leverage you’re being offered and the loss potential you face if your trade
goes sour. Just imagine starting with $100,000, which you can use to trade $2
million dollars, and then losing half of that trading maximum with trades that
have gone sour. You could end up $900,000 in the hole. Sure, lots of traders
can come up with that — no problem. In reality, as long as you stick to trading,
the major currencies’ drastic price changes that end up in that type of loss are
unlikely, but a loss of 10 to 20 percent of your holding in a matter of minutes
can happen. Only trading in third-world currencies could result in losses of the
million dollar magnitude described here and only if there was a major uprising
in the country and the price of its currency dropped dramatically.

Types of risks
You also face a number of different kinds of risk, including market risk,
exchange risk, interest rate risk, counterparty risk, volatility risk, liquidity
risk, and country risk.

Market risk
All traders and investors face market risk. Basically, market risk is comprised
of changes in price that adversely impact your trade or investment. Market
risk is in play from the moment you enter into a foreign currency exchange

313

314 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
position until the moment you exit it. The foreign exchange rate can change
any time during that period, so when you’re dealing in foreign currency
exchange, two key factors can impact the price of the currency — exchange
risk and interest rate risk.

Exchange risk
Foreign exchange traders take on exchange risk the moment they buy or sell
a foreign currency. Every time you take on a new foreign exchange position,
regardless of whether it’s through a spot, forward, future, or option transaction, you’re immediately exposed to the potential that the exchange rate will
move against your position, making it worth less than when you bought it. In
only a matter of seconds, a profitable transaction can turn into an unprofitable one.

Interest rate risk
Foreign exchange positions can change in value not only because of the
exchange rate but also because of the currency’s underlying interest rate.
Whenever a country’s central bank (think Federal Reserve) raises or lowers
the underlying interest rate for its currency, the impact on any positions
you’re holding in that country’s currency can be a major one.

Counterparty risk
In the currency trading world, a counterparty is the other entity involved in a
transaction — a bank or banker, a broker, or another trader. When you buy
a currency option or execute a forward transaction, you risk the possibility
that the counterparty to your transaction won’t be able to meet his, her, or
its obligations.
Note: Whenever you buy the option through an exchange, rather than
directly from the counterparty, this risk is not a factor. When that happens,
you run into additional replacement costs, because you’re forced to enter
into another currency transaction to meet your own foreign currency needs.
The key to avoiding this kind of risk is entering into contracts with known
entities that have high credit ratings. Additionally, you need to investigate
whether the counterparty with which you’re trading has had any problems
with regulators, insolvency, or questions of ethical conduct. One good place
to begin your investigation is the consumer protection section of the CFTC at
www.cftc.gov/customerprotection/index.htm.
When evaluating a company, you first need to consider its credit risk. You
can find credit rankings for many major banks at the Standard & Poor’s Web
site (www2.standardandpoors.com). You can research a company’s creditworthiness by investigating the requirements and standards it uses when
providing credit to its customers. Companies that provide easy credit to

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)
their customers run a greater risk of not being able to meet their obligations.
Conversely, companies with higher margin limits definitely are safer to do
business with when you’re entering into a contract.

Volatility risk
Volatility risk relates to the possibility of rapidly changing exchange rates
that can impact your positions in foreign currencies. As we mention in the
“Exploring the World of Foreign Currency Exchange” section, earlier in this
chapter, currency prices can change thousands of times per day. Options on
currencies are valued according to volatility and underlying changes in the
prices of the respective currencies. If a trader sees an increase of 100 percent in volatility, or a doubling of volatility, then the price of the option can
increase 5 percent to 10 percent. If you’re trading on credit, which is highly
likely, your bank or broker can reevaluate the credit it’s extending to you
whenever it sees a dramatic increase in the volatility of your holdings.

Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is not a major factor if you’re trading in the more commonly
traded currencies, but if you decide to trade in less active currencies, it
can become a factor when you’re unable to sell a currency you hold at the
expressed time you want the sale to take place, especially when the market
for that currency is not active. You can avoid liquidity risk by buying currency options or futures on an exchange.

Country risk
Country risks come in several different varieties, all of which you need to
consider whenever you trade in foreign currencies. Among those aspects are
✓ Political risk: This variety relates to the political stability of the country
in whose currency you’re trading. Although we haven’t seen any recent
seizures of commercial assets by any nations, it has happened in the
past. For example, Venezuela took control of its oil industry by seizing
assets of non-Venezuelan oil companies. If you trade in currencies of
countries that are at risk of possible destabilization, the currency you
buy can become worthless if the country changes political leaders.
✓ Regulation risk: This variety relates to what can happen after you establish a position in a country’s currency. Its government can change its
regulations, and in effect, put restraints on the ownership established by
your position in the currency and by the position of your counterparty —
and that can get messy.
✓ Legal risk: This variety relates to which country has jurisdiction to rule on
a contract if your counterparty happens to default. Unfavorable contract
law in the host country of your counterparty can end up determining that

315

316 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
the contract is invalid or illegal, and you can lose your position. Be sure
that you understand from whom you’re buying and under which country’s
laws any disputes will be settled. If U.S. law won’t be the overriding law for
the contract, be certain you understand contract law in the country of the
counterparty with whom you’re trading.
✓ Holiday risk: This variety relates to the possibility that the country in
whose currency you’re trading has different religious, political, or governmental holidays that can shut down trading in that currency right
when you need the money. Be sure you know the holiday schedules for
the countries in whose currencies you trade.

Seeking risk protection
Although trading in foreign currencies often is called the modern-day Wild
West, forces are in place that can help you minimize the risks — provided
you take advantage of them and trade within their boundaries. The primary
monitors of foreign currency trading are the world’s central banks. They
monitor the flow of money between countries and the balance of payments
between governments and banking institutions. In the United States, these
types of transactions are monitored and regulated by the U.S. Treasury
Department and the Federal Reserve Banks. Similar regulatory authorities
exist in most major currency markets, but if you decide to do business with
a nonbanking institution, you’re transacting your business in unprotected
waters outside the safe harbor of regulatory oversight and must do so under
the often fateful guise of caveat emptor — let the buyer beware.
Internationally, the Bank for International Settlement (BIS — www.bis.org/
index.htm) is the leading independent agency for evaluating foreign
exchange trading institutions on a global basis. BIS created risk-weighted
evaluation and capital requirements for institutions that trade in foreign
currencies and money market transactions. Be certain that any institution
outside the United States with which you plan to conduct trades meets BIS
standards.
A number of common clearing systems assist with the transfer of foreign
currencies. The two best-known ones are the Clearing House Interbank
Payments System, or CHIPS, and the Society for Worldwide Interbank
Financial Telecommunication, or S.W.I.F.T. Be sure you’re using one of these
systems when you trade, because they code transactions to avoid defaults
and help you identify the creditworthiness of transactions. CHIPS is privately
owned and operated by the New York Clearing House.

Chapter 19: Going Foreign (Forex)
If you’re trading in foreign currency futures, your risks are much less,
because the futures industry is highly regulated. Clearinghouses for futures
are efficient, and futures transactions usually are cleared hourly or in some
cases even minute-by-minute.

Getting Ready to Trade Money
Your first step as a foreign currency trader is to develop an extensive collection of historical information not only about rate fluctuations for the currencies you plan to trade but also about interest rate fluctuations, economic
history, and political stability of the countries whose currencies you’re considering. Gathering some background information about the Forex market
itself doesn’t hurt either. You can find more details about trading currency in
Currency Trading For Dummies by Mark Galant and Brian Dolan (Wiley).
After collecting this information, you need to consider your own trading
goals and how much you want to put at risk. Set your risk limits before you
start, so you don’t get emotionally caught up in having to making these
potentially disastrous trading decisions on the fly. Capital that you risk on
foreign currency exchange trading needs to be money that you can afford to
lose without impacting your lifestyle. Do not, for any reason, use retirement
savings, savings for your children’s educations, or savings required to maintain your house and lifestyle.
As is true for stock trading, when trading currencies, you need to develop a
plan that determines what you trade and how much you’re at risk. When your
plan’s in place, you need to stick to it for the entire trading day. You should
not be developing the plan and executing it at the same time. Foreign currency
trading requires a great deal of focus, and you can’t risk breaking that focus to
do additional planning in the middle of a trading day. Monitor the successes
you have in meeting the goals of your plan. If you’re not achieving your objectives, you may want to step back and reevaluate your plan and your decision
to trade in foreign currency.
Technical analysis is used by foreign currency traders in a way that is similar
to stock trading (see Chapters 9 and 10). Bar charts are the most common
tools. The basic bar chart shows the opening, high, low, and closing prices
for a given period of time.
The key difference between trading currencies and stocks is that in the foreign
exchange market, a daily price chart sometimes shows the opening price in
the Pacific Rim and the closing price in the United States. Because the foreign

317

318 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
exchange market is open 24 hours a day, time periods are different for foreign
currency trading than they are for stock trading. You can play with Forex
charting online at www.forex-markets.com/charts.htm.
We won’t cover the basics of technical analysis for foreign currency trading, because we’d need to take up another entire book to do it right. That’s
exactly why Wiley Publishing, Inc., also publishes Technical Analysis For
Dummies by Barbara Rockefeller. Be sure to check it out, too.
Because we can’t say it enough, we repeat: If you truly want to pursue this
form of trading, we highly recommend that you seek additional training before
you begin trading individually.

Chapter 20

Trading for Others: Obtaining
Trading Licenses and
Certifications
In This Chapter
▶ Exploring FINRA tests
▶ Deciphering financial advisor designations
▶ Knowing what licenses are required
▶ Getting your own licenses

A

s you become more involved in trading, you hear about trading designations, such as Series 7 or Series 23. Nope, they’re not talking about
the World Series. These designations refer to examinations, administered by
the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), that you must pass to
be able to work in various capacities within the securities field. After passing
these examinations, you can become licensed in the securities markets. What
tests you need to take depend on where you plan to work and what you plan
to do.
You also may hear an alphabet soup of designations like CFA, CFP, or CFS.
They are certifications given by different professional organizations to
people who have completed coursework, testing, and in most cases, years of
work experience.
Typically, investment and trading advisors must be licensed. In this chapter,
we discuss the various types of licenses and certifications and the level of
training that is required for each. We also describe the types of tests FINRA
offers for each of its designations and help you find out about how advisors
are licensed and regulated and what requirements you need to fulfill if you
plan to make trades for others.

320 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Getting to Know the FINRA Series
Brokers can’t just hang out a shingle and advertise that they’re selling securities. Before ever selling the first share of stock, a broker must complete
coursework and pass an examination administered by FINRA to become a
registered securities broker, agent, or salesperson.
A number of different types of exams are required for brokers to demonstrate
their knowledge of the various types of securities they plan to sell. Each
examination indicates whether candidates have an understanding of specific
products they want to sell and the laws that govern investing in them.
Failure to register with FINRA can result in hefty fines imposed by the United
States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or state regulators whenever you try to sell securities as an unregistered broker. People who plan to
supervise other brokers must take additional coursework and training.
Courses to prepare candidates for these exams are available for home study,
or they can be taken on-site at various training centers throughout the United
States. You can schedule tests through Pearson VUE National Registration
Center by calling 866-396-6273 or online at www.pearsonvue.com/finra, or
through Prometric by calling 800-578-6273 or online at www.prometric.com/
finra.
Two sets of examinations are administered, one for registered representatives, or the people on the front lines, and the other for principals who
manage registered representatives. In the sections that follow, we give you
an overview of the types of examinations and licenses that people who want
to do business in the securities market must take, including what you can
expect to find on some of the key tests.
To pass any of the FINRA examinations that we discuss in the sections that
follow, you must answer at least 70 percent of the questions correctly to
become registered or licensed as a broker or principal in the areas evaluated
by each specific exam.
