
Continuous Futures Contracts 509

nearest contracts, and looking 14 weeks into the future, the sym-
bol could be: TRCF314. TR is the symbol, CF is for Continuous
(Forward Looking), 3 is the number of contracts used, and 14 is
the number of weeks the price is projected.

The mechanics of this are fairly simple. First, a fixed rollover
date would need to be set for each commodity. A good one to start
with could be 10 days prior to expiration. What is important is that
there is a rollover sometime prior to actual expiration. Second, the
number of contracts used will never be less than 2 and probably
never greater than 4. The number of weeks used should probably
always be greater that 3 and could go up to 40 in some cases.

Example: This is the method used by Commodity Systems,
Inc. (See Perpetual Contract in Chapter 8.)

T-Bonds will be used again, because they have a uniform
expiration cycle of every 3 months. Let’s say a trader wants a
Continuous Contract of T-Bonds using the 2 nearest months and
looking 12 weeks into the future (symbol = TRCE212). Today’s
date is December 1. A graphical portrayal makes this easier to
understand (see Figure D.1). The vertical axis is price and the hor-
izontal axis is time. Today’s date is marked on the horizontal axis
and the expiration dates of the two nearest contracts (December
and March), are also marked. He wants to look 12 weeks into the
future so a mark is made 12 weeks from today which is about
February 25. The close price of the December contract was 88.25
and the close of the March contract was 87.75 These points are
then put above their expiration dates at the corresponding prices.
Then a linear extrapolation is made by merely drawing a line
between the two points. The slope of this line will vary up and
down depending upon the outlook for long term interest rates (in
this T-Bond example). In this particular example the outlook is for
higher rates because the March futures price is lower than the
December price.

To find the value of the TRCF212 close price for today, find
the point on the horizontal axis that is 12 weeks from today (Feb
25th) and go up to the line drawn on the chart. Then from the
line go to the right and that is the price of the close for this
Constant Forward Continuous Contract (about 87.91). You can


510 Appendix D

also visually see from the chart that the March contract is carry-
ing more weight than the December contract because the point of
interception is closer to March. This method can be done on the
Open, High, Low, and Close in the exact manner. Of course, a
computer does it mathematically; this is just a visual explanation
of how a Perpetual Contract is constructed.


Advance-decline line: One of the most widely used indicators

to measure the breadth of a stock market advance or
decline. Each day (or week) the number of advancing
issues is compared to the number of declining issues. If
advances outnumber declines, the net total is added to the
previous cumulative total. If declines outnumber advances,
the net difference is subtracted from the previous cumula-
tive total. The advance-decline line is usually compared to
a popular stock average, such as the Dow Jones Industrial
Average. They should trend in the same direction. When
the advance-decline line begins to diverge from the stock
average, an early indication is given of a possible trend
reversal.

Arms index: Developed by Richard Arms, this contrary indicator

is a ratio of the average volume of declining stocks divided by
the average volume of advancing stocks. A reading below 1.0

511


512 Glossary

indicates more volume in rising stocks. A reading above 1.0
reflects more volume in declining issues. A 10 day average of
the Arms index over 1.20 is oversold, while a 10 day average
below .70 is overbought.

Ascending triangle: A sideways price pattern between two con-
verging trendlines, in which the lower line is rising while the
upper line is flat. This is generally a bullish pattern. (See
Triangles.)

Bar chart: On a daily bar chart, each bar represents one day's
activity. The vertical bar is drawn from the day’s highest price
to the day’s lowest price (the range). A tic to the left of the
bar marks the opening price, while a tic to the right of the bar
marks the closing price. Bar charts can be constructed for any
time period, including monthly, weekly, hourly, and minute
periods.

Bollinger bands: Developed by John Bollinger, this indicator
plots trading bands two standard deviations above and below
a 20 period moving average. Prices will often meet resistance
at the upper band and support at the lower band.

Breakaway gap: A price gap that forms on the completion of an
important price pattern. A breakaway gap usually signals the
beginning of an important price move. (See Gaps.)

Channel line: Straight lines drawn parallel to the basic trendline.
In an uptrend, the channel line slants up to the right and is
drawn above rally peaks; in a downtrend, the channel line is
drawn below price troughs and slants down to the right.
Prices will often meet resistance at rising channel lines and
support at falling channel lines.

Confirmation: Having as many market factors as possible agree-
ing with one another. For example, if prices and volume are
rising together, volume is confirming the price action. The
opposite of confirmation is divergence.


Glossary 513

Continuation patterns: Price formations that imply a pause or
consolidation in the prevailing trend. The most common
types are triangles, flags, and pennants.

Descending triangle: A sideways price pattern between two con-
verging trendlines, in which the upper line is declining while
the lower line is flat. This is generally a bearish pattern. (See
Triangles.)

Divergence: A situation where two indicators are not confirming
each other. For example, in oscillator analysis, prices trend
higher while an oscillator starts to drop. Divergence usually
warns of a trend reversal. (See Confirmation.)

Double top: This price pattern displays two prominent peaks. The
reversal is complete when the middle trough is broken. The
double bottom is a mirror image of the top.

Down trendline: A straight line drawn down and to the right
above successive rally peaks. A violation of the down trend-
line usually signals a reversal of the downtrend. (See
Trendlines.)

Dow Theory: One of the oldest and most highly regarded tech-
nical theories. A Dow Theory buy signal is given when the
Dow Industrial and Dow Transportation Averages close above
a prior rally peak. A sell signal is given when both averages
close below a prior reaction low.

Elliott wave analysis: An approach to market analysis that is based
on repetitive wave patterns and the Fibonacci number
sequence. An ideal Elliott wave pattern shows a five wave
advance followed by a 3-wave decline. (See Fibonacci numbers).

Envelopes: Lines placed at fixed percentages above and below a
moving average line. Envelopes help determine when a mar-
ket has traveled too far from its moving average and is
overextended.


514 Glossary

Exhaustion gap: A price gap that occurs at the end of an impor-
tant trend, and signals that the trend is ending. (See Gaps.)

Exponential smoothing: A moving average that uses all data
points, but gives greater weight to more recent price data.
(See Moving average.)

Fibonacci numbers: The Fibonacci number sequence (1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144...) is constructed by adding the first
two numbers to arrive at the third. The ratio of any number
to the next larger number is 62 percent, which is a popular
Fibonacci retracement number. The inverse of 62 percent,
which is 38 percent, is also used as a Fibonacci retracement
number. The ratio of any number to the next smaller num-
ber is 1.62 percent, which is used to arrive at Fibonacci price
targets. (See Elliott wave analysis).

Flag: A continuation price pattern, generally lasting less than
three weeks, which resembles a parallelogram that slopes
against the prevailing trend. The flag represents a minor
pause in a dynamic price trend. (See Pennant.)

Fundamental analysis: The opposite of technical analysis.
Fundamental analysis relies on economic supply and
demand information, as opposed to market activity.

Gaps: Gaps are spaces left on the bar chart where no trading has
taken place. An up gap is formed when the lowest price on a
trading day is higher than the highest high of the previous
day. A down gap is formed when the highest price on a day
is lower than the lowest price of the prior day. An up gap is
usually a sign of market strength, while a down gap is a sign
of market weakness. Three types of gaps are breakaway, run-
away (also called measuring), and exhaustion gaps.

Head and shoulders: The best known of the reversal patterns. At
a market top, three prominent peaks are formed with the
middle peak (or head) slightly higher than the two other


Glossary 515

peaks (shoulders). When the trendline (neckline) connecting
the two intervening troughs is broken, the pattern is com-
plete. A bottom pattern is a mirror image of a top and is
called an inverse head and shoulders.

Intermarket analysis: An additional aspect of market analysis
that takes into consideration the price action of related mar-
ket sectors. The four sectors are currencies, commodities,
bonds, and stocks. International markets are also included.
This approach is based on the premise that all markets are
interrelated and impact on one another.

Island reversal: A combination of an exhaustion gap in one
direction and a breakaway gap in the other direction within
a few days. Toward the end of an uptrend, for example, prices
gap upward and then downward within a few days. The
result is usually two or three trading days standing alone
with gaps on either side. The island reversal usually signals a
trend reversal. (See Gaps.)

Key reversal day: In an uptrend, this one day pattern occurs
when prices open in new highs, and then close below the
previous day's closing price. In a downtrend, prices open
lower and then close higher. The wider the price range on
the key reversal day and the heavier the volume, the
greater the odds that a reversal is taking place. (See Weekly
Reversal.)

Line charts: Price charts that connect the closing prices of a given
market over a span of time. The result is a curving line on the
chart. This type of chart is most useful with overlay or com-
parison charts that are commonly employed in intermarket
analysis. It is also used for visual trend analysis of open end
mutual funds.

MACD: Developed by Gerald Appel, the moving average conver-
gence divergence system shows two lines. The first (MACD)
line is the difference between two exponential moving aver-


516 Glossary

ages (usually 12 and 26 periods) of closing prices. The second
(signal) line is usually a 9 period EMA of the first (MACD)
line. Signals are given when the two lines cross.

MACD histogram: A variation of the MACD system that plots the
difference between the signal and MACD lines. Changes in
the spread between the two lines can be spotted faster, lead-
ing to earlier trading signals.

McClellan oscillator: Developed by Sherman McClellan, this
oscillator is the difference between the 19 day (10% trend)
and the 39 day (5% trend) exponentially smoothed averages
of the daily net advance decline figures. Crossings above the
zero line are positive and below zero are negative. Readings
above +100 are overbought while readings below -100 are
oversold.

McClellan summation index: A cumulative sum of all daily
McClellan oscillator readings that provides longer range
analysis of market breadth. Used in the same way as an
advance-decline line.

Momentum: A technique used to construct an overbought-over-
sold oscillator. Momentum measures price differences over a
selected span of time. To construct a 10 day momentum line,
the closing price 10 days earlier is subtracted from the latest
price. The resulting positive or negative value is plotted
above or below a zero line. (See Oscillators.)

Moving average: A trend following indicator that works best in
a trending environment. Moving averages smooth out price
action but operate with a time lag. A simple 10 day moving
average of a stock, for example, adds up the last 10 days’
closing prices and divides the total by 10. That procedure is
repeated each day. Any number of moving averages can be
employed, with different time spans, to generate buy and
sell signals. When only one average is employed, a buy sig-
nal is given when the price closes above the average. When


Glossary 517

two averages are employed, a buy signal is given when the
shorter average crosses above the longer average. There are
three types: simple, weighted, and exponentially smoothed
averages.

On balance volume: Developed by Joseph Granville, OBV is a
running cumulative total of upside and downside volume.
Volume is added on up days and subtracted on down days.
The OBV line is plotted with the price line to see if the two
lines are confirming each other. (See Volume.)

Open interest: The number of options or futures contracts that
are still unliquidated at the end of a trading day. A rise or fall
in open interest shows that money is flowing into or out of
a futures contract or option, respectively. In futures markets,
rising open interest is considered good for the current trend.
Open interest also measures liquidity.

Oscillators: Indicators that determine when a market is in an
overbought or oversold condition. When the oscillator
reaches an upper extreme, the market is overbought. When
the oscillator line reaches a lower extreme, the market is
oversold. (See Momentum, Rate of change, Relative strength
index, and Stochastics.)

Overbought: A term usually used in reference to an oscillator.
When an oscillator reaches an upper extreme, it is believed
that a market has risen too far and is vulnerable to a selloff.

Oversold: A term usually used in reference to an oscillator. When
an oscillator reaches a lower extreme, it is believed that a
market has dropped too far and is due for a bounce.

Pennant: This continuation price pattern is similar to the flag,
except that it is more horizontal and resembles a small sym-
metrical triangle. Like the flag, the pennant usually lasts
from one to three weeks and is typically followed by a
resumption of the prior trend.


518 Glossary

Percent investment advisors bullish: This measure of stock mar-
Ket bullish sentiment is published weekly by Investor's
Intelligence of New Rochelle, New York. When only 35% of
professionals are bullish, the market is considered oversold. A
reading of 55% is considered to be overbought.

Price patterns: Patterns that appear on price charts and that have
predictive value. Patterns are divided into reversal and con-
tinuation patterns.

Rate of change: A technique used to construct an overbought-
oversold oscillator. Rate of change employs a price ratio over
a selected span of time. To construct a 10 day rate of change
oscillator, the last closing price is divided by the closing price
10 days earlier. The resulting value is plotted above or below
a value of 100.

Ratio analysis: The use of a ratio to compare the relative strength
between two entities. An individual stock or industry group
divided by the S&P S00 index can determine whether that
stock or industry group is outperforming or underperforming
the stock market as a whole. Ratio analysis can be used to
compare any two entities. A rising ratio indicates that the
numerator in the ratio is outperforming the denominator.
Trend analysis can be applied to the ratio line itself to deter-
mine important turning points.

Relative strength index (RSI): A popular oscillator developed by
Welles Wilder, Jr. and described in his self published 1978
book, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. RSI is plotted
on a vertical scale from 0 to 100. Values above 70 are consid-
ered to be overbought and values below 30, oversold. When
prices are over 70 or below 30 and diverge from price action,
a warning is given of a possible trend reversal. RSI usually
employs 9 or 14 time periods.

Resistance: The opposite of support. Resistance is marked by a
previous price peak and provides enough of a barrier above
the market to halt a price advance. (See Support.)


Glossary 519

Retracements: Prices normally retrace the prior trend by a per-
centage amount before resuming the original trend. The best
known example is the 50% retracement. Minimum and max-
imum retracements are normally one third and two thirds,
respectively. Elliott wave analysis uses Fibonacci retrace-
ments of 38% and 62%.

Reversal patterns: Price patterns on a price chart that usually
indicate that a trend reversal is taking place. The best known
of the reversal patterns are the head and shoulders and dou-
ble and triple tops and bottoms.

Runaway gap: A price gap that usually occurs around the mid-
point of an important market trend. For that reason, it is also
called a measuring gap. (See Gaps.)

Sentiment indicators: Psychological indicators that attempt to
measure the degree of bullishness or bearishness in a market.
These are contrary indicators and are used in much the same
fashion as overbought or oversold oscillators. Their greatest
value is when they reach upper or lower extremes.

Simple average: A moving average that gives equal weight to
each day’s price data. (See Exponential smoothing and
Weighted average.)

Stochastics: An overbought-oversold oscillator popularized by
George Lane. A time period of 14 is usually employed in its
construction. Stochastics uses two lines—%K and its 3 period
moving average, %D. These two lines fluctuate in a vertical
range between 0 and 100. Readings above 80 are overbought,
while readings below 20 are oversold. When the faster %K
line crosses above the slower %D line and the lines are below
20, a buy signal is given. When the %K crosses below the %D
line and the lines are over 80, a sell signal is given.

Support: A price, or price zone, beneath the current market price,
where buying power is sufficient to halt a price decline. A
previous reaction low usually forms a support level.


520 Glossary

Symmetrical triangle: A sideways price pattern between two con-
verging trendlines in which the upper trendline is declining
and lower trendline is rising. This pattern represents an even
balance between buyers and sellers, although the prior trend
is usually resumed. The breakout through either trendline
signals the direction of the price trend. (See Ascending and
Descending triangles.)

Technical analysis: The study of market action, usually with
price charts, which includes volume and open interest pat-
terns. Also called chart analysis, market analysis and, more
recently, visual analysis.

Trend: Refers to the direction of prices. Rising peaks and troughs
constitute an uptrend; falling peaks and troughs constitute a
downtrend. A trading range is characterized by horizontal
peaks and troughs. Trends are generally classified into major
(longer than a year), intermediate (one to six months), or
minor (less than a month).

Trendlines: Straight lines drawn on a chart below reaction lows in
an uptrend, or above rally peaks in a downtrend, that deter-
mine the steepness of the current trend. The breaking of a
trendline usually signals a trend reversal.

Triangles: Sideways price patterns in which prices fluctuate with-
in converging trendlines. The three types of triangles are the
symmetrical, the ascending, and the descending.

Triple top: A price pattern with three prominent peaks, similar to
the head and shoulders top, except that all three peaks occur
at about the same level. The triple bottom is a mirror image
of the top.

Up trendline: A straight line drawn upward and to the right
below reaction lows. The longer the up trendline has been in
effect and the more times it has been tested, the more signif-


Glossary 521

icant it becomes. Violation of the trendline usually signals
that the uptrend may be changing direction. (See Down
trendline.)

Visual analysis: A form of analysis that utilizes charts and market
indicators to determine market direction.

Volume: The level of trading activity in a stock, option, or
futures contract. Expanding volume in the direction of the
current price trend confirms the price trend. (See On-balance
volume.)

Weekly reversal: An upside weekly reversal is present when prices
open lower on Monday and then on Friday close above the
previous week’s close. A downside weekly reversal opens the
week higher but closes down by Friday. (See Key reversal day.)

Weighted average: A moving average that uses a selected time
span, but gives greater weight to more recent price data. (See
Moving average.)


Achelis, Steven B., Technical Analysis from A to Z, Probus, 1995.

Allen, R.C., How to Build a Fortune in Commodities (Windsor Books,
Brightwaters, NY) (Best Books, Chicago) 1972.

Allen, R.C., How to Use the 4 Day, 9 Day, and 18 Day Moving
Averages to Earn Large Profits in Commodities, Best Books 1974.

Arms, Richard W., The Arms Index (TRIN), Dow Jones-Irwin, 1989.

Volume Cycles in the Stock Market: Market Timing Through
Equivolume—Charting, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1983.

Bressert, Walter J., The Power of Oscillator/Cycle Combinations,
Bressert & Associates, 1991.

Burke, Michael L., Three-Point Reversal Method of Point & Figure
Construction and Formations, Chartcraft, 1990.

Colby, Robert W. and Thomas A. Meyers, The Encyclopedia of
Technical Market Indicators, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1988.

523


524 Bibliography

deVilliers, Victor, The Point and Figure Method of Anticipating Stock
Price Movements (1933: available from Traders’ Library, P.O.
Box 2466, Ellicott City, MD 20141 [1-800-222-2855]).

Dewey, Edward R. with Og Mandino, Cycles, the Mysterious Forces
That Trigger Events, Manor Books, 1973.

Dorsey, Thomas J., Point & Figure Charting, Wiley, 1995.

Edwards, Robert D. and John Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends, 5th Edition, John Magee, 1966.

Ehlers, John F, MESA and Trading Market Cycles, Wiley, 1992.
Elder, Alexander Dr., Trading for a Living, Wiley, 1993.
Study Guide for Trading for a Living.

Freund, John E. and Frank J. Williams, Modem Business Statistics,
Prentice-Hall.

Frost, Alfred J. and Robert R. Prechter, Elliott Wave Principle, Key to
Stock Market Profits, New Classics Library, 1978.

Gann, W.D., How to Make Profits in Commodities, revised edition,
Lambert-Gann Publishing, orig. 1942, reprinted in 1976.

Granville, Joseph, Granville’s New Key to Stock Market Profits,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1963.

Hadady, R. Earl, Contrary Opinion: How to Use It for Profit in Trading
Commodity Futures, Hadady Publications, 1983.
