
prematurely exit from large, sustained moves, with only small profits, especially
if the entry methods do not provide for multiple reentries into ongoing trends. All
things being equal, the closer the profit target is to the entry price, the greater the
chances are of it getting hit and, consequently, the higher the percentage of winning trades. However, the closer the profit target, the smaller the per-trade profit.
For instance, if a $50 profit target is set on a trade in the S&P 500 and the money
management stop is kept far out (e.g., at $5,000), more than 95% of the trades will
be winners! Under such circumstances, however, the wins will yield small profits
that Will certainly be wiped out, along with a chunk of principal, by the rare $5,000
loss, as well as by the commissions. On the other hand, if the profit target is very
wide, it will only occasionally be triggered, but when it does get hit, the profits
will be substantial. As with exits that employ stops, there is a compromise to be
made: The profit target must be placed close enough so that there can be benefit
from an increased percentage of winning trades and a reduction in slippage, but it
should not be so close that the per-trade profit becomes unreasonably small. An
exit strategy does not necessarily need to include a profit target exit. Some of the
other strategies, like a trailing stop, can also serve to terminate trades profitably.
They have the added benefit that if a significant trend develops, it can be ridden to
maturity for a very substantial return on investment. Under the same conditions,
but using a profit target exit, the trade would probably be closed out a long time
before the trend matures and, consequently, without capturing the bulk of the profit inherent in the move.
Personally, we prefer systems that have a high percentage of winning trades.
Profit targets can increase the percentage of wins. If a model that is able to reenter active trends is used, profit target exits may be effective. The advantages and
disadvantages really depend on the nature of the system being trading, as well as
on personal factors.
One kind of profit target we have experimented with, designed to close out
dead, languishing trades that fail to trigger other types of exits, might be called a
shn’nking target. A profit target that is very far away from the market is set.
Initially, it is unlikely to be triggered, but it is constantly moved closer and closer
to where the market is at any point in the trade. As the trade matures, despite the
fact that it is not going anywhere, it may be possible to exit with a small profit
when the profit target comes into a region where the market has enough volatility
to hit it, resulting in an exit at a good price and without slippage.
Time-Based Exits
Time-based exits involve getting out of the market on a market order after having
held a trade for a fixed period of time. The assumption is that if the market has not,
in the specified period of time, moved sufficiently to trigger a profit target or some
other kind of exit, then the trade is probably dead and just tying up margin. Since

the reason for having entered the trade in the first place may no longer be relevant,
the trade should be closed out and the next opportunity pursued.
Volatility Exits

A volatility exit depends on recognizing that the level of risk is increasing due to
rapidly rising market volatility, actual or potential. Under such circumstances, it is
prudent to close out positions and, in so doing, limit exposure. For instance, when
volatility suddenly expands on high volume after a sustained trend, a “blow-off
top might be developing. Why not sell off long positions into the buying frenzy?
Not only may a sudden retracement be avoided, but the fills are likely to be very
good, with slippage working with, rather than against, the trader! Another volatility exit point could be a date that suggests a high degree of risk, e.g., anniversaries
of major market crashes: If long positions are exited and the market trends up
instead, it is still possible to jump back in. However, if a deep downturn does
occur, the long position can be reentered at a much better price!
What else constitutes a point of increased risk? If an indicator suggests that
a trend is about to reverse, it may be wise to exit and avoid the potential reversal.
If a breakout system causes a long entry into the S&P 500 to occur several days
before the full moon, but lunar studies have shown that the market often drops
when the moon is full and the trade is still being held, then it might be a good idea
to close the position, thus avoiding potential volatility. Also remember, positions
need not be exited all at once. Just a proportion of a multicontract position can be
closed out, a strategy that is likely to help smooth out a trader’s equity curve.
Barrier

Exits

A barrier exit is taken when the market touches or penetrates some barrier, such as a
point of support or resistance, a trendline, or a Fibonacci retracement level. Barrier
exits are the best exits: They represent theoretical barriers beyond which interpretation
of market action must be revised, and they often allow very close stops to be set, thereby dramatically reducing losses on trades that go wrong. The trick is to find a good
barrier in approximately the right place. For example, a money management stop can
serve as a barrier exit when it is placed at a strong support or resistance level, if such
a level exists close enough to the entry price to keep potential loss within an acceptable level. The trailing exit also can be a barrier exit if it is based on a trendhne.
Signal

Exits

Signal exits occur when a system gives a signal (or indication) that is contrary to
a currently held position and the position is closed for that reason. The system generating the signal need not be the same one that produced the signal that initiated

288

the trade. In fact, the system does not have to be as reliable as the one used for
trade entry! Entries should be conservative. Only the best opportunities should be
selected, even if that means missing many potential entry points, Exits, on the
other hand, can be liberal. It is important to avoid missing any reversal, even at the
expense of a higher rate of false alarms. A missed entry is just one missed opportunity out of many. A missed exit, however, could easily lead to a downsized
account! Exits based on pattern recognition, moving average crossovers, and
divergences are signal exits.
CONSIDERATIONS WHEN EXITING THE MARKET
There are a number of issues to take into account when attempting to exit the mar
ket. Some orders, such as stops, may result in poor executions and substantial
transaction costs due to such factors as “gunning” and slippage. Other orders, such
as limits, may simply not be filled at all. There are also trade-offs to consider; e.g.,
tight stops might keep losses small but, at the same time, kill potentially winning
trades and increase the number of losses, Loose stops allow winning trades to
develop, but they do so at the cost of less frequent, but potentially catastrophic,
losses. In short, there are aspects to exiting that involve how the orders are placed
and how the markets respond to them.
Gunning

Sometimes putting stops in the market as they really are may not be prudent, especially when tight stops are being used Floor traders may try to gun the stops to pick
up a few ticks for themselves. In other words, the floor traders may intentionally try
to force the market to hit the stops, causing them to be executed. When stops are taken
out this way, the trader who placed them usually ends up losing. How can this be
avoided? Place a catastrophe stop with the broker, just in case trading action cannot
be taken quickly enough due to busy phones or difficult market conditions. The catastrophe stop is placed far enough away from the market that it is beyond the reach
of gunning and similar “mischief.” No one would like to see this stop hit, but at least
it will keep the trader from getting killed should something go badly wrong. The real
stop should reside only with the trader, i.e., in the system on the computer: when this
stop gets hit, the computer displays a message and beeps, at which time the broker
can be immediately phoned and the trade exited. Handled this way, tight stops can be
used safely and without the risk of being gunned.
Trade-Offs

with

Protective

Stops

Usually, as stops are moved in tighter, risk control gets better, but many winning
trades could be sacrificed, resulting in the decline of profit, Everyone would love

to use $100 stops in the S&P 500 because the losses on losing trades would be fairly small. However, most systems would lose 95% of tbe time! Certain systems
allow stops to be tight, just because of the way the market moves relative to the
entry point. Such systems yield a reasonable percentage of winning trades. When
developing systems, it is good to build in a tight stop tolerance property. Such systems are often based on support and resistance or other barrier-related models.
Many systems do not have a tight stop characteristic and so require wider stops.
Nevertheless, there is always a trade-off between having tight stops to control risk,
but not so tight that many winning trades are sacrificed. Loose stops will not sacrifice winning trades, but the bad trades may run away and be devastating. A compromise must be found that, in part, depends on the nature of the trading system
and the market being traded.
Slippage
Slippage is the amount the market moves from the instant the trading order is

placed or, in the case of a stop, triggered, to the instant that order gets executed.
Such movement translates into dollars. When considered in terms of stops, if the
market is moving against the trade, the speed at which it is moving affects the
amount that will be lost due to slippage. If the market is moving quickly and a
stop gets hit, a greater loss due to slippage is going to be experienced than if the
market was moving more slowly. If there was a stop loss on the S&P 500 of $500
and the market really started moving rapidly against the trade, $200 or $300 of
slippage could easily occur, resulting in a $700 or $800 loss, instead of the $500
loss that was anticipated. If the market is moving more slowly, then the slippage
might only be $25 or $50, resulting in a $525 or $550 loss. Slippage exists in all
trades that involve market or stop orders, although it may, in some circumstances,
work for rather than against the trader. Limit orders (e.g., “sell at $2 or better”)
are not subject to slippage, but such orders cannot close out a’position in an
emergency.
Contrarian Trading
If possible, exit long trades when most traders are buying, and exit short trades
when they are selling. Such behavior will make it easier to quickly close out a
trade, and to do so at an excellent price, with slippage working for rather than
against the trader. Profit targets usually exit into liquidity in the sense just discussed. Certain volatility exits also achieve an exit into liquidity. Selling at a blowoff top, for example, is selling into a buying frenzy! “Buy the rumor, sell the news”
also suggests the benefits of selling when everyone starts buying. Of course, not
all the exits in an exit strategy can be of a kind that takes advantage of exiting
into liquidity.

Conclusion
A complete exit strategy makes coordinated, simultaneous use of a variety of exit
types to achieve the goals of effective money management and profit taking. Every
trader must employ some kind of catastrophe and money management stop. It is also
advisable to use a trailing stop to lock in profits when the market is moving in the
trade’s favor. A risk- or volatility-based exit is useful for closing positions before a
stop gets hit-getting out with the market still moving in a favorable direction, or at
least not against the trade, means getting out quickly and with less slippage.
TESTING

EXIT

STRATEGIES

In the next few chapters, a variety of exit strategies are tested. In contrast to entries,
where an individual entry could be tested on its own, exits need company. An entire
exit strategy must be tested even if, for purposes of scientific study, only one element
at a time is altered to explore the effects. The reason for this involves the fact that an
exit must be achieved in some fashion to complete a trade. If an entry is not signaled
now, one will always come along later. This is not so with an exit, where exposure to
market risk can become unlimited over time, should one not be signaled. Consider,
for example, a money management stop with no other exit. Are looser stops, or perhaps the absence of any money management stop, better than tight ones? The first test
determines the consequences of using a very loose stop. If the no-stop condition was
the first tested, there would be no trades to use to evaluate money management stops;
i.e., there would only be an entry to a trade from which an exit would never occur.
With a loose stop, if the market goes in favor of the trade, perhaps the trade would be
held for years or never exited, leading to the same problem as the no-stop condition.
These examples illustrate why exits must be tested as parts of complete, even if simple, strategies, e.g., a stop combined with a time limit exit.
For the aforementioned reasons, all the tests conducted in Chapter 13 employ a
basic exit strategy, specifically, the standard exit strategy (and a modification thereon
used throughout the study of entries; this will provide a kind of baseline. In Chapters
14 and 1.5, several significant variations on, and additions too, the standard exit will
be. tested. More effective stops and profit targets, which attempt to lock in profit without cutting it short, are examined in Chapter 14. In Chapter 15, techniques developed
in the section on entries are brought into the standard exit strategy as additional components, specifically, as signal exits. Moreover, an attempt will be made to evolve
some of the elements in the exit stmtegy. To test these various exit strategies in a man
ner that allows comparisons to be made, a set of standard entry models is needed.
STANDARD

ENTRIES

FOR

TESTING

EXITS

When studying entries, it was necessary to employ a standard, consistent exit
methodology. Likewise, the investigation of exits requires the use of a standard
entry method, a rather shocking one, i.e., the random entry model. It works this

way: The market is entered at random times and in random directions. As in all
previous chapters, the number of contracts bought or sold on any entry is selected
to create a trade that has an effective dollar volatility equal to two contracts of the
S&P 500 at the end of 1998. Due to the need to avoid ambiguity when carrying
out simulations using end-of-day data, the entries used in the tests of the various
exit strategies are restricted to the open. If entry takes place only at the open, it
will be possible to achieve unambiguous simulations with exits that take place on
intrabar limits and stops. Unambiguous simulations involving such orders would
otherwise not be possible without using tick-by-tick data. As previously, the standard portfolio and test platform will be used.
The Random Entry Model

To obtain the random entries, a pseudo-random number generator (RNG) is used
to determine both when the trades are entered and whether those trades are long
or short. This approach is being taken for a number of reasons. First of all, a uniform way of testing exits is needed. Different types of entry systems have their
own unique characteristics that affect the ways in which different exits and/or
stops behave. For example, if an entry system forecasts exact market turning
points, a very tight money management stop can be used that might even improve
the system. However, with more typical entries, that might not be the case.
Therefore, it is preferable to take the kinds of entries that might be typical of a bad
system, or a system that is slightly tradable but not very good, to see how much
improvement can be had by use of a good exit. Obviously, a great entry system
makes everything easier and reduces the need to find perfect exits. An entry system that stays fixed over the exploration of the different types of exits allows determination of the degree to which profitability can be improved (or losses reduced)
by effective money management and exit strategies,
Second, random entries help ensure that the system contains a number of bad
trades, which are needed to test the mettle of any exit strategy. After all, the whole
idea of a good exit strategy is to cut all the bad trades quickly before they do damage and to preserve and grow the good trades. With a really good exit strategy, it
is reasonable to assume that bad trades will be exited before large losses are
incurred and that profit will be made from the good trades. This relates to the popular notion that if losses are cut short, the profits will come, regardless of the system. The studies that follow put the truth of this axiom to the test.
Last, the approach provides an entry model that has a reasonably large, fixed
number of trades. The sample consists of all kinds of trades, many bad ones and
some good ones (by accident or chance). Under such circumstances, the overall
performance of the system is expected to be due exclusively to the exits.
Generating the Random Entries.

The random entry model generates a long
series of numbers (composed of + Is, -Is, and OS), each of which corresponds to

292

a trading day. The numbers represent whether, for any given date, a long entry signal (+ l), a short entry signal (-I), or no entry signal at all (0) should be generated.
For example, the random entry system might generate a -1 on October 29, 1997,
which means that there is a signal to enter a short trade at the open on that date.
The RNG used to implement the random entry strategy is the one described
as ran2 in Numerical Recipes in C (Press et al., 1992). The period of this RNG is
greater than 2 multiplied by 10”. It is by far a better RNG than those normally
found in the run-time libraries that usually come with a programming language.
Signals are generated based on random numbers from this generator. On each bar,
a uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 1 is obtained from the
RNG. If the random number is less than 0.025, a short signal is generated. The
probability of a short being generated on any bar is 0.025; i.e., a short signal
should occur every 40 bars, on average. If the random number is greater than
0.975, a long signal is issued; these signals also should occur, on average, every
40 bars. In other words, on average, a long or a short trading signal should occur
every 20 bars. The limit and stop prices are calculated in the usual way. Orders are
placed in the usual manner.

C H A P T E R

1 3

The Standard Exit Strategy

The standard exit strategy (SES) was used throughout the tests of entry methods.

Basically, the SES employs a money management stop, a profit target limit, and a
market order for exit after a specified amount of time. The examination of this
strategy provides a baseline against which variations and more complex exit
strategies (studied in the next two chapters) may be judged. The SES is being
investigated using the random entry technique discussed in the “Introduction” to
Part III.
WHAT IS THE STANDARD EXIT STRATEGY?
Although the standard exit strategy is basic and minimal, it does incorporate elements that are essential to any exit strategy: profit taking, risk control, and time
exposure restraint. The profit-taking aspect of the SES is done through a profit target limit order that closes out a trade when it has become sufficiently profitable.
Tbe risk control aspect of the SES is accomplished using a simple money management stop that serves to close out a losing position with a manageable loss. The
time exposure restraint is achieved with a market order, posted after a certain
amount of time has elapsed. It closes out a languishing trade that has hit neither
the money management stop nor the profit target.
CHARACTERISTICS

OF

THE

STANDARD

EXIT

The standard exit was intended to be simply a minimal exit for use when testing
various entry strategies. As such it is not necessarily a very good exit. Unlike an
optimal exit strategy, the standard exit is unable to hold onto sustained trends and

294

ride them to the end. In addition, a profit can be developed and then lost. The reason is that the SES has no way of locking in any proportion of paper profit that
may develop. A good exit strategy would, almost certainly, have some method of
doing this. After having made a substantial paper profit, who would want to find
it quickly vanish as the market reverses its course? The fixed time limit also contributes to the inability of the SES to hold onto long, sustained moves, but it was
a desirable feature when testing entry strategies. Finally, the SES lacks any means
of attempting to exit a languishing trade at the best possible price, as might be
done, e.g., by using a shrinking profit target.
On the positive side, the SES does have the basics required of any exit strategy. Through its money management stop, the SES has a means of getting out of a
bad trade with a limited loss. The limit order or profit target allows the SES to close
a trade that turned substantially profitable. Using the time limit exit, the SES can exit
a trade that simply does not move. These three features make the standard exit definitely better than a random exit or a simple exit after a fixed number of bars.

PURPOSE OF TESTING THE SES
A major reason for testing the SES is to be able to make comparisons between it
and the other exit strategies that will be tested. The SES will serve as a good pivot
point or baseline, having been used in the study of entries. An additional benefit
that is quite important and useful is derived from these tests. The SES will be tested with a random en@, providing a random entry baseline against which the various real entries (tested in Part II) may be compared. The tests in this chapter,
therefore, provide baselines for both the previous chapters and those that follow.
An additional reason for doing these tests is to determine how much was lost by
restricting the SES to the close in earlier tests. In some of the tests below, the
restriction to the close will be lifted, an action that should improve the overall performance of the SES.
Four tests will be conducted. The first three tests examine the SES in the
form that was used in all the earlier chapters; i.e., entries will be taken at the open,
on a stop, or on a limit, and exits will take place only on the close. The remaining
test will study the SES in a way that permits stop and limit exits to take place
inside the bar, lifting the restriction of the exit to the close; the entry in this test
will only take place on the open, to avoid the kinds of ambiguity mentioned in the
previous chapter.
