
How did you first get interested in the stock market?
My dad traded for a living back in the 1970s. When I was about
eleven or twelve, I became curious about what he did and asked him
a lot of questions. He gave me a book to read, When to Sell Stocks by
Justin Mammis. Note that the title of the book wasn't When to Buy
Stocks, but When to Sell Stocks. My dad's focus was mainly on short
selling.
How did your dad do in the markets?
He did well enough to support a family for five or six years.

What happened after that?
He went back to school to earn an M.B.A. and then established a
consulting business.
Did you learn anything about the markets from your dad?
Definitely. He taught me the importance of taking profits, which I
have incorporated into our strategy.

Taking profits in what sense?
The idea that a profit isn't real until it is realized.
The other big influence for me were my uncles, Uncle Louie and
Uncle Larry, who both traded stocks. When I was little, we would
have family gatherings. Uncle Louie would be seated on one side,
Uncle Larry on the other, and my dad across the table, and they would
all be talking about the stock market. I was the only son, and I thought
that's what men did. When I got into the business, Uncle Louie and
Uncle Larry were accounts of mine, and I learned a lot from them.
What did they teach you?
The importance of discipline. If you have a loss, get out.

MICHAETMASTERS

Did you go to college with the intention of becoming a money
manager?
No, I went to college with the intention of becoming a doctor. Actually, I went to the University of Tennessee because 1 had a swimming
scholarship. That experience helped a lot. There is no way I could be
doing what I am today without that background.

How so?
Getting used to the pain. We did some crazy sets in training. We
would swim as much as twenty thousand or twenty-five thousand
meters a day. The coach would come over and say, "Okay we're going
to do a hundred 200s" [a hundred repeats of 200-yard intervals], and
your heart would sink. You just knew it was going to hurt.
How far did you get in your swimming career?
I was a collegiate ail-American in the sprint freestyle.
What does all-American imply?
It means that you are in the top eight in the NCAA championships.
Did you try out for the Olympics?
I went to the Olympic trials, but I didn't make it. I came down with
the mumps the summer before the trials, and I didn't have enough
time to get back into peak condition. I would, however, have ranked
high enough the year before to have made the team.
Did you try out at the next Olympic trials?
Swimming is not a real profitable sport. I would have been twenty-six
by the time of the next trials. I could have hung around, but I had
been swimming a long time, and I'd had enough of it.
Do you still swim?
I swim a little bit, but not as much as I should. I just don't have the
time.
How did you make the transition from being premed to being a
trader?
When I got through organic chemistry, I realized that I didn't have any
passion for going to medical school.
Why did you want to become a doctor in the first place?
When I was ten years old, I had a really bad accident and ended up in
the hospital for many weeks. As a kid, I was impressed by watching the

S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H THE M A R K E T S

doctors in the hospital, and I thought it would be a good occupation. I
liked the idea that the job combined both science and helping people.
What kind of accident?
I ran into a plate glass window. We had sliding doors out to our pool.
One day I was running back into the house, and I thought I had left
the doors open, but they were closed. I ran right into the glass and it
shattered, cutting me all over. The cut in my leg went all the way
through to my femur and severed my tendons. I don't know if you
noticed, but I still have a limp. I had to relearn how to walk. Actually,
that is how I first became involved in swimming; it was part of the
therapy.
Your mom must have kept the windows very clean.
Yes she did. But after the accident she always made sure to have tape
across the glass doors.
What changed your mind about becoming a doctor? There had to
be more to it than not liking organic chemistry.
After two or three years in college, I realized that I really didn't have
any desire to become a doctor; I was only on that track because of a
goal I had as a ten-year-old. I took some finance courses, which I
really enjoyed, including an investment course that was tremendous,
and I switched my major.
What did you learn in that investment course?
The typical valuation theories—the Graham & Dodd-type stuff [a
classic investment text].
Do you use that type of analysis in your own trading?
I don't use it much, but it's a good background to have. I think it's very
useful just so that you can measure other investors' perceptions of
what is important.
What part of the academic background might still find its way
into your current approach?
Portfolio theory. The conventional theory is that you should diversify
your portfolio so that you can remove the unsystematic, or company
specific, risk. That way, if a company blows up, you don't get hurt by
it. But that also means that you end up tracking the index. If your goal
is to outperform the index, using that type of strategy makes it very

MICHAEL MASTERS

difficult to succeed. We stand portfolio theory on its head. We actually try to take unsystematic risk by being in stocks when the unsystematic risk is high relative to the systematic risk (that is, at times
when the stock's price movement will be more influenced by companyspecific events as opposed to directional movements of the stock
market as a whole).
What did you do after you graduated college?
I decided to go to business school, which allows you to put off the
decision of doing anything for another couple of years. I applied to
Emory, which is a local school, and I didn't bother applying anywhere
else. I was told by the admission officer that they'd love to have me,
but I didn't have the work experience, which I found out was one of
the entry requirements at Emory at the time. The only work experience I had was mowing lawns and summer jobs at a steel mill, which
didn't exactly qualify.
I decided to get work experience by applying for a job in the brokerage industry. There was a fellow who lived near me who worked at
a brokerage firm and thought I was industrious because he had seen
me mowing lawns in the neighborhood. Also, he had played college
football, and he liked the idea that I had been a college athlete as
well. He told me that he would give me a shot as a broker, even
though I didn't have the typical profile.
What is the typical profile?
Sales experience.
Did they have a training course?
Yes, two weeks on how to sell.

What happened after the training course?
I was given a list of people to cold-call.
Was that difficult to do?
It was real difficult to do. I also did cold-call visits with one of the
other trainees. We knocked on doors in the neighborhood, trying to
get people to open accounts. One time we went into a grocery store,
and it turned out that the owner's brother-in-law had lost all his
money in the stock market. The grocery owner chased us out of his
store, swinging a big loaf of bread at us, and yelling, "I don't want to

SWIMMING T H R O U G H THE MARKETS

talk to you brokers. Get out of here!" [He laughs lengthily at the recollection.]
I guess you were lucky it wasn't a hardware store. What percent
of your cold calls were you able to convert into accounts?
About 1 percent. After I had been in the business for a while, I figured out that I wanted to be on the managing side, not the selling
side. The company, however, wanted you to sell financial products. If
you were a broker who wanted to manage money, they looked at you
as if you had two heads.
Were you successful as a broker?
I was able to survive, which I guess is somewhat successful. One of
the problems I had with my company was that I thought their commission structure was too high. So I just changed it.
Did you have approval to do that?
I didn't.
You just unilaterally lowered commissions?
Yes, because the commissions were just too high to trade.
So you realized even then that paying full commissions would
make trading a losing game?
Absolutely. If the clients are not going to win, they are not going to
stay with you.

How did your company react to your lowering commissions?
They were upset when they found out about it.
By how much did you reduce commissions?
About 90 percent. Of course, now you have discount brokerage, but it
was different then.

What did you know at the time that was right, and what did you
know that was wrong?
I learned that if I thought ahead about events, I usually made money,
but if I waited until events happened, I would lose. For example, I
remember situations where a company reported positive earnings, but
the stock sold off because the news had already been discounted.
That was a good lesson for me.

When did you make the transition from a broker to a fund manager?

SWIMMING THRQUGIfTHE M A R K E T S

MICHAETMASTERS

I reached a point where the trading in my own account was becoming
reliably profitable, and I felt I was ready to go out on my own. But the
actual move was a forced issue.
Forced issue in what sense?
I was fired. I had a number of discretionary accounts that were below
the firm's minimum. The office manager said, "You can't trade these
accounts below the company minimum."
I said, "Yes I can."
He said, "No you can't. You're out of here!"
It was something that I psychologically really wanted to happen. I
guess I just needed a good kick in the ass to make the transition. I
wasn't comfortable being a broker anymore.
Why is that?
Because anytime you're trying to make money for both the firm and
the client, there is a built-in conflict. 1 wanted to manage money on a
performance basis because I thought it was far cleaner. I had some
ethical problems with the brokerage business.
Such as?
There are subtle pressures for you to push stocks the firm is underwriting and to sell mutual funds with whom the firm has a relationship, even though they may be lower-rated funds.
What if you try to sell other mutual funds?
You may get a lower commission on the sale, and in some cases you
may not get any commission at all.
What happened after you got fired?
I spoke to my dad about what I should do, and he suggested that I
should try going out on my own. Although I liked the idea of having
my income based on my performance, I was concerned about
whether anyone would be interested in having me manage their
money when my only experience was being a broker.
What made you believe that you could be a successful money
manager?
Except for my dad and my wife, Suzanne, everyone said that you
couldn't trade successfully and advised me against trying to do it. Your
books [Market Wizards and The New Market Wizards] were actually
very helpful because they showed me that it was possible. Just know-

•S

ing that was very important. 1 realized that if somebody could make
money trading, so could I. Also, the fact that I had competed successfully at the highest levels of swimming gave me confidence that I
could excel in this business as well.
But what was that confidence based on? Were you getting trading results anything like those you are getting now?
For years, I had done only slightly better than breakeven in my own
account. But my trading results were just beginning to improve significantly when I was fired.
What changed?
I started focusing on catalysts. One thing that helped me tremendously was writing the software for my trading ideas. My father wrote
a lot of software for his food service consulting business, and he
advised me, "If you really want to know something, you should write
software for it."
What did you put in your model?
All types of inputs, but I found that the catalysts outweighed everything else. As a result, the model ended up focusing almost completely on the catalysts.
What exactly do you mean by catalysts':'
A catalyst is an event or an upcoming event that has the potential to
trigger a stock price move by changing the market's perception about
a company.
Isn't a catalyst by definition a one-time event? How do you model
one-time events?
Most catalysts are repetitive events—earnings are reported four times
a year; retail companies report same-store sales monthly; airline companies report load factors monthly, and so on.
How do you use an event such as an earnings report to make
trading decisions?
There have been lots of academic studies to show that stocks with
positive earnings surprises tend to outperform the market, but the
margin of improvement is relatively moderate. Frequently, you may
find that when you buy a stock after a positive earnings surprise, you
are buying it near a price peak because the earnings surprise was
already discounted.

SWIMMING THROUGH THE M A R K E T S

How could it be discounted if it was a "surprise"?
We are talking about two different things. An "earnings surprise" is
defined by academics and Wall Street as a number that is above or
below the consensus estimate by some minimum margin. Whether an
earnings surprise is discounted or not, however, depends on the price
trend before the report's release. For example, if a stock goes up 10
points in a flat market during the week prior to the earnings report,
and earnings are reported as only a nickel better than the consensus,
it may be a "surprise" in terms of the academic definition, but it's
probably already discounted.
Don't any of the academic studies consider the stock price trend
before a number's release?
No, they only look at whether a number beats the consensus expectations. Although this is still useful information, by considering other
factors, such as the price trend in the stock before the release of the
earnings report and the magnitude of the difference between
reported earnings and expected earnings, you can significantly
increase the probabilities of a successful trade.
For example, if I crossed a street without looking, I could
decrease my chances of getting hit by a car by crossing at 2 A.M.
instead of midday. That would be analogous to the information these
academic studies use—it is worthwhile, but there is lots of room for
improvement. What if I listened when I crossed the street? That
would reduce the odds of my getting hit by a car even more. What if
I not only listened, but looked one way? My survival odds would
increase further. What If I looked both ways? I would increase my
chances even more. That's what we're doing in our analysis. We are
trying to increase the probabilities of a trade being successful as
much as possible.
Therefore, as an example, I assume that if a stock moved down
before a positive earnings surprise, it increases the probabilities

of a bullish market response.
Absolutely. If a stock goes down before a report because of negative
expectations and then there is a positive earnings surprise, there will
be shorts who have to cover, new investors who want to buy, and a

completely undiscounted event. In this type of situation you can get a
tremendous response in the stock.
But won't the stock gap up sharply after earnings are reported
and eliminate the profit opportunity?
The stock price will go up, but usually it will not fully discount the
change. That is one of the problems with the efficient market hypothesis. The market doesn't discount all information instantaneously.
What happens when you put on a position before a report
because you anticipate a better-than-expected figure and the
actual number is worse than expected or vice versa?
We just get out, usually right away. We make lots of trades, and I
make mistakes all the time. Every day I come in and get humbled [he

The whole Street focuses on events that provide catalysts; what
gives you the edge?
Our whole focus is looking for catalysts. It's not just part of our strategy; it is our strategy.
How do you decide when to get out of a position?
One thing that has been tremendously helpful is the use of time
stops. For every trade I put on, 1 have a time window within which the
trade should work, f f something doesn't happen within the time stop,
the market is probably not going to discount that event.
What is your balance between longs and shorts?
Our net position averages about 40 percent net long and has ranged
between 90 percent net long and 10 percent net short. A typical
breakdown would be 50 percent long and 10 percent short, with the
remainder in cash.

That's a pretty large portion to keep in cash.
We have a dual mission: to make money for our investors and to preserve capital. Keeping about 40 percent in cash acts as a performance
stabilizer.
How are you able to trounce the index returns while keeping
such a large portion of your capital in cash?
We look at our business like a grocery store. You can get leverage in
two ways: by taking on larger positions or by turnover. Just like a gro-

MICHAEL MASTERS

eery store, we're constantly getting inventory in and moving it out the
door. If we have a piece of meat that's going bad, we mark it down to
get rid of it.
Typically, how long might you hold a position?
On average, about two to four weeks.
What percent of your trades are profitable?
Just over 70 percent.

Do you use technical analysis?
We use technical analysis not because we think it means something,
but because other people think it means something. We are always
looking for market participants to take us out of a trade, and in that
sense, knowing the technical points at which people are likely to be
buying or selling is helpful.

Do you use the Internet as an information source?
The main thing I use on the Internet is TheStreet.com. I like Jim
Cramer's running market commentary. This Web page is one of the
best Internet resources available to the ordinary investor. One thing I
would caution investors about, however, is paying attention to chat
rooms, where the information can be very tainted because people
have an agenda.
Are there trades that have provided valuable lessons?
Hundreds. When you order business cards, you get a huge stack of
them. I hardly ever hand out any business cards because I am not in
marketing. Instead, I use the back of my business cards to jot down
trade lessons. For any trade that I find instructive regarding market
behavior, I'll write down the stock symbol and a brief summary of
what I think I learned from the trade. That's how I developed and
continue to build my trading model.
I believe that writing down your trading philosophy is a tremendously valuable exercise for any investor. Writing down your trading
ideas helps clarify your thought process. I can remember spending
many weekends at the library writing down my investment philosophy: what catalysts I was looking for; how I expected them to affect a
stock; and how I would interpret different price responses. I must
have accumulated over five hundred pages of trading philosophy.
Frankly, it was a lot of drudge work, and I could only do it for so long in

SWIMMING T H R O U G H THE M A R K E T S

one sitting. But the process was invaluable in developing my trading
approach.

What other advice do you have for investors?
One of the benefits of having been a retail broker is that 1 got to see a
lot of people's mistakes. Based on this experience, the most important
advice I can offer investors is: Have a plan. Know why you are buying
a stock, and know what you are looking for on the trade. If you just
take a step back and think about what you are doing, you can avoid a
lot of mistakes.

Masters's approach can be summarized as a four-step process:
1. Learn from experience. For any trade that is instructive (winner or
loser), write down what you learned about the market from that
trade. It doesn't make any difference whether you keep a trader's
diary or use the back of business cards, as Masters does; the
important thing is that you methodically record market lessons as
they occur.
2. Develop a trading philosophy. Compile your experience-based
trading lessons into a coherent trading philosophy. Two points
should be made here. First, by definition, this step will be
unachievable by beginners because it will take the experience of
many trades to develop a meaningful trading philosophy. Second,
this step is a dynamic process; as a trader gathers more experience and knowledge, the existing philosophy should be revised
accordingly.
3. Define high-probability trades. Use your trading philosophy to
develop a methodology for identifying high-probability trades. The
idea is to look for trades that exhibit several of the characteristics
you have identified as having some predictive value. Even if each
condition provides only a marginal edge, the combination of several such conditions can provide a trade with a significant edge.
4. Have a plan. Know how you will get into a trade, and know how
you will get out of the trade. Many investors make the mistake of
only focusing on the former of these two requirements. Masters
not only has a specific method for selecting and entering trades,

MICHAEL MASTERS

but he also has a plan for liquidating trades. He will exit a trade
whenever one of the following three conditions are met: (a) his
profit objective for the trade is realized; (b) the expected catalyst
fails to develop or the stock fails to respond as anticipated; (c) the
stock fails to respond within a predefined length of time (the
"time stop" is triggered).

JOHN BENDER
Questioning the Obvious

If John Bender is right about options*—and, given his performance, there is
good reason to believe he is—then virtually everyone else is wrong. Bender asserts that the option pricing theory developed by Nobel Prize-winning economists, which underlies virtually all option pricing models used
by traders worldwide, is fundamentally flawed. This contention is not
just a theoretical argument; Bender's entire methodology is based on betting against the price implications of conventional option models. Bender
places trades that will profit if his model's estimates of price probabilities
are more accurate than those implied by prevailing option prices, which
more closely reflect standard option pricing models.
Bender has maintained a surprisingly low profile, in view of the large
sums of money he is managing and his excellent performance. His fund
did not show up in any of the industry databases I checked. As was the
case for the majority of interview subjects in this book and its two predecessors, 1 found Bender through networking with industry contacts.
Bender graduated with high honors from the University of Pennsylvania in 1988, receiving a degree in biophysics. During his summers as an
undergraduate, Bender held several scientific jobs, including positions at
Livermore Labs and the Marine Biological Laboratories at Woods Hole.
Although he liked science, he was disenchanted because the career scientists he observed were forced to spend much of their time seeking
grants instead of doing research. At the same time, he became intrigued
*It is recommended that readers unfamiliar with options first review the brief primer on
options in the appendix before reading this chapter.
