
FIGURE 4.21 Widening interest rate diﬀerentials between German and United
States 10-year bond yields left little choice for currency traders but to send EUR/USD
higher.

P1: JYS
c04
JWBT010-Laidi

October 13, 2008

106

16:11

Printer: Yet to come

CURRENCY TRADING AND INTERMARKET ANALYSIS

New Zealand Dollar: +13 percent
The kiwi’s performance resulted from aggressive rate hikes and soaring dairy prices, which provided a robust growth foundation for the rising currency. Speculative interest also played a vital role in sustaining
the kiwi’s gains, especially from traders who funded their investments
with low-yielding currencies such as the yen. The Reserve Bank of New
Zealand (RBNZ) raised the official cash rate four times, driving it to 8.25
percent, the highest level since its introduction in 1999. Persistent demand
strength from Asia was supported by strong growth GDP rates in China
and NIAEs at 11.3 percent and 3.9 percent respectively. Currency strength
lifted the kiwi to 25-year highs against the U.S. dollar, prompting the central
bank to intervene by selling kiwis in the open market to stabilize the trend.
But the interventions proved too little against the speculative interest
propping the currency. The RBNZ gave up intervening after three failed attempts and the kiwi pursued its run-up to multidecade highs. The threat
of rising inflationary pressures emerging from record-breaking dairy prices
was stabilized by the strong currency, thus providing an impetus to real
interest rates. GDP growth hit a three-year high of 2.8 percent, while inflation stabilized at 2.4 percent. Similar to the aussie, the kiwi sustained sharp
declines during the stock market corrections of February–March, August,
and November 2007.

Swiss Franc: −10 percent
The low-yielding Swiss franc served its role of a funding currency to carry
trades targeting higher-yielding currencies and growth alternatives such
as stock indexes, individual stocks, oil, and gold. Consequently, the franc
came under sharp pressure during periods of rising risk appetite and low
market volatility during which investors leveraged their investments in the
rallying markets by borrowing in cheap francs. Conversely, the franc rallied significantly as those trades were unwound during periods of rising
volatility. During the weeks of surging volatility, on March 2, August 17, and
November 9, the S&P 500 dropped 5.2 percent, 6.5 percent, and 4.7 percent
respectively, while the Swiss franc rallied against the USD and AUD by
0.2 percent and 2.9 percent, 1.7 percent and 9.0 percent, 3.3 percent and
4.4 percent respectively.

Japanese Yen: −17 percent
Similar to the Swiss franc, the Japanese yen had its share of carry trade
sales, shedding 7 percent in trade-weighted terms to reach a 22-year low in
July 2007. Once the summer market turmoil deteriorated into the rest of the
year, JPY rebounded 4 percent, ending down 0.5 percent on the year. The

P1: JYS
c04
JWBT010-Laidi

October 13, 2008

16:11

The Dollar Bear Awakens (2002–2007)

Printer: Yet to come

107

currency was characterized by several episodes of extremely rapid gains,
gaining more than 4 percent or 500 points in a single day (August 16). But
unlike its Swiss counterpart, the Bank of Japan held rates unchanged at
0.5 percent, worrying that slowing U.S. growth would drag down Japan’s
economy and a rate hike would risk jeopardizing the fragile recovery.

British Pound: −40 percent
The British pound was the worst-performing currency in 2007 behind the
beleaguered U.S. dollar. Despite having breached the $2.00 level, hitting
26-year highs, sterling gave up most of its earlier 9 percent gains versus the
greenback to end the year barely 1 percent higher. The currency closed at
all-time lows against the euro to lose 8.0 percent.
After a strong seven months, sterling’s fundamentals began to deteriorate due to prolonged declines in housing prices, a struggling banking
sector suffering from dried-up liquidity, and a near collapse of the nation’s
biggest mortgage lender, as well as eroding confidence among households
and businesses. Personal debt had been stretched to the extent that the
savings ratio headed below zero, a level not seen since the late 1980s, while
household debt service soared to 14 percent of incomes, the highest since
1991. House price indexes began showing three consecutive monthly declines, a pattern not seen in over 12 years. With over a million fixed-rate
mortgages due for reset in 2008, the risks to UK personal debt were considerable and also for consumer demand. Estimates placed the number of
homes to be repossessed in 2007 at 30,000 to 45,000 in 2008, the highest
since the property crisis of the 1990s. In other sectors of the economy, the
services sector dropped to its lowest level in four and a half years.
UK interest rates were raised three times, reaching a six-year high of
5.75 percent. But as the cracks began to show, the Bank of England was
obliged to cut rates by 25 bps in December, earlier than it anticipated in
the November inflation report. Considering the aforementioned downside
risks, traders perceived UK rates as the highest in the G7, but also with the
greatest potential for rate cuts by the central bank. The Bank of England
had already been forced into a unanimous decision to cut rates in December, one month earlier than it predicted at the November inflation report.
We expect the BoE to cut rates by 100 bps in 2008, taking down rates to
4.50 percent, which would deal sharp erosion to real interest rates, currently at 3.4 percent as of this writing.

U.S. Dollar: −51 percent
The dollar’s trade-weighted index dropped 9 percent to 74.79, its lowest
level ever since it was created in 1967. The speed of the 2007 dollar decline was particularly intensified by two factors: (1) the speed at which the

P1: JYS
c04
JWBT010-Laidi

October 13, 2008

108

16:11

Printer: Yet to come

CURRENCY TRADING AND INTERMARKET ANALYSIS

Federal Reserve shifted its policy emphasis from worrying about
inflation—in August—to making an about-turn and slashing interest rates
within less than four weeks; (2) the continued divergence in growth and interest rates between the United States and the rest of the G7, to the extent
of driving the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates, while the ECB, United
Kingdom, Canada, and Australia were raising interest rates. Less than five
months after the U.S. central bank told the markets that inflationary pressures were the greater risk to policy and that U.S. growth would revert
to its trend growth within a year, the interest rates were cut by 100 bps,
a magnitude that reflected the Fed’s considerable underestimation of the
downside risks to the economy and the deterioration in housing.
One other factor behind the falling value of the dollar is that of reserve
diversification away from U.S. dollars among global central banks and
private asset managers. China’s central bank had already reduced the
proportion of its $1.7 trillion in currency reserves from over 90 percent
USD-denominated in 2000 to less than 70 percent in 2005. Chinese officials
also made comments about the need for reserve diversification. Although
such pronouncements meant that central banks would slow their future
accumulation of U.S. dollars, rather than dump their U.S. reserves, they
triggered various bouts of dollar selling and worsening sentiment for the
currency.
Speculation also emerged that some Arab Gulf nations (United Arab
Emirates and Saudi Arabia) would end their policy of pegging their currencies to the U.S. dollar and move toward a basket of currencies due to
the falling value of the dollar fueling these nations’ inflation rates. With the
dollar having lost over 30 percent of its value in trade-weighted terms over
the previous five years, the currency’s decline sent inflation soaring in the
Gulf countries, prompting Kuwait to break from its dollar peg in early 2007
and to revalue its currency twice after inflation hit an all-time high of 14.8
percent in March. Speculation abounded that the UAE, another country
maintaining its dollar peg, may either revalue its currency to a new peg or
break off the currency system altogether after inflation reached a 19-year
high of 9.3 percent. In early January, officials from Saudi Arabia and the
UAE said they would continue pegging their currencies to the U.S. dollar
and no revaluation will take place. We suspect the issue will be revisited
when the greenback sustains its next bout of declines, prompting the Gulf
nations to rethink their currency regimes.

LESSONS LEARNED
Several lessons can be learned from the currency developments of 1999–
2007.

P1: JYS
c04
JWBT010-Laidi

October 13, 2008

16:11

The Dollar Bear Awakens (2002–2007)

Printer: Yet to come

109

The most striking pattern prevailing through the eight-year period is
the growing polarity between EUR and USD. As the two currencies dominated trading in global foreign exchange markets, one currency would
persistently act as an opposite for the other. Daily trading averages in
EUR/USD accounted for 30 percent of total market turnover in 2001, before
retreating toward 28 percent in 2004. However, trading in the currency pair
increased 42 percent to $501 billion between 2001 and 2004, before leaping
67 percent to $840 billion from 2004 to 2007.
On the commodities front, the demonstrable link between global
growth and commodity currencies (AUD, NZD, and CAD) was brought
to the fore at the turn of the new millennium, especially on the heels of
China’s tremendous appetite for commodities. Consequently, foreign exchange markets became segmented into a new set of currencies, against
which low-yielding currencies were the first to drop during any signs of improved global growth such as strong economic data from the United States
or China, or any signs of reduced risk appetite.
Since the late 1990s, risk appetite and carry trades have grown to form
the single most influencing dynamic in foreign exchange markets since
2005. The combination of the widening gulf between low- and high-yielding
currencies, and the reduction of fear—as gauged via falling volatility and
rising global equities—had triggered a nearly systematic shift into higheryielding currencies at the expense of the low-yielding CHF, JPY, and the
USD. Among these three currencies, JPY fares as the most consistent loser
during risk appetite trades—in other words, the accumulation of carry
trades. Conversely, JPY is the main winner out of these three currencies
during rising volatility and falling equities.
The multicurrency performances of 1999–2007 have also proven that
interest rate differentials do not always succeed in solely influencing currency values. Other important factors such as global growth, risk aversion,
carry trade unwinding, and the direct relationship between commodities
and their currencies have had significant weight. The year 2001 proved to
be one of those situations, when the deepening slowdown in the United
States and an impending cooling abroad led investors to reward the dollar
during the Fed’s aggressive easing.
Capital flows are another reason why interest rate differentials may
not work in driving currencies. In 1999, the lowest-yielding currency, the
yen, was the highest performer among the major eight currencies, while
NZD was the highest-yielding and lowest-performing currency. Escalating anticipation of an eventual Japanese recovery following the slump of
the 1990s drove asset managers to snap up Japanese stocks, which were
largely deemed to be undervalued. Conversely, a soaring trade deficit in
New Zealand, partly as a result of declining food and agricultural prices,
sent the kiwi to the bottom of the league. In such cases where the interest

P1: JYS
c04
JWBT010-Laidi

110

October 13, 2008

16:11

Printer: Yet to come

CURRENCY TRADING AND INTERMARKET ANALYSIS

rate landscape is largely unchanged, other dynamics succeed in taking over
the influence over foreign exchange values.
Increasingly regionalized economic activity within Asia Pacific and
East Asia has acted as a quasi hedge for the AUD and NZD from economic
headwinds in Western Europe and North America. The reverse relation took place in 1998–1999 when regional trade was hampered by the
1997–1999 Asian crises. The relationship is particularly robust between
the annual aggregate returns of the aussie and annual GDP growth of
newly industrialized Asian economies. The powerful advance in China’s
GDP growth between 2004 and 2005 proved a vital source of demand for
Australia’s iron ore industry, thus alleviating the fallout from the burst of
Australia’s real estate bubble.
The strong positive correlation between copper prices and the Australian dollar was instrumental in identifying turnarounds in the aussie that
may have not been anticipated via interest rates. The extent of the relationship is also underlined by not only whether copper has ended higher or
lower at year-end but also by the metal’s most recent performance shift
during the year. Thus, even if copper has ended the year on a high note, it
may have a negative impact on the aussie in the event of a decline in the
latter part of the year, such as was the case in 2000 and 2002.

P1: JYS
c05
JWBT010-Laidi

October 12, 2008

8:48

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 5

Risk Appetite
in the Markets

anaging risk has become an increasingly integral part of the
risk/return trade-off in financial markets over the years as participants seek to improve the profitability of their investments while
attempting to reduce their downside. Increasing risk can adopt one of
the following forms: (1) concentrating assets in securities with similar
risk/return attributes; (2) holding securities with the probability of high
rates of return and correspondingly high probability of losing the initial
investment; (3) selecting securities with relatively high volatility or variability of returns; and finally, (4) borrowing funds with the intention of enhancing the rate of return at the risk of magnifying the potential of a loss.
The latter type of investment risk is most relevant to this chapter as
it involves risk appetite in the way funds are raised and where they are
invested. Speculation may be more apt to describe this type of endeavor
due to the high potential of losing all of one’s initial capital in a relatively
short period of time as well as the use of borrowed funds. Yet, regardless
of the likelihood of recouping one’s initial investment, the principal idea is
underlined by the notion of minimizing the use of one’s own funds with the
hope of maximizing the rate of return.
The following example can be used to illustrate risk appetite relevant
to this chapter. Let’s say Jane purchases 200 shares of a pharmaceutical
company priced at $50 each with the intention of selling them in two weeks
based on her expectation of a favorable ruling by the Federal Drug Administration. Jane evaluates two options to go about her $10,000 investment:
(1) Use her own funds to pay $10,000 for the shares, or (2) borrow $10,000
from a bank at a 7 percent interest rate repayable in one year. Assuming the

M

111

P1: JYS
c05
JWBT010-Laidi

112

October 12, 2008

8:48

Printer: Yet to come

CURRENCY TRADING AND INTERMARKET ANALYSIS

FDA rejects the introduction of a new drug by the company and the stock
price plummets to $15 per share after one year, Jane’s holdings would drop
to $3,000. Had Jane used her own funds in the first option, her total loss
would be $7,000. Had she borrowed the funds at 7 percent, Jane would
be obligated to return the initial $10,000 loan plus the interest rate cost of
$722.90 resulting from 7 percent charged monthly, bringing her total cost
to $10,722.90. Spending $10,722.90 on an investment that fell to $3,000 entails a loss of 357 percent, versus a loss of 40 percent in the case of the
no-loan option.
If, however, the price of the stock rises by 40 percent to $70 after one
year, following a favorable ruling by the FDA, Jane’s holdings would grow
to $14,000, netting her a 40 percent gain on her investment. Under the same
price increase scenario, Jane’s 7 percent loan would have an interest cost
of $722.90, netting her a profit of $13,277.10 or a 1,837 percent rate of return. By leveraging her investment through borrowing, Jane has magnified
her rate of return to 1,837 percent compared to only 40 percent when she
uses her own money. Conversely, the loan would have magnified her loss
to a 357 percent loss compared to 40 percent using her own money.
There are several factors driving Jane to embrace risk and borrow
money to fund her investment. But for the sake of relevance to this chapter, I focus on the environmental factors impacting her tolerance for risk.
These may include a generally favorable stance by the FDA toward new
drugs, a bull market in pharmaceutical stocks prompted by rising health
care costs, expanding economic growth, or broader media attention on the
disorder that the pharmaceutical company aims to treat. None of these dynamics are related to the company per se, but they do shape the general climate impacting the share price. As these factors bolster Jane’s confidence
in the stock, her risk appetite is improved, prompting her to magnify her bet
by leveraging the purchase of the stock. Thus, even if there is no improvement in the company’s specific fundamentals, Jane’s risk appetite may be
driven by a generally positive environment, conducive to raising risk appetite and confidence, sometimes at the expense of overlooking some vital
elements pertinent to the individual stock.
Similarly, we will see next how emerging shifts in economic growth,
market volatility, liquidity, and confidence can lead to fluctuations in risk
appetite over relatively short periods of time, triggering tremendous fluctuations in the foreign exchange market.

CARRY TRADES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE
Borrowing money at low interest rates to fund higher-yielding loans has
been the conventional source of revenue for banks for as long as credit

P1: JYS
c05
JWBT010-Laidi

October 12, 2008

Risk Appetite in the Markets

8:48

Printer: Yet to come

113

providers have been around. The same principal is also the basis of currency carry trades, whereby hedge funds, asset managers, or individuals
borrow funds in low-yielding currencies (funding currencies) to convert
and deposit the proceeds in bonds or certificates of deposit in higheryielding currencies, aiming to reap the return from the interest rate differential. An extra return can be obtained during the appreciation of the
high-yielding currency, while in other cases the currency depreciation is
greater than the interest rate differential, making the carry trade a losing
investment. The two components on which carry trades rest are therefore
currency- and yield-related.
Carry trades are also used in bond investing within the same currency
by borrowing (selling) bonds at short-term interest rates to finance the
purchase of long-term bonds at higher rates. The difference between the
coupon received from the higher-yielding bond and the interest cost paid
on the shorter-term bond is called the carry return. The downside risk
entails an unexpected decline in the price of long-term bonds (and rising
long-term interest rates), and a rise in the price of short-term bonds (falling
short-term rates). As investors unwind these positions (i.e., sell their holdings of long-term bonds and repay their short-term borrowing), they accelerate the decline in the price of long-term bonds, exacerbating the rise
in their yield and triggering the opposite reaction in the price and rates of
short-term bonds.
Let’s return to carry trades in currencies. Suppose an investor borrows
100,000 yen from a Japanese bank at 0.70 percent interest and deposits
the proceeds in a U.S. dollar–denominated 10-year government bond worth
$1,000, paying 5 percent interest. The investor stands to make 4.3 percent
from the interest differential plus or minus the exchange rate risk. If the
U.S. dollar appreciates by 5 percent over the duration of the investment,
the investor makes 9.3 percent (4.3 percent yield differential plus 5 percent
currency gain). If the dollar loses 5 percent against the yen, the investment
nets a loss of 1.3 percent (4.3 percent yield differential minus 5 percent
currency loss).
This example illustrates that currency carry trades have interest rate
and currency elements. While higher interest rate differentials play a major role in spurring interest in carry trades, the potential for currency appreciation or depreciation is also essential in sustaining the viability of
the trade.
Such a straightforward investment endeavor is the basis of hundreds
of billions of dollars worth of daily carry trades by foreign exchange
dealers, proprietary traders, and hedge fund managers. As these players
aim at reaping the gains from the interest rate differential, they tend to
leverage their positions to magnify their returns from what appears to be
an assured investment. Accumulating over $2.3 trillion in daily turnover,

P1: JYS
c05
JWBT010-Laidi

October 12, 2008

114

8:48

Printer: Yet to come

CURRENCY TRADING AND INTERMARKET ANALYSIS

currency markets thrive on trading volumes among bank dealers, corporate treasuries, and speculators. As participants increasingly exploit
emerging opportunities of widening interest rate differentials, volumes
expand and momentum intensifies, resulting in self-reinforcing trends,
whereby high-yielding currencies rally against their lower-yielding counterparts. The result could entail prolonged trends lasting for several weeks
and months.

Every Trend Has Its End
But every trend reaches an end, at least a temporary one. Carry trades are
notably visible once they start to unwind. As funds exit high-yielding currencies back into the low-yielding currencies, the latter tend to appreciate in value relative to the former. Such unwinding takes place upon the
following:

r Anticipation of a decline in the high-yielding currency or an actual decline in its value.

r Anticipation of a rise in the low-yielding currency or an actual rise in
its value.

r Anticipation of a decrease in interest rates of the high-yielding currency, or the end of its tightening cycle.

r Anticipation of an increase in interest rates of the low-yielding currency, or the end of its easing cycle.

r A sudden decrease in risk appetite, which normally leads to a decrease
in the high-yielding currency and an increase in the lower-yielding
currencies. This type of development is the primary focus of this
chapter.
The above scenarios may result from new economic data, speeches
or reports from central banks, or, in the case of the fourth scenario, a reduction in market confidence, eroding risk appetite due to market declines
or geopolitical events. Recall that the profitability of carry trades is reinforced by the buildup of positions, which accelerates the strengthening of
higher-yielding currencies and deepens the declines in the lower-yielding
ones (funding currencies). Conversely, the unwinding of carry trades can
be accelerated by the execution of multiple margin calls and the subsequent opening of new positions, triggering further selling in high-yielding
currencies. What may be a 3 percent or 5 percent differential in interest
rates between two currencies can be completely eroded during a 6 percent
slide (rally) in the high- (low-) yielding currency.
