
THREE
P A

R

T

rediscovering
profitability

This page intentionally left blank

5

C

H

A

P

TE

R

the nature
of winning

L

et’s talk about the differences between profitable and unprofitable
traders. Is it a question of experience, or are some folks just born with
the talent to play the financial markets successfully? How does risk tie
in with profitability, and are profitable traders more or less willing to
make riskier trades? Trading psychologist Mark Douglas talks about the
three stages in becoming a profitable trader. First, you learn how to find
promising setups. Second, you learn how to enter and exit those positions
at the right time and at the right price. Third, you get to a level of experience where you build equity on a consistent basis. Ironically, the secret
to this third step is really no secret at all. You just master the discipline
required to follow your methodology, system, or plan.
Traders need to make an important choice between two equally
attractive alternatives early in their careers. Neither approach is right or
wrong, but both paths of action demand a ruthless focus on the profit and
loss feedback loop.

97

98

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

1.	Follow a specific methodology that forces you out of the market
during adverse conditions.
2.	Master a broad range of skills, and shift strategies as market conditions change.
Unprofitable traders rely on a poorly matched execution style or a
good one they haven’t mastered yet. In most cases, they’ve failed to recognize critical errors in their methodology because it was learned in a
book or through inappropriate conditioning, like making money on bad
decisions. Conversely, profitable traders know all the weak points in their
broad toolkit of strategies and exercise damage control at all times.
You can’t understand your trading methodology until you analyze
profits and losses over long periods. Locate systemic weaknesses as
quickly as possible, and then decide if your methodology, system, or plan
really works at all. In the real world, many traders discover their entire
approach to the markets isn’t right for their lifestyle, emotional nature, or
long-term goals. For example, you might be a scalper with the disposition
of an investor, or a day trader who hates volatility. The bottom line: bad
things will happen when your system doesn’t match your personality.
Nassim Taleb offers a powerful argument about why we lose money
in his controversial book Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in
Life and in the Markets. The author alleges that many traders think they’re
gunslingers because they were in the right place with the right strategy for
that moment in history. Unfortunately, these so-called experts wash out
of the markets as soon as times change, because their foolproof strategies
crash and burn. Does Taleb’s argument sound familiar to you? It should
because it zeroes in on the bull market genius that evaporated after the
tech, real estate, and energy bubbles burst. Now here’s the real question:
Why do you still chase stocks in the same way you did two, five, or ten
years ago? I guess the obvious answer is, you want to believe those days
are coming back and are willing to sacrifice your hard-earned capital over
and over again to relive those glory days of endlessly rising prices.
Nearly every poll taken during adverse market conditions yields
identical results. About half the respondents will indicate they’re thinking
about leaving the game, because they’re getting clobbered, while the other
half tells pollsters they’re booking the best profits of their careers. To which
group do you belong in tough times? Well, I can answer that one for you.
If you’re adapting to the market, seeing what’s right in front of your nose,
and not allowing old habits to interfere with reality, you probably do very
well. But if you’re praying for better days or playing a bull market game

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

99

in a bear market world, chances are you’re getting crushed like a bug on
a windshield.
Volumes have been written about money management techniques,
like evaluating reward:risk and cutting your losses, but losing traders
continue to outnumber profitable ones by a wide margin because they
don’t know when to cash in their chips and walk away. Frankly, no one
can help you to take opportunistic profits or inevitable losses if you don’t
help yourself. Of course, all strategies experience drawdowns, and profitable ones are no exception, but a large cadre of traders are so shackled by
greed and fear they routinely abandon great methodologies because the
adverse price swings hurt too much.
There are a lot of reasons traders trade, but the only legitimate one
is to make money. After all, that’s why you got hooked on the financial
markets in the first place. Let’s do a quick reality check. Are you making
money this year? If so, is it enough to pay the bills or at least earn bragging
rights with your family and friends? How did things go in prior years? Are
you any closer now to consistent profitability than you were two, three,
or five years ago? Profitability is a question of nature versus nurture to
some extent. In other words, some folks are natural born traders, while
the rest of us need to spend lifetimes compensating for our genetic shortcomings. Fortunately, key trading attributes, such as risk-taking, can be
learned by anyone with a genuine love of the markets and a keen interest
in self-discipline.
It makes perfect sense for losing traders to study the habits, mindset,
and strategies that winners take into their profession each day. This contemplation gives them a chance to mimic the winners and to internalize
the discipline needed to improve long-term performance. Realistically,
losing traders hate to think about “the D word” because it’s not as sexy as
becoming a market gunslinger, but it’s the only realistic path to survival.
That’s ironic because the folks ignoring the most obvious reason for losing
money are the same ones who spend thousands of dollars attending
trading seminars. And, sadly, personal discipline is the one thing you can’t
learn sitting in an audience.

Positive Expectancy
Discipline and money management go a long way toward making you
a profitable trader, but let’s be realistic. However you trade, you need to

PART THREE

100

Rediscovering Profitability

be confident in the positive expectancy, or trading edge, of your methodology, system, or plan. This poorly understood concept refers to how
much profit you can reasonably expect to make versus each dollar risked
on a trade. Gamblers live and die by this equation, which is better known
in a casino or at a card table as the player’s edge. The math behind the
concept is very simple:

Positive Expectancy
Expectancy = (PW × AW) – (PL × AL)
PW: probability of a winning trade
AW: average gain
PL: probability of a losing trade
AL: average loss

In the real world, most of us don’t understand our strategies well
enough to determine whether or not they have positive expectancy.
System traders rely upon back testing to divine these magic numbers,
while discretionary traders need to compensate for their meeny-miney-mo
decision making through extensive record keeping and thorough analysis
of each outcome. Even so, it’s still easy to fool ourselves into believing our
approach has positive expectancy when, in truth, it doesn’t. The sell side
of the positive expectancy equation is far more important than the price
and time you assume the risk of a trade. In fact, research suggests that a
profitable system can be built using random entry. Yes, you heard that
right. It’s theoretically possible to turn a profit in the same way as a chimp
hitting the bull’s-eye throwing darts at a dartboard. Unfortunately, our
hairy primate suffers from the same fatal flaw as the losing trader—he or
she doesn’t know when to take money off the table.
The mental aspect of positive expectancy is more difficult to manage
than the pure numbers game. Many traders stop executing perfectly good
strategies when they don’t get the instant gratification they want from
the financial markets. They get stuck in a vicious cycle in which they trade
a strategy until it frustrates them to the point that they abandon it and go
looking for another strategy. In the process, they never take the time to find
out whether or not the methodology had positive expectancy in the first place,
i.e., they didn’t let it mature enough to watch its true potency bear fruit.

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

101

Which brings us back to the thorny subject of discipline. Of course it’s
boring to plan the trade and trade the plan, but it’s the only reliable way to
break the loser’s cycle and get on the road to consistent profitability.

The Survivalist Trading Plan
Trading plans come in all shapes and sizes. A few talented individuals
can jot down their entire plans on one side of a napkin and use those
bullet points to build a successful career. More analytical types may write
volume after volume, addressing every detail of their daily actions, mental
processes, and filtering mechanics, and then follow up with a closetful of
trading journals. A robust trading plan for the rest of us falls somewhere in
between these extremes, where it’s dangerous to think too little about the
subject but counterproductive when we give it too much of our attention.
Simply put, our plans must establish the rules of the road, pointing out
what will be done and what will be avoided during the market day. They
need to cover all aspects of profit and loss, including reward targeting,
stop loss placement, and risk tolerance. We then internalize those rules,
criteria, and strategies to avoid the traps and pitfalls of our modern electronic markets.
The survivalist trading plan takes the additional step of shifting
focus toward the risk side of the profit and loss equation, at the expense
of common technical analysis and popular market folklore. It examines
all opportunities with a skeptical eye, mindful of diabolical forces and
program algorithms that could enter the market at any time and overcome
the natural flow of supply and demand. It works in harmony with those
influences whenever possible, picking the pockets of weak-handed traders
playing the same old systems, styles, and methods. Finally, it recognizes
the overriding force of pattern failure in our modern market landscape
and develops opportunistic strategies to take advantage of this counterintuitive reality.
Draw up your trading plan, follow it for a few weeks, and then start
an introspective journal that lists every position and how it works out.
Make small adjustments going forward, testing each modification, but
don’t be in a rush or assume you’re wrong just because the plan doesn’t
reward you with instant gratification. Save your big changes for weekends
and holidays, when you have more time to examine the potential impact
away from the heat of battle. After a few weeks or months, compare the

102

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

plan to your daily journal notes, and see how your actions and omissions
characterize your individual style. The trading game demands constant
tinkering, and an honest journal will keep you focused squarely on your
long-term goals. However, never use it as an excuse or a reason to make
bad decisions.
The survivalist plan needs four key building blocks. Once you’ve
established your plan, run each opportunity through this gauntlet of
market dynamics before taking a position. The time you set aside for this
filtering process will be well spent because it will uncover the best trades
while pointing out hidden dangers before you actually put your money
at risk.
1.	Prediction. Prediction comes in two flavors. You can predict that
price will move up or down, or apply a bilateral strategy that
takes advantage of whichever way the trend eventually breaks.
Choosing a directional play requires one additional task. You need
to place odds on the probability that price will move according
to your prediction, within the specified holding period. This can
be quite difficult because most of us don’t understand how our
trades really work in the first place.
	  Here’s a useful hint in establishing trade odds. The probability
of a prediction working as expected rises or falls depending on
the frequency of cross-verification. This major concept from The
Master Swing Trader takes the pattern and looks for convergencedivergence relationships through a variety of moving averages,
Fibonacci retracements, trendlines, gaps, and technical indicators.
The bottom line: the more charting elements that line up with
your predicted uptrend or downtrend, the higher the odds it will
actually happen.
2.	Timing. You can make or lose money only during the actual time
you’re in the market, so it’s important to choose your battles
wisely. Of course, you can look back at a chart and find all the
great trades you missed, but real-life decisions need to be made at
the “hard right edge,” which is the part of the chart you can’t see
because it hasn’t happened yet.
	  Define your holding period—i.e., how much time you want to
spend in a position—before taking on risk. It’s a critical decision
because your trade needs to complete the anticipated price swing
within this time frame. Clearly, the many levels of price-time
coordination required in a good trading plan take a good deal

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

103

of experience. You might think, “Why even bother? I’ll just stay
in the market until I get my move.” Unfortunately this approach
doesn’t work because risk increases as a function of your time in
the market. Conversely, the tradable pattern and your entry price
cap reward potential, so that side of the equation doesn’t increase
over time. This disconnect can put you into a very dangerous
situation.
3.	Volatility. Each trading opportunity carries a specific volatility
profile that needs to be examined before taking a position. This is
important because more volatile markets move a greater distance
over a shorter time period than less volatile markets. Simply put,
this element will eventually translate into your profit or loss.
The best trades generally align with volatility breakouts, i.e.,
movement from a low into a high volatility state. This aligns with
the negative-positive feedback interface, which The Master Swing
Trader covered in great detail. Now here’s a trader’s secret: getting
into a position while volatility is low almost guarantees a decent
reward:risk ratio.
	  However, recognizing and trading cyclical shifts on the
trend-range axis requires well-honed pattern reading skills. For
example, a symmetrical triangle signals a breakout or breakdown
through price contraction about two-thirds of the distance
between the start of the pattern and the nexus point, where the
converging trendlines will cross. However, that observation is
often dependent on the number of alternating waves within the
triangle prior to the narrow range signal. In most cases, triangles
need to complete five swings before they’re ready to break out or
break down. So, the pattern reader needs to combine two sets of
observations into one well-organized opinion that yields a single
good trade.
	  You can measure current volatility cycles on your trade prospects
in just a few seconds using a three-pronged visual analysis:
• Price bars expand through periods of high volatility and
contract through periods of low volatility.
• Bollinger Bands expand sharply during active trends and then
contract when markets ease into trading ranges.
• Price/moving average relationships expose longer-term cycles,
with reversion into averages setting the stage for the start of
new expansion cycles.

PART THREE

104

F I G U R E

Rediscovering Profitability

5.1

BioCryst Pharmaceuticals awakens from a long slumber.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

   Let’s see how these tools interact on the BioCryst Pharmaceuticals chart to pinpoint cyclical shifts in volatility as well as
excellent profit opportunities. In Figure 5.1, the stock wakes up
from a long bear market and settles under $2 in April. It moves
sideways for a month in a symmetrical triangle pattern (1) while
Bollinger Bands and price bars contract. It then gaps higher (2) on
heavy volume, shifting from a low into a high volatility state, and
stalls out at 5. The stock pulls back and hits the 50-day moving
average (3), prints an NR7 (the narrowest range price bar of the
last seven bars), and takes off in a vertical recovery that stops at

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

105

resistance, yielding the next leg of an ascending triangle pattern.
Bollinger Bands then contract sharply, and the stock settles into a
trading range until mid-July, when it tags the 50-day EMA for the
second time. Price ticks higher for five sessions and goes vertical
in a high volume breakout (4) that forces the Bollinger Bands to
expand once again.
4.	Risk. I walked up to a brilliant trader a long time ago and asked
him to reveal his secrets. With Zen-like clarity, he uttered two
words in answer to my question: “control risk.” It took me years
to understand how literal his comments really were. Amazing as
it sounds, you can safely ignore the first three elements of your
trading plan and still turn a profit, as long as you aggressively
control risk on every position.
	  Let’s take this revelation one step further. In truth, you don’t
need a pattern to trade, or even know which way price is headed
in order to take money out of the markets. That’s right, you can be
profitable just taking low-risk positions and managing them ruthlessly. The greatest challenge, of course, is to recognize the nature
of risk in the first place. Most traders do a terrible job in this regard
and resist taking the steps needed to overcome this career-ending
myopia. Why does this happen? Well, for starters, most of us are
running around like rats in the maze, too busy chasing the magic
cheese to watch out for all the traps and dead ends.
Your job is just half done after you’ve taken these four building
blocks and created a workable trading plan. To finish the process, you
need to customize each element to fit your experience level, position in
life, and personal liquidity. Here are 10 ways to accomplish this task:
1. Define a personal style. This includes your execution rules,
instrument choices, position size, and the filters that tell you
when it’s time to stand aside.
2. Match the plan to the realities of your life. Choose a suitable
holding period because everything else is defined by it. Base
your decision on experience and available capital. Then take into
account lifestyle considerations, like family and free time.
3. Review your trading goals. Is risk aversion or financial return
more important to you? Do your profits need to pay the mortgage
or just finance the next vacation? If you’re not sure what your
goals are, trade small until you figure them out.

106

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

4. Align position size with equity stake and risk tolerance. Never
overtrade a small account in hopes of building it up. Apply the
limited stake to longer-term positions rather than flipping it
repeatedly. Decide when and how to use margin.
5. Define your entry and exit rules. Decide what your opportunity needs to look like before taking the trade. List out exactly
what must happen in the minutes or hours before you pull the
trigger.
6. Choose how many shares you want to trade for each position.
Take more shares when your ducks line up in a row, and reduce
size when they don’t. Limit shares to manage risk, and trade
smaller when experimenting with new tactics.
7. Will you use limit or market orders? Will you use physical or
mental stops? A lot depends on whether or not you’re sitting in
front of your trading screen all day. If lifestyle keeps you away
from the markets, place physical stops on all positions.
8. Create a quiet space to modify your trading plan going forward.
Fresh tactics require new risk considerations. Don’t let your plan
strangle new ideas, but add them slowly, and make sure they’re
a measurable improvement to the big picture.
9. Decide where to focus your efforts at the start of each market
day. Your time is limited, and it’s easy to get overwhelmed, so
save your energy for the most urgent tasks.
10. Choose information sources. Will you listen to the news or the
numbers? Will you trade through economic releases, or close out
ahead of the news and step to the sidelines? Finally, decide if the
boob tube stays on or off during market hours.
Now it’s time to put your trading plan into action. Realistically, there
are many ways to lose money in the financial markets, and, if you play
this game long enough, you’ll get to know most of them intimately. Fortunately, a survivalist plan empowers you to avoid many of the traps and
pitfalls faced by other traders. Above all else, learn the five market scenarios that place you at the most risk:
1.	Bad markets. A good pattern won’t bail you out of a bad market,
so move to the sidelines when conflict and indecision take hold of
the tape. Your long-term survival depends on effective trade management. The bottom line: don’t trade when you can’t measure
your risk, and stand aside when you can’t find your edge.

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

107

2.	Bad timing. It’s easy to be right but still lose money. Financial
instruments are forced to negotiate a minefield of conflicting
trends, each dependent on different time frames. Your positions
need to align with the majority of these cycles in order to capture
the profits visualized in your trade analysis.
3.	Bad trades. There are a lot of stinkers out there vying for your
attention, so look for perfect convergence before risking capital on
a questionable play, and then get out at the first sign of danger. It’s
easy to go brain dead and step into a weak-handed position that
makes absolutely no sense, whether it moves in your favor or not.
The bottom line: it’s never too late to get out of a stupid trade.
4.	Bad stops. Poor stops will shake you out of good positions. Stops
do their best work when placed outside the market noise, while
keeping risk to a minimum. Many traders believe professionals
hit their stops because they have inside knowledge, but the truth
is less mysterious. Most of us stick them in the same old places.
5.	Bad action. Modern markets try to burn everyone before they
