
Indicator Seasons
A farmer sows in spring, harvests in late summer, and uses the fall to get
ready for winter. There is a time to sow and a time to reap, a time to bet on a
warm trend and a time to get ready for a cold spell. The concept of seasons

36. TIME

189

275 I!

,:

ii

10

22-1 $I

i
219 j
211

Corn

SPECTRLrn

ji

......

28 30 43
CYCLE LENGTH

I

58,

Transition to a
cyclical market

l!l:

?

i*

i'

DATE = 911181
50
..._
OpsN :: 255 13v.'-,b*--'.C!,
. . . . . . . . . . . . .,.:...
.,: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ./ 40
HIM :: z8.53 . . . >. .
.
.
/ . .
?>.
,..
. . . . . . . . . . . .i 38
LOU :: 255.8@ . . . . . .j.. . . .;'j j'\ .,....,.- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ./ 20
'
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .j 10
CLOSE:: ?
t
J
,SR . . . . . .\....-I\. ?

...

.,

.T'

-.

:

1

Figure 36-1.

R

Price Cycles-Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis

(MESA)

MESA (a method and a software package) shows that cycles are prone to
shift and disappear. The narrow window at the bottom of the chart keeps
track of cyclic content. When it is near its upper edge it shows that the
market is chaotic, and when it nears its lower edge it shows that the market is cycling. A vertical arrow marks a transition from a chaotic to a
cyclical market.
The square window in the upper left corner shows cyclic content for
any date selected by the analyst. It currently shows that a 13-day cycle is
rising above the market noise. The jagged line at the right edge of the
chart projects the current cycle several days into the future.

can be applied to the financial markets. A trader can use a farmer's
approach. He should look to buy in spring, sell in summer, go short in the
fall, and cover in winter.
Martin Pring developed the model of seasons for prices, but this concept
works even better with technical indicators. Indicator seasons show you
where you are in the market cycle. This simple but effective concept helps
you buy when prices are low and sell short when they are high. It tells you

190

T H E NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

when an indicator signal is likely to be strong or weak. It helps you stand
apart from the market crowd.
The season of any indicator is defined by two factors: its slope and its
position above or below the centerline. For example, we can apply the concept of indicator seasons to MACD-Histogram (see Section 26). We define
the slope of MACD-Histogram as the relationship between two neighboring
bars. When MACD-Histogram rises from below its centerline, it is spring;
when it rises above its centerline, it is summer; when it falls from above its
centerline, it is autumn; and when it falls below its centerline, it is winter.
Spring is the best season for going long, and autumn is the best season for
selling short (Figure 36-2).
Indicator Slope

Position Relative to Centerline

Season

Action

Rising
Rising
Falling
Falling

Below
Above
Above
Below

Spring
Summer
Fall
Winter

Go long
Start selling
Go short
Start covering

When MACD-Histogram is below its centerline but its slope is rising, it is
spring in the market. The weather is cool but turning warmer. Most traders
expect the winter to return and are afraid to buy. Emotionally, it is hard to
buy because the memories of a downtrend are still fresh. In fact, spring is the
best time for buying, with the highest profit potential. Risk is low because a
protective stop can be placed slightly below the market.
When MACD rises above its centerline, it is summer in the market - and
most traders recognize the uptrend. It is emotionally easy to buy in summer
because bulls have plenty of company. In fact, profit potential in summer is
lower than in spring and risks are higher because stops have to be farther
away from the market.
When MACD-Histogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down,
it is autumn in the market. Few traders recognize the change and they keep
buying, expecting summer to return. Emotionally, it is hard to sell short in
autumn - it requires you to stand apart from the crowd, which is still bullish.
In fact, autumn is the best time for selling short. The profit potential is high,
while risks can be limited by placing a stop above the recent highs or using
options.
When MACD-Histogram falls below its centerline, it is winter in the market. By then, most traders recognize the downtrend. It is emotionally easy to
sell short in winter, joining many vocal bears. In fact, the riskheward ratio is
rapidly shifting against bears. Potential rewards are getting smaller and risks
are high because stops have to be placed relatively far away from prices.

36. TIME

191

..

Figure 36-2.

26182

Indicator Seasons

The concept of seasons can be applied to almost any indicator, even
though this example focuses on the weekly MACD-Histogram. It helps
you trade in gear with the markets.
Autumn-the indicator is above its centerline but falling. This is the
best season for establishing short positions.
Winter-the indicator drops below its centerline. Use weakness to take
profits on short positions.
Spring-the indicator turns up from below its centerline. It is the best
time to establish long positions. Notice "a cold spell" in spring
when prices fell to a new low and MACD-Histogram ticked down
temporarily. Do not sell short when MACD-Histogram turns down
from below its centerline. Do not buy when it turns up from above
its centerline. A bullish divergence when prices fall to a new low
while the indicator makes a more shallow bottom gives a powerful
buy signal.
Summer-the indicator rises above its centerline. When the weather
gets hot, use strength to take profits on long positions.

Just as a farmer pays attention to the vagaries of weather, a trader needs to
pay attention to the vagaries of the markets. An autumn on the farm can be
interrupted by an Indian summer, and a market can stage a strong rally in

192

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

autumn. A sudden freeze can hit the fields in spring, and the market can drop
early in a bull move. A trader needs to use his judgment and apply several
indicators and techniques to avoid getting whipsawed (see Section 43).
The concept of indicator seasons focuses a trader's attention on the passage of time in the market. It helps you plan for the season ahead instead of
jumping in response to other people's actions.

Retracements

Many traders watch price retracements. For example, if a market rallies 120
points, traders try to add to long positions when the market retraces 50 percent of the preceding move and declines 60 points from the top.
Many floor traders look for a trend to reverse after it retraces 61.8 percent
of the previous move. This number is based on the Fibonacci number series.
This idea of measuring retracements can also be applied to time. It pays to
measure how long each rally and decline have lasted. For example, rallies in
a bull market are often interrupted by declines that last approximately half as
long as the preceding rallies. If you discover that rallies tend to last 8 days
and declines 5 days, that knowledge encourages you to look for a buying
opportunity 4 days into a decline.

The Factor of Five

Analysts often feel confused when they look at charts in different timeframes
and see that the market is going in several directions at once. The trend may
be up on the daily charts but down on the weeklies, and vice versa. Which of
these trends will you follow? This becomes even more complex if you look
at intraday charts. Most traders pick one timeframe and close their eyes to
others - until a sudden move outside of "their" timeframe hits them.
The factor of 5 links all timeframes. If you start with monthly charts and
proceed to the weeklies, you will notice that there are 4.5 weeks to a month.
As you switch to daily charts, you will see 5 trading days to a week. As your
timeframe narrows, you will look at hourly charts- and there are approximately 5-6 hours to a trading day. Day-traders can proceed even further and
look at 10-minute charts, followed by 2-minute charts. All are related by the
factor of 5.

36. TIME

193

The proper way to analyze any market is to analyze it in at least two timeframes. They should be related by the factor of 5. When you analyze the
market in two timeframes, the shorter of them has to be five times shorter
than the longer one. If you want to analyze daily charts, you must first examine weekly charts, and if you want to day-trade using 10-minute charts, you
first need to analyze hourly charts. This is one of the key principles of the
Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43).

Stock Market Indicators

37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX
Stock and futures traders used to live like two separate tribes. They traded
different markets and used different analytic tools. The wall between them
began to crumble after stock index futures were created in 1982. Both tribes
rushed to trade them. An astute trader owes it to himself to master the tools
of both tribes.
Shrewd stock traders use Stochastic, moving averages, and other tools of
futures analysts. Futures and options traders can time their stock index trades
better by using stock market indicators. They include the New High-New
Low Index (probably the best leading indicator of the stock market), the
Traders' Index (TRIN), and several others.

How to Construct NH-NL

The New High-New Low Index (NH-NL) tracks the numbers of market
leaders. It measures the number of stocks that have reached new highs or
lows for the year on any given day. The stocks on the list of new highs are
the leaders in strength, and the stocks on the list of new lows are the leaders
in weakness. NH-NL confirms trends when it rallies or falls in gear with
prices. It identifies tops and bottoms in the stock market when it diverges
from prices.
The New High-New Low Index measures daily differences between new

37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX

195

highs and new lows. The New High-New Low Index is easy to calculate by
hand, using information from the Market Diary section of most major newspapers.
NH-NL = New Highs - New Lows
New highs and new lows are reported by most data services in the United
States. Make sure that your data vendor calculates new highs and lows over
a 52-week period. Some use the ancient "calendar method" and calculate
new highs and lows going back only to January.
Plot the New High-New Low Index as a histogram, with a horizontal reference line at zero level. On the days when there are more new highs than
new lows, NH-NL is positive and plotted above the centerline. On the days
when there are more new lows than new highs, NH-NL is negative and plotted below the centerline. If the numbers of new highs and new lows are
equal, NH-NL is zero.

Crowd Psychology

A stock appears on the list of new highs when it is the strongest it has been
in a year. This shows that a herd of eager bulls is chasing its shares. A stock
appears on the list of new lows when it is the weakest it has been in a year.
This shows that a crowd of aggressive bears is dumping its shares.
The New High-New Low Index tracks the strongest and the weakest
stocks on the exchange and compares their numbers. It measures the balance
of power between the leaders in strength and the leaders in weakness. This is
why NH-NL is a leading indicator of the stock market. The broad indexes,
such as the S&P 500, tend to follow the trend of NH-NL (Figure 37-1).
You can visualize the 2000 stocks on the New York Stock Exchange as a
regiment of 2000 men. If each stock is a soldier, then new highs and new
lows are the officers. New highs are the officers who lead the attack up a hill,
and new lows are the officers who are deserting and running downhill. There
are no bad soldiers, only bad officers, say the military experts. The New
High-New Low Index shows whether more officers lead the attack uphill or
run downhill.
When NH-NL rises above its centerline, it shows that bullish leadership is
stronger. When NH-NL falls below its centerline, it shows that bearish leadership is stronger. If the market rallies to a new high and NH-NL rises to a new
peak, it shows that bullish leadership is growing and the uptrend is likely to

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

196

L
,

Jbwhf/l
1

Standard & Poor's 500

Sell

r

A

B

C

D

E

F

ew High-New Low lndex

Figure 37-1.

New High-New Low lndex

Stocks making new highs for the year are the leaders in strength, and
stocks making new lows are the leaders in weakness. NH-NL measures
the direction and intensity of market leadership by comparing the number of new highs and new lows.
In the summer of 1987, mass bullishness rose to a high pitch, as the
bull market roared into its final peak. It was safe to hold stocks as long as
each new high in the stock market was confirmed by a new peak in the
New High-New Low lndex (A, B, C, D, and E). The August peak in the
stock market was accompanied by a bearish divergence (E-F) in the NHNL Index, giving a sell signal.
When the stock market declined in September, many traders went
bargain hunting. Five years of rising prices had trained them to use
declines for buying. NH-NL, meanwhile, pointed to a severe weakness.
It peaked out at only 100 (G),indicating weakness. NH-NL turned negative in October (H). It gave repeated sell signals in advance of the historic crash.

continue. If the market rallies but NH-NL shrinks, i t shows that the uptrend is
in trouble. A regiment whose officers are deserting is likely to turn and run.
A new low i n NH-NL shows that the downtrend is likely to persist. If
officers are running faster than men, the regiment is likely to be routed. If
stocks fall but NH-NL turns up, i t shows that officers are no longer running.

37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX

197

When officers regain their morale, the whole regiment is likely to rally
(Figures 37-2 and 37-3).

Trading Rules

Traders need to pay attention to three aspects of NH-NL, listed here in the
order of their importance: divergences between the peaks and bottoms of
NH-NL and prices, the trend of NH-NL, and the level of NH-NL above or
below its centerline.

." 328

Standard & P m h500

! \ w 7 ,
D+vb
buy
t

A

.. 3e0

.. 272

.. 244
216

C

B

96
-246
-588

New High-New Low lndex

-929
v
Figure 37-2.

c

an

e

+

-1271

New High-New Low lndex

The stock market crashed in October 1987, and the number of new lows
exploded, reaching nearly 1300 (A). The stock market bounced ("a dead
cat bounce") and fell back to its lows (0). The newspapers were filled
with alarmist articles, wondering whether this was the end of the
Western financial system as we knew it. NH-NL flashed a much more
optimistic message. It showed that new lows were shrinking-the officers
were refusing to run. The market retested its lows in December (C), and
NH-NL traced an even stronger bullish divergence, giving a buy signal. It
was confirmed when NH-NL crossed into positive territory (D). This was
the beginning of a 2-year bull market.

198

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

Standard & Poor's 500

Figure 37-3.

N e w High- New Low Index

The New High-New Low lndex gives its best messages when it diverges
from prices. This chart shows what happened prior to the 1989 minicrash and how the recovery began.
The market reached a new peak in August (A), accompanied by a
new peak in NH-NL, which indicated that the market was likely to go
higher. The rally in September (B) was accompanied by a bearish divergence that gave a sell signal. The market struggled to a new high in
October (C), but NH-NL made a lower peak, repeating its sell signal.
NH-NL turned negative one day prior to the crash, forcefully confirming
its sell signal.
The October low (D)was followed by a reflex rally ("a dead cat
bounce"), and then prices twice retested their October lows (E, F). On
both occasions, NH-NL made more shallow bottoms than in October.
These bullish divergences gave buy signals, and a new uptrend began.
L

As long as a price peak is confirmed by a new high in NH-NL, the rally is
likely to continue, even if i t is punctuated by a decline. When low prices are
accompanied by new lows in NH-NL, i t means that bears are in control and
the downtrend is likely to continue. Divergences between NH-NL and broad

37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX

199

market averages provide the best trading signals. A trend that loses its leaders is likely to reverse.
1. If NH-NL traces a lower peak while the market rallies to a new high, it
creates a bearish divergence. This shows that bullish leadership is
weakening even though the broad market is higher. Bearish divergences mark the ends of uptrends. If the last peak in NH-NL is about
+I00 or less, then a major reversal is probably at hand and it is time to
get short. If the latest peak is much higher than +loo, then the upside
leadership is strong enough to prevent the market from collapsing.
2. If NH-NL traces a more shallow bottom while the market declines to a
new low, it creates a bullish divergence. This shows that bearish leadership is shrinking, even though the market is lower. If the latest low
in NH-NL is near -100, it shows that the bearish leadership is
exhausted and a major upside reversal is near. If the latest low is much
lower than -100, then bears still have some strength, and the downtrend may pause but not reverse. Keep in mind that bullish divergences at stock market bottoms tend to develop faster than bearish
divergences at market tops: Buy fast and sell slowly.
The slope of NH-NL on any given day is defined by the trend of its bars
for the last few days. When the market rallies and NH-NL rises, it confirms
uptrends. When NH-NL declines together with the market, it confirms
downtrends.
3. A rise in NH-NL shows that it is safe to hold long positions and add to
them. If NH-NL declines while the broad market stays flat or rallies, it
is time to take profits on short-term long positions. When NH-NL
falls, it shows that the bearish leadership is strong and it is safe to hold
short positions and even add to them. If the market continues to fall
but NH-NL rises, the downtrend is in question-it is time to cover
shorts.

4. If NH-NL rises on a flat day, it flashes a bullish message and gives a
buy signal. It shows that officers are going over the top while the soldiers are still crouching in their foxholes. When NH-NL falls on a flat
day, it gives a signal to sell short. It shows that officers are deserting
while the troops are still holding their positions. Soldiers are not
stupid - if the officers run, they will not stay and fight.

200

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

The position of NH-NL in relation to its centerline shows whether bulls or
bears are in control. When NH-NL is above its centerline, it shows that more
market leaders are bullish than bearish. Then it is better to trade the stock
market from the long side. When NH-NL is below its centerline, it shows
that bearish leadership is stronger, and it is better to trade from the short side.
NH-NL can stay above its centerline for months at a time in bull markets and
below its centerline for months at a time in bear markets.

5. If NH-NL stays negative for several months but then rallies above its
centerline, it signals that a bull move is likely to begin. Then it is time
to look for buying opportunities, using oscillators for precise timing. If
NH-NL stays positive for several months but then falls below its centerline, it shows that a bear move is likely to begin. Then it is time to
look for shorting opportunities using oscillators for precise timing.

More on NH-NL

Old analysts used to smooth NH-NL using 10-day and 30-day simple moving averages. When a 10-day MA of NH-NL crossed above a 30-day MA, it
gave a buy signal. When a 10-day MA crossed below a 30-day MA, it gave a
sell signal. Raw NH-NL gives clearer signals, but if you still want to smooth
NH-NL, it is better to use exponential moving averages.
The number of new highs and new lows is reported daily by the New
York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the Over-the-counter
Exchange, and the London Stock Exchange. Most overseas s t o c k
exchanges do not report these numbers, but a computer-equipped analyst
should have no difficulty creating NH-NL for any market. Traders who use
NH-NL outside of the United States get an edge over competitors who lack
this indicator. You need to obtain one year's worth of daily data for every
stock on the exchange you follow and update that file daily. Program your
computer to examine your database each day and flag those stocks that have
reached a new high or a new low for the past 52 weeks.
NH-NL does not work in the stock markets dominated by a handful of
stocks. For example, hundreds of stocks are listed on the Milan Stock
Exchange in Italy, but only 2 of them - FIAT and Generale - represent
nearly 70 percent of total market capitalization. These two giants can override the rest of the market.

38. TRADERS' INDEX A N D OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

201

38. TRADERS' INDEX A N D OTHER STOCK
MARKET INDICATORS
The Traders' Index (TRIN) is a leading stock market indicator. It shows
when major rallies and declines get ready to reverse by measuring the intensity of optimism of the dominant market group. Excessive optimism is associated with market tops and excessive pessimism with bottoms.
TRIN measures the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it
to the ratio of advancing to declining volume. This indicator was popularized
by Richard Arms and is included in most quote systems. Any broker with a
terminal on his desk can punch a few keys and see the latest TRIN. It is easy
to calculate TRIN by hand or by using a computer at the end of each trading
day.
New market developments have changed TRIN over the years: listed
stock options, index arbitrage, dividend recapture plays, and so on. The original interpretation of TRIN had to be adjusted, but TRIN continues to stand
out as one of the best stock market indicators. It helps in timing stock trades
as well as trades in stock index futures and options.

How to Construct TRIN

You need four pieces of data to calculate the Traders' Index: the number and
volume of advancing and declining stocks as well as the volume of both
groups. These figures are released by the New York Stock Exchange and
several other exchanges throughout each trading session.
TRIN =

Adv Issues
Decl Issues

1

Adv Volume
Decl Volume

TRIN compares the relationship between the ratio of advancing and
declining stocks and the ratio of advancing and declining volume (see worksheet, Figure 38-1). If 1000 stocks rally on a volume of 100 million shares,
and 1000 stocks decline on a volume of 100 million shares, then TRIN
equals 1. If 1500 stocks go up on a volume of 150 million shares and 500
stocks go down on a volume of 50 million shares, TRIN remains 1.
TRIN falls when the volume of advancing stocks is disproportionately
high, compared to their number. TRIN rises when the volume of declining
stocks is disproportionately high, compared to their number.
