
How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

The IBD SmartSelect® Corporate Ratings
The one line of information in the IBD SmartSelect Corporate Ratings is
much more powerful and meaningful than anything you’ll find in standard
price tables. These ratings, which have been proven to be the most predictive measurements of a stock’s possible future value, will narrow your search
from over 10,000 stocks to the top investment prospects.
You’ll find these ratings are like a condensed statistical summary financial
report that looks at the fundamental strength or weakness of a stock. They
are also a well-rounded evaluation of each company’s general health. Most
importantly, along with daily and/or weekly charts, these ratings will help
you find better stocks. Let’s examine each element.
Earnings per Share Rating Indicates
a Company’s Relative Earnings Growth Rate

Strong earnings growth is essential to a stock’s success and has the greatest
impact on its future price performance. The first absolutely vital component
of the SmartSelect ratings is the Earnings per Share (EPS) rating, which is
labeled 1 in the chart.
The EPS rating calculates the growth and stability of each company’s
earnings over the last three years, giving additional weight to the most
recent few quarters. The result is compared with those of all other common
stocks in the price tables and is rated on a scale from 1 to 99, with 99 being
the best.
Example: An EPS rating of 90 means that a company’s bottom-line earnings results over the short and the long term are in the top 10% of the
roughly 10,000 stocks being measured.
This one number gives you the relative earnings performance for publicly
held companies and the possible prospects for their stocks. It’s an objective
measure you can use to compare the audited results of one company to
those of any other; for example, the earnings growth of IBM to that of
Hewlett-Packard, Lockheed, Loews Companies, Wal-Mart, or Apple. Earnings estimates are not used in the calculation because they are personal
opinions, which, as you know, might be wrong and do change.
Since earnings power and earnings growth are the most basic measures of
a company’s success, the EPS rating is invaluable for separating the true
leaders from the poorly managed, deficient, and lackluster companies in
today’s tougher worldwide competition.
The EPS rating is also more meaningful than the widely followed Fortune 500 lists that rank corporations by company size. Size alone rarely
guarantees innovation, growth, or profitability. Large companies that are

343

344 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
between 50 and 100 years old may have a well-known brand image, but
often they are losing market share to younger, more innovative companies
that have created newer, better products. Consider the decline of some of
our auto companies and their unions, Alcoa, Eastman Kodak, International
Paper, Xerox, CBS, Gannett, and Citigroup.
Relative Price Strength Rating Shows Emerging Price Leaders

Since we’ve learned that the best stocks are superior price performers even
before their major moves, you should look for stocks with price leadership.
The Relative Price Strength (RS) rating shows you which stocks are the best
price performers, measuring a stock’s performance over the previous 12
months. That performance is then compared with the performance of all
other publicly traded companies and given a 1 to 99 rating, with 99 being
best. Look at the column labeled 2 in the chart example.
Example: An RS rating of 85 means the stock’s price movement has outperformed 85% of all other common stocks in the last year. The greatest
winning stocks since 1952 and even much earlier showed an average RS rating of 87 when they broke out of their first price consolidation areas (bases).
In other words, the greatest stocks were already outperforming nearly 90%,
or nine out of 10, of all other stocks in the market before they made their
biggest price gains.
Even in poor markets, a Relative Price Strength rating that breaks below
70 can forewarn you of a possible problem situation. On the sell side, however, we have a ton of sell rules that can lead you to sell most stocks sooner
and more effectively than relying on a deteriorating relative strength line
that is calculated using the past 12 months’ price action. When you compare
these fact-based performance ratings to the old, unscientific methods,
which were typically based on faulty personal opinions, beliefs, academic
theories, stories, promotions, egos, tips, and rumors, it becomes inarguable
that IBD’s unique factual ratings can give you a more clearheaded edge up
in the complex market.
You Need Both Strong EPS and Strong RS Ratings

The implications of both the Earnings per Share rating and the Relative
Price Strength rating are considerable. So far, you’ve been able to determine the top leaders in earnings and relative price strength. The vast majority of superior stocks will rank 80 or higher on both the EPS and the RS
ratings before their major moves. Since one of these is a fundamental measurement and the other is a marketplace valuation, insisting on both numbers being strong should, in positive markets, materially improve your
selection process.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

Of course, there’s no guarantee that a company’s terrific past or current
record won’t suddenly turn sour in the future. That’s why you must always
use a loss-cutting strategy, such as the sell rules discussed in Chapters 10
and 11. It’s also prudent and essential to check the stock’s daily or weekly
chart to see if it’s in a proper base or if it’s extended in price too far above its
most recent area of consolidation. (For a review of common chart patterns
to watch for, refer back to Chapter 2.)
As previously discussed, models of the best-performing companies over
the last century showed that earnings growth for the last three years and
percent increase in earnings per share for the latest two or three quarters
were the two most common fundamental characteristics.
Having hard data like these available to you naturally begs the question,
why would you ever invest your hard-earned dollars in a sluggish stock that
sports a 30 EPS rating or a 40 RS rating when there are literally thousands
of companies with higher ratings, including hundreds with superlative
numbers?
It’s not that companies with poor ratings can’t perform. It’s just that a
greater percentage of them turn out to be disappointments. Even when a
low-rated company has a decent price move, you’ll find that the better-rated
stocks in the same industry have probably done much better.
In a way, the combination of the EPS rating and the RS rating is similar
to A. C. Nielsen’s viewer ratings for TV shows. Who wants to continue sponsoring a TV show that gets poor ratings?
Now, pretend for a minute you’re the manager of the New York Yankees.
It’s off-season, and you’re going to pick new players for next year’s team.
Would you trade for, recruit, or sign only .200 hitters? Or would you select
as many .300 hitters as possible? The .300 hitters cost you more money;
their P/Es are higher, and they sell nearer to their price high. It’s true the
.200 hitters are available at a cheaper price, but how many games will you
win with nine players in your lineup averaging .200? When the bases are
loaded in the ninth inning and the score is tied, who would you rather see
step up to the plate: a .200 hitter or a .300 hitter? How often does an established .200 hitter blossom into a batting champion?
Selecting and managing a portfolio of stocks is no different from baseball
when it comes to performance. To win consistently and finish first in your
division, you need a roster of the very best players available—those with
proven records of excellence. You won’t do as well in your investing if you
insist on buying poorer performers and “cheaper stocks,” or those with
some positive features but three or four little-noticed defects, in the hope of
“discovering” a winner. Every little detail separates winners from losers.
Hope never works in the market unless you start with a high-quality stock

345

346 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
that’s begun to build steam. It’s the “steam” (earnings, sales, and price and
volume strength) that is the key prerequisite for future growth. Don’t be
fooled by bargain-basement thinking or buy stocks on the way down
because they look cheap. Replace your hopes and fallible personal opinions
with proven, measurable facts.
It’s also interesting to note that these practical, no-nonsense ratings have
helped to wake up corporate board members and put pressure on management teams producing second-rate results. A consistently low IBD relative
performance rating should be a serious wake-up call to any top management
team or board of directors.
Strong Sales, Profit Margins, and Return on Equity Are a Big Clue

Cutting costs may boost a company’s earnings for a quarter or two, but powerful, sustained profit increases require healthy sales growth. It’s also important to buy companies that make the most of their sales growth. How much
profit do they generate from each dollar of sales? How well do they use their
capital? The Sales + Profit Margins + Return on Equity (SMR®) rating combines these important fundamental factors and is the fastest way to identify
truly outstanding companies with real sales growth and profitability. These
are factors that are widely followed by the better analysts and portfolio managers. The SMR rating is on an A to E scale, with A and B being the best. In
most cases, you want to avoid stocks with an SMR rating of D or E. See the
column labeled 3 on the chart.
Example: An SMR rating of A puts a stock in the top 20% of companies in
terms of sales growth, profitability, and return on equity. During the brief rally
that followed the Nasdaq’s bear market plunge from March to May 2000, SDL
Inc. shot ahead as a leading performer. The maker of components for fiberoptic networks broke out to new highs just as the market confirmed a new
uptrend, the most ideal situation for buying a stock. SDL Inc. ran up 112% in
just eight weeks. Among its many strong qualities was an SMR rating of A.
For those of you who may not have always checked your stocks’ return on
equity, it’s important. Here’s a table of past leaders that shows their ROEs.
Accumulation/Distribution—The Influence of Professional Trading on Stocks

Professional investors wield a huge amount of influence over a stock’s price.
Thus, it’s essential that you buy the better stocks that mutual funds are buying and that you sell or avoid the ones they may be selling on a heavy basis.
Trying to go against this monumental amount of trading will only hurt your
results. A quick, efficient way to keep track of the end result of professional
trading is to use IBD’s Accumulation/Distribution Rating (the column
labeled 4 on the chart), which is based on daily price and volume changes.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

347

Stock name

Return on equity
at the time

Year an up
move started

Percent
increase to peak

Pic ’N Save

28.7%

1976

2950%

Home Depot

27.8%

1982

958%

Price Co

55.4%

1982

1086%

Liz Claiborne

42.4%

1984

715%

The Limited

42.3%

1985

451%

This Can’t Be Yogurt

41.2%

1985

2073%

Merck

19.8%

1985

870%

Microsoft

40.5%

1986

340%

Cisco

36.3%

1990

74445%

Intl. Game Tech

22.9%

1991

1691%

Nokia

30.9%

1998

8620%

Qlogic

18.8%

1998

3345%

America Online

36.3%

1998

481%

Charles Schwab

29.4%

1998

434%

Coach

43.1%

2002

625%

Chicago Mercantile Exchange

28.2%

2002

915%

Nextel Intl.

56.1%

2003

368%

Google

87.8%

2003

536%

Southern Copper

47.6%

2004

369%

C B Richard Ellis

26.4%

2004

220%

Hansens

43.6%

2004

751%

It tells you if your stock is under accumulation (professional buying) or distribution (professional selling). This thoroughly tested, complex, and proprietary formula is highly accurate and is not based on simple up/down
volume calculations. Stocks are rated on an A to E scale, with each letter
representing the following:
A = heavy accumulation (buying) by institutions
B = moderate accumulation (buying) by institutions
C = equal (or neutral) amount of buying and selling by institutions
D = moderate distribution (selling) by institutions
E = heavy distribution (selling) by institutions

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

ROE of Past Leaders

348 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
When a stock receives an A or B rating in Investor’s Business Daily, it
means that the stock is being bought on balance. However, this does not
guarantee that it will go up. The buying activity is being picked up, but
maybe the funds are buying into a questionable position, and what they are
doing could be wrong. In some cases, stocks rated as D should be avoided.
I would not buy a stock with an E rating. Later, however, if and when the
market improves, it could change. C-rated stocks may be OK.
You needn’t feel you’ve missed out on the trading action if you spot heavy
buying or selling. Many funds take weeks or even months to complete their
positions in a stock or rid themselves of those positions, which gives you
time to capitalize on that action. However, be sure to check a daily or weekly
stock chart to see if the stock is in the early, beginning stage of a move or if
it is overextended in price and too risky or late to more safely buy.
Composite Rating: An Overview

The rating in the first column of the IBD stock tables is the SmartSelect
Composite Rating, which combines all four SmartSelect ratings into a summary rating for quick review of overall performance. Look at the column
labeled 5. The SmartSelect Composite Rating formula is simple:

• Because of the impact of earnings and previous price performance on

stock price, double weighting is given to both the Earnings per Share and
the Relative Price Strength ratings. This weighting may change somewhat in the future as we continue to improve our ratings. Normal weight
is given to the Industry Group Relative Strength, SMR, and Accumulation/Distribution ratings.

• The percent off the stock’s 52-week high is also used in the SmartSelect
Composite Rating.

• The results are then compared to the entire database, and a 1 to 99 rating

(with 99 being best) summarizes the five most predictive measurements
we’ve just discussed.

For some stocks, the SmartSelect Composite Rating may be higher than
the four individual SmartSelect ratings. This is because the formula is
weighted and includes the stock’s percent off its 52-week high.
When you review the stock tables, this simple rating gives you an enormous time-saving edge. Work your way down the columns and look for
SmartSelect Composite Ratings of 80 or better to spot the potential strong
opportunities when you are in an uptrending general market.
The next step is to review all four individual SmartSelect ratings: EPS, RS,
SMR and Accumulation/Distribution. With a quick scan of the stock tables,
you’re now that much closer to being sure you are selecting better stocks.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

Volume Percent Change Tracks the Big Money Flow

Another important measurement IBD created is Volume Percent Change
(see the column labeled 6). Most newspapers and information providers on
TV and the Web provide only a stock’s trading volume for the day, which
doesn’t tell the entire, meaningful story. Based on the volume information
they provide, how would you know whether the volume for all the stocks in
your portfolio and those you’re considering for purchase is normal, abnormally low, or abnormally high?
In order to know this, you’d have to keep in your head or on paper what
the average daily volume is for each stock under review. Instead, you can
rely on IBD to keep track of this key measure of supply and demand for you.
IBD was the first to provide investors with a Volume Percent Change measure that monitors what the normal daily trading level for every stock has
been over the most recent 50 trading days. It pays to always have the most
relevant facts, not just a bunch of numbers.
Stocks trade at many different volume levels, and any major change in
volume can give you extremely significant clues. One stock may trade an
average of 10,000 shares a day, while another trades 200,000 shares a day,
and still another trades 5 million shares a day. The key is not how many
shares were traded, but whether a particular day’s volume activity is or is not
unusually above or below average. For example, if a stock with an average
trading volume of 10,000 shares suddenly trades 70,000 shares, while its
price jumps one point, the stock has increased in price on a 600% increase
in volume—generally a positive sign as long as other market and fundamental measurements are constructive.
If this happens, the Volume Percent Change column will show a +600%,
which quickly alerts you to possible emerging professional interest in the
stock. (In this case, the stock is trading 600% above its normal volume, and
if the price is up substantially all of a sudden; this can be a major tip-off.)
Volume Percent Change is like having a computer in your pocket to carefully monitor the changing supply and demand for every single stock.
Where else can you get such preeminently critical data?
Almost all daily newspapers have cut out essential information in their
stock tables. This includes the Wall Street Journal, which no longer even
shows a stock’s trading volume in its daily stock tables.
Volume Percent Change is one of the main reasons so many specialists on the
floor of the New York Stock Exchange, professional portfolio managers, topproducing stockbrokers, and savvy individual investors use and refer to IBD’s
stock tables. There is no better way to track the flow of money into and out of
companies, if you know how to utilize these data. If price is all you look at when
you check your stocks, you’re like a piano player who plays with only one hand,

349

350 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
uses only one finger, has never heard of a chord or foot pedal, or doesn’t read
sheet music, so he never knows when to speed up, get loud, or get softer.
Investor’s Business Daily is more than a newspaper. It’s also a gigantic
radar set that monitors every variable that’s important to the successful
investor. And it lays all the information out for you daily, both in print and
electronically, with the version that’s available on the Internet.
The electronic version lets you have the information sooner—within
hours after the market closes. Investors who like to prepare for the next
trading day find this especially convenient. Others prefer a paper they can
carry with them, make notes on, and use as a valuable guidebook.

How to Use Investor’s Business Daily
Whether she uses the print or the electronic version (or both), each reader
probably has a different way of reading the paper. My preference is to start
with the front page and then proceed page by page to the end.
Front Page Comes First

The first feature I check on the front page is the short, quick market summaries at the top, above the paper’s nameplate. These show price and volume changes for the S&P 500 index, the Dow Jones Industrials, and the
Nasdaq, plus brief, two-line comments on market highlights. Brief notes on
fixed income, currency, and commodities are also shown.
For example, the comment under NYSE volume reads, “Volume above
average, up from previous day.” In 40 seconds I look at these briefs to make
sure I didn’t miss anything important from the day’s action.

S&P 500 INDEX
845.85
+13.62 (+1.6%)
MasterCard, Akamai
explode on upside

DOW JONES IND.
8063.07
+106.41 (+1.3%)
GM, Wal-Mart Stores
lead blue chip rally

NYSE VOL. (MIL)
1,619
+230 (+16.5%)
Volume above average,
up from previous day

NASDAQ
1546.24
+31.19 (+2.1%)
50-day line retaken;
chips up for fourth day

NASDAQ VOL. (MIL)
2,549
+324 (+14.6%)
Best upside volume
since Nov. 21 low

“IBD’s Top 10” Stories

The second thing I read on page one is “IBD’s Top 10,” a quick, time-saving
way to stay informed. In briefs of only seven to nine lines each, the ten most
important new stories are summarized. Today, for example, the number two
story tells how same-store sales were down last month at most retail chains,
but Wal-Mart’s were not only up but better than expected. In the number
three spot is, “Senate Nears Vote On Stimulus,” an update on Congress’s
efforts to come up with an economic recovery plan.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

The Big Picture

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

The third feature I always check on page A1 is the “The Big Picture” column at
the bottom. It’s a fairly short but excellent summary of market action and key
developments. Inside the column is “Market Pulse,” a valuable box that notes
leaders that were up in volume for the day and those that were down. The pulse
also lets you know whether the market’s in an uptrend or a declining phase.
“The Big Picture” column is one of IBD’s most highly read features. Dedicated readers have repeatedly told us it has helped them immeasurably in
dissecting the general market. In fact, more than a thousand have given testimonials on how it has helped them raise cash when the market began getting difficult or determine when it was starting a major uptrend.

Top Stories

Finally, I glance at the headlines on the main two front-page stories. I’m a
headline reader: if a story is on a subject I want to know about, I read it; if
not, I skip it and go to the next page.
The top stories will often show charts or tables. The one I’m looking at
has a table of 15 retailers. It shows sales changes for the month plus samestore results and estimates for the future. This quickly tells me three companies in the field are doing excellently, but many others aren’t.
To The Point

Page 2 saves a busy executive or investor time. Titled “To The Point,” it provides some 50 business briefs, arranged by industry sector, and short summaries on the nation, the world, and the economy. I can quickly scan each
headline and read the briefs I’m interested in. There’s also a column called
“Trends and Innovations” that I always try to read to learn about the new
things that keep being invented in today’s society.
