
NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

143

and bigger first homes perhaps has become increasingly passé. Because so
many people were doing this during the housing boom that crashed after
2006, it may have started to seem pointless—uniquely beautiful rather than
big may seem better in the future.
There appears to be an element of truth to such new era stories about second
homes. But such stories, reminiscent of the stories that fed the Florida land
bubble in the 1920s, may have increased acceptance during real estate bubbles,
because the feedback that is driving home prices increases the contagion of
such stories. There are some disquieting similarities between new era stories
around 2003 or 2004 about vacation and second homes and those of the 1920s
Florida bubble. For example, in Florida in 1925, the boom was supposed to
be driven by the advent of the automobile; more recently, the second home
boom is supposed to be driven by the advent of the Internet. In both cases, a
rush of retirees was supposed to drive the market. The housing crash once
again particularly affected those markets, like Florida, driven by speculative
and unreliable new era stories.

The Ends of New Eras
Despite the suggestion inherent in the phrase speculative bubble that there
may be a dramatic burst—a stock market crash—speculative bubbles and
their associated new era thinking do not end definitively with a sudden, final
crash. On reflection, this is not surprising, given that speculative prices are
essentially formed in the minds of the millions of investors who buy and sell,
and it is unlikely that so many people would simultaneously arrive at sudden
and enduring changes in their long‑run perceptions.
People today remember the stock market crash of 1929 as occurring in one
or two days. In fact, after that crash, the market recovered almost all of its
lost ground by early 1930. The significance of 1929 is not the one‑day drops in
October, but the fact that the year marked the beginning of the end: the beginning of the three‑year period that reversed much of the stock market gains
of the 1920s. The same is true of other stock market drops. One‑day events
do not figure prominently, except as symbols of the malaise in the markets.
I noted in Chapter 1 that the high pricing of the market in 1901 was not
followed by any immediate or dramatic price decline, but rather that prices
ceased to increase and that eventually, after some twenty years had elapsed,
the market had lost most of the real value it had had in 1901. The change took
so long to work itself out that it is rather more generational in character, and
therefore it is hard to find comment about it in the media.
If we look at 1920–21, when the real stock market was at its lowest since 1901,
discussions of the stock market centered on what had gone wrong; the glowing
descriptions of future prosperity seen in 1901 were no longer to be found. The

144

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

biggest factor in most commentary of the period centers on the 1920–21 recession,
which was unusually severe. Coverage focused on recent losses by businessmen and on paper fortunes that had disappeared. In place of the “community
of interest” keeping prices up, there was instead discussion of hostility from
farmers and shippers toward railroads, of customers demanding reductions in
rates. The cancellation of government contracts following the world war was
thought to have revealed weakness in existing businesses. Strained political
conditions abroad following the war were also viewed as a negative factor for
the U.S. economy. The actions of “conscienceless” short sellers or bear raiders
were considered negative influences on the market, as were the effects of tax‑loss
selling for income tax purposes.
There is some evidence that investors in 1921 had learned not to be in­­
fluenced by exaggerated claims and inflated schemes. A 1921 article in the
Saturday Evening Post by Albert Atwood describes highly speculative prices
as a thing of the past and quotes a stockbroker as saying that “the promotions
of the last few years have been neither as wild nor as fantastic as those of the
boom period of 1900 and 1901.”
Another theme running through accounts of the period is that market
psychology somehow mysteriously changes, and that it had, at that time,
become inexplicably negative. Atwood quotes a banker in 1921: “All the world
got together to drive down prices, and when the whole world makes up its
mind, when everyone thinks alike and is determined that prices shall go
lower, nothing can resist the movement.”47
The end of the 1929 new era thinking was more dramatic and was directly
tied to the Great Depression that followed; by 1932, it was already plain
that the United States was into the deepest depression it had ever experienced, and there seemed to be prima facie evidence that the new era was
over. The optimists who had been extolling a bright future for the economy
were silenced by events that deviated so markedly from their forecasts that
it seemed they could not be explained by any convenient adjustments in
theories. Economic forecasters demonstrated extreme uncertainty about
the future, and observers of consumer behavior claimed that consumer
uncertainty had stalled demand.48
The depression of the 1930s was a time of widespread concern that our
economic system was failing. Oscar Lange, a University of Chicago professor
of economics, wrote in the American Economic Review in 1939 that “the view is
widely held that the American economy has lost its momentum of expansion
and reached a stage of more or less permanent stagnation.”49
The perceived failure of capitalism ushered in the heyday of communism
in the United States. Communism seemed to many to be the wave of the
future, even inevitable. Many of the best writers of the era became openly
sympathetic to communism in the 1930s, including Kenneth Burke, Erskine

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

145

Caldwell, Robert Cantwell, Jack Conroy, Edward Dahlberg, John Dos Passos,
James Farrell, Langston Hughes, and William Saroyan.50
Further evidence of the loss of hope for the uncontrolled capitalist economy
can be seen in the ascendance of radical political movements abroad. The rise
of Nazism in Germany is itself a telling symptom of the widespread despair
that took hold of many people’s thinking after 1929. The change in mindset
of the German public within the space of a few years seems astonishing, and
it is a useful reminder of how changeable any public mood may be.
The end of 1965 new era thinking was associated with suddenly magnified
fears of the consequences of world population growth, exhaustion of natural
resources, and the appearance of high inflation. These fears inhibited further
stock price growth, and promoted commodity price growth.
The great population scare began quite abruptly in the early 1960s. A
Proquest search of historical databases of the Los Angeles Times, New York
Times, and Washington Post for articles containing the word “population
explosion” found no articles during 1945–49, one article during 1950–54, 169
articles during 1955–59, and 1,319 articles during 1960–64. Paul Ehrlich’s 1968
book The Population Bomb, which predicted devastating economic problems
to come within a decade, was a symptom of the public discourse generated
by this great public fear. The number of articles with the words “population
explosion” fell steadily after its early 1960s peak, down to only 177 in 1985–86.
Over the course of the 1960s, inflation fears began to reignite. The
Kennedy administration’s claim that it could lower unemployment through
high‑pressure economics without kindling inflation was found to be false; in
fact we entered a period of “stagflation,” with both high unemployment and
high inflation. In 1974, Arthur Okun, who had been a staff member of the
Council of Economic Advisors under President Kennedy and later was its
chairman, called the attempt at high‑pressure economics “one of the greatest
failures of economic analysis in modern times.” Inflation began to be seen
as a significant brake on the economic outlook. Arthur Burns, the Chair of
the Federal Reserve Board, said, “No country that I know of has been able to
maintain widespread economic prosperity once inflation got out of hand.”51
Even though this fact is unsupported by economic analysis, there was a general
perception that it was true.52
By the early 1980s, there was a widespread feeling that the United States
was losing its preeminence to Japan. In a USA Today article titled “How Japan
Is Taking Over Our Markets,” an expert is quoted as saying, “The only problem is that no targeted industry in history—not autos, not steel, ball bearings,
televisions, motorcycles—has been able to cope with the onslaught from the
Japanese.” Japan was seen then as especially strong in the high‑tech fields, in
which our past successes had always been integral to our national self‑esteem
and identity.

146

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

The California real estate boom of the 1970s was interrupted, due at least
in part to the most severe economic recessions since the Great Depression of
the 1930s: a pair of back-to-back recessions in 1980 and 1981–82. These recessions produced small declines in real California home prices and a quiescent
period in the markets until the late 1980s, when the boom resumed. Here is
an example of a speculative boom that took a breather and then resumed in
even greater force a few years later. The twin recessions and the real price
declines in the early 1980s did nothing to hamper the stories that had propelled the first bubble. Indeed, in the 1980s, the free-market tax-cutting former
California governor Ronald Reagan was president of the United States, and
many Californians no doubt continued to believe that their economy was in
the vanguard of the world.
Another economic recession occurred in 1990–91, and this helped bring the
real estate booms of the 1980s to an end. This time, price declines were severe.
In Los Angeles, after peaking at the end of 1989, real home prices declined
41% by 1997. However, it is not clear that the recession caused the ends of
the booms. The price declines in Boston began in 1988, two years before the
recession. The price declines in Los Angeles began in 1990, before the recession, and did not end until long after the recession. The recession lasted much
longer in California, as measured by employment numbers, but it is hard to
say whether that was an exogenous cause of the price declines or was caused
by them. Once again, the change in thinking that represented the end of the
new era had no clear alignment with any precipitating factor, but had rather
more to do with the feedback from price movements themselves.
Any interpretation of the end of the stock market bubble in 2000 has to
confront what was different about the stock market when compared with the
housing market, which continued to flourish for years after the stock market
crashed.
The recession of 2001 was part of the reason for the sharp drop in cor­
porate earnings in 2001, which of course affected the stock market, and not
the housing market. In the United States, the only major metropolitan areas
that suffered a drop in home prices between 2000 and 2001 were those near
the technology center, Silicon Valley—San Jose and San Francisco.
As a matter of history, the first stocks to go after 2000 were the Internet or
dot-com stocks. The downturn in these stocks from their peak in March 2000
was extremely sudden. The Dow had its all-time peak on March 9, 2000. In a
little more than a month, by April 14, it had lost more than half its value.53 What
happened in that month-long interval? Except for the price declines themselves,
there was nothing so dramatic, nothing that one could point to, that should have
reduced the outlook for these stocks by half in such a short time.
In a Financial Times article dated April 29, 2000, the interpretation given
was this: “People are beginning to recognize that the basic fundamentals are

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

147

still true and just adding a dotcom (to the company name) is an indication of
nothing.”54 That is what the article itself was: a public recognition, not a concrete news story. The fascination with the Internet stocks suddenly appeared
to have been a silly, in fact embarrassing, fad. It was basically a change in
perception.
Behind this change in public perception was a lot of talk. According to
a count of news stories from Lexis-Nexis, the number of newspaper stories
about Internet stocks had already started to pick up dramatically by late 1999,
often reporting dramatic successes of initial public offerings, but often also
expressing skepticism. By the beginning of 2000, the number of stories using
the words Internet and stock had surpassed 1,000 a week; that number peaked
the week of April 16, 2000, at over 1,400 stories. After this extended period of
media attention, the number of stories with these two words began to decline
gradually, with a half-life of about a year.
The stories right at the turning point in the stock market may have been
especially significant. One, a March 14, 2000, article in the Wall Street Journal
by Jeremy J. Siegel, “Big-Cap Tech Stocks Are a Sucker Bet,” showed priceearnings ratios for large market capitalization stocks that were over 100. In
this article, Siegel asserted that history shows “the failure of any large-cap
stock ever to justify, by its subsequent record, a P/E ratio anywhere near 100.”
This statement was very quotable, and was often quoted.
Another article, in Barron’s, “Burning Up” by Jack Willoughby, included
a ranking of Internet companies that were losing money, by the number of
months it took until they had burned through all their cash.55 Willoughby’s
idea of ranking Internet companies this way made these companies’ problems suddenly vivid and clear, and was eminently quotable. His article was
a bombshell that led to the kind of skeptical talk that can in turn lead to the
undoing of stocks.
Given the many thousands of newspaper articles and other media accounts
about stocks that appeared at the peak of the market, there are many more that
one could mention as influential. In this context, it might be noted that my own
first edition of Irrational Exuberance saw a lot of coverage right at the peak of the
market, between late February 2000 and the beginning of April 2000, by Paul
Krugman in the New York Times, David Henry in USA Today, and John Cassidy
in the New Yorker, as well as by The Economist, Newsweek, and Business Week. All
these stories, occurring as they did in rapid succession at the very time that
Internet stocks were collapsing, might have added to the effect of the other
market skeptics who were suddenly proliferating.
But none of these publications seems to have been so influential by itself
as to do something like break the upward stock market trajectory. Probably
some of the more influential of them had some role in stimulating a public
dialogue that led to the change in public opinion; probably they played a role

148

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

much like that of the innocent child in Hans Christian Andersen’s story “The
Emperor’s New Clothes,” whose remark, “The emperor has no clothes,” set
everyone whispering to one another what the child had said, until, observing
each other, they realized how much everyone else was harboring doubts as
well.56 Possibly, too, the attention these various stories got was just a symptom
of the beginnings of public doubts that would have broken the bubble one
way or another whether these stories had been written or not. In that sense,
the public interest in these publications was mostly a symptom of a feedback
mechanism’s working its way out in the downside direction.
The subsequent massive decline in the entire market appears to have been
related to the break in confidence about stocks in general that came about
first for the Internet stocks. The decline in Internet stocks became a symbol
of a malaise that gradually became diffused throughout the stock market.
The stock market decline after 2000 did not extend to housing at the same
time, perhaps in part because the analogy to Internet stocks did not seem to
extend to housing.
The stock market decline was certainly related as well to the recession of
2001, and to the sharp decline in reported corporate earnings between 2000
and 2001. But these cannot be considered exogenous causes of the decline in
the market, since they may be regarded as part of the same feedback mechanism that led to the decline in stock prices. Probably the whole decline in the
market could be attributed to the natural process of feedback and correction,
not to any events completely exogenous to the market.
We have already seen that, as the years went by after the peak in the market,
public opinion became gradually less sanguine about the stock market and the
economy. Consumer confidence had declined sharply from its peak in 2000 to
levels fairly typical of prior decades, and, as we have seen, confidence in the
stock market as an investment had fallen as well. By 2004, while the market still
remained at high levels, the excitement of the late 1990s seemed very remote.
But the decline in confidence toward more normal levels after 2000 seemed
actually to stimulate the demand for housing, and, in fact, to strengthen its
upward momentum. Recall that in Chapter 4, we saw some evidence that
uncertainty about jobs encouraged people to invest in real estate, and in
Chapter 5, we saw that the decline in the stock market encouraged people to
think that real estate was a better investment than stocks. Thus, with the help
of feedback, we were able to have a real estate boom even in an economy that
was less upbeat than it was a few years earlier. When the feedback that was
causing the upward thrust in real estate came to an end, and the stock market took another tumble after the global financial crisis, we found ourselves
in post-bubble situations in both the stock market and the housing market.
The end of the boom in the stock market of 2003–7 seems to roughly corre­
spond with the end of the housing boom of 1997–2006. In our minds, we may

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

149

imagine that both were ended by the financial crisis that followed. However,
there is actually a considerable gap between these two endings, and between
their end and the first real signs of the financial crisis. These events must surely
have some relationship, but it is not an obvious one. Indeed, even after these
two booms were well on their way to correction, economic forecasters still
did not see the financial crisis coming. Hites Ahir and Prakash Loungani of
the International Monetary Fund point out that in 2008–9, sixty-two countries
had slipped into recession, but as of September of the year before, not a single
one of these recessions had been predicted by prominent economic analysts
polled by Consensus Forecasts.57
It was noted in Chapter 3 that around 2005, public attention to the concept
of a housing bubble increased in the United States. Indeed, public thinking
changed from glamorous new era thinking to “I was a fool to believe this”
thinking. Magazines and newspapers gave prominent cover stories about
housing bubbles in mid-2005. Google Trends, a website that produces counts
through time of search queries on the Internet beginning in 2004, shows a huge
spike in searches for the term “housing bubble” in 2005, and these searches
gradually trailed off to almost nothing by 2014. It appears that people had to
learn the meaning of, or get comfortable with, the idea of a housing bubble.
The sudden new vocabulary and view that what we had experienced was
not a new era but a bubble led to what was effectively a run on the shadow
banking system that was making the most aggressive loans and a collapse of
confidence in the whole financial sector.
Ends of new eras seem to be periods when the focus of debate can no longer
be so upbeat. At such times, a public speaker may still think that it would be
good business to extol a vision of a brilliant future for the economy, but it is
simply not credible to do so. One can, at such times, present a case that the
economy must recover, as it always has, and that the stock market should go
up, as it historically has, but public speakers who make such a case cannot
achieve the command of public attention they do after a major speculative
market run‑up and economic boom. There are times when an audience is
highly receptive to optimistic statements and times when it is not.

Eight

New Eras and Bubbles around the World

L

arge stock market moves like the U.S.
examples I discussed in the previous
chapter have also occurred in many other countries over the years, affording
us numerous other observations. These suggest that speculative bubbles—
periods of exaggerated but temporary investor enthusiasm, often associated
with “new era” theories—are in fact commonplace.
In this chapter, I examine the largest stock market moves around the world
that preceded the peak of the Millennium Bubble in 2000. For some of these,
I rely on accounts by the news media. Of course, media accounts are not
always reliable, and I cannot claim to have done exhaustive research on any
of these examples. However, they illustrate the significance in these countries
of factors I have identified in previous chapters as important in U.S. stock
market moves. I show that prices in these countries have tended to reverse
after making exceptionally large increases, as one would expect if bubbles
were common among them.

The Largest Stock Market Events
Table 8.1 shows the twenty‑five largest recent one‑year real stock price index
increases before 2000 for thirty‑six selected countries, and Table 8.2 shows
the twenty‑five largest decreases for the same countries. Table 8.3 shows the
twenty‑five largest recent five‑year real stock price increases, and Table 8.4
shows the twenty‑five largest decreases. The tables are based on monthly

150

151

NEW E R A S A N D B U BBL E S ARO UN D TH E WO RL D

Table 8.1
Largest Recent One‑Year Real Stock Price Index Increases

Country

Percentage
increase

One‑year period

Price change over
subsequent one‑year
period (percent)

1. Philippines
2. Taiwan
3. Venezuela
4. Peru
5. Colombia
6. Jamaica
7. Chile
8. Italy
9. Jamaica
10. Thailand
11. India
12. Italy
13. Austria
14. Finland
15. Denmark
16. Spain
