
A Summary of the Graham-Newman Methods
To give concreteness to the last statement, it should be worthwhile to give a brief account of the types of operations we engaged
in during the thirty-year life of Graham-Newman Corporation,
between 1926 and 1956.† These were classified in our records as
follows:
Arbitrages: The purchase of a security and the simultaneous sale

* In this section, as he did also on pp. 363–364, Graham is summarizing the
Efficient Market Hypothesis. Recent appearances to the contrary, the problem with the stock market today is not that so many financial analysts are
idiots, but rather that so many of them are so smart. As more and more
smart people search the market for bargains, that very act of searching
makes those bargains rarer—and, in a cruel paradox, makes the analysts look
as if they lack the intelligence to justify the search. The market’s valuation of
a given stock is the result of a vast, continuous, real-time operation of collective intelligence. Most of the time, for most stocks, that collective intelligence gets the valuation approximately right. Only rarely does Graham’s
“Mr. Market” (see Chapter 8) send prices wildly out of whack.
† Graham launched Graham-Newman Corp. in January 1936, and dissolved
it when he retired from active money management in 1956; it was the successor to a partnership called the Benjamin Graham Joint Account, which
he ran from January 1926, through December 1935.

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

381

of one or more other securities into which it was to be exchanged
under a plan of reorganization, merger, or the like.
Liquidations: Purchase of shares which were to receive one or
more cash payments in liquidation of the company’s assets.
Operations of these two classes were selected on the twin basis
of (a) a calculated annual return of 20% or more, and (b) our judgment that the chance of a successful outcome was at least four out
of five.
Related Hedges: The purchase of convertible bonds or convertible
preferred shares, and the simultaneous sale of the common stock
into which they were exchangeable. The position was established
at close to a parity basis—i.e., at a small maximum loss if the senior
issue had actually to be converted and the operation closed out in
that way. But a profit would be made if the common stock fell considerably more than the senior issue, and the position closed out in
the market.
Net-Current-Asset (or “Bargain”) Issues: The idea here was to
acquire as many issues as possible at a cost for each of less than
their book value in terms of net-current-assets alone—i.e., giving
no value to the plant account and other assets. Our purchases were
made typically at two-thirds or less of such stripped-down asset
value. In most years we carried a wide diversification here—at
least 100 different issues.
We should add that from time to time we had some large-scale
acquisitions of the control type, but these are not relevant to the
present discussion.
We kept close track of the results shown by each class of operation. In consequence of these follow-ups we discontinued two
broader fields, which were found not to have shown satisfactory
overall results. The first was the purchase of apparently attractive
issues—based on our general analysis—which were not obtainable
at less than their working-capital value alone. The second were
“unrelated” hedging operations, in which the purchased security
was not exchangeable for the common shares sold. (Such operations correspond roughly to those recently embarked on by the
new group of “hedge funds” in the investment-company field.* In

* An “unrelated” hedge involves buying a stock or bond issued by one company and short-selling (or betting on a decline in) a security issued by a dif-

382

The Intelligent Investor

both cases a study of the results realized by us over a period of ten
years or more led us to conclude that the profits were not sufficiently dependable—and the operations not sufficiently “headache
proof”—to justify our continuing them.
Hence from 1939 on our operations were limited to “selfliquidating” situations, related hedges, working-capital bargains,
and a few control operations. Each of these classes gave us quite
consistently satisfactory results from then on, with the special feature that the related hedges turned in good profits in the bear markets when our “undervalued issues” were not doing so well.
We hesitate to prescribe our own diet for any large number of
intelligent investors. Obviously, the professional techniques we
have followed are not suitable for the defensive investor, who by
definition is an amateur. As for the aggressive investor, perhaps
only a small minority of them would have the type of temperament
needed to limit themselves so severely to only a relatively small
part of the world of securities. Most active-minded practitioners
would prefer to venture into wider channels. Their natural hunting
grounds would be the entire field of securities that they felt (a)
were certainly not overvalued by conservative measures, and (b)
appeared decidedly more attractive—because of their prospects or
past record, or both—than the average common stock. In such
choices they would do well to apply various tests of quality and
price-reasonableness along the lines we have proposed for the
defensive investor. But they should be less inflexible, permitting a
considerable plus in one factor to offset a small black mark in
another. For example, he might not rule out a company which had
shown a deficit in a year such as 1970, if large average earnings and
other important attributes made the stock look cheap. The enterprising investor may confine his choice to industries and companies about which he holds an optimistic view, but we counsel
strongly against paying a high price for a stock (in relation to earn-

ferent company. A “related” hedge involves buying and selling different
stocks or bonds issued by the same company. The “new group” of hedge
funds described by Graham were widely available around 1968, but later
regulation by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission restricted access to hedge funds for the general public.

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

383

ings and assets) because of such enthusiasm. If he followed our
philosophy in this field he would more likely be the buyer of
important cyclical enterprises—such as steel shares perhaps—
when the current situation is unfavorable, the near-term prospects
are poor, and the low price fully reflects the current pessimism.*

Secondary Companies
Next in order for examination and possible selection would come
secondary companies that are making a good showing, have a satisfactory past record, but appear to hold no charm for the public.
These would be enterprises on the order of eltra and Emhart at
their 1970 closing prices. (See Chapter 13 above.) There are various
ways of going about locating such companies. We should like to try
a novel approach here and give a reasonably detailed exposition of
one such exercise in stock selection. Ours is a double purpose. Many
of our readers may find a substantial practical value in the method
we shall follow, or it may suggest comparable methods to try out.
Beyond that what we shall do may help them to come to grips with
the real world of common stocks, and introduce them to one of the
most fascinating and valuable little volumes in existence. It is Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide, published monthly, and made available
to the general public under annual subscription. In addition many
brokerage firms distribute the Guide to their clients (on request.)
The great bulk of the Guide is given over to about 230 pages of
condensed statistical information on the stocks of more than 4,500
companies. These include all the issues listed on the various
exchanges, say 3,000, plus some 1,500 unlisted issues. Most of the
items needed for a first and even a second look at a given company
appear in this compendium. (From our viewpoint the important
missing datum is the net-asset-value, or book value, per share,
which can be found in the larger Standard & Poor’s volumes and
elsewhere.)

* In 2003, an intelligent investor following Graham’s train of thought would
be searching for opportunities in the technology, telecommunications, and
electric-utility industries. History has shown that yesterday’s losers are often
tomorrow’s winners.

384

The Intelligent Investor

The investor who likes to play around with corporate figures
will find himself in clover with the Stock Guide. He can open to any
page and see before his eyes a condensed panorama of the splendors and miseries of the stock market, with all-time high and low
prices going as far back as 1936, when available. He will find companies that have multiplied their price 2,000 times from the minuscule low to the majestic high. (For prestigious IBM the growth was
“only” 333 times in that period.) He will find (not so exceptionally)
a company whose shares advanced from 3⁄8 to 68, and then fell back
to 3.2 In the dividend record column he will find one that goes back
to 1791—paid by Industrial National Bank of Rhode Island (which
recently saw fit to change its ancient corporate name).* If he looks
at the Guide for the year-end 1969 he will read that Penn Central
Co. (as successor to Pennsylvania Railroad) has been paying dividends steadily since 1848; alas!, it was doomed to bankruptcy a
few months later. He will find a company selling at only 2 times its
last reported earnings, and another selling at 99 times such earnings.3 In most cases he will find it difficult to tell the line of business
from the corporate name; for one U.S. Steel there will be three
called such things as ITI Corp. (bakery stuff) or Santa Fe Industries
(mainly the large railroad). He can feast on an extraordinary variety of price histories, dividend and earnings histories, financial
positions, capitalization setups, and what not. Backward-leaning
conservatism, run-of-the-mine featureless companies, the most
peculiar combinations of “principal business,” all kinds of Wall
Street gadgets and widgets—they are all there, waiting to be
browsed over, or studied with a serious objective.
The Guides give in separate columns the current dividend yields
and price/earnings ratios, based on latest 12-month figures, wherever applicable. It is this last item that puts us on the track of our
exercise in common-stock selection.

* The successor corporation to Industrial National Bank of Rhode Island is
FleetBoston Financial Corp. One of its corporate ancestors, the Providence
Bank, was founded in 1791.

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

385

A Winnowing of the Stock Guide
Suppose we look for a simple prima facie indication that a stock
is cheap. The first such clue that comes to mind is a low price in
relation to recent earnings. Let’s make a preliminary list of stocks
that sold at a multiple of nine or less at the end of 1970. That datum
is conveniently provided in the last column of the even-numbered
pages. For an illustrative sample we shall take the first 20 such lowmultiplier stocks; they begin with the sixth issue listed, Aberdeen
Mfg. Co., which closed the year at 101⁄4, or 9 times its reported earnings of $1.25 per share for the 12 months ended September 1970.
The twentieth such issue is American Maize Products, which
closed at 91⁄2, also with a multiplier of 9.
The group may have seemed mediocre, with 10 issues selling
below $10 per share. (This fact is not truly important; it would
probably—not necessarily—warn defensive investors against such
a list, but the inference for enterprising investors might be favorable on balance.)* Before making a further scrutiny let us calculate
some numbers. Our list represents about one in ten of the first 200
issues looked at. On that basis the Guide should yield, say, 450
issues selling at multipliers under 10. This would make a goodly
number of candidates for further selectivity.
So let us apply to our list some additional criteria, rather similar
to those we suggested for the defensive investor, but not so severe.
We suggest the following:
1. Financial condition: (a) Current assets at least 11⁄2 times current
liabilities, and (b) debt not more than 110% of net current assets
(for industrial companies).

* For today’s investor, the cutoff is more likely to be around $1 per share—the
level below which many stocks are “delisted,” or declared ineligible for trading on major exchanges. Just monitoring the stock prices of these companies
can take a considerable amount of effort, making them impractical for defensive investors. The costs of trading low-priced stocks can be very high.
Finally, companies with very low stock prices have a distressing tendency to
go out of business. However, a diversified portfolio of dozens of these distressed companies may still appeal to some enterprising investors today.

386

The Intelligent Investor

2. Earnings stability: No deficit in the last five years covered in
the Stock Guide.
3. Dividend record: Some current dividend.
4. Earnings growth: Last year’s earnings more than those of 1966.
5. Price: Less than 120% net tangible assets.
The earnings figures in the Guide were generally for those ending September 30, 1970, and thus do not include what may be a bad
quarter at the end of that year. But an intelligent investor can’t ask
for the moon—at least not to start with. Note also that we set no
lower limit on the size of the enterprise. Small companies may
afford enough safety if bought carefully and on a group basis.
When we have applied the five additional criteria our list of 20
candidates is reduced to only five. Let us continue our search until
the first 450 issues in the Guide have yielded us a little “portfolio”
of 15 stocks meeting our six requirements. (They are set forth in
Table 15–1, together with some relevant data.) The group, of
course, is presented for illustration only, and would not necessarily
have been chosen by our inquiring investor.
The fact is that the user of our method would have had a much
wider choice. If our winnowing approach had been applied to all
4,500 companies in the Stock Guide, and if the ratio for the first
tenth had held good throughout, we would end up with about 150
companies meeting all six of our criteria of selection. The enterprising investor would then be able to follow his judgment—or his
partialities and prejudices—in making a third selection of, say, one
out of five in this ample list.
The Stock Guide material includes “Earnings and Dividend
Rankings,” which are based on stability and growth of these factors for the past eight years. (Thus price attractiveness does not
enter here.) We include the S & P rankings in our Table 15-1. Ten of
the 15 issues are ranked B+ (= average) and one (American Maize)
is given the “high” rating of A. If our enterprising investor wanted
to add a seventh mechanical criterion to his choice, by considering
only issues ranked by Standard & Poor’s as average or better in
quality, he might still have about 100 such issues to choose from.
One might say that a group of issues, of at least average quality,
meeting criteria of financial condition as well, purchasable at a low
multiplier of current earnings and below asset value, should offer
good promise of satisfactory investment results.

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

387

TABLE 15-1 A Sample Portfolio of Low-Multiplier Industrial
Stocks
(The First Fifteen Issues in the Stock Guide at December 31, 1971, Meeting
Six Requirements)

Aberdeen Mfg.
Alba-Waldensian
Albert’s Inc.
Allied Mills
Am. Maize Prod.
Am. Rubber & Plastics
Am. Smelt. & Ref.
Anaconda
Anderson Clayton
Archer-Daniels-Mid.
Bagdad Copper
D. H. Baldwin
Big Bear Stores
Binks Mfg.
Bluefield Supply
a
b

Price
Dec.
1970

Earned
Per Share
Last
12 Months

Book
Value

S&P
Ranking

Price
Feb.
1972

101⁄4
63⁄8
81⁄2
241⁄2
91⁄4
133⁄4
271⁄2
211⁄2
373⁄4
321⁄2
22
28
181⁄2
151⁄4
221⁄4

$1.25
.68
1.00
2.68
1.03
1.58
3.69
4.19
4.52
3.51
2.69
3.21
2.71
1.83
2.59

$9.33
9.06
8.48
24.38
10.68
15.06
25.30
54.28
65.74
31.35
18.54
28.60
20.57
14.41
28.66

B
B+
n.r.a
B+
A
B
B+
B+
B+
B+
n.r.a
B+
B+
B+
n.r.a

133⁄4
63⁄8
14
181⁄4
161⁄2
15
231⁄4
19
521⁄2
321⁄2
32
50
391⁄2
211⁄2
391⁄2 b

n.r. = not ranked.
Adjusted for stock split.

Single Criteria for Choosing Common Stocks
An inquiring reader might well ask whether the choice of a better than average portfolio could be made a simpler affair than we
have just outlined. Could a single plausible criterion be used to
good advantage—such as a low price/earnings ratio, or a high dividend return, or a large asset value? The two methods of this sort
that we have found to give quite consistently good results in the
longer past have been (a) the purchase of low-multiplier stocks of
important companies (such as the DJIA list), and (b) the choice of a
diversified group of stocks selling under their net-current-asset

388

The Intelligent Investor

value (or working-capital value). We have already pointed out that
the low-multiplier criterion applied to the DJIA at the end of 1968
worked out badly when the results are measured to mid-1971. The
record of common-stock purchases made at a price below their
working-capital value has no such bad mark against it; the drawback here has been the drying up of such opportunities during
most of the past decade.
What about other bases of choice? In writing this book we have
made a series of “experiments,” each based on a single, fairly obvious criterion. The data used would be readily found in the Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide. In all cases a 30-stock portfolio was
assumed to have been acquired at the 1968 closing prices and then
revalued at June 30, 1971. The separate criteria applied were the
following, as applied to otherwise random choices: (1) A low multiplier of recent earnings (not confined to DJIA issues). (2) A high
dividend return. (3) A very long dividend record. (4) A very large
enterprise, as measured by number of outstanding shares. (5) A
strong financial position. (6) A low price in dollars per share. (7) A
low price in relation to the previous high price. (8) A high qualityranking by Standard & Poor’s.
It will be noted that the Stock Guide has at least one column relating to each of the above criteria. This indicates the publisher’s
belief that each is of importance in analyzing and choosing common stocks. (As we pointed out above, we should like to see
another figure added: the net-asset-value per share.)
The most important fact that emerges from our various tests
relates to the performance of stocks bought at random. We have
tested this performance for three 30-stock portfolios, each made up
of issues found on the first line of the December 31, 1968, Stock
Guide and also found in the issue for August 31, 1971. Between
these two dates the S & P composite was practically unchanged,
and the DJIA lost about 5%. But our 90 randomly chosen issues
declined an average of 22%, not counting 19 issues that were
dropped from the Guide and probably showed larger losses. These
comparative results undoubtedly reflect the tendency of smaller
issues of inferior quality to be relatively overvalued in bull markets, and not only to suffer more serious declines than the stronger
issues in the ensuing price collapse, but also to delay their full
recovery—in many cases indefinitely. The moral for the intelligent

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

389

investor is, of course, to avoid second-quality issues in making up
a portfolio, unless—for the enterprising investor—they are demonstrable bargains.
Other results gleaned from our portfolio studies may be summarized as follows:
Only three of the groups studied showed up better than the
S & P composite (and hence better than the DJIA), viz: (1) Industrials with the highest quality ranking (A+). These advanced 91⁄2% in
the period against a decline of 2.4% for the S & P industrials, and
5.6% for the DJIA. (However, the ten public-utility issues rated A+
declined 18% against a decline of 14% for the 55-stock S & P publicutility index.) It is worth remarking that the S & P rankings showed
up very well in this single test. In every case a portfolio based on a
higher ranking did better than a lower-ranking portfolio. (2) Companies with more than 50 million shares outstanding showed no
change on the whole, as against a small decline for the indexes. (3)
Strangely enough, stocks selling at a high price per share (over 100)
showed a slight (1%) composite advance.
Among our various tests we made one based on book value, a
figure not given in the Stock Guide. Here we found—contrary to our
investment philosophy—that companies that combined major size
with a large good-will component in their market price did very
well as a whole in the 21⁄2-year holding period. (By “good-will component” we mean the part of the price that exceeds the book
value.)* Our list of “good-will giants” was made up of 30 issues,
each of which had a good-will component of over a billion dollars,
representing more than half of its market price. The total market
value of these good-will items at the end of 1968 was more than
$120 billions! Despite these optimistic market valuations the group
as a whole showed a price advance per share of 15% between
December 1968 and August 1971, and acquitted itself best among
the 20-odd lists studied.
A fact like this must not be ignored in a work on investment

* In Graham’s terms, a large amount of goodwill can result from two causes:
a corporation can acquire other companies for substantially more than the
value of their assets, or its own stock can trade for substantially more than
its book value.

390

The Intelligent Investor

policies. It is clear that, at the least, a considerable momentum is
attached to those companies that combine the virtues of great size,
an excellent past record of earnings, the public’s expectation of
continued earnings growth in the future, and strong market action
over many past years. Even if the price may appear excessive by
our quantitative standards the underlying market momentum may
well carry such issues along more or less indefinitely. (Naturally
this assumption does not apply to every individual issue in the category. For example, the indisputable good-will leader, IBM, moved
down from 315 to 304 in the 30-month period.) It is difficult to
judge to what extent the superior market action shown is due to
“true” or objective investment merits and to what extent to longestablished popularity. No doubt both factors are important here.
Clearly, both the long-term and the recent market action of the
good-will giants would recommend them for a diversified portfolio of common stocks. Our own preference, however, remains for
other types that show a combination of favorable investment factors, including asset values of at least two-thirds the market price.
The tests using other criteria indicate in general that random
lists based on a single favorable factor did better than random lists
chosen for the opposite factor—e.g., low-multiplier issues had a
smaller decline in this period than high-multiplier issues, and
long-term dividend payers lost less than those that were not paying dividends at the end of 1968. To that extent the results support
our recommendation that the issues selected meet a combination of
quantitative or tangible criteria.
Finally we should comment on the much poorer showing made
by our lists as a whole as compared with the price record of the
S & P composite. The latter is weighted by the size of each enterprise, whereas our tests are based on taking one share of each company. Evidently the larger emphasis given to giant enterprises by
the S & P method made a significant difference in the results, and
points up once again their greater price stability as compared with
“run-of-the-mine” companies.
