
To recap, when price is in a trend move, we look to short retracements in price to the declining 20or 50-period exponential moving average, and during a trend move to the upside, we look to buy
pullbacks to the 20- or 50-period moving average. In Figure 3.12, I label four short-sell signals as
price retraced either to the 20- or 50-period moving average, while the averages remained in a
bearish orientation that began with a bearish crossover in mid-August 2005. Each retracement led to a
profitable short-sale trade.
However, as price ended its range expansion phase and consolidated in a range contraction phase
beginning in October and November 2005, the moving averages converged and price traded up and
down through these flat moving averages. Price remained in this range contraction phase until the
March 2006 breakout, and shortly after the 20- and 50-period moving averages took on a bullish
structure and price began forming good retracements back to the 20- or 50-period averages, in turn
setting up new buy signals. I have highlighted four buy signals starting with early April 2006 that
triggered as price retraced to these averages.
During a range breakout phase, look for moving averages to generate low-risk buy or sell signals
and to be effective indicators for price structure. However, during a range consolidation phase,
moving averages completely lose their value to generate buy and sell signals, as price no longer

respects the averages for support or resistance. Look for a clean distance between the short-term and
intermediate-term averages as they rise or fall during a range expansion phase and then observe the
flattening or consolidation of the moving averages during a range contraction phase in price.

The ADX Indicator: Revealing the Difference in Contraction and
Expansion
By now, you're probably wondering if there is any indicator that works well in both range expansion
and contraction environments. You may also be asking if there is a specific indicator to tell if you are
in a range contraction or expansion environment beyond pure price trendlines. Just remember that
there is no perfect indicator for all market conditions, and that almost all indicators are a derivation
of price. You will often find the best answers by observing price itself, in terms of drawing trendlines
to highlight key price levels and monitoring price as it interacts with those levels.
However, there is an indicator that can give you clues about whether price is in a range contraction
or expansion phase, but like all price-based indicators, there is a slight delay in its signal because the
math has to catch up with the price action. The ADX may be one of the most mysterious and least
understood indicators, but it also can be very helpful in revealing the type of feedback phase—
positive or negative—that a particular stock or market is experiencing.
Wells Wilder created the Average Directional Index (ADX), and introduced this indicator to the
world in his book New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems in 1978. Sparing you the math, the
indicator calculates the strength of a trend in place, or reveals the absence of a trend.
The ADX is the average of two separate calculations: the positive directional index which
measures the strength of rising prices and the negative directional index which measures the strength
of falling prices. If there is a large directional move to the upside, the positive directional index will
rise and the negative directional index will fall, thus increasing the average of the two, which
comprises the value of the ADX indicator. However, the situation is the same in a falling trend.
During a sustained price decline, the negative directional index will rise and the positive directional
index will fall, and the larger the distance between the two, the larger the ADX value will be.
This is what is confusing to most new traders: the ADX does not reveal the direction of a price
move, but instead reveals its intensity, or specifically the tendency of price to move in one sustained
direction. During a range consolidation phase, we do not see directional price movement and the
ADX value will decrease as the positive and negative directional indexes converge. Traders
generally accept that an ADX value above 30 indicates that price has developed a range expansion
phase or trend move, while any value under 20 indicates the lack of a trend. A value under 15
indicates a sustained period of range contraction and a value over 30 indicates a sustained period of
range expansion. Once again, let us turn to our example in Sears Holdings (SHLD) through expansion
and contraction phases to observe how the ADX indicator performs, as seen in Figure 3.13.
FIGURE 3.13 The ADX Indicator during Range Expansion and Contraction Phases in Sears Holdings

Turning back to our familiar example, we see that the ADX begins the chart in July 2005 under 20
which indicates that price is likely in a range contraction phase. Price then breaks sharply under the
lower trendline at the $155.00 level in early August and then the ADX Indicator breaks above the 30
value threshold in late August to indicate that price has now moved into a range expansion mode. The
ADX stays elevated above 30 until dropping back under the 30 level in early October as price begins
to form a trading range consolidation.
Generally, an ADX reading between 20 and 30 indicates a market in a potential transition phase, so
most traders wait for price to break under the 20 value threshold to declare a market officially in a
range consolidation phase. The ADX drops under 20 in early November as we can clearly draw
trendlines as highlighted in earlier examples at the $125.00 and $115.00 levels. Throughout the entire
range consolidation phase, the ADX remains under 20, and actually stays most of the time under the
15 threshold to define a lengthy range compression phase.
However, price breaks upwards from the consolidation on March 15, 2006, and the ADX rises
above the 20 threshold two days later on March 17. The official range expansion signal comes from
the ADX on April 5 as the indicator broke above the 30 threshold to signal that price has likely
entered a range expansion phase. Throughout the rest of the chart, the ADX remains elevated above
30, peaking near 43 on May 1, indicating the presence of a strong range expansion phase.
Figure 3.14 reveals how the ADX indicator performed during eBay's three range contraction and
expansion phases in 2009.

FIGURE 3.14 The ADX Indicator during Range Expansion and Contraction Phases in eBay

The three range consolidation phases are labeled and horizontal lines are also drawn when the
ADX indicator crossed above the 30 threshold to signal a likely range expansion phase in price.
Arrows on the ADX indicator highlight where the indicator crossed either beneath 20 to indicate a
range consolidation phase or above 30 to indicate a range expansion phase.
The ADX Indicator first dipped under 20 in December 2008 as price consolidated in a slightly
downward sloping trading range that led to a quick range expansion phase in April 2009. The ADX
indicator rose above 30 shortly after the early April price breakout and then quickly dipped back
under 30 then 20 to highlight the May to July range consolidation phase in price. Price gapped higher
out of the range, breaking above $18.00 per share and the ADX followed quickly by rising again
above 30, only to fall once again under 30, then 20 in November 2009. This time, price remained in a
sideways negative feedback loop or range consolidation environment until the breakout on March 5,
2010 and the ADX rose back above 30 to confirm the range expansion mode on March 23, almost a
full month later. Remember that all price-based indicators contain a lag or delay due to the
mathematical calculations that take place. You're often in a better position to recognize range
breakouts by monitoring price and acting on any sudden breakout through the upper resistance line or
lower support price as opposed to waiting for an indicator to reveal to you a price breakout or
increasing value in the ADX.
In addition to highlighting on your chart likely periods of range expansion or contraction, the ADX
is useful for traders who search specifically for compressed stocks that are likely to make a range
breakout soon. Using any scanning program, you can scan the universe of stocks for those with ADX
values under 20 and then examine their respective stock charts to see if you can draw trendlines to
highlight a range contraction phase in price. If so, you can keep those stocks in a separate watchlist
and set alerts to notify you when a stock has broken above or beneath a trendline price you set. This
way you will be able to keep track of stocks that are potentially ending a range consolidation phase

and embarking on a range breakout phase.
Now we have discussed the three foundation price principles and are ready to use these as a
stepping stone to build trading strategies, guide our analysis, and find trading opportunities. The next
four chapters will build upon these principles using classic methods for identifying low-risk, high
probability trade setups to enter and manage. Chapter 4 describes how to read candlestick charts and
the popular signals that price reveals through one-bar moves, while Chapter 5 uncovers popular price
patterns. From there, Chapter 6 explains how to use Fibonacci retracements to find hidden support or
resistance levels within the context of a trending move, and Chapter 7 defines the life cycle of a price
move, and where we can expect to find the best trading setups in the broader context.

PART II
Strategies and Tools

CHAPTER 4
Candlestick Charting
Candlestick charts offer a depth of information on supply and demand that visually leaps off the chart
at the trader, offering insights that simple bar or line charts do not reveal. Not only can candlestick
charts reveal better insight into the current supply and demand balance than traditional bar charts, they
can also help us confirm or even trigger entry into a trade setup. As we will see, we do not need to
learn intricate or obscure candle patterns, but need only to identify insights into the changing
supply/demand relationship between buyers and sellers, particularly at expected turning points such
as major support or resistance levels on the charts. A candle trigger can be the final piece of the
puzzle that calls for position entry within the context of where the candle signal occurs.
This chapter will explain the benefits of candlestick charts, describe some of the most effective
signals, and explain how reversal candles can be used as trade triggers to draw us into trades with
other sources of confluence across non-correlated methods such as we will discover in the next few
chapters.

BENEFITS OF USING CANDLESTICK CHARTS
Many beginning traders start analyzing stock price charts by viewing simple bar charts, which are
default in most charting websites or software programs. Bar charts graphically represent the open,
high, low, and close of a stock price or index as a single line with the height or range of the bar
representing the difference between the open and the close. A left hash-mark represents the opening
price on a given timeframe and a right hash-mark represents the closing price.
While bar charts may be sufficient for longer-term investors who only want a quick view of the
current price trend before adding a stock to a portfolio, shorter term traders benefit from the clearer
signals and additional information candle charts reveal at key market reversals. In fact, the strongest
benefit of using candlestick charts is to highlight key shifts in the supply and demand relationship that
occur at expected market turning points in the trend.
When a candle reversal signal appears at an expected market turning point, a trader can enter a
position after the candle has formed and then place a stop under the low of the candle. Traders often
seek as much information as possible from noncorrelated methods or strategies before putting on a
high-probability, low-risk trade. We never strive for perfection before putting on a trade, but only that
the odds of a successful trade be as much in our favor as possible. Interpreting candle reversal signals
is a valuable tool in any trader's arsenal. A specific candle signal often gives us the trigger needed to
enter a position at a confluence support or resistance zone in anticipation of a turning point in price.
By using candlestick charts, you can expect the following benefits:
Quickly reveal insights into changes in supply and demand

Easily spot potential turning points in price as they occur
Confirm other signals as price moves into a support or resistance zone
Enter a trade objectively as price rises above or below a reversal candle
“Step inside a bar” to reveal information present on lower timeframes

CONSTRUCTION OF CANDLESTICK CHARTS
Figure 4.1 compares the construction of a price bar and a price candlestick. The open, high, low, and
close of the timeframe is shown in both images.
FIGURE 4.1 Construction of Bar and Candle Charts

The amount of data contained in each candle depends on the timeframe of the chart you analyze. A
weekly candle contains five trading days, with the open price reflecting the opening price on Monday
morning and the closing bar reflecting the closing price on Friday afternoon, while the high and low
of the bar would reflect the high and low price of the entire week.
The open of a monthly candle begins the morning of the first day of the month and the close of a
single monthly candle ends on the close of the final trading day of the month. The high and low of the
candle mark the respective high and low price of the entire month. The same logic applies to a daily
candle along with intraday candles that form from 15-minute, 30-minute, or even 1-minute charts.
Candlestick charts and bar charts present the exact same price data, however the candle chart adds an
extra visual dimension to the difference between the opening and closing price of the bar. In essence,
the candle chart creates a distinction in the difference between the open and close that is not viewed
as easily on a simple bar chart.
Unlike a bar chart, which reflects the open and close with hashmarks, if the close of the bar is
higher than the open, meaning that price rose during the period, then a candle would be white or
hollow (or sometimes colored green). However, if the close of the bar is lower than the open,
meaning price declined during the period, then the candle would be black or filled (or sometimes
colored red).

WHY CANDLESTICK CHARTS TRUMP BAR CHARTS
Candlestick charts highlight the difference between the opening and closing price more clearly than bar charts. By
emphasizing the most pertinent information, candle charts provide quick insights into the supply and demand relationship
which can alert you to price reversals sooner than bar charts alone.
In addition to the distance between the open and the close of the candle being important, a trader is interested in the wick or
shadows, which reflect the volatility of a particular bar and distance between the high and low as compared with the open

or close. Long upper shadows reflect bearish price rejection, which is important when these candles, such as shooting stars
or gravestone doji, occur at a key resistance level that also contains a negative momentum divergence or other indicator sell
signal.
By learning how to interpret a candle chart instead of a bar chart, a trader gets a deeper glimpse into the buying and selling
pressure of the market and receives earlier alerts to the potential for a price swing that is occurring at the time a particular
candle forms. In trading, the sooner we receive a signal that the probabilities, as revealed from price and indicators, favor a
change in trend or in the current price swing, the better we will be able to exit a profitable position at the most favorable
price, and put on a new position with a tighter stop as close as possible to the expected turning point in price.

Figure 4.2 shows a standard bar chart of the S&P 500, while Figure 4.3 represents the same
information, only with the benefit of a candle chart. Compare these two charts carefully.
FIGURE 4.2 Daily S&P 500 Index—Bar Chart

FIGURE 4.3 Daily S&P 500 Index—Candle Chart

In the S&P 500 daily chart showing the beginning of 2009, we see how standard bar charts reflect
the daily range, open, high, low, and close. However, as seen in the same chart using candles, we
emphasize the difference between each day's opening and closing price as a way to highlight the
buying or selling pressure. Though the information is the same, the candle chart visually reflects more
information about the underlying price moves. Though you might not see the value of the candle chart
immediately, come back to this example after reading this chapter and see if you recognize additional
insights from the candle chart. The candle chart also labels some common candlestick signals at key
turning points in price that are not seen as easily in the bar chart alone.
Which chart is more visually appealing to you?
We will describe the particular candlestick signals labeled in the chart above. A specific candle
signal appeared at most of the key turning points in swing highs and lows in price as the market
moved in a downtrend to the March 2009 lows. The final low in 2009 revealed two ‘neutral’ candles
and one ‘extreme’ reversal candle, giving an early signal that odds favored a shift toward buyers in
the supply/demand relationship.
It is important to distinguish between the opening and closing price of a bar because this
information gives clues into the current supply and demand relationship that existed during the time
period the bar was created. A price that closed strongly above the open indicates bullish strength,
while a price that closed strongly below the open reflects bearish weakness.
If the closing price is roughly equal to the opening price, then we would know that supply and
demand were neutral, or in balance, for that particular bar. Pay particular attention to the range of a
bar in comparison to previous bars to give insight into the volatility of the candle. Remember that
price alternates between range expansion and contraction on all timeframes. Candles give swift
insight into expansion and contraction periods on lower timeframes.
Some candles reveal a small price distance between the high and low of the bar, which reflects a

non-volatile period while other bars exhibit large ranges which reflect periods of range expansion.
Tight range, low volatile candles can reflect a market that has the potential to reverse, particularly if
the narrow range candle forms at a known support or resistance area.
Strong, large range candles, particularly those that open at one extreme and close at the opposite
extreme, might indicate that an expansion move or reversal in trend is developing, especially when
these bars form either after neutral candles or also at a known price support or resistance level. We
will learn how to interpret small and large volatility candles and what specific insights we can gather
when considering entering or exiting a trade.
If a candle closes at the upper part of the range, or at the high of the bar, then this is a signal of
bullish strength, just as a candle that closes at the lower part of the range is a signal of bearish
weakness. Candle charts clarify this distinction and allow us to focus closer on the supply and
demand relationship as revealed through price on the chart. Such insights clue us in earlier to shifts or
reversals in price, giving us a low-risk trading opportunity when located in context.

BASIC TERMS USED TO DESCRIBE
CANDLESTICKS
When analyzing candlestick charts, traders use specific terms to describe the key characteristics of the
chart. Figure 4.4 and the following definitions explain this candlestick language.
FIGURE 4.4 Terms Used in Candle Construction

When describing candles, we observe the real body of the candle which gives us insights into the
intensity of the buyers during an up candle and the sellers during a down candle. The real body is the
distance between the open and the close of a specific candle, where a major price distance between
the open and close shows up as a visually noticeable bar, while a very small change between the
open and close reveals itself as a flat line, or no real body. If the real body of an up candle is longer
than prior candles, we glean insights that buyers are increasing their aggression to purchase shares
and that we could expect continuation of higher prices, just like a longer real body of a bearish down
candle suggests that sellers are more aggressive and that lower prices could be in store for the future.

CANDLESTICK TERMS
Real Body: The distance between the open and the close. Real bodies are hollow when the close is higher than the
open and filled when the close is lower than the open.
Upper Shadow or Wick: The distance between the close and the high of an up candle or between the open and the
high of a down candle.
Lower Shadow or Wick: The distance between the open and the high of an up candle or between the close and
the high of a down candle.

If the real body is narrow or smaller than prior candles, this would suggest that the buyers and
sellers were coming into balance, or were equally aggressive such that neither side could move price.
Candles with very small or non-existent real bodies could be a sign of possible indecision, or
balance between buyers and sellers and might be a precursor to a potential reversal in the future of

the prior price direction, especially when such candles form at known support or resistance levels.
The upper and lower shadows of a candle, also called wicks (think about an actual candle with
long real body and a small wick at the top) give us insights into the volatility of a time period. A wick
forms when the high or low of the candle is different from the open or close of the candle. For
example, an upper shadow forms when the high of the bar is greater by a noticeable difference than
the top of the real body, just as a lower shadow forms when the low of the bar is lower by a
noticeable difference than the real body. Long shadows can be a clear sign of price rejection and can
also be associated with key turning points in a market, especially when long shadows form at key
support or resistance levels.
