
8

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

wants to make money in a buy-and-hold long-term position strategy only to
give it back day trading, and vice versa.
I am going to show you a trading method based on combining candle
charts, to help identify shifts in momentum, and pivot point analysis. I will
teach you very succinct rules, which is what I have taught to professional
traders on the floor of the exchanges and introduced to thousands of private investors, including other leading trading educators who now effectively teach my trading methods. I will walk you through deciding what
investment vehicles are available, when and how to decide which investment vehicle would better suit a trader under various market conditions,
and how to develop a trading strategy based on the specific trading triggers.

EDUCATION IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS
Traders need and, moreover, have an obligation and responsibility to understand as much as possible about how the markets that they trade work
and what makes them function. It is vital to your success that you continue
to learn not only about the market but also about your trading hardware or
computer equipment. For example, if you trade off a laptop, you should
know how to disable the tapping feature on the touch pad. After all, who
wants to accidentally place the wrong order on line? That has happened to
traders because the touch pad is ultrasensative. Simply moving your finger
or having your shirt sleeve touch the pad can act as an action click. Traders
should know how to set up and troubleshoot office or home Internet connections or at least have a brokerage account that offers assistance in taking over-the-phone orders.
Traders need to learn and comprehend all the features and benefits
that charting software packages offer and should know all about the order
entry platforms and, more specifically, the brokerage firm rules and procedures for trading. Traders should make sure the brokerage firm has the
title of the account set up so if ever there is a situation where you wish to
wire money into an account, it matches the name on the bank to your trading account. You don’t want an important wire to be rejected. In a situation
where you want to either put on more positions or add a second account to
trade a great opportunity, how sad it would be for back-office personnel to
reject the wire, resulting in a lost opportunity.
A great trader is always looking to learn. One of the best processes to
learn is asking a series of questions; evaluating the dynamics of a situation
or event; and seeking out how to take advantage of that event within the financial resources, risk factors, and time constraints in place.
The traits that most professional and consistently profitable traders

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

9

possess are that they follow a trading plan on extensively tested research
and limit losses while letting winning positions ride. Winning traders exhibit the qualities of patience and discipline. The techniques that will be
taught in this book will help you master those two qualities.
Other traits that winners possess are that they diversify into various
trading positions, while committing only 10 to 40 percent of accounts equity
in the markets. Successful traders commit their full attention to the market
trends and prices, and they act on trading signals immediately.
They also seem to possess the ability to accept winners and embrace
losers, and they don’t let either of these outcomes generally influence their
next trade decision. They stay in the now and react to what the market is
currently doing. Winning traders take breaks from trading. Through continued education and the process of asking questions, they gain an edge and
stay on top of their competition through diversification or other more advanced trading strategies.

TRADERS NEED TO ASK MORE QUESTIONS
The process of asking questions is what is needed in order to gain more
knowledge. The trouble is, most traders do not have enough experience to
know what the right questions are. If you apply simple common sense,
then you will be on a great start to learn how to identify investing or trading opportunities and find the right strategy to take advantage of those
opportunities.
Some questions traders need to ask themselves include, just for
starters: How much time do I have to dedicate to the markets? If I enter a
day trade, do I have the time to watch this position, or do I have an appointment or meeting scheduled for that day? What are the possible outcomes of what I am about to do, based on what I have control over?
Focus on what it is you want to achieve, write it out, and concentrate
on that goal. Think of the consequences or possible outcomes of your actions so you will have a more balanced emotional reaction if the outcome
is not as positive as you expected. Ask questions such as:
• Do market conditions warrant increasing or decreasing my position
size?
• Are there reports coming out that may impact the market or my position?
• Are my entry and exit targets justified?
• If the market is so bearish, why won’t it go down?
• If the market is so bullish, why won’t it rally?

10

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Trading without asking questions or without probing leads to trading
blindly or without a plan. It opens the door for destructive emotional interference. Another quote from Jesse Livermore helps confirm this: “There is
nothing new on Wall Street or in stock speculation. What has happened in
the past will happen again and again and again. This is because human nature does not change, and it is human emotion that always gets in the way
of human intelligence. Of this I am sure.” (Smitten, Trade Like Jesse Livermore, p. 167)
That statement was made over 65 years ago and is without a doubt still
applicable to this day. Do not let your emotions get in the way of your trading decisions. If you ask the right question before placing a trade, you stand
to gain an edge on winning the emotional battle of trading. It is generally
those who are afraid of losing through fear itself who stand to lose because
that emotion will interfere with rational, well-thought-out trading plans.
Asking yourself the right questions will help you to choose a more apropriate investment vehicle or trading strategy. For example, ask yourself before entering a trade: What are the time expectations for a result to occur?
Do I have availability of time to see the trade through? Would short-term
day trading or swing trading be possible if I have a regular day time job? In
what time zone do I start work? This is relevant because a person living on
the West Coast could trade an early morning market such as the Chicago
Board of Trade (CBOT) bond contract opening session; however, a person
with an early morning job may want to consider foreign currency or forex
(Foreign Exchange) trading on the European session starting at night.
In order to know what time demands you need, you should also ask
yourself if you have the tolerance for trading a leveraged product and if
you have the tolerance for the risks: Should I use a time period stop—if the
market does not move or react within a specified time period, should I exit
the position? Should I use a conditional stop, such as a “stop-close only”
order? Does my order platform take such orders, or do I need to manually
watch and then implement such an order? (In intraday trading, the answer
is yes, you need to manually watch the close of the time period you are trading in.) Can I afford to place a stop, say, 10 or 20 percent of my overall account value?
You need to be clear and honest with yourself when answering these
evaluation questions. Remind yourself by asking: Why am I trading? What
are my expectations? (I have met too many people that look at trading as an
easy and quick way to make money or to replace their current career.)
Based on your trading account size or your risk capital, ask: What returns
will I need in order to generate sufficient income? Is my starting equity size
or bank roll inclusive of my living expenses? Are my expectations on that
return realistic on a constant basis?
These questions are important because they will help you to determine

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

11

which type of investment vehicle and which type of diversified trading
strategies you can incorporate into your trading repertoire.

RISK PER TRADE
A most important yet simple thought process that a trader can start with is
learning how to determine how much equity to put into any one trade or position. How much to risk per trade is a concept that many novice traders fail
to realize until it is way too late. They end up learning the exact wiring instructions on a regular basis to their brokerage account; the real hard cases
end up remembering those instructions by heart. Once you learn and have
the confidence to trade a system or follow a trading plan with a set of conditions and specific rules, you still need to have an effective method for risk
controls. I would start by considering how much risk per trade I should use
by looking at my overall account size, then at the market’s volatility and liquidity conditions, and then at a certain percentage of the overall account on
a percentage basis. Let me show you what I mean; and when we go over
various stop types and methods later in the book, you will be able to better
comprehend my meaning. If a person wanting to start a day trading account begins with $10,000 and uses a 10 percent risk factor per trade based
on the overall beginning equity size, if the first five trades go bad, then he
or she has lost 50 percent of the overall account. Therefore, it is imperative
that traders learn different techniques to protect their trading equity. Investors also need to know the number of positions with which they should
start in connection to the account size and the point at which they add on
to their contract lot or position size. In Chapter 11, I will go over a method
to help you determine answers to those questions. Then you will have a better understanding of a proper ratio and the point at which you should start
to increase your trading size.

NUMBER ONE TRADING FOCUS—RISK MANAGEMENT
As most trading books will explain, risk management is the key to survival
and what trading is really all about. While it may sound like a cliché, the
hard truth is that consistently profitable trading, in my opinion, significantly
depends on proper risk taking and risk management combined. Winning
traders follow a tried-and-tested plan based on rules or on a defined set of
criteria. Winning traders recognize the importance of risk management and
of money management. As I stated in my first book, the common denomi-

12

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

nator among losing traders was that most guess and hope and usually say,
when asked about placing a stop-loss or taking a profit, “I’ll think about it.”
Always remember that when trading with a set of rules, you will never
be 100 percent right. But if you do not follow a set of rules, you increase
the odds of being 100 percent wrong in your trading. If you manage your
trading risks and execute promptly on the trade signal, then you increase
the odds that you will be successful. When trading, your mind can play
tricks on you. You start to anticipate a buy signal only to act on a false signal. You need to learn when and how an actual signal is generated and
what and when you should trigger the action to initiate a trade. When you
are trading market signals by a predefined set of rules and a set of criteria,
then the mind cannot play tricks on you. When a signal says buy, then buy;
when a signal says sell, then sell. It’s that simple. Generally speaking, from
my experience, if a trader says, “I am tired of this,” and decides not to take
the signal, that ignored signal is the one that becomes a big winner. If you
have traded before, you may relate to that syndrome. For day traders in
stock or stock index futures, this usually happens in the last hour of the
trading session!

DIVERSIFICATION IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS
This observation was written by Peter L. Bernstein in his book Against the
Gods, The Remarkable Story of Risk (Wiley, 1996):
All of the tools we use today in risk management and in the analysis of
decisions, from the strict rationality of game theory to the challenges of
chaos theory, stem from the mathematical developments that took
place between 1654 and 1760 with two exceptions: In 1875 Francis Galton, an amateur mathematician, discovered regression to the mean;
and in 1952, Nobel Laureate Harry Markowitz, then a young graduate
student at the University of Chicago, demonstrated mathematically
why putting all your eggs in one basket is an unacceptably risky strategy and why diversification is the nearest an investor or business
manager can ever come to a free lunch. That revelation touched off the
intellectual movement that revolutionized Wall Street, corporate finance, and business decisions around the world; its effects are still
being felt today. (pp. 5–6)
With that notion came the concept of exploiting diversification by
means of spreading investment and risk capital in various markets, such as
stocks, bonds, real estate, precious metals, and commodities. There are

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

13

various methods to trade those investment vehicles through the use of real
estate investment trust (REIT) mutual funds, exchange traded funds
(ETFs), and other derivatives products, like single stock futures, stock
index futures, and options. There are simple and complex strategies even
more so with the use of options and inter- and intramarket spreading or pair
trading opportunities. We will cover some sophisticated strategies in this
book as well as basic investment strategies to help you create your own retirement fund.

HABITUAL WINNERS FOLLOW TRADING PLANS
Traders need to consider new techniques that will allow for increased profitability and ways to reduce risks. This book will demonstrate how you can
identify conditional changes in the markets and how you can utilize my
techniques in certain setups and triggers based on an approach to using
candle charts and pivot point analysis that may be different from what you
have encountered before.
You will learn which leading price indicators are the best to use, plus
professional chart-reading techniques and how to apply this knowledge to
make trading decisions based on facts rather than on opinions. You would
be surprised at how many times I am asked what my “feeling” is on the market. I can feel upset, I can feel warm, I can feel cold; but I just can’t feel the
market. I can see the price action and can act on a shift in the momentum,
and I can determine that the market is currently in an uptrend or a downtrend or in a consolidation phase. I certainly can’t feel the market.
I want to walk you through some top chart patterns or setups and triggers so that you can develop a trading plan based on a testable trading system. This will be a method with a complete set of rules that do not
arbitrarily change. You will be able to use these concepts in many different
markets and in different time frames. This book will go into more specific
rules and explanations of setups and triggers than my first book did. Not
only was that first project, The Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics: How to Profit Using Pivot Points, Candlesticks, & Other Indicators,
a great introductory book that touched on several trading concepts, but it
was the first work that introduced traders to the concept of integrating
candlestick charting with pivot point analysis. Some of the principles in
that first project will be used here, but this book will cover in greater detail how to apply and use those methods so you can learn to make money
with the triggers. I would suggest that you get that book if you have not already done so, as there are many great tips and suggestions described in
those pages.

14

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

In this book, I want to teach you what to search for when chart reading.
I am not going to go into detail on every specific candlestick chart pattern
because I generally only use them to help identify where the market closes
in relationship to the open or the past price points, such as the high or low
points, rather than rely on them to signal a trade based on traditional chart
formations.
I believe that, like many things in life, the more you repeat positive actions, the more you will experience and receive positive reactions. In trading, that translates to simply following rules, waiting for signals to
transpire, and then acting on those signals, rather than anticipating that signals will form. When signals trigger a buy, then go long; when a signal triggers a sell, then exit the long or go short. As I stated earlier, following a set
of rules will not guarantee that you will be 100 percent right in your trading
results; but by not following a set of rules, your chances increase that you
may be closer to 100 percent wrong in your trading results. One must learn
to cut losses and let winning trades ride. It sounds like a cliché to trading
veterans; but the fact is that it is so simple, yet it is so hard to do. By accepting this process of learning some simple principles and then following
a few sets of rules, which I will go into in this book, you become a better
trader; and that may translate into becoming a more profitable trader.
One trait I have noticed that most novice traders possess is that they
try to overanalyze and overcomplicate matters. In order to help simplify
your thinking, remember this: There are only four common denominators
that each of us has equal access to—the open, the high, the low, and the
close of any given market, in any given time frame. There are two other values to measure: volume and, for futures traders, open interest. However,
even these two elements cannot be finalized or completely calculated until
the close of each trading session. Therefore, it is important that you realize
that the close is the single most important aspect when using and applying
all forms of technical analysis studies.
So no matter what market or trading vehicle you are trading—whether
it is a stock, a futures or commodity market, a stock index, the forex currency markets, or even an exchange traded fund, you need to watch the
close of the time period in which you are trading to capture a clue in order
to initiate a trade, manage the trade, and learn the right exit spot. Always remember that the close is the most important element and what matters
most to focus on when trading. It is the relationship of the close to past
price action and to the high, the low, and the open that will help measure or
weigh a value of a given market at any given time. Therefore, you can get a
more accurate gauge of what to do. In trading terms, the choices you have
are to buy, to sell, to spread off, or to do nothing and hold onto your cash.
Sometimes not knowing what to do translates into not entering a position.
Remember that being in cash or standing on the sidelines is a trade, too.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

15

Once you grasp the understanding that it is the close that shows you
what the current market value is, then you should have a clue as what your
next trading decision should be. If you learn to act on the close for your
trading decisions and on triggers, that information will help stack the odds
in your favor that you are going with the current flow or in the right market
direction. That includes any time period for which you are trading. That
means if you are a day trader using a 5-minute period, you cannot act on an
intratime period signal. You need to wait for the five-minute period to conclude before acting on a trigger. The same goes for a 5-minute, a 60-minute,
a daily, a weekly, or even a monthly time period.
The clues for which we as traders are looking are what we need to initiate a trading decision and are what I define as a trading trigger, which will
be explained later in the book. Once you understand how markets work,
understand simple charting techniques, and have a fundamental working
knowledge of indicators and what dictates increases or decreases in values
of a given product at a given time (such as supply and demand factors) and
how that is represented on a chart, then you will have gained a better edge
in the market and will have stacked the odds of success in your favor.
There is one flaw in any system, and it is generally from the execution
side rather than from the construction side of the system. To be specific,
most traders who lose while trading a system fail to trade by the signals
generated by that system. Either they fail to act once the signal is generated, or they anticipate that a signal will be generated thus acting on a
false signal.
It is imperative that once you read this book you learn that you must
wait for the actual signal to trigger, and that occurs in most cases by the
close of the time period in which you are trading. Even when a system generates a losing trade, it will signal a trigger to get out. You must act on confirmed signals rather than on anticipation of those signals or, more
important, on your personal hunches.
Once you have a working knowledge of the markets and the confidence
in what the possible outcome of those triggers might be, working with a few
setups and signals will allow you to find a trading opportunity; and then you
will be able to apply the appropriate strategy. You can diversify trading
styles, such as integrating a day trade into a position trade, utilizing an option strategy, or applying the information on various trading vehicles.
I talked about this concept of “finding opportunity, then applying a
strategy” in my first book: I called it playing the Monte Hall game, Let’s
Make a Deal. Look behind door number one, and review the risk rewards;
then look at the strategy behind door number two, and review the risk and
rewards there; and then finally open door number three, and see if that
strategy appeals to your analysis of risk and rewards. Remember, you can
determine, if an opportunity is longer term in nature, to use an option strat-

16

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

egy (such as an outright long call or put); a ratio back spread; or, if the best
opportunity exists taking a position in a stock, a stock index future or possibly an ETF or a holding company depositary receipt (HOLDR).
