How Long Are Previous Levels Valid
The question arises frequently in technical chart analysis as to how long a previous
support or resistance level retains its power and importance. It is admittedly difficult to arrive at a definite answer. Some clues may be gleaned from our study of the
possible explanations of these levels at the beginning of this chapter; we have noted
also that volume is a factor to be considered.
Speaking very generally, the support and resistance levels established by minor
fluctuations such as we saw in the Snider Packing chart (Fig. IX.4), lose their importance after two or three months. On the other hand, the support and resistance levels established by the tops or bottoms of important intermediate movements in a
major trend (such as we saw in the weekly chart of General Electric in (Fig. IX.1) may
still be effective after a lapse of years when the next major trend brings prices back
to those levels. We have, then, the general rule that the greater the movement which
produces it, the longer the potency of any level in future market action.
Then, in the next major trend we may, of course, have new levels develop – as well
as the old ones that repeat – and these new levels
may become significant in turn in another later
The support and
trend. For example, note on the daily chart of Genresistance levels
eral Electric in Fig. IX.3 the resistance that showed
established by the tops or
up at 44 1/2 the week ending August 1. This 44 1/2
bottoms of intermediate
level became support for the reactions August 21
movements in a major
and September 25. The general 44 1/2 level may show
trend may still be
up again as support or resistance months later, pereffective after a lapse of
haps taking the place of the old 46 1/2 level as an
years.
important level in future trading. So far as we can
see on this chart, however, it is to be regarded only
as one of our minor levels which may soon lose its value.
Another factor seems to have some bearing on our question of longevity and that
is the sharpness of the price movement to and away from the original reversal level.
A gently rounding top following a slow rise in prices, usually has less effectiveness
as a support level after a lapse of time, than does a sharp peak formed by a rapid
advance of prices and then a rapid retreat. In this connection note the long lasting
importance of the 42 level in the General Electric charts (Figs IX.1 and IX.2) first
established by the sharp drop to that level in the Fall of 1929 and the fast subsequent
rally away from it.

– 328 –

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE LEVELS

Fifty and One Hundred as Critical Levels
Every follower of the stock market has noticed at one time or another how price
movements are halted and congestions developed around the even fifty and hundred levels. There is no doubt but what prices have difficulty in many cases in
‘‘working through’’ these levels. The reason is, probably, simply a reflection of the
tendency we all have to think in round numbers. How often we hear the casual comment on a stock selling at say, 42, that it ‘‘ought to go to 50’’. Traders are apt to place
buy or sell orders at these round number levels, and what started as a purely artificial resistance becomes reinforced by public covering or profit-taking taking, as a
consequence of which the influence of these levels on future market action is further
strengthened. Moreover, in former days, 100 was the par value of most leading
stocks and ‘‘par’’ was naturally an important and significant level, tending to stop
any movement of prices through it from either direction. Such very artificial support
and resistance levels, however, are not as powerful as those more natural levels previously discussed; the back history of trading, after all, is our best and safest guide.

The Half-way Intermediate Movement Theory
Although it is not; perhaps, related technically to our study of support and resistance, this seems to be a logical place to take up briefly a general theory of price
action which has, at one time or another, been given considerable attention by market analysts. This theory states that when a major movement is interrupted by a
reversal, this interruption is to be regarded as only an intermediate movement so
long as it retraces half or less than half of the ground covered by the previous major
move. If the assumed intermediate movement carries on and retraces more than half
the ground covered by the previous move in the direction of the major trend, then
the suggestion is that a reversal in the basic trend may be in the making. What we
assumed at first to be only an intermediate correction may now very likely become
instead the first true movement in a new major trend.
Examination of a great many charts over a period of years shows that this theory
has some foundation in fact, but is not an altogether reliable trading rule. The majority of intermediate corrections do not retrace much over a half of the previous movement in the direction of the major trend, but some retrace two-thirds of the distance
and occasionally a correction will take prices almost all the way back, without the
basic trend being reversed. Two-thirds is, perhaps, a safer limit to set: an intermediate movement then which retraces two-thirds of the distance covered by the previous major movement would certainly be subject to suspicion as indicating a possible
major reversal.
– 329 –

STUDY IX

The ‘‘Bounce’’ Away from Support or Resistance
One more point remains to be discussed in connection with the practical application
of our support and resistance study, and that is the action of prices when they
approach such a level. A quick inspection of the various chart examples we have
used to help our understanding of these phenomena, indicates that prices may do
one of two things – they may either halt and build a pattern of congestion lasting for
some time before the level is finally penetrated, or they may ‘‘bounce’’ back into a
reversal movement of more or less importance.
There seems to be no dependable guide to forecasting which type of price action
will follow the attainment of a critical support or resistance level. (In fact, we have
seen that occasionally there will be no halt of any consequence in the current movement, but that is the exception rather then the rule). We must take into account other
chart factors, such as volume, the extent and sharpness of the preceding movement,
the character and size of the pattern from which it arose, the appearance of the charts
of other stocks, and the market as a whole, as well as the potential strength of the
anticipated support or resistance. And then we must watch to see what sort of pattern develops on the individual chart of the stock which has reached this critical
level.

A Good Place to Take Profits
In the final analysis, it is a pretty safe rule to withdraw from the stock when it nears
what looks as though it might be a strong support or resistance zone, depending
upon your position, and wait to see what develops before again entering the market. If, for example, we had bought General Electric in 1935 and had carried it up
into February, 1936 (see Fig. IX.2), we should have been well advised to sell it and
take our profit when it approached the 42 level which previous trading history had
indicated would likely be a ‘‘tough’’ resistance point. Then we might wait to see
whether GE could work through that level before we bought it again, or watch for
the building of some strong ascending pattern to indicate that the advance was
ready to continue. Such a pattern did, in fact, develop (on the daily chart of the
period) in May, 1936.
The natural corollary of this sound trading rule suggests that it is not good practice to buy a stock – that is, take a new long position in it – when the price is close
under a strong resistance level. We may have a break-out from what appears to be a
powerful pattern just two or three points under a resistance level; judging by the
pattern alone we might be tempted to buy, but we know that the resistance is there
and may overcome completely the technical strength of our pattern. In such cases,
– 330 –

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE LEVELS

the conservative trader waits to see whether the resistance will ‘‘hold.” If the resistance level is decisively broken then he can confidently count on a worthwhile
movement.

Use of Support and Resistance Levels in Short Selling
We have already noted, on page 307, the failure of even the best nearby support levels to hold in the panic phase of a bear market. At these times prices drop precipitately, under pressure of accumulative margin calls and forced selling, until weak
holdings and the public generally have been thoroughly shaken out. With this
exception, however, bear market tactics differ in no respect from the bull market tactics discussed in the paragraphs above.
It is not advisable to sell a stock short when its price has dropped to, or is nearing,
a good support level. The safest level at which to go short is after a rally to the vicinity of a resistance point, or right after a decisive break down through support. Then
as the next support level is approached the short sale should be covered and the
stock given a chance to rally before again selling it short.

– 331 –

Study X

MEASURING RULES
AND FORMATIONS
■ Back History of Support and Resistance

■ The Ordinary Symmetrical Triangle False

■ Noting Significant Price Levels on Cur-

Move

rent Charts
■ Trend Lines as Measuring Indications
■ Primary Trend Lines More Dependable
■ Measuring Implications of Patterns
Themselves
■ Measuring Implications of Head and
Shoulders
■ Testing the Head and Shoulders Measuring Formula
■ Reliability of Head and Shoulders Measuring Rule
■ Measuring Implications of Triangles
■ Flags and Pennants as Measuring
Patterns
■ Measurement Applies Only to the Mast
Itself
■ The Flag Rule Does Not Forecast a Reversal
■ The ‘‘Half-mast’’ Congestion Pattern
■ Examples of Half-mast Congestions
■ A Less Distinct Example
■ Reliability of the Half-mast Pattern
■ Measuring Theories Applied to Gaps
■ The Single Gap Measuring Theory
■ Wide Variance in Movements Following
Gaps
■ A Less Easily Interpreted Example
■ The Multiple Gap Theory
■ May Be Applied Also to Two Continuation Gaps
■ A working Example of Measuring Gap
Analysis
■ Dependability of Multiple Gap Rule
■ The Time Element in Measuring

■ Most False Moves Attended by Low Vol-

FALSE MOVES AND SHAKE-OUTS

■ Stop-loss orders of Little Help within Pat-

■ The Chart’s Most Confusing Enemy

ume
■ The Exceptional False Move with High

Volume
■ False Moves from Right-angle Triangles
■ False Moves out of Rectangles
■ The False Move vs. the Out-of-line Move
■ False Moves Following Head and Shoul-

ders
■ Defense against False Moves
■ The Shake-out on High Volume
■ Strict Construction of Break-out Rules
■ The Use of Stop-loss Orders against False

Moves
■ False Moves Have their Bright Side
■ The ‘‘End Run’’ – Not a False Move

STOP-LOSS ORDERS
■ The Mechanics of the Stop-loss Order
■ When to Place Stop-loss Orders
■ Shifting the Stop-loss Order
■ Where to Place Stop Orders
■ Applying the Principles to a Long Com-

mitment
■ The First Shift in the Stop-loss Level
■ A Gap Provides a New Basing Point
■ Completing the Trade in US Rubber
■ Our Stop Finally Executed
■ The Stop Loss Order in Short Selling
■ Placement of the Initial Stop on a Short

Commitment
■ Stop-loss Orders in Short Trading Are

Buy Orders
■ The Use of ‘‘Mental’’ Stops

terns

■ Misleading False Moves Fortunately Rare

■ Do Not Neglect Other Chart Indications

■ Triangles Most Susceptible to False Moves

■ Other Minor Uses for Stop Orders

– 333 –

MEASURING RULES AND FORMATIONS

The trader in stocks has three questions to decide before he takes a position in any
particular issue. They are:
1. When has a movement started?
2. In which direction will prices move – up or down?
3. How far can the movement carry before it is reversed, or halted in a long and
unprofitable congestion?
The first two of these questions are answered directly and with a high degree of
dependability for the technical student, by the patterns and formations we have analyzed in the first seven chapters of this Course. The third question, however, is certainly of equal importance, for with all the market to choose from, we naturally want
to use our trading capital to best advantage at all times. We want to buy or sell only
those stocks which promise the most worthwhile movements percentage-wise. So it
behooves us in interpreting our charts, constantly to compare one opportunity with
another and to estimate as well as we can which offers the greater profit.

Back History of Support and Resistance
In our study of Support and Resistance (Study IX) we saw how useful those levels,
established in the previous trading history of a stock, became in forecasting its
future market action. Especially in the longer range analysis of major and intermediate trends as pictured on the weekly charts, the influence of old support and resistance points was clearly evident even after the lapse of years. From those levels we
derive our first and best aid in estimating the probable objective of a price movement once it has gotten under way. Suppose we find amongst the number of issues
we are charting, two stocks in about the same price class which have developed formations of apparently equal strength, both breaking out at the same time in what
would seem to promise a profitable upward movement. But suppose the back history of one, as shown on its long-range weekly chart, indicates a probable resistance
zone only a few points above the current price level, while in the case of the other
there is nothing in the back history to suggest any resistance for 20 or 30 points
above the break-out. Obviously, other things being equal, the second stock has a better chance of making a worthwhile advance than the first. The first may conceivably,
if its technical action is very strong, plow right through its old resistance level and
move on up for many points without a halt, but the odds are against it; the more
likely consequence is at least a long and patience-trying delay at the old resistance
– 335 –

STUDY X

level, with the possibility even of a reaction and the building of another pattern
before the resistance is finally penetrated.

Noting Significant Price Levels on Current Charts
A thorough and painstaking analysis of the trading history of any stock whose market action we may wish to chart for trading purposes, is therefore well worth the
time and trouble it entails. That trading history is most easily studied and the probable levels of support and resistance determined through the medium of the weekly
charts. And our study should carry back at least to the beginning of the preceding
major trend. In other words, if we are charting a stock during a long-term bull market movement we should examine its trading history all the way back to the top
from which the preceding bear market started. If we are following a stock in a bear
market we should analyze its action back to the bottoms from which the preceding
bull market started, in order to determine its probable support levels.
If we wish to be particularly thorough we may carry our studies even farther back
into history by means of monthly charts, with a view to establishing the most important levels which tend to repeat as supply or demand areas. Monthly charts may, in
fact, be used instead of the weeklies in analyzing the trend immediately preceding
the current one, but some of the significant levels as well as the volume action tend
to become obscured on the monthly charts; the weekly record if available is much
more helpful. Once we have determined as well as we can through our study of past
trading history the levels where resistance or support are most likely to be encountered by our stock in its current trend, we can note these levels on our current daily
charts. We may even mark these levels according to their anticipated importance, by
means of some convenient code. By transferring our notations from one sheet to the
next when it becomes necessary to start a new sheet, we can thus keep before us constantly a valuable gauge to our stock’s potential movements while we watch its
daily action to determine when to trade in it, and save ourselves the time and labor
of digging out the back history every time the stock moves.

Trend Lines as Measuring Indications
In Study VIII we studied trend lines and trend action, and we learned that once a
definite trend has been established we can place a reasonable degree of reliance
upon its continuance, at least until strong signs of reversal appear. In trend action,
therefore, we have another gauge as to the probable objective of a current minor or
intermediate movement; the odds favor its being halted and reversed in the vicinity
of the trend line toward which it is moving. The exact price level at which this reversal occurs will depend, however, on the ‘‘angle’’ of the movement – that is, on the
– 336 –

MEASURING RULES AND FORMATIONS

time it takes prices to get to the trend line. If the trend channel slopes at a steep angle,
any minor price movement within it in the direction opposite to, or across, the basic
trend may be extremely limited in terms of actual price change. This important consideration was illustrated very well in our analysis of the trend line action in Industrial Rayon (Fig. VIII.7 and pages 280–1).

Primary Trend Lines More Dependable
Generally speaking, we find trend lines most helpful in our measuring forecasts
when we apply them to the ‘‘corrective’’ movements which run contrary to the general trend. Trend lines work best, for example, in defining the probable limits of
intermediate advances within a major bear market, or the minor advances within an
intermediate downward trend, and vice-versa in bull movements. In these cases we
are, of course, working with the single or primary trend lines which, as we have
learned, define the tops in a declining trend, or the bottoms in an advancing trend.
Only occasionally can we draw good workable parallel or secondary trend lines;
when we can, they are very useful in suggesting the probable objectives of price
movements in both directions within the trend channel.

Measuring Implications of Patterns Themselves
The student will see that both of the preceding methods of estimating the probable
extent of a price movement depend on our recognizing in advance certain conditions which tend to set a limit to that movement,
something which that movement will meet and by
We find trend lines most
which it will presumably be stopped or reversed.
helpful when we apply
But there are, of course, many cases where the back
them to the “corrective”
trading history gives us no clues as to resistance or
movements contrary to
support levels, and where no well established trend
the general trend.
appears on the charts. In such cases we are obliged
to make our estimate of the probable extent of
movement by reference to its origin; we look to the pattern from which it sprang, or
to signs that develop within the movement itself, to determine how strong it is and
how far it is likely to go.
In our earlier Studies, we learned that in a very general sense the larger and
clearer the pattern, whether it be a reversal or a continuation formation, the more
extensive the movement of prices we may expect to follow its completion. We made
note also of the fact that the direction of the basic trend must be taken into account
in appraising the importance of a pattern. Prices tend to move more easily in the
direction of the fundamental market trend. Consequently, in a general bull market
– 337 –

STUDY X

comparatively small bottom patterns may produce surprisingly extensive upward
movements, while very large and impressive top formations may be followed by
quite insignificant declines. In a general bear market we are apt to have just the
opposite, of course, with top patterns producing long and extensive declines, and
bottom patterns comparatively small rallies. This consideration of the basic trend,
however, need not concern us when we are comparing the patterns appearing
simultaneously in two different stocks both of which are evidently working in the
same trend.

Measuring Implications of Head and Shoulders
The first reversal formation which we studied in this Course, was the Head and
Shoulders. In our analysis of this pattern we made brief mention (on page 63) of one
fairly reliable measuring formula that may be applied to it. This formula may be
simply expressed as follows: the price movement will proceed at least as far (in
terms of points or dollars) after the breaking of the neck-base line, as the vertical distance in points from the level of the head to the neck-base line, before it is halted. The
halt at that point may be only a very brief one, followed by a resumption of the
movement, or it may develop into a minor and temporary reversal, sending prices
back in the opposite trend to the level of the old neck-base line before the movement
originally forecast by the Head and Shoulders is resumed. Or a complete technical
change may develop at that point canceling and reversing the Head and Shoulders
forecast.

Testing the Head and Shoulders Measuring Formula
We may apply this rule to the various Head and Shoulders formations pictured on
the charts in our preceding lessons and check its accuracy. Starting with the Head
and Shoulder top in Republic Steel (Fig. II.1) if we draw the neck-base line across
points C and I, the vertical distance from that line to the top of the head is about 28
points. The neck-base line was broken at the 112 level by the price action of the last
week of October. Applying our measuring rule, we should expect a halt in the downward movement to show up on the chart 28 points lower, or around the 84 level. The
movement was not, in fact, halted until it had reached 73, where a minor rally sent
prices back up to 89.
In the Head and Shoulder top in Western Union (Fig. II.2), our rule worked out
with surprising accuracy, but in the case of the US. Industrial Alcohol top, (Fig. II.3)
the rule called for a halt around the 56 level and the movement shot right through
this level and showed no signs of stopping until it reached 38. The rule worked on
the Borden chart (Fig. II.4), and in connection with Head and Shoulders bottoms, on
– 338 –
