
Chapter 16: The Basics of Swing Trading
climbed above $29.45, rising as high as $30.01 before backing off to close at
$29.80. You could expect your order to fill very near your $29.45 buy-stop
price. For the sake of our example, we’ll assume a fill price of $29.50.

Bar #1

Bar #3 Bar #5 Bar #7

Figure 16-2:
Chart of
National
Oilwell
Varco (NOV)
showing
pullback
trading
examples.

Bar #2

Bar #4

Bar #6

Immediately following the trade execution, you set a stop-loss order below
the low of the previous bar, $28.74 in this case. Or you may set the low at
$28.90, the trade day’s low. Either approach makes sense, so it’s your call.
Each day the trade remains active, reset the stop order just below the low of
the previous bar on the chart.
The thrust of this trend lasted through February 12, 2007, a duration of ten
trading days. This position hit the stop price on February 12, labeled Bar #3
on the chart in Figure 16-2, when the stock traded below the February 9 low
of $33.03.
The next opportunity to trade a pullback occurred during the pullback that
began after NOV traded at a new high on February 13, labeled Bar #4. The
trade was triggered on February 21, shown as Bar #5, when NOV traded
above the February 20 high of $33.85. The position hit its stop price on
February 27, shown as Bar #6, when the stock traded below the February 26
low of $34.91. Given slippage and transaction costs, this trade was no better
than a breakeven trade.

263

264 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
The next opportunity came following the poorly formed pullback that began
with Bar #6. You entered the trade on Bar #7 when NOV traded above the
February 28 intraday high of $35.00. The trade would stop out two bars later
for a loss.
Swing trades don’t always work out, of course. Complications and frequent
losing trades always are likely.

Surfing channels
Another trend-following approach to swing trading uses a channeling strategy
to identify entry and exit points. Chapter 10 explains the channeling strategy
and how to construct the channel lines. After a channel is identified on the
daily charts, channel lines are treated as lines of support and resistance.
Figure 16-3 shows an example.

Resistance Channel Line

Figure 16-3:
Chart of
Jacobs
Engineering
Group, Inc.
(JEC) in
a trend
channel.

Support Channel Line

After identifying support and resistance levels for a channeling stock, you
can monitor its chart for reversals near the channel lines. As the stock price
approaches the lower or support channel line, you have an opportunity to
take a position in the direction of the trend. After entering a position, your
stop-loss order is entered just below the support channel line. As the stock
price approaches the upper or resistance channel line, that signals when to
exit your position.

Chapter 16: The Basics of Swing Trading
You can use intraday charts to fine-tune this strategy. As a stock price falls
toward its lower channel or support level, begin watching intraday charts for
indications that the stock is changing direction and heading higher. If you see
an intraday low near the location of the support channel line, followed by a
higher high and a higher low, you can use that situation as an entry signal.
After entering a long position, you place a stop-loss order just below the support channel line.
You hold this long position until it either is stopped out or the stock
approaches its upper channel resistance level. Again, you need to monitor the intraday charts for hints of a change in direction and exit the trade
whenever you see the reversal. After that, you wait for the stock to head back
toward the lower channel line to initiate a new long trade.

Trading range-bound stocks
Unlike the typical position trader, a swing trader is more likely to use countertrend strategies (see Chapter 15) and actively participate when a stock
is range bound. The swing trader tries to make trades based on price movements from the bottom to the top of the range and back down again. You can
use either daily or weekly charts to identify the trading range. An example
using a daily chart is shown in Figure 16-4.
Your trading approach to range-bound stocks is similar to the one for trading a channeling stock that we describe in the previous “Surfing channels”
section. As the stock price approaches the support level, which is just above
$59.00 in Figure 16-4, you have an opportunity to take a position. You can use
the a few approaches to enter a position.
You can, for example, simply choose to place a buy order using a limit price
just above the support line. Another approach that may give you a little more
control and provide better entry and exit points is to monitor the stock to
find pivot points as it trades near the support line. A pivot point is a three-bar
pattern in which the low price of the middle bar is lower than the lows of the
bars on either side of it. The entry and exit points for this kind of trading are
similar to the ones used for trading based on a pullback pattern. After identifying a pivot point, you enter an order on the next bar. The protective stop
is placed either immediately below the low of the pivot bar or just below the
support channel line.

265

266 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Sell

Breakout
Resistance

Figure 16-4:
Chart of
Genzyme
General
(GENZ)
stock prices
bound
within a
trading
range.

Support
Buy

Using intraday charts is another way to fine-tune your entry point. As the
stock approaches the support line, you enter a position as soon as you see
a reversal pattern on the intraday charts — for example, a higher high and a
higher low, or a gap higher (Chapter 10).
You exit these kinds of positions when the stock reverses near its resistance
line. You can then take a short position in the stock — using any of the entry
techniques described earlier — or wait for the stock to return to the support
line to initiate another long position.
If the stock breaks through its upper resistance level, you interpret that
condition exactly the way a position trader does — a very bullish indication
that the stock is likely beginning a new trend, immediately closing any open
short positions and converting to a trend-following strategy (see the earlier
“Trading trending stocks” section).

Chapter 16: The Basics of Swing Trading

Swinging with Gann and Taylor
Swing trading has been around in one form or
another since the earliest days of markets. The
term itself probably originated with W. D. Gann
when he invented the swing chart during the
1920s. George Douglass Taylor popularized the
phrase, and a short-term trading technique,
when he introduced a now classic three-bar
trading pattern in his 1950 book, The Taylor
Trading Technique.
Taylor’s ideas serve as the basis for much of
today’s swing-trading methodology. According
to Taylor, trending stocks tend to rally, then
rest, and then continue to trend. Swing traders watch for these rest periods and attempt to
enter the market just in advance of the thrust of
the new trend.
Taylor’s method, sometimes called “the book
trader’s method,” was originally developed to
trade futures contracts in the grain markets.
Taylor theorized that the market cycles through
three distinct phases or days. The first phase
is the buy day, the second is a sell day, and the
third is a sell-short day. Although these three
days don’t necessarily fall on consecutive days,
for the sake of following the discussion, we
assume they do.
Taylor first determines the short-term trend,
finds the position of the short-term cycle within
the trend, and then uses this information to

determine when to buy, sell, or sell short. The
buy day begins the cycle. A typical buy day
begins with weakness, and the trader takes a
long position near a previously identified support level based on the weakness. This position is held overnight into the next day, the
sell day. The sell day typically opens strong,
but the strength fades before the close. The
trader sells at the early signs of weakness. The
final day of the cycle is the sell-short day. The
trader watches for any strength near resistance
levels on the third day and sells short into this
strength. The short position is held overnight
and then covered during early weakness the
following buy day. The cycle begins in earnest
again with the trader initiating a long position
after covering the short position.
Taylor’s approach is difficult to execute. Like
all swing trading, it requires constant monitoring of the market and an excellent understanding of support and resistance levels. It
is a discretionary approach that is difficult to
test. Few stocks actually follow a three-day
script on consecutive days. Many stocks trend
for several days before pulling back or rising,
so the three-bar method must be adjusted to
account for these differences. Nevertheless,
Taylor’s thinking is evident in much of today’s
swing-trading methodology.

Trading volatility
Swing traders try to trade stocks that move up and down more than average.
To find these stocks, swing traders spend a great deal of effort measuring
and analyzing volatility, usually in the form of historic volatility. Although
the math required to calculate historic volatility is complex, the concept
is simple. Historic volatility measures a stock’s price movement. The faster
it moves, the higher the historic volatility. Fortunately, many charting and
analysis programs include a method for calculating historic volatility, so you
don’t have to program in the formula.

267

268 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Historic volatility isn’t concerned with the direction of a stock’s price movement. A high historic volatility value doesn’t reveal whether a stock’s price is
rising or falling. Although swing traders want to know that a stock trends in
one direction or the other, they don’t really care which direction. Downside
movement is just as attractive as upside movement to the swing trader.
You can use historic volatility for swing trading in several different ways. One
popular approach uses historic volatility for finding stocks that have been
very volatile but currently are experiencing quiet periods. These temporarily
quiet stocks often return to previous levels of historic volatility, and that presents a swing-trading opportunity. Swing traders identify these stocks by comparing measurements of historic volatility across longer and much shorter
periods of time and expressing that comparison as a ratio. The ratio looks
like this:
Historic volatility ratio = Short-term historic volatility ÷ Long-term
historic volatility
One common ratio compares a 6-day historic volatility with a 100-day historic
volatility. Whenever the value of that ratio is less than 50 percent, the stock
is a candidate for a swing-trading position.
After this stock takes a short low-volatility rest, it is likely to return to its
historic level of volatility with a fast move. Remember that volatility tells you
nothing about the direction of price movements, so to get around this limitation, be sure to place buy and sell-short stop orders, respectively, above the
high and below the low of the current bar. When the stock decides which
way it will go, one of your stop orders will be filled and that should get you
pointed in the right direction. Using more traditional technical analysis tools
is another approach to evaluating a stock’s current trend, so you can then
trade in the direction of that trend.
Risks accompany both approaches. Using the first approach, the stock may
take off in one direction and quickly reverse course, and you may end up
holding a position with a highly volatile stock heading the wrong way. This
same scenario also can happen with the second approach. Another potential
problem occurs when the stock price gaps through your entry order, and your
order may end up getting filled at a price that’s significantly different than you
expected.

Money management issues
Because of the short duration of each trade, swing trading generates a large
volume of trades. Execution and slippage costs (Chapter 12) can be very
high. Profits are relatively small when measured on each trade, so losses
must be carefully controlled.

Chapter 16: The Basics of Swing Trading
You need to adhere closely to the money management rules we discuss in
Chapter 12. In addition, each swing trade must represent only a small percentage of your trading capital. Ten percent of your capital per trade is too
much. Risking less than 5 percent — and perhaps as little as 2 percent — of
your trading capital on any one swing trade is a more conservative approach.
This approach is similar to the one used by professional traders. When profit
potential is small, don’t take big risks, or you won’t be a swing trader for long.

Using Options for Swing Trading
Stock options can be used as substitutes for the underlying stocks when
swing trading. A stock option is a limited duration contract that grants the
option buyer the right to either buy or sell a stock for a fixed price. The option
seller, usually called the option writer or the option grantor, is granting the
right to the option buyer to either buy or sell a specific stock for a fixed
price.
Each option represents 100 shares of stock. A call is an option to buy 100
shares of a specified stock. The call buyer is acquiring a limited duration
right to buy 100 shares of a stock from the option grantor at a fixed price,
called the strike price. A put is an option to sell 100 shares of a specified
stock. The put buyer is acquiring a limited duration right to sell 100 shares
of a stock to the option grantor at the specified strike price. Options are discussed in more detail in Chapter 18.
You can, for example, substitute a call option for a long stock position or a
put option for a short stock position. You realize any profits by selling the
options outright, or you can exercise an option and take possession of the
shares of stock. Swing traders, however, are more likely to sell the option
than exercise it.
Although using options as stock substitutes has several advantages, it also
has risks of its own. The primary advantage: An option costs far less than
the underlying stock, which enables you to limit your risk to the price of the
option.
Each option is a substitute for 100 shares of stock or 100 shares of an
exchange-traded fund. One call option, for example, gives you the ability to
buy 100 shares of a stock at a fixed price for a certain length of time. As an
example, assume that the QQQQ exchange-traded fund is trading at $27.10
per share. At the time of the example, you can buy one call option with a $27
strike price for $2.26 per share, or a total of $226, before transaction costs.
That one option enables you to buy 100 shares of QQQQ for $27 before the
option expires.

269

270 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Say that the option in this example has approximately six weeks before
expiration. Your option position is therefore profitable as long as the QQQQ
exchange-traded fund trades above $29.26 (excluding transaction costs)
before the expiration date. (We determined the breakeven price by adding
the $27 strike price to the $2.26 cost of the option, which totals $29.26.) Your
risk is the price of the option. In other words, you can’t lose any more than
$2.26 per share, or $226, on this trade.
Unfortunately, option pricing is not as straightforward as stock pricing.
The pricing example above is merely a snapshot that varies with changes
in the price of the QQQQ exchange-traded fund. The following factors affect
option prices:
✓ Options expire and their prices decay as the expiration date draws
closer. This price decay is caused by the option’s falling time value.
✓ The prices of current-month options decay at faster rates than longerdated options.
✓ In percentage terms, out-of-the-money options often move at a faster rate
than in-the-money options. (An option is said to be in the money if it has
intrinsic value and out of the money if it has no intrinsic value. For a call
option, that means the price for the underlying stock is greater than the
specified strike price. For a put, that means the price for the underlying
stock is less than the strike price. See Chapter 18 for additional details.)
Note: Trading options that are far out of the money is rarely a good
strategy.
✓ Volatility is a component of option pricing. Option prices rise and fall as
the volatility of the stock rises and falls.
✓ Except in a few unusual circumstances, an option’s price doesn’t move
in lock step with the underlying stock’s price. If a stock moves $1, the
option, in general, moves some amount less than $1. The more an option
is in the money, the closer the change in an option’s price will be to the
change in the underlying stock’s price.
Another factor to consider when substituting options for stocks is that the
option’s spread, or the difference between the bid price and the ask price, is
extremely wide when considered as a percentage of the option price.
Before you decide to substitute options for your stock trades, make sure that
you understand the option-pricing model. We discuss it in Chapter 18. And be
careful that you don’t overtrade with options. If you normally buy 100 shares
of a stock, then you need to buy only one option contract. Although the price
of 10 option contracts may be attractive when compared with the price of
the stock, 10 option contracts nevertheless represent 1,000 shares of stock.
When buying options for 10 times the number of shares that you normally
trade, you’re increasing your exposure to risk by a factor of 10.

Chapter 16: The Basics of Swing Trading
When trading options, you can’t make money in as many ways as you can
lose it. Being right on the stock’s direction but still losing money on an option
trade is possible because of pricing issues. That’s why gaining an understanding of the option-pricing model is so important before you try to substitute an
option for a stock. We discuss options more fully in Chapter 18.

Getting a Grip on Swing-Trading Risks
Swing trading is risky and demands a great deal of time. As a swing trader,
you must monitor the market during every trading hour. You also must be
able to control your emotions so that you stay focused and trade within
your plan.
Ask any swing trader; you’re likely to hear that strict adherence to money
management reduces risk. The counterargument is that swing trading
exposes a great deal of capital to risk but makes only small profits. Some
traders are able to swing trade profitably, but you need to realize that the
odds are stacked against you. Only you can decide whether it’s worth the
effort.
Some argue that swing trading combines the worst aspects of position trading with the worst aspects of day trading. Like day trading, swing-trading
profits are small and slippage costs are high. Swing-trading positions are held
overnight, so swing traders can’t take advantage of the special margin provisions that are available to day traders who close all positions by the end of
the trading day. And swing traders are subject to the same account restrictions as day traders, but they may not qualify for the special tax advantages
afforded to full-time day traders.

Taxes (of course)
Special tax treatment is available from the IRS for full-time traders. The
benefits enable full-time traders to be taxed as a business rather than an
investor, and that means you can deduct the cost of the computer hardware and software used for trading, and you can treat your home-office
expenses, including the costs for data acquisition, as ordinary business
expenses. Furthermore, you can convert capital gains and losses to ordinary
gains and losses under the Mark-to-Market accounting rules in the IRS Code
Section 475. Mark-to-Market rules enable you to avoid wash-sale regulations
and deduct all losses against other income, without hitting the $3,000 cap
imposed on other investors.

271

272 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Unfortunately, swing traders do not necessarily trade every day, so some
swing traders have a difficult time qualifying for these special tax provisions.
If you are unable to qualify as a full-time trader, then your swing trades will
be taxed in the same way as every other investor. You must report gains and
losses on IRS Schedule D, and you must adhere to wash-sale regulations. You
may also run into difficulty if you try to report your trading expenses as a
business deduction.
The rules are complex. You need to consult with your tax advisor to determine
your eligibility. Information about the rules is in IRS Publication 550, Chapter 4,
“Special Rules for Traders.” We provide more information in Chapter 17.

Pattern day-trading rules apply
Swing traders are subject to the same rules as day traders. If a swing trader
opens and closes a position in a single stock during one day, and does this
more than four times in a five-day period, the swing trader is categorized as
a pattern day trader. If this occurs, the swing trader must maintain an equity
balance of $25,000 in his account or his broker will prohibit him from making
any day trades. Additional information about the pattern day-trading rules is
provided in Chapter 17.
This scenario actually is quite likely for the swing trader, because of the
number of stops that are hit. As a swing trader, you may as well plan to maintain a minimum equity balance in your trading account in excess of $25,000.

Chapter 17

The Basics of Day Trading
In This Chapter
▶ Exploring day trading
▶ Deciphering account restrictions
▶ Reviewing day-trading strategies
▶ Assessing day-trading risks

D

ay traders enter and exit trading positions sometimes more than a hundred times within a single day. Day traders may even get into and out of
a position within the span of only a minute or two.
Some players compare watching the charts and jumping quickly in and out of
positions to the rapid-fire action and excitement of a video game. However,
much more is at risk. Instead of merely losing a game, a bad move can mean
the loss of your entire portfolio, or maybe even more. Yes, day traders sometimes end up in negative positions, owing money to the firms with which
they’re trading. We explain how that can happen later in this chapter.
For now, you need to know that day traders rarely hold a stock overnight
and that watching a computer screen for hours at a time is a critical part of
the day for this high-stress type of trading. Although neither of us is or ever
has been a day trader, in this chapter, we nevertheless explain how this
type of high-risk trading works, give you some common strategies used by
these types of traders, explore restrictions the United States Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) places on day traders, and show you the high
levels of risk day traders face.
