
 I cannot emphasize enough to you how unimportant the results are from your first six months of trading. They do not matter. During these first months, you are building the foundation for a lifetime career. Do you think in year ten that your results in your first six months will be significant? 

 I believe becoming a consistently profitable trader just might be the hardest thing you will ever do in your life. Respect the process. You are not entitled to make it. You are entitled to work very hard for eight to twelve months, be trained well, and find out how good you can be. You must believe that you will become great. 

 Make no mistake, we all have mental weaknesses that we must conquer. Some of us insist in showing the market that we are correct, and we pay the price for that stubbornness. Some cannot accept the loss and exit stocks that trade against them. Some anxiously take small profits when there is no reason to do so and do not wait for the final profit target. Some are afraid to pull the trigger and enter a trade with an excellent risk/reward that they recognize. The only way to get better is to work on your weaknesses. 

 However, there is no shame in failing as a trader. The real shame is for people who never try to embrace whatever their passion is. If you are passionate about trading, or any other challenge in life for that matter, and you never try it, then you will live your life wondering what could have been. Life is too short to never try new challenges. To try any challenge in life and fail is very honorable. Having the courage to take a chance and day trade will serve you well later in life. The next career change or next challenge you take may very well be the one to work out for you. What you will learn about yourself in the process is invaluable. 

 At the end of this book, I have summarized in one place my eleven rules of day trading. I have printed this page off and posted it next to my trading station. I reread it often and I encourage you too as well. I know these rules will help you to keep on track and to be successful. 

 Last but not least, if you enjoyed reading this book and found it useful, I would very much appreciate your taking a few minutes to write a review on the Amazon website. The success of a book like this is based on honest reviews, and I will consider your comments in making revisions. If you have any feedback, feel free to send me an email. Your review on Amazon will help other people to make informed decisions about my book. I purposely priced it low so more people would be able to purchase it and use it. Teaching people and helping them to start a new career fulfills something inside of me that motivates me every day, so I hope you can help me to accomplish this task of ongoing learning. 

 If you’re ever interested in connecting with me, check out our chatroom at www.BearBullTraders.com or send me an email at andrew@BearBullTraders.com . I’d be happy to have a chat with you. 

 Thank you, and happy trading!

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Andrew’s 11 Rules of Day Trading 
 Rule 1: Day trading is not a strategy to get rich quickly. 
 Rule 2: Day trading is not easy. It is a serious business, and you should treat it as such. 
 Rule 3: Day traders do not hold positions overnight. If necessary, you must sell with a loss to make sure you do not hold onto any stock overnight. 
 Rule 4: Always ask, “Is this stock moving because the overall market is moving, or is it moving because it has a unique fundamental catalyst?” 
 Rule 5: Success in day trading comes from risk management - finding low-risk entries with a high potential reward. The minimum win:lose ratio for me is 2:1. 
 Rule 6: Your broker will buy and sell stocks for you at the Exchange. Your only job as a day trader is to manage risk. You cannot be a successful day trader without excellent risk management skills, even if you are the master of many effective strategies. 
 Rule 7: Retail traders trade only Stocks in Play, high relative volume stocks that have fundamental catalysts and are being traded regardless of the overall market. 
 Rule 8: Experienced traders are like guerrilla soldiers. They jump out at just the right time, take their profit, and get out. 
 Rule 9: Hollow candlesticks, where the close is greater than the open, indicate buying pressure. Filled candlesticks, where the close is less than the open, indicate selling pressure. 
 Rule 10: Indicators only indicate; they should not be allowed to dictate. 
 Rule 11: Profitable trading does not involve emotion. If you are an emotional trader, you will lose your money.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Glossary 
 A 

 Alpha stock:   a Stock in Play, a stock that is moving independently of both the overall market and its sector, the market is not able to control it, these are the stocks day traders look for. 

 Ask:   the price sellers are demanding in order to sell their stock, it’s always higher than the bid price. 

 Average daily volume:   the average number of shares traded each day in a particular stock, I don’t trade stocks with an average daily volume of less than 500,000 shares, as a day trader you need sufficient liquidity to be able to get in and out of the stock without difficulty. 

 Average relative volume:   how much of the stock is trading compared to its normal volume, I don’t trade in stocks with an average relative volume of less than 1.5, which means the stock is trading at least 1.5 times its normal daily volume. 

 Average True Range/ATR:   how large of a range in price a particular stock has on average each day, I look for an ATR of at least 50 cents, which means the price of the stock will move at least 50 cents most days. 

 Averaging down:   adding more shares to your losing position in order to lower the average cost of your position, with the hope of selling it at break-even in the next rally in your favor, as a day trader, don’t do it, do not average down, ever, a full explanation is provided in this book, to be a successful day trader you must avoid the urge to average down. 

 B 

 Bear:   a seller or short seller of stock, if you hear the market is bear it means the entire stock market is losing value because the sellers or short sellers are selling their stocks, in other words, the sellers are in control. 

 Bearish candlestick:   a candlestick with a big filled body demonstrating that the open was at a high and the close was at a low, it tells you that the sellers are in control of the price and it is not a good time to buy, Figure 6.1 includes an image of a bearish candlestick. 

 Bid:   the price people are willing to pay to purchase a stock at a particular time, it’s always lower than the ask price. 

 Bid-ask spread:   the difference between what people are willing to pay to purchase a particular stock and what other people are demanding in order to sell that stock at any given moment, it can change throughout the trading day. 

 Black box:   the top secret hidden computer programs, formulas and systems that large Wall Street firms use to manipulate the stock market.  

 Broker:   the company who buys and sells stocks for you at the Exchange. 

 Bull:   a buyer of stock, if you hear the market is bull it means the entire stock market is gaining value because the buyers are purchasing stocks, in other words, the buyers are in control. 

 Bull Flag:   a type of candlestick pattern that resembles a flag on a pole, you will see several large candles going up (like a pole) and a series of small candles moving sideways (like a flag), which day traders call consolidating, you will usually miss the first Bull Flag but your scanner will alert you to it and you can then be ready for the second Bull Flag, you can see an example of a Bull Flag formation in Figure 7.3. 

 Bullish candlestick:   a candlestick with a large body toward the upside, it tells you that the buyers are in control of the price and will likely keep pushing the price up, Figure 6.1 includes an image of a bullish candlestick. 

 Buying long:   buying a stock in the hope that its price will go higher. 

 Buying power:   the capital (money) in your account with your broker plus the leverage they provide you, for example, my broker gives me a leverage of 4:1, if I have $25,000 in my account, I can actually trade up to $100,000. 

 C 

