
Using the moving average level rule
Instead of looking at the crossover, you can call the end of an uptrend when
the moving average today is less than the moving average yesterday, and you
call the end of a downtrend when the moving average today is higher than
yesterday’s. The moving average level rule usually calls the end of trend earlier than the crossover, although not always.
A moving average always lags the price action. In Figure 12-1, look at the
prices and moving average in the left-hand ellipse. From the peak close, it
takes the price six days to cross below the moving average — and ten days
for the value of the moving average to be lower than the day before. By the
time the moving average puts in a lower value than the day before, it’s Day 10
and the price has fallen from $82.49 to $75.38, or by 8.6 percent.

www.pdfdummies.com

209

210 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
But despite giving up 8.6 percent from the highest close while you wait for
the moving average to catch up with prices, to trade this stock by using this
indicator during this period would have been profitable. (See the “Fixing lag”
section in this chapter for more information.)
The black arrows on the chart in Figure 12-1 mark the buy/sell entry and exit
points, using the moving average level rule. You buy and sell at the open the
day after the moving average meets the rule. Table 12-2 shows the profit you
make by applying the rule. Your gain is $43.07 on an initial capital stake of
$71.05, or 61 percent, compared to 14 percent if you buy on the first date and
account for the gain on the last date.
Accounting for the gain is what mark-to-market means in Table 12-2. Cash in
the bank from closed positions, named realized gain, is the main way to keep
score in trading, but mark-to-market is the way to keep score on positions
that are still open. It means to apply today’s closing price to your position
to see how much it’s worth in cash terms, even though you didn’t actually
exit the position today. Mark-to-market gains are named unrealized, and it’s a
good phrase, meaning that the gain is only an accounting convention — and
not real, although in futures trading you may use unrealized gains to add to
positions. Needless to say, a mark-to-market valuation is valid only until the
next market price becomes available.
Be on the lookout for trading system vendor performance track records that
rely on mark-to-market gains for wonderful end-of-period gains. Mark-tomarket gains are only paper gains and can vanish in a puff of smoke. To evaluate a technique, look at its performance on closed trades.

Table 12-2

Hypothetical Profit from the Moving
Average Level Rule

N. of Days

Action

Price

22 days

Buy
Sell

$71.05
$78.24

$7.19

42 days

Sell
Buy

$78.24
$61.54

$16.70

29 days

Buy
Mark-tomarket

$61.54
$80.72

$19.18

$80.72

$43.07 (61%)

$9.67 (14%)

Total

Level Rule
Profit

Buy-and-Hold
$71.05

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 12: Using Dynamic Lines

Dealing with limitations
You may have seen Table 12-2 and are starting to get excited by the 60 percent
plus return in four months. But before you go off the deep end, consider that I
rigged the case by finding an ideal chart like Figure 12-1. It wasn’t hard to find,
but for every ideal situation like this, thousands more can be found where
applying a 10-day simple moving average crossover or the moving average
level rule results in heartache and losses.
The security in Figure 12-1 is trending, and in a tidy fashion. Aside from one
outlier, prices don’t vary much away from the moving average. But this same
security goes through periods when it is neither trending nor tidy. Moving
averages lose their power to help you make money when either of these two
conditions arises:
✓ Not trending: Prices can move sideways for long periods of time while
the market makes up its mind what to do next (congestion). In that
instance, the moving average is a horizontal line. You get no buy/sell
guidance from moving average techniques in a sideways move like the
one shown in Figure 12-2. This particular one is tidy, too — no outliers.
But a sideways movement defeats trend-following by definition.
✓ Noisy: A price series with many prices varying far from the moving average is said to have a lot of noise, likening outliers to the static you get on a
car radio as you move out of signal range. The second chart in Figure 12-2
shows a tidy trend, with few outliers. The third chart is the same moving
average, but it arises from a price move with many outliers.
The trader using moving averages faces a perpetual task of reducing noise
while also reducing lag, and these two goals are hard to achieve simultaneously. Fixing noise entails using a higher number of periods in the moving
average, while fixing lag entails using a shorter number — as you can see in
the following sections.

Fixing noise
You can’t do anything about a sideways move (except perhaps trade the
security on a shorter time frame that may contain minitrends). But you can
do something about noise — apply a moving average with more days in it.
You want to minimize losses, and a noisy price series makes you vulnerable
to false buy/sell signals. When you use a higher number of days in the moving
average, say 50 days, noisy outliers get put in their place, arithmetically
speaking. An abnormally high or low price relative to the existing average is
less important in a 50-day moving average than in a 10-day moving average,
because it literally carries less weight in the calculation.

www.pdfdummies.com

211

212 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
SIDEWAYS TREND —
LOW NOISE

TIDY TREND —
LOW NOISE

Figure 12-2:
Trend
tidiness
and the
moving
average.

UNTIDY TREND —
HIGH NOISE

But if you’re using a 50-day moving average, your buy/sell signals are even
later than the 10 days that cost 8.6 percent in the case above. Besides, in
some periods, the security is tidy, and in other periods, it’s noisy, and you
don’t know in advance which it is going to be. Fixing noise by altering the
number of periods in the moving average is an endless challenge that has
launched a gazillion hours of research. Because new data comes along all the
time, a lot of this noise-targeting research is wasted.

Fixing lag
Often you can see a dramatic price move, but you know it’s going to take
days for the moving average to catch up. You’re disciplined and committed
to following the crossover rule, but potential profits are going up the chimney while you impatiently wait. Why not simply reduce the number of days
in the moving average? A short moving average is more sensitive to recent
prices.
As a general rule, you want to use as few days in the moving average as possible without running into a high level of wrong signals. When you use a very
short moving average, like three days, you not only lose the descriptive visual
power of the line on the chart, but you also get a lot of whipsaws. In fact, using
a 3-day moving average on the same data in Figure 12-1 cuts the profitability to
under 5 percent — worse than if you used the buy-and-hold approach.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 12: Using Dynamic Lines
No single number of days is best for a moving average. The best number is the
one that fits how noisy the prices are. If your prices are so noisy that you
would have to use a high number of days in the moving average, resign yourself to getting late exits long after the price peak. Or you can find a different,
more orderly security to trade.

Magic moving average numbers
Some technical traders think that securities prices move in cycles that are
relatively fixed, such as three-to-four weeks, three-to-four months (and its
double, six-to-eight months), and three-to-four years. Therefore, they imagine
that you should gear the number of days in your moving average to these
cycles. But while cycles do exist, too many of them exist. They overlap, and
nobody can agree on a single one that rules securities prices all the time,
or which one is ruling the market at any one time. You won’t find statistical
proof of cycle theories consistently working in securities markets, and you
will certainly see thousands of situations that don’t conform to them.
As I note in Chapter 2, whether or not fixed-length cycles are true doesn’t
matter. If a sufficient number of traders believe they’re true, sometimes traders cause the predicted cycle to occur. Popular moving averages are 28 days
and half of 28 days (14 days), and the combination 5-10-20 days, or a variation, 4-18-40. The 28-day number was devised as a monthly number in apparent disregard of the trading month having 20 to 22 days compared to the
lunar or calendar month. Systems designers joke that the 4-day moving average was devised to ace out the people using the 5-day, and the 9-day to get in
front of the traders using the 10-day moving average.
The bottom line: Be skeptical of buying into a magic number. The spirit of
technical analysis is empirical: What does the data say?
One moving average really does stand out — the 20-day. When a security is
trending, the 20-day moving average often works the same way a support
line works — sellers stop selling when it’s reached. Less often, the 20-day
moving average constitutes resistance. (I describe support and resistance
in Chapter 10.) The virtue of a moving average that works as support or
resistance is that you don’t have to choose a starting and ending point — the
moving average is nonjudgmental and everyone gets the same line. Many
traders plot the 20-day moving average on every chart to get a feel for what
other traders in the market may see as a benchmark level.
You may also see the 20-day moving average tracking the linear regression.
When you see this confluence, you get a sense that maybe the market has
some underlying order after all. Beware of superstition! The sense of orderliness may not be an illusion in any particular case, but remember that no
trend lasts forever. At the turning point, the 20-day moving average is dead
wrong, so enjoy it while you have it.

www.pdfdummies.com

213

214 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Folklore versus trading tools
You see reports that Blue Widget stock just surpassed its 50-day moving average, or its 200day moving average, or that its 50-day moving
average crossed its 200-day moving average, a
so-called “golden cross.” This type of information may or may not be interesting and useful.
Maybe the price had been within a few pennies
of the 200-day moving average for months on
end, and just managed to inch over it. Why is
this news?
Without a context, a price crossing a moving
average of a fixed number of days is just
another statistic. Because of research by technical trader Richard Donchian, the 5-day and
20-day moving averages became popular, and
that makes sense — 5 days is a week and 20
days is (roughly) a month. But 50 days and 200
days are just round numbers unrelated to the
calendar (the number of business days in a year
is about 240). And as I note in this chapter, the
best number of days to put in a moving average is the smallest number that still generates
as few whipsaws as possible. By choosing a
number as high as 50 or 200 days, you’re condemning yourself to an inefficient parameter
practically by definition.

But that would be to mistake a barometer of the
environment for a trading tool. If you’re looking
for an indicator to describe the general tone of
a security or market index, the 200-day moving
average is pretty good — mostly because it is
in vogue. To use a fixed number like 50 or 200
makes sense only if everyone else is looking at
the same number, and increasingly, they are.
Even people who profess to dislike and distrust
technical analysis give credence to the 200-day
moving average.
But what exactly does it mean? Well, the 200day moving average doesn’t have a proven
meaning. A security whose price falls below
the 200-day moving average has fallen out of
favor with traders, and one whose price is in the
process of crossing above the 200-day moving
average is back in favor. The financial press
sometimes reports a “death cross,” or the
50-day moving average crossing below the 200day. Death cross is a semantically loaded term
that has no statistical basis for reliably predicting outcomes. This technical jargon example
is an instance where language influences the
outcome far more than the event the language
is purportedly describing.

Adjusting the Moving Average
You can adjust the moving average to make it track current prices more
closely without sacrificing all the benefits of the averaging process. Keep
reading this section to find out how.

Getting acquainted with
moving average types
Moving averages are often abbreviated. You may see SMA and wonder what
that is. SMA stands for the simple moving average (and you feel like an idiot
after you figure it out). Likewise, the moving averages I cover in the following

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 12: Using Dynamic Lines
sections are also often abbreviated: WMA refers to weighted moving average, EMA refers to exponential moving average, and AMA refers to adaptive
moving average.

Weighted and exponential moving averages
Instead of reducing the number of days in the moving average, a different
way to make the moving average more responsive to the latest prices is to
weight the latest prices more heavily. You get the weighted moving average
by multiplying each price in your series according to how fresh it is. In a
5-day moving average, for example, Day 5 (today) would be multiplied by 5,
Day 4 by 4, Day 3 by 3, and so on. Remember to divide the total by the sum of
the weights, not the sum of the days (5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 15).
More popular than the weighted moving average is the exponential moving
average. This moving average is hard to calculate, and fortunately, all the
charting software packages can do it for you. The principle is to subtract
today’s closing price from yesterday’s exponential moving average.
When you begin, start with a simple moving average. Multiply the difference
between today’s price and the moving average by a constant smoothing
factor (the exponent). The factor is determined by the number of days you’re
using in the moving average, say 10 days. The exponent is calculated by
dividing 2 by 10, yielding 0.2 as the factor. If you’re using 20 days, you divide
2 by 20 and get 0.1 as the factor. Here’s why:
✓ The factor minimizes the change between the existing moving average
and the latest price, creating a smaller bridge than in a simple moving
average, which has to bridge the entire distance between today’s price
and yesterday’s. This factor gives the moving average a numerical value
closer to the last price and thus makes it more representative of recent
prices.
✓ The fewer the number of days in the moving average, the bigger the
factor. This principle closes the gap between the moving average and
the latest price even more.

Adaptive moving averages
The adaptive moving average works like a long-term moving average in that it
diminishes the effect of outliers, but without sacrificing sensitivity to trended
prices. You always want a moving average to be as short as possible to identify the beginning of a trend quickly, but as long as necessary to avoid whipsaw losses.
In other words, sometimes you want the moving average to contain a small
number of days, and other times you want it to contain a higher number of
days. You don’t want to be forced to select the number yourself, because
you have no way of knowing in advance which is right. You want some automatic mechanical adjustment to kick in when variability changes, to adapt

www.pdfdummies.com

215

216 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
the moving average to the new condition. You can’t change the number of
days according to conditions, but you can get the same effect by making the
moving average adaptive.
A trading systems designer named Perry Kaufman devised an ingenious way
to achieve this adaptiveness for trading purposes and called it the adaptive moving average. It is abbreviated KAMA, for Kaufman’s adaptive moving
average, while other versions of the adaptive moving average are usually
named just AMA or have the inventor’s initial, like Richard Jurik’s JAMA. The
Kaufman process of performing the adaptive calculation begins with a concept called an efficiency ratio, which measures how straight the line prices
follow as they move from one point to the next.
Efficient prices follow a straight line. They receive an efficiency rating of 1.
Prices that are inefficient resemble the meandering path of a drunken sailor.
They get an efficiency rating of zero. Most prices are somewhere in between.
The rating is then converted to a smoothing constant (which is confusing
because in this application, it’s not constant, but changes depending on the
numbers; constant is a term used by mathematicians for a term in a formula
because it’s constantly there, whatever its numerical value). As the smoothing constant gets closer to 1, the moving average tracks the prices more
closely. When the smoothing constant is zero, the moving average value
doesn’t change and is carried over unchanged from yesterday — in other
words, a spiky outlier is simply ignored.

Choosing a moving average type
Traders debate which type of moving average is the best. Figure 12-3 shows
examples of all four of the moving averages I discuss in this chapter, and that
doesn’t come close to exhausting all the possible modifications.
Each version of moving averages has strengths and weaknesses. The
weighted moving average is the most sensitive to the latest price moves, followed by the exponential moving average. Notice that the KAMA is the best
at chopping off the spiky outlier prices that make the price series noisy. That
means it works best at reducing whipsaw losses, too. But it gives a value of
zero to the breakaway gap like the last bar on this chart. (See Chapter 7 for
a discussion of gaps). In a trend reversal like the one depicted on this chart,
that’s a drawback. You enter the new trend later than if you used a nonadaptive technique, but as an offset, you don’t get very many false signals.
Don’t invest the moving average with supernatural powers. It’s only arithmetic. A moving average can’t capture every important move and in fact, rides
roughshod over some important chart events, like breakaway gaps. The
moving average is a repackaging of the price series, not the price series itself.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 12: Using Dynamic Lines

91
90
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
82
81
80
79

10-DAY MOVING AVERAGES

Figure 12-3:
Types of
moving
averages.

78
77

SIMPLE
WEIGHTED
EXPONENTIAL
ADAPTIVE

76
75
74
73
72

10
arch

17

24

31 7
April

14 21

28

5
May

12

19

27 2
9
June

16

23

30 7
July

14

21

Using Multiple Moving Averages
You like a short moving average because it responds quickly to new conditions, and you like a long moving average because it reduces errors. So why
not use both of them? Or three — a short-, medium-, and long-term moving
average? You can. Read on!

Putting two moving averages into play
Here’s where the crossover concept (which I introduce earlier in this chapter) comes back into the picture, and it shines. Instead of looking for the
price to cross a single moving average, you look for a shorter moving average
(say 5 days) to cross a longer moving average (say 20 days). When you use
5 and 20 days, you chart a one-week moving average against a one-month
moving average.
When the shorter moving average crosses the longer moving average on the
upside, you buy. When the shorter moving average crosses the longer moving
average on the downside, you sell.
You are free to use any parameter set in the two moving average crossover
model. Before getting into how to customize the two moving average model,
look at Figure 12-4, which shows the same security and time frame as in

www.pdfdummies.com

217

218 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Figure 12-1, only this time with two moving averages, the short one at 5 days
and the longer one at 20 days. You buy when the short-term moving averages
crosses above the long-term moving average, and sell when it crosses below.
Again, the arrows mark the buy/sell crossovers.
You may notice the similarity of the buy/sell arrow placement on Figure 12-4 to
those in Figure 12-1. But you can also see that the problems present on the first
chart are absent from this chart. The outlier is still there, but the short-term
moving average is clearly below the long-term moving average, so you don’t
care. You hardly see it. On the right-hand side of the chart, some prices close
below the short-term moving average, and again, you don’t care. The shortterm moving average remains nicely above the long-term one, and in fact, you
can see a fair amount of daylight between the two moving average lines.

85

80

75

70

65

Figure 12-4:
Two
moving
average
crossover
model. 29

60

55

5
August

12

19

26

3
9
September

16

23

30
7
October

14

21

28

4
11
November

The more open space — daylight — you see between two moving averages,
the more confident you can be that the signal is correct and will continue.
When the two moving averages converge (as they do near the outlier, for
example), you have less confidence that the signal is going to last.
If you trade the two moving average model, your gain is $25.31 on an initial
capital stake of $70.61, or 36 percent, as shown in Table 12-3. This gain is considerably less than the 61 percent you can make by using the moving average level rule, shown in Table 12-2, but consider the advantages of the two
moving average crossover:

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 12: Using Dynamic Lines
✓ You can see the crossover and don’t have to calculate the numerical
value of the moving average every day, which is a nuisance. You still
may want to add a filter, such as waiting a day or two after the crossover
to put on the trade or qualifying the crossover by a percentage amount.
✓ The two moving average crossover is more reliable than the single
moving average in that it is less sensitive. It lags more (see the section
“Fixing lag” earlier in this chapter), but is wrong less often. You’re swapping risk for return, as usual.
✓ You have fewer trades and therefore lower brokerage expense. In the
crossover of the moving average and price, you have ten trades (five in
and five out), whereas in the level rule and two moving average crossover, you have six.
