
FIGURE 4.18 Inside the Gravestone Doji in eBay—A Look at the 10-minute Intraday Chart from
December 17–18

The $15.50 level served as key resistance after a rally higher into this level. The intraday chart in
Figure 4.18 shows exactly how this candle formed, and the logic behind its potential to serve as a
price reversal signal.
The stock price of eBay continued higher into the afternoon on December 17, 2008, but formed an
afternoon high of $15.50. Sellers became aggressive and pushed price back to the morning's opening
price near $15.10 to form the special doji with a long upper wick. Immediately after price formed the
gravestone doji on the daily chart, sellers became dominant and pushed prices lower through the next
week. Price rallied back to the $15.50 area in early January 2009 only to form another long upper
shadow at the established resistance level before price fell in a stronger downswing.

Lower Price Rejection Candle: Dragonfly Doji
The other specially named doji is a dragonfly doji, which is the opposite of its gravestone doji
brother. Unlike the gravestone doji, a dragonfly doji is associated with bullish reversals in price, as
the open and close of the bar are roughly equivalent and occur at the high of the session. Imagine a
dragonfly flying higher and you will understand the logic of this candle, especially if it forms after a
price swing to the downside into an expected support area.
In Figure 4.19, Sears Holdings (SHLD) gives us a good example of a dragonfly doji on its daily
chart. Price formed a downswing that began in early June and continued into mid-July. Sellers pushed
price down to the $55.00-per-share level, where buyers found value and began supporting the price.
FIGURE 4.19 Dragonfly Doji Example on the Daily Chart of Sears Holdings on July 13, 2009

The 10-minute intraday chart in Figure 4.20 shows us exactly how sellers pushed price lower,
buyers and sellers came into alignment with a price consolidation at the $57.00 level, and how sellers
were quickly and suddenly overtaken by buyers on July 13th which marked a key swing low in price
that provided an opportunity to trade long when the dragonfly doji was complete and price rose above
the high of $57.50 which completed the candle pattern.
FIGURE 4.20 Sears Holdings Reveals the Intraday Creation of a Daily Chart Dragonfly Doji—July
13, 2009

Price Rejection Candles: Hammers and Shooting Stars
We have seen how the upper or lower shadows of doji candles can be helpful in identifying price
rejection at key support or resistance levels, which can clue us in to key turning points in price
swings. While a doji candle with a long upper or lower shadow has a similar opening and closing
price, there is a separate but similar candle that forms a similar long shadow, but has a slight
difference between the open and the close of the candle. Traders often call these candles hammers if
they occur at a support level or shooting stars if they form at a resistance level.
As we will see, the difference between a bullish hammer and a dragonfly doji is the same logic as
the difference between a doji and a spinning top. The main idea is to pick up on the bullish or bearish
clues that a particular candle reveals within the context of the price chart, rather than get confused by
the specific terminology traders use when describing candles.

Bullish Lower Price Rejection: Hammer
It is often best to think of candles generally instead of specifically, meaning it is best to understand
how candles reveal the dynamics of supply and demand on lower timeframes, which gives clues into
the future move in price rather than missing a signal because a candle did not conform exactly to
specifications. As such, hammers and shooting stars fall under the same logic as gravestone and
dragonfly doji: These candles reflect intraday price rejection and could be the start of a new swing in
price if these long wicks form at key support or resistance levels.
The hammer candle would be most similar to a dragonfly doji in both logic of formation and
indication of a potential bullish reversal in price, especially when this special candle forms into a key
support level after a downswing in price.
While the hammer and dragonfly doji both have long lower shadows (wicks), the main difference is
that the hammer shows a small price distance between the open and close while the dragonfly doji
shows little to no price change between the open and the close. Technically, the hammer sends a
bullish reversal signal regardless if the open is higher than the close, or if the close is higher than the
open. Traders generally think of hammers as having a higher close than open, making it a hollow
bullish bar, but many candle experts teach that hammers can either be hollow or filled, meaning that
the orientation of the close to the open is irrelevant as long as the distance between the two is roughly
two times the distance of the wick or greater.
The best hammers form after a downswing in price which comes into an expected or confluence
support zone, perhaps as a positive momentum divergence forms. Traders buy after the high of the
hammer is exceeded and often place stops under the low of the candle or other relevant support area.
Like the dragonfly doji, the hammer reflects a bullish price rejection of lower prices, which
forecasts a positive shift in the supply/demand relationship. The important characteristic of the candle
is the long lower shadow which reflects not only an inability of sellers to drive prices lower, but a
willingness of buyers to enter the market at lower levels, potentially finding value at lower prices.
Yahoo Inc (YHOO) shows an example in Figure 4.21 of two hammer candles in late January 2009,
and also how the $11.00-per-share level served as a key support zone. Figure 4.22 zooms in on these
two candles to highlight the development of a bullish reversal forming at the $11.00-per-share level.
FIGURE 4.21 Daily Chart of Yahoo in January 2009 Reveals two Hammer Candles

Officially, the candle that formed on January 26 would be a hybrid between a dragonfly doji and a
true hammer, as the open and close were slightly larger than the equality expected in a doji, but not
enough to qualify for the “real body is two times the lower shadow” rule of a hammer. Instead of
becoming frustrated by specific labeling of a particular candle, focus on the underlying message of the
candle, whether it be bullish, bearish, or neutral. Our goal is to spot the signals that give us clues into
the supply/demand relationship between bulls and bears, especially in regard to reversals in the
relationship.
As we step inside the intraday frame in Figure 4.22, we now see how these candles developed.
Price formed a bullish engulfing candle on January 23 which was the first clue that buyers were
finding value at lower prices and willing to drive prices higher. However, sellers entered by the
close of the session and then pushed prices lower into the morning of January 26. Buyers and sellers
then kept price in a range, with buyers entering to create support at the $11.00 level and sellers
pushing price lower, creating resistance at the $11.25 level.
FIGURE 4.22 The 15-minute Chart of Yahoo from January 22–27, 2009 Reveals a Key Support
Level at $11.00 and three Specific Candles: a Bullish Engulfing on January 23, and two Hammers

The daily chart does give a powerful signal that odds favor a potential move higher yet to come.
How? Price formed a bullish engulfing candle, quasi-hammer candle (long lower shadow), and

official hammer candle, all of which formed long lower shadows at the $11.00 level. Price then
gapped higher the next morning and quickly rallied to $14.00 before turning lower, highlighting that
buyers became dominant over sellers. A savvy trader might have seen this development on the daily
chart and entered as price tested the $11.00 level either on January 26 or 27 and placed a tight stop
under $10.90, or perhaps entered long into the close on January 27 as the upper range boundary at
$11.30 was broken and the hammer completed.
We can also see a similar construction of a hammer on Exxon-Mobil (XOM) on the five-minute
frame on November 24 in Figure 4.23. Instead of seeing multiple bars as revealed on the chart of
Yahoo above, the Exxon-Mobil chart reveals a pure intraday structure that forms a daily hammer.
FIGURE 4.23 Bullish Hammer Formation in Exxon-Mobil Five-minute Chart on November 24, 2009

Price opened on the morning of November 24 at the $75.70 level and sellers quickly pushed price
lower under $70.00 per share. However, buyers found value at the lower prices and quickly rejected
the morning lows formed by the sellers. Buyers pushed prices higher into the close, creating the
hammer bar drawn on the right side of the chart.
By integrating the daily chart with the lower timeframes and seeing the push and pull interaction
between buyers and sellers, traders can understand potential shifts in the supply/demand relationship
clearly which then creates low-risk opportunities for profit, especially when combined with other
forms of analysis that uncover support and resistance levels.

Bearish Upper Price Rejection: Shooting Star
The same logic that applies to bullish hammer candles applies to their opposite bearish signal—
shooting stars. A shooting star is similar to a gravestone doji, except that the distance between the
open and close is slightly greater than that of a doji candle, which ends in near price equality.
Shooting stars form long upper shadows which reflect price rejection of higher levels, and signal
low-risk trading opportunities when they form after an upswing in price into a key resistance level,
particularly if a negative momentum divergence develops. The best trading signal would contain all
three (or more) elements (shooting star candle, trendline or moving average resistance, and negative
divergence).
I n Figure 4.24, Johnson and Johnson (JNJ) shows another hybrid candle signal between a true

shooting star (in which the distance between the open and close is roughly two times that of the wick)
and gravestone doji. Don't pass on a potential signal that does not conform specifically to exact
definitions from textbooks. You will deprive yourself of a potentially good opportunity if you demand
perfection.
As price moves into August 2009 after a two-month upswing, price forms a shooting star at the
$62.50-per-share level. Price quickly retraces after this candle forms, as a profit-taking swing
unfolds which drives prices lower.
Stepping inside the shooting star candle seen in Figure 4.24, the intraday chart of Johnson and
Johnson in Figure 4.25 allows us to understand the logic and intraday formation of the shooting star
candle signal. The importance of any candle signal is not
FIGURE 4.24 Shooting Star candle on the Daily Chart of Johnson and Johnson—July 30, 2009

FIGURE 4.25 An Inside Look at the 10-minute Intraday Chart of the Daily Shooting Star in Johnson
and Johnson—July 29–30, 2009

the signal itself, but the insight the candle gives into the lower-timeframe supply and demand
relationship and how that helps uncover the broader picture of price structure and potential turning
points.
In a shooting star candle, price is in an established uptrend with buyers overtaking sellers. In this
case, the open and low are almost equivalent, and buyers continue to push price higher into mid-day.
However, a rounded reversal price pattern forms as the balance of supply and demand gently tips to
the sellers, who push price lower into the close of the day. The result appears as a bearish shooting
star on the daily chart, which offers a potential short-term price reversal signal. A trader could enter
short as the low of the candle at $61.60 was broken, which occurred early on the next morning's
session, and then place a stop above the high of the candle above $62.40.

Upside-Down Candles: Hanging Man and Inverted Hammer
Before concluding our discussion on shooting stars and hammer candles, it is important to make a
quick note about inverted signals that these candles can form. These particular candles reveal why
trend context is so important in making a trading decision.
A hammer is a bullish reversal candle with a long lower shadow that occurs after a price decline
and is associated with price rejection at a support zone. The logic is that price is likely to rise
because buyers have overtaken sellers and demand is stronger than supply, and we would expect a
continuation of the rally upwards off of established price support.
However, an identical formation can also occur at the peak of an upswing in price into a key
resistance level. A hammer candlestick that forms at the end of an upswing is labeled a hanging man,
and carries much darker connotations than a hammer. Hanging man candles have the same bearish
reversal expectations as shooting stars, only the candle is flipped upside down.
In the same inverse logic as the hanging man, a shooting star candle that forms after a lengthy
downswing or into a key support level is labeled an Inverted Hammer. While this less-creative name
is not as graphic as hanging man, the inverse logic is the same. The inverted hammer is identical to a
bearish shooting star with a long upper wick, but the upside-down candle forms at the end of a

downswing.
You may take inverted hammers and hanging man candle signals in the same way you would
interpret shooting stars and hammers, only the context will be flipped. If you are uncomfortable or do
not understand the logic of these upside-down candles, you might pass on a particular trade and move
on to the next trade that you interpret more clearly. Many traders report difficulty in buying shares
after a bearish-looking candle like a shooting star forms into a support level, or short-selling shares
after a bullish-looking candle like a hammer forms into known resistance.
These upside-down candles reveal why context is so important. Never take candle signals in
isolation, but instead, always look to the broader context before making any trading decision. The
broader context includes the prevailing trend, known support or resistance levels, any nonconfirmations (such as positive or negative divergences in momentum, volume, or market internals),
and any indicator signals such as an overbought or oversold oscillator.
Even if you see a common candle signal such as a hammer or a doji, but it appears out of place, you
might consider passing on a trade setup. In other words, every day will form a candle on your daily
chart. However, only a handful of candles should grab your attention, and those would be the ones that
form at confluence or expected support or resistance levels. If price does not form a common candle
pattern that you understand the logic of the formation as it gives insights into the supply/demand
relationship, then you are receiving no signal from the candlestick chart. You do not need to become a
candlestick expert to use candle charts—just as you need not become an indicator expert to use
indicators. Place all signals in the broader structure or context of price principles and price
behaviors.

THREE TRADING SCENARIOS
It is helpful to envision a candle as a graphical representation of the supply and demand balance
between sellers and buyers that exists over a given period of time, such as a month, week, day, or
intraday period. For this example, let us discuss a weekly time period which reflects five days worth
of price data. We will look at three different scenarios. Read the scenarios first and envision what the
candle will look like. Then, see Figure 4.26 for the answers and the respective candles that formed
for each of the three scenarios.

A Very Bullish Week
Assume that the price of a given stock begins Monday morning at a price of $100.00 per share. By
Tuesday, the price has risen to $102.00 per share and by Wednesday, the price closes at $105.00 per
share. Buyers are dominant over sellers as evidenced by steadily rising closing prices each day. On
Thursday, the price closes at $107.00 per share and by the close of Friday afternoon, the price of the
stock rests at $110.00 per share, which is the highest price of the week.
The candle created by this five-day period would be the most bullish single candlestick called the
Marabozu, where price opened at the low of the week and price closed at the high of the week. The
insight we would gain from seeing this candle on a weekly chart would be that buyers dominated the
week from Monday's open until Friday's close, which could hint at further bullish action yet to come
if the buyers continue their aggression over sellers.

A Neutral Week
We again start the week at $100.00 per share and move higher on Monday and Tuesday to close at
$102.00 per share. However, this time Wednesday is a sharp down day which takes the price down
$4.00 to close at $98.00 per share, which is lower than when the week began. Seeing the $98.00 level
as a bargain, buyers step in and push the price slightly higher to close Thursday at $99.00 per share.
By the close on Friday, buyers again stepped in to push the price higher by $1.00 to close at the
original $100.00 level where price opened on Monday morning. The candle created by this week
would be a doji candle with the open and close being equal in price, while price would show a $4.00
range with $102.00 per share being the high and $98.00 being the candle low. Neither buyers nor
sellers were dominant this week as evidenced by the equal close.

A Bullish Reversal Week
Let us again start Monday morning at $100.00 per share and by the close of Monday's trading, price
has declined $4.00 to $96.00 per share. The week is off to a bearish beginning, which is continued
also into Tuesday, with the price falling another $2.00 to close at $94.00. At this point, the situation is
looking bleak for buyers. However, by Wednesday's close, buyers stepped in to push the price
slightly higher to close back at $96.00. Thursday is another up day for the stock, and this time buyers
are showing aggression as they push the price $4.00 higher to close yet again at $100.00. At this
point, we have a long lower shadow which indicates price rejection of lower prices as evidenced by
the higher move. By Friday's close, buyers have taken charge and driven the price higher by $2.00 to
close the week at $102.00, having come back from an early decline at the beginning of the week.
FIGURE 4.26 A Bar Chart and Candle Chart Neutral Bar Doji

The shape of this candle displays a bullish bias because the candle formed a long lower shadow,

which indicates that sellers drove price lower initially and then aggressive buyers prevented lower
prices by finding value at lower levels. Demand outweighed supply and price rose off a lower level.
The name for this type of candle is a hammer candle, and it is often associated with bullish price
reversals. Hammers provide clues into possible bullish market reversals when they form at
confluence support levels. Lower shadows or wicks inform us that buyers rejected lower prices, or
found value at the lower levels, and could be expected to push price even higher.

A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE GOES A LONG WAY

Authors have written full books on the subject of candle charting, and some traders have become
experts in the area. For example, Thomas Bulkowski compiled extensive data on 103 candlestick
patterns in his book The Encyclopedia of Candlesticks. I have only discussed 13 of the more
common, popular candles that are in the vocabulary of most traders.
You need not become an expert in candle charting to gather information and employ the benefits
from candle patterns on your charts. However, there are great resources available for you if you
desire to learn more. Steve Nison is recognized as the individual who introduced candle charts to
American traders, and he has written extensively on the subject with such books as Japanese
Candlestick Charting Techniques, Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques
Revealed, and The Candlestick Course.
Candle charts have their place in a complete trader's plan because they give quick insights into the
supply/demand relationship in price. They can also be helpful in confirming a trade setup while
triggering an entry or stop-loss when a signal occurs at a point of confluence with other strategies.
A trader will benefit from finding a key reversal candle such as a bullish engulfing or doji pattern
that forms at an expected support zone such as a prior price support level, moving average, Fibonacci
retracement level, or trendline. Traders can enhance the odds of a successful trade by identifying a
positive momentum divergence or other indicator buy signal that forms simultaneously at this price
level. The remainder of the book will discuss other methods for finding confluence before placing a
trade, but many trades will be officially triggered with a buy or sell signal when a common candle
reversal signal forms and price officially breaks above or beneath the respective high or the low of
the candle.

CHAPTER 5
Examining Price Patterns
So far, we have discussed three main price principles, along with basic candlestick charting on our
quest to discover higher probability trade setups and determine how to profit from the next likely
swing in price. This chapter will continue the journey by describing how popular price patterns help
you uncover opportunities in the seemingly random movements of the markets.
However, simply finding a price pattern is not enough; rather, you will enhance your trades if you
combine the principles, insights from candle charts, volume, momentum, and—as we will soon see in
Chapters 6 and 7—Fibonacci principles, along with the life cycle of a price move. All of the
concepts combine to form a complete strategy to increase the odds of success as you develop trading
experience. Combining as much chart information as possible allows you to have a greater degree of
confidence that the trade setup you are about to take has a high probability of meeting the price target
that you expect.
This chapter will describe popular classic price patterns, show how the patterns are based on one
of the underlying principles, and explain exactly what to know about each pattern to increase the
probability of a successful trade. By the end of the chapter, you will be able to see the logic of pattern
formations, rather than just recognizing them on the price chart. That will take some practice, but first,
let's get to work defining these popular patterns!
