
www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move

HIGH
CLOSE

Figure 6-1:
The
standard
price bar.

OPEN
LOW

The price bar tells you the outcome of the battle between the buyers (bulls) and
the sellers (bears). Hidden in every price bar are a winning group and a losing
group. If the price opened at the low and closed at the high, the winners that
day were the buyers. If the price opened at the high and closed at the low, the
winners that day were the sellers. You almost always have to take into consideration the price action embedded in the bar the day before in order to make the
winner-loser judgment. For example, you can have an opening gap down from
the day before that still delivers a close at the high of the new bar — but that
close at the high is still lower than the close the day before. Who is the winner
on this day? Well, anyone who bought at today’s low (not the poor guy who
had bought the previous day).
But back to the single bar. Each bar reflects a very real contest — and you
measure the outcome in money. If the bar is very tall, encompassing a $10
range when the normal bar for this security is only $3, the trading was a
Titanic battle. If the bar is very short, say $1, it was a pillow fight. On every
single trade, one party wins and the other party loses. That is why trading —
like war — is called a zero sum game.
The relationship between prices and volume is important in judging the bar.
Volume is the number of shares or contracts traded during the period that
your bar encompasses. Everything that you infer about the state of mind of
the market participants is subject to confirmation by volume. For example,
if the price bar is three times the usual size, you would want to verify that a
large number of traders were active that day by looking at volume. It would
be wrong to see a trading battle if only one trade was done at the $10 high. In
that case, the $10 price is an anomaly. Somebody made a mistake — either the
buyer at $10 or the data collection department at the exchange.
When you get befuddled by a tangle of patterns and indicators on your chart,
return to the basics — a clean chart that contains only the price bars — and
ask yourself “What are these bars saying?” Chances are they are singing quite
a tune. Price bars are the raw material of indicators, so when indicators are

www.pdfdummies.com

95

96

Part III: Observing Market Behavior
giving you conflicting or confusing signals, go back to the source. Observing
the characteristics of the price bar and interpreting changes correctly can
save your hide. In fact, many traders make all their decisions on the price bar
alone. See Chapter 16.

Setting the tone: The opening price
The opening price is the very first trade done between a buyer and a seller on
the trading day. It reflects the new day’s hopes and fears. The meaning of the
open, like all the price bar components, comes from its relationship to the
other components of the bar as they develop and to the components of the
bars that had come before, especially the close.
Sometimes the opening price means nothing at all. Market prices are sometimes random because people make decisions about their money that have
nothing to do with the price, but rather with their personal needs. Maybe
Uncle Herbert got up this morning and said to himself, “I think I’ll sell my Blue
Widget shares at the open today and go on a cruise.” Randomness can also
affect the other parts of the price bar, not just the open, of course.
In U.S. stocks, the exchanges decided years ago to stop recording the first
trade. When you see the open in a newspaper or most data services, that numbers is often not actually the first trade of the day, but a synthetic price (like
an average of the first five trades) devised by the data collector (the exchange
where the security is traded or a private data vendor like Reuters). This is why
the opening price varies from one data source to another. Not having accurate data drives some technical analysts wild because the opening price sets
the tone and if somebody made it up, it doesn’t matter how reasonable the
calculation process — it’s not literally the first price of the day. This problem
is now compounded by the existence of several exchanges trading the same
equity securities and related options.
Some equity analysts say that they never look at the open because it’s not
strictly accurate. And although in futures trading the open is the real McCoy,
in many instances (such as equity index futures and foreign exchange), trading has been going on in the overnight Globex market, so the actual open on
the U.S. exchange floor is hardly ever a surprise.
So should you heed the open? Yes. In equities, any particular opening price
may not be accurate, but over a series of days, the open adequately represents the sentiment at the beginning of the day. Heed the opening price in
futures, too, including equity index futures. The open is your benchmark for
evaluating the price action over the course of the day.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
The opening price’s most important relationship is to the close of the day
before. Whether the open is up or down, you can figure out how to evaluate
the opening price in the following sections. (For more on the close, see the
section “Summarizing sentiment: The closing price,” in this chapter.)

When the open is up
If the open is up from the close the day before, you imagine that the first
trader of the day spotted overnight news favorable to the security, or is
expecting favorable news, or has some other reason to think his purchase
will return a gain. If you, too, want to be a buyer today, his action reinforces
your feeling. The first trade sets the tone.
Sometimes a good opening is due to a practice named buy on open. You
can’t automatically attribute optimism or hopefulness to an opening bounce,
because
✓ Mutual fund and other professional managers have preset allocations to
specific securities. When fresh money comes in the night before, these
managers are going to distribute a certain percentage of it to all the
securities in the fund selected by the new customer. To buy on open is
the easiest way to top up a fund, but this action is not necessarily a judgment on that security that day.
✓ Fund managers want to clean out stops from the day before. A stop is a
preset sell order usually designed to prevent losses or otherwise exit
the trade; see Chapter 5. A stop placed significantly beneath the close
from the day before may be hit merely because all the market makers
have not refreshed their bids at the time the market opens. This type of
buying an open occurs particularly with more lightly traded issues, not
the big names trading millions of shares a day.
Fund managers and other professionals control far larger sums than individuals do, and you don’t know what proportion of opening trades are due
to genuine research-based enthusiasm and what proportion is due to the
mechanical buy-on-open effect. The market can take up to an hour to get
down to new business.
How do you know whether an opening bounce is due to fresh enthusiasm or
just the mechanical buy-on-open effect? You have to study each security to
see whether it normally displays the effect. Heavily traded, big-name securities (such as IBM stock) are less susceptible to an opening bounce than specialized securities with a narrower trader base (like cocoa futures).

www.pdfdummies.com

97

98

Part III: Observing Market Behavior
When the open is down
If the opening price is below the close of the day before, look out! Maybe
bad news came out after the close last night. The bad news may pertain to a
political event, a change in interest rates, a bankruptcy in the same industry,
or a zillion other factors (see the discussion of events in the sidebar “Current
events: Buy on the rumor; sell on the news,” in this chapter).
Some traders may have executed a sell on open, although to sell on the open
is not a common practice. A sell-on-open order is just what it sounds like — an
order given the night before to exit the trade at whatever the price happens
to be, although hunting for stops at the open is widespread and can create
either a buying or a selling surge (for more on stops, see the section, “When
the open is up”).

Summarizing sentiment: The closing price
The closing price is literally the last price at which a buyer bought and a
seller sold before the closing bell. The close is the most important part of
the price bar. In fact, if you were to draw a chart by using only one of the
bar components, you’d usually pick the close. A set of closes over a small
number of days is an indicator in its own right. The close remains the most
important price bar component even though after-the-bell trading was introduced to the retail market in the early 2000s.
The close is the most important part of the price bar because it summarizes
what traders feel about the security. They’ve watched this price all day, and by
the end of the day, they have a sense of how popular it was near the lows (lots
of buying going on) or how unpopular near the highs (lots of selling going on).
Remember, they’re also looking at volume to confirm these impressions. As the
close approaches, traders have to decide whether to hold the security overnight, a course of action they take only if they think it’s going up farther tomorrow and they won’t be able to get it more cheaply than they already have.
Note also that the close is what brokers use to value your portfolio at the
end of an accounting period, and the close is used to calculate the “mark-tomarket” value of a futures position. Professionals whose job performance
depends on end-of-period accounting care passionately about the close and
you may sometimes see them engineering a higher close in the last few minutes of trading.
After-hours trading creates a problem in evaluating the close. How do you
treat the close when your security makes a new high or new low in afterhours trading — only ten minutes after the close? The answer is that you
don’t adjust the close. In terms of managing your data, the open and close are

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
associated with the trading hours of the primary exchange where the security is listed — the New York Stock Exchange, the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and so on. If the security trades wildly higher
or lower from the “official” close, the new information is included in the price
data for the next day. This can result in some peculiar outcomes, such as
the price opening at $5 and closing at $7 on its primary exchange during the
exchange’s regular hours, but both the high and the low occurring in afterhours trading — and reaching (say) $4 at the low and $9 at the high. The new
high and low gets incorporated in the next day’s data.
As with all price bar components, what’s important is the relationship of the
close to other bar components, especially the open today and the close yesterday. Don’t dismiss the daily bar because your trading style is for a multiday period. Over time, the cumulative relationship of the close to the close
the day before gives you a good impression of directional bias.
You often hear “it’s up on the day” or “it’s down on the day,” referring to the
closing price relative to the close the day before. Here’s the skinny on these
technical trading terms:
✓ An up day is one where the close is higher than the close the day before.
✓ A down day refers to a day on which the close is lower than the close the
day before.
I go into more detail on these concepts in the following sections.

When the close is up
If today’s close is consistently higher than yesterday’s close, day after day,
buyers are demanding more and more of the security and are willing to pay an
ever-higher price to get it. In other words, the close is up. See Figure 6-2. With
the exception of Day 4, every close is higher than the close the previous day.

DAY 4
Figure 6-2:
A series of
up days.

www.pdfdummies.com

99

100 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
If you see an up-day trend like the one shown in Figure 6-2, you want to join
the crowd and buy into the trend.

When the close is down
In Figure 6-3, you can see that Day 3 starts a series in which each close is
lower than the day before. Here the sellers are willing to take ever-lower
prices to get rid of the security. The market assumes that those holding an
inventory of the security are willing to sell at lower and lower prices in order
to get buyers to demand it. This action is the same as your auto dealer putting last year’s cars on sale just before the new models come in. By lowering
the price, he creates demand. When you see a down move like the one in
Figure 6-3, you should join the crowd and be a seller.

Figure 6-3:
A series of
down days.

DAY 3

Hope, fear, and risk management at the close
On an up day, you hear that “today the bulls won” or on a down day, “today
the bears won.” This talk of bulls and bears acknowledges the emotional
aspect of trading — bulls are buyers who are hopeful of higher prices later
that they can sell for a profit, and bears are pessimists who foresee prices
falling. You can also say that the bulls are motivated by greed and the bears
are motivated by fear. However, greed and fear aren’t the only emotions traders feel, and some even find the use of the word greed offensive. Traders also
make buy/sell decisions to manage risk, a nonemotional reason.
Just as some traders buy on the open as a standard practice, some traders sell
on the close, chiefly to eliminate the risk of loss if something were to happen
overnight that would cause the price to fall. Institutions as well as individuals use his simple risk-management tactic. Should you? Only if you’re trading
without a stop or you fear the market could gap over your stop.
Because so many people exit on the close, the close is seldom the high of the
day. And when the close is at the exact high of the day, that’s useful information. It means people who do hold overnight positions are buying right up to
the last minute, offsetting the usual end-of-day sales.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move

Current events: Buy on the rumor; sell on the news
New highs and lows are often the seed of a new
trend, and usually arise directly from a specific
piece of news. Fresh news that causes a new
high or a new low is an event. The risk that a
new high or low will ensue from the news is
event risk. It may seem odd, but most events
are not surprises, but rather scheduled, such as
✓ News or a rumor pertaining to the security itself, such as a company’s earnings
announcement
✓ Market-related events such as options
expiration dates or the end of a calendar or
tax period
✓ Scheduled releases (such as the Fed’s
interest rate statement or any of a dozen
economic reports)
Event risk also refers to unexpected
developments:
✓ Acts of terrorism and war.
✓ Natural disasters.
✓ Correlation of a stock to the performance
of the major indices. Even if your stock is
doing well, for example, it can open down
from the close the night before as a side
effect of a drop in the index or sector to
which it belongs.
✓ Previous technical levels, such as a round
number (like 10,000 on the Dow) or a historic high or low (see Chapter 4).
Traders treat forecasts prepared by economists
and analysts as though the event had already
happened precisely as predicted. In other words,

they “build in” the forecast to the price, creating
the very high on the price bar that the news is
supposed to produce. This practice is named buy
on the rumor, where rumor refers to the forecast.
The rest of the phrase is sell on the news. The
news is the event itself. You sometimes get the
seeming paradox of a price reaching a new
high before the event and falling lower immediately after the event, even when the news
matches the forecast. The lower price comes
about because the early birds take profit on
the up move that they themselves engineered.
The new low is usually short lived. After all, the
forecast was for good news and the good news
occurred, so the news was properly built in and
the new high is the appropriate price.
If the news is much better than forecast,
though, traders don’t take profit because
better-than-expected news draws in new players and sends the price higher still. Then the
early birds are positioned to make even better
profits. Should the news fail to match expectations, traders and investors alike sell, and the
dip may turn into a longer-lasting price drop.
Either way, to buy on the rumor pays off for the
short-term trader who keeps his finger on the
trigger. Evaluating forecasts and being mentally
ready to buy or sell at the moment of impact of
the news is a difficult and risky business. It’s
no wonder risk-averse traders get out of the
market altogether around scheduled event
dates. Buy on the rumor, sell on the news is a
primary cause of technical price developments,
and in many instances, the only “technical analysis” that commentators mention (along with
the 200-day moving average — see Chapter 12).

Going up: The high
The high of the price bar is literally the highest point of the bar. It’s the highest price at which a buyer and seller made an exchange of cash for the security. The buyer obviously thought he was getting a bargain or good value and

www.pdfdummies.com

101

102 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
thinks that the price will rise some more. The seller holds the opposite view,
that the price will likely fall.
The high of the day has meaning only in the context of its relationship to other
parts of the same bar, especially the close (see earlier section), and to the
high the day before.
When the price closes at the high of the day, traders are extremely optimistic of more gains to come (bullish). When the high is at the open and it’s all
downhill for the rest of the day, traders are pessimistic (bearish).

Getting to the bottom of it: The low
The low of the day is the cheapest price at which the buyer and seller
exchange cash for the security. The buyer thinks he’s getting a good value
and that the price will rise. The seller believes the price is going to fall or is
already falling.
As with the high of the day, the low has meaning only in the context of its
relationship to other parts of the price bar and the bars that precede it.
When the low is lower than the open, it probably means that some fresh
news has come out after the opening bell that offsets any buy-on-open orders
or initial sentiment. When the close is at the low, it means that bad news or
negative sentiment ruled for the day.
You can judge the power of fresh negative news by checking whether it
inspired traders to produce not only a close at or near the low, but also a low
that is lower than the low the day before.

Putting It All Together: Using
Bars to Identify Trends
In the previous sections, I talk about interpreting market sentiment from
the relationship of the price bar components to one another largely within a
single bar. When you look at the components across a series of bars, you get
even more information. In fact, you get so much information that you risk
information overload. Interpretation — figuring out supply and demand from
the bars — becomes a lot more complex.
Some charts or parts of a chart are such a chaotic mess that no regularity
or pattern exists at all. But a security whose price jumps around all over the
place without rhyme or reason would soon run out of people to trade it. As
I discuss in Chapter 2, the law of supply and demand states that for every

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
security, you can find some price that persuades suppliers to part with it
or buyers to purchase it. After a price is established through the execution
of a real cash trade, traders have a baseline from which to track prices. Any
transaction may occur at a random price, but not every transaction can occur
randomly, or the market in that security would collapse.
The central observation of technical analysis is that the price bar embodies
all the supply-demand dynamics of the day and that a series of bars on a chart
shows the evolution of the supply-demand dynamics over time. Some percentage of the time, the evolution is visible in the form of a trend. In this section, I
describe how to use combinations of bars to help identify a trend.

Identifying an uptrend
The textbook-perfect uptrend is a series of up-day price bars (close higher
than the close yesterday) that have higher highs and higher lows in a majority
of the bars:
✓ Higher high: When the high today is higher than the high yesterday or
higher than the high of the past few days, you have a higher high. Higher
highs refers to visible peaks, not a higher high every single day. A series
of higher highs often signals that the market is feeling enthusiastic about
the security. But you usually don’t know at the time whether a new high
or a small series of new highs is the beginning of a trend.
✓ Higher low: You need to qualify the higher high as truly indicating that
a trend may be forming. What you want is an additional confirming condition — you can specify that you must also have higher lows.
Now you have two pieces of evidence that bulls outnumber bears. A series of
higher highs together with higher lows hints that a trend is forming. After two
days, you aren’t yet sure what is happening, but you’re starting to get excited.
After all, your goal in identifying a trend is to buy near the beginning of the
trend. As I describe in Chapter 1, your key assumption is that a trend, once
formed, will continue. If you have two higher highs with two higher lows, can
you assume that Day 3 will also deliver a higher high and a higher low?
Not necessarily. Alas, prices don’t move in straight lines. You often see a
series of two or three higher highs interrupted by one or two lower highs.
This happens for several reasons:
✓ Traders already in the security are taking an early profit.
✓ The market is reconsidering whether the new high is really justified.
✓ The higher highs were just a random accident.

www.pdfdummies.com

103

104 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
You seldom see an unbroken series of higher highs on every single day. Go to
Figure 6-2. You see a series of days on which the close is higher than the close
the day before. At the same time, the price is making a fresh high nearly every
day, but not every day without fail. See the bar marked “Day 4.” On that day,
the close was higher than the open and the low was higher than the day
before, but the high of the day was not higher than the day before. Oh, oh.
What does that mean? Remember, you don’t know yet what Day 5 is going to
bring at the time you’re looking this chart.
Most analysts tell you not to worry about this particular configuration of
bars. It’s an uptrend, all right, and you know this because you have an unbroken series of higher lows. Day 4 is a disappointment — it doesn’t deliver a
higher high — but the low is higher than all the previous lows. By considering the additional factor of higher lows, you confirm that the probability is
pretty good of getting a higher high and a higher close on Day 5.
