
periods 1 and 9 as an example. But the need for and application of

fast waterfall declines. Go down in time rather than longer. It applies

timing. Take a look at the spread between two simple averages of

consider using in the S&P are 100 by 3 and 50 by 3. Why those par-

mind that the two-minute chart is used in emergency situations like

use candlesticks or consider Point-and-Figure charts. Intervals to

Bond markets I rarely drop below 20-minutes. Also, please keep in

data format. If you need to look at your data in a different format,

short time intervals i f the price swings are not as clearly defined.

an analysis method, your wave structure will de distorted in a tick

a 60-minute or daily bar chart. Don't drop down to these extremely

over a fixed unit of time. If you apply the Elliott Wave Principle, as

on the time and price axis and lead you to believe that the chart was

of trades into a single bar as opposed to plotting the trades that occur

12,1998. The data are so well defined that I could remove the labels

that you do not use tick charts as you will be forcing a fixed number

Figure 3.1 is a two-minute chart of the September S&P on June

ticular periods? These setup periods for point and figure charts are
RSPU8-2 m i n
06/12/98 C=111250 +1050
-111200

popular with the floor traders in the S&P pit. Even though volume
has now switched to electronic trading, old habits still have an influence. Which leads us right back to Figure 3.1 because, if our market

our own position entry or exit, we should monitor that element i f

-110400

can be influenced by a known entity that could shift the timing for

-110800

at all possible. If there is a favored analytic method used by a large
-110000

group of traders like a specific period for point and figure charts,
-109600

candlestick charts, or simply a common error used by inexperienced
traders in mass, that knowledge can be used to your advantage.

stochastic - Slow

9:58

mi

11:??

1^:1 g

_ „

-100.00

The two-minute S&P chart in Figure 3.1 was deliberately set up

taneous global village. Our ability to trade any market is becoming

-20.00

tries with less experienced professional traders are part of the instan-

-40.00

monitored. The "Stochastics Default Club" remains because coun-

•60.00

with the vendor's default periods so that the retail traders could be

-80.00

easier as exchanges blend together in an effort to survive. What is

U2 m

1^:54

fascinating is that the mass psychology remains the same. I might

Figure 3.1 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., ® 1996-2011,
www.aeroinvest.com
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

see a reason in a very thin market to delay my order i f the timing
is moments away from the Stochastics Default Club. There clearly

62

• D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators • 6 3

do better. It is a promise kept, but we miss you, George.

the retail sector most likely entering the market. The P in the same

the Default Club in seminars so people would push themselves to

interest. In Figure 3.1, a few signals are marked to show an R for

setup Stochastics. He made me promise I would not stop abusing

a Stochastics study that is deliberately set up incorrectly can be of

he referenced my definition for the trader that never learned how to

suggest that something could be out of sync. But then looking at

Sadly George Lane has passed and he used to make me laugh when

tern and momentum indicator combination in my own charts to

long before basic survival instincts motivate us to find a better way

have to be other concerns present first, such as an Elhott wave pat-

chart denotes where professionals are using the retail trader's volume

very forgiving if the period used is just slightly off the mark.

or a W bottom in the indicator like the chart displays at R2, they will

rect cycle to use than one might suspect. However, Stochastics is

the novice trading group three signals in a row and offers divergence

cycles are not symmetrical, and it will be harder to identify the cor-

what they often see demonstrated on the Internet. If Stochastics gives

Club"? Well, forming a new club will be harder to do as dominant

They are doing just what their user's manual told them to do and

right period? Won't we be establishing a "Modified Stochastics

the 20 line and will sell as the indicator crosses below the 80 level.

will happen when everyone uses the same method to define the

Default Club will enter on cue as the indicator crosses up through

How do we go about finding the right period to use? And what

to establish more favorable entries for themselves. The Stochastics

for defining the correct periodicity for %D is to study the time

to boldly step in front of an oncoming freight train. Splat. It isn't too

In Figure 3.2 the weekly DMK/$ chart is offered. The method

runaway fast market shortly after your indicators gave you permission

period used for the primary oscillator %D, different results will occur.

like the emotional swings of being trapped on the wrong side of a

gave a smoother sine wave than the Fast Stochastics. By varying the

started. Maybe it is just a rite of passage. There is no experience quite

along with %D-Slow as a confirming indicator. The Slow Stochastics

to be disrespectful, as I was once a member myself when I first

%D. George Lane used a three-line oscillator by plotting %K, %D,

chart. Coining the phrase "Stochastics Default Club" is not meant

primary and %K in a shorter interval to offer a leading indicator to

would be entering orders from entirely different zones from the same

relationship. Stochastics is a two-line oscillator that uses %D as the

different time horizons. Add the range rules for oscillators, and we

tion to develop his overbought-oversold oscillator, which shows this

we are making our trading decisions from different periods and from

bar chart or a monthly time period. George Lane used this observa-

have had an opportunity to trigger a reverse signal. That is because

This concept holds true whether we are trading from a two-minute

their orders will likely be entered before the Default Club charts

to accumulate ever closer to the extreme highs of the daily ranges.

not let the Stochastics Default Club off the hook graciously because

the daily range. Conversely, as price increases, the daily closes tend

three-wave corrective move. The experienced traders generally will

daily closes tend to accumulate ever closer to their extreme lows of

weaker market positions with size (large position size), producing a

Stochastics is based on the observation that, as price decreases, the

generally come out in larger numbers and squeeze out some of the

64

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

f X U S D M M U I -Wookly

D M K . ? - WV.Aly

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators • 6 5

would be used for %D. But how do we know that the 118-period cycle
is the correct one to use? In Chapter 2 we developed a chart that
needed four cycles just to mark some of the more significant market
lows. As we are never going to stumble on the ideal cycle to use in
most cases, here is a useful way to evaluate the period you selected.
The compressed x axis can now be expanded so that the data
appears normal on the screen. Then add the Stochastics study to
the chart using a 59-period interval. While the results in Figure
3.3 are correct, I do not like the results from this period because
there is insufficient movement in the indicator between zero and
one hundred, and the oscillator does not display the range rules
discussed in Chapter 1. So the first efforts have established a period

Figure 3.2

that is too long. I f I repeat the process of arbitrarily plotting a bestfit cycle and taking a look at the period results in the Stochastics

horizon in the chart from which you are making trading decisions

formula, it could take several hours to find something I really liked.

and determine the best cycle for that chart. The data i n this chart
have been compressed so that as much data as possible can be seen
on the screen for this weekly time horizon. We need to see only

1X1 I S )MMUI W o o k l y

l l v $ - VV.,-cklj-

price lows so the temporary distortion of the data is inconsequential. In this chart a cycle of 118 is identified. This cycle is close, but

L

it does not fit the price lows exactly, for reasons discussed in the
preceding chapter. Therefore, bias your cycle placement so that
the cycle bottoms align most accurately with the price lows in the
most recent data, and let the price lows furthest to the left of the
chart fall slightly out of phase. Most will establish cycles from left
to right and let the price lows closest to the current bar fall out of
sync. That just doesn't make much sense.

A
*

/

•19000
•18000
•17000
•16000
•15000

\

¥^

Stoch Slow Custom

A /IT V

/

•14000
•100.00

•80 00
\ A A •60.00
•40.00

/

Use the periodicity that is half of the cycle length you identified. As
a 118-period cycle is acknowledged in the weekly chart, a 59-period

•20.00
'93

'94

'95

'96

'97

'98

Figure 3.3

66 • D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators

• 67

part of the optimization process will still be of value to us.

as the period to use.

to use Stochastics in such a manner, the profitability test results as

So let's use the computer's smarts to see what it can come up with

in Chapter 1 to mark the upper and lower levels for a trending bull

into a single period to use as a guide or starting point.

in Chapter I are now present. The four boundary lines discussed

situation we are consciously trying to curve fit the historical data

right period has been identified. How? The range rules discussed

or specialized interpretative ways are not recommended. But in this

results in Figure 3.5 should immediately offer confirmation that the

Curve-fitting technical indicators that are used in unconventional

ahead and add a Stochastics study using a 36 period for % D . The

of 10 to 50 in increments of one unit to identify a better period.

cal range in the database. Having passed the first test, we can go

short. Instead, let the computer run through an optimization range

this is tested when the data are compressed to show the full histori-

know that the 59-period is too long and the default of 10 will be too

be identified. The computer may have found a better cycle, and

Stochastics as an indicator to be plotted in a chart. Regardless, we

chart. After setting a 72-period cycle, comparable price lows can

over System, but their default value is different when you select

that a 72-period cycle will be dominant in this weekly D M K / $

TradeStation uses a default value of 10 in their Stochastics Cross-

will be double the Stochastics period. The computer is indicating

optimize a period when you want to edit the default value. Omega

value to use for % D . Working backward, we know that the cycle

In Figure 3.4 the Omega TradeStation software has the ability to

The computer optimization suggests a period of 36 is the best

Professional charting products all have an optimization feature.

The optimization feature for the Omega TradeStation Stochastics system will use the buy-sell signals generated when the Stochasn<USDMMUL Weekly

D M K , $ - Weekly

tics oscillators cross through the 80 and 20 levels. As we do not want

hXUSDh Format System: Stochastic Crossover
06J19/9S C=
JProperties

000
^^000

Edit Input
Input Name:
Input Type:
Start [To"
E Ofitimize

LENGTH
Numeric Simple
Stop [so"
Function Wizard...

xj
Verified:

0

No

0

lnc|l

0

Set default...

Stoch Slow C

tnM.
Figure 3.5

Figure 3.4

68 • D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators

• 69

high is not the time to sell. It rarely is as this indicator will first top at

a bear market.

the Composite Index. Like the previous example, the momentum

the lower range for a bull market and the upper resistance zone for

futures. A vertical line on October 31 shows a momentum high in

and bear market have been reduced in this chart to show only two:

learn the characteristic swing action of any oscillator you favor to use.

when the indicator crossed through the 20 and 80 levels. This is not

the top of wave iii of 3 implying more to follow. Patience is needed to

The price data show that the computer gave us buy-sell signals
how George Lane advises us to use his indicator, and we can see
that these signals offer poor results. He advises trading only with the

TradeStatJon Chirt Analyst...

i8'ji£-_

_

USZll - 240 min U140 25/32 3/32 0.07% 6=140

trend when using this indicator—that is, to buy or sell when permission is obtained from divergence analysis and when the "permission"
signal is accompanied on lower volume. However, when the correct
period is identified for the Stochastics Oscillator, it will contain trend
information by traveling within the ranges that were detailed in the
Chapter 1. While the oscillator character between RSI and Stochastics will be different, the signals to buy or sell will abide by the same
range rules. The Stochastics indicator in Figure 3.5 has been marked
to show the buy-sell signals generated when you apply range rules.
The signals are occurring in the direction of the market's trend.
Every point marked with a buy or sell signal was discussed in the
first chapter with the exception of three. There are two buy signals
along a trend line drawn on the oscillator that occurred in 1996.
The addition of trend lines and moving averages is of great value
and will be discussed in greater detail separately. The other signal

eb RSI avgi (14,9,45) 51.27

55.83

is the Stochastics peak that has the word "Elliott" above it. Permission to sell is not given by Stochastics just because it is at an extreme
high. However, the rally that unfolds from the low identified with a
dotted line to the high is a distinctfive-waveadvance that someone
using the Elliott Wave Principle along with Stochastics would have
known to act upon, or to at least unwind, or scale back a portion of
a long dollar position. Figure 3.6 shows the December 2011 T-Bond

2 ^

Ott

19/7

19/13

lO/H ' 18/25

NU

tl/t

Figure 3.6 A e r o d y n a m i c I n v e s t m e n t s Inc., © 1 9 9 6 - 2 0 1 1 , Daily
Market R e p o r t , w w w . a e r o i n v e s t . c o m
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

7 0

•

DISPELLING S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

After discussing how to identify the correct % D periodicity for Stochastics, you might ask, "When should the period be changed?" It is
generally recognized that a shorter period can be used to anticipate a
signal. It will also give you false signals in the form of noise. The best

I t ; ; i > l l 8 88
06/15/98 C = 1 0 8 4 5 0

mm
-2800

1 IjitlniU^^
J

"

I

T

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators

1

* 7 1

R S P U 8 - 6 0 min

tmmi 0 = 1 0 8 4 5 0 -2800

114000

|M 1 1 1 0 0 0
m

110000
|j

way to handle volatile markets is to use two windows with the data

f
1'

displayed in a ratio of 4:1. For example, a 240-minute chart next to

1'

CMB c o m p o s i t e

^

110000
109000
^

a 60-minute chart will help you filter noise from your indicators and
improve the timing. I personally do not use Stochastics as I favor the

75 QO

RSIMvgs

ranges in RSI that develop and the Composite index to increase prob-

II

'

109000

ability. But I am aware of what the Stochastics trader is likely thinking.
Early in this discussion the question was asked, " W i l l we not

sax

fm

m.

, ,Mi

m

sin

Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

same procedure of using half the cycle length?" First, people will

Figure 3.7 A e r o d y n a m i c I n v e s t m e n t s Inc., © 1 9 9 6 - 2 0 1 1 ,
www.aeroinvest.com

be creating a new Modified Stochastics Club if everyone uses the
find different cycles, but second, you will want to make one last

5/21

5/29

6/04

6/10

ever, in the 88-minute chart the same data points are directly below

is also the easiest way to catch that an adjustment is required.

near points 1,2, and 3 are all exceeding the nearby averages. How-

will find it is not only an effective way to make an adjustment but it

ing averages appear to be incorrectly defined, as the price highs

ing the bar chart. I have not encountered others that do this. You

used to create the bar charts. In the 60-minute bar chart, the mov-

"tweak." What you will want to change is the time period for creat-

at a very difficult decision point for a trader.

In both charts two oscillators are plotted. The bottom oscillator is

are easy to interpret and are right on their mark when the market is

ratio 4:1. Therefore 88- to 22-minutes would be the better pairing.)

exact same indicators in the 88-minute bar chart trigger signals that

old dogs with nothing to prove, one becomes more humble. Use the

Y, and Z in the 60-minute chart are not very helpful. However, the

displayed 88-minute and 60-minute; when you become one of the

also occurs in the oscillators: the oscillator pivot points marked atX,

ute September S&P 500 bar chart. (I should mention here that I

the moving average at points 1, 2, and 3. Now take a look at what

Figure 3.7 is a comparison between an 88-minute and 60-min-

eral weeks ago, and the key pivots were still working on the left-hand

The only difference between these two windows is the time interval

the screen. In this case, the 88-minutc period of time was set up sev-

plotted with them, and two averages are plotted with the price data.

my fixed-interval averages on prices in the oldest data on the left of

composite of two studies. Both oscillators have two moving averages

down in front of a chart, the first thing I check is the relationship of

developed called the Composite index as it is a formula that is a

How did I know 88 minutes would work at point 3? When I sit

a 14-period RSI, and the middle oscillator is a custom formula I

72 • DISPELLING SOME COMMON BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

side of the screen. Therefore, I would not make a change. As the cur-

<JPU8-88 mm

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators • 73

SPU8-13 min (includes Globex session)

•113500

made that if the signals are true on the left, then I should be able to

•114500

rent data coming into the chart is the most critical, the assumption is

•114000
•113500
•113000

•110500

missing its mark. Change the time period of the bar chart. I look at

•111500

the right. In a two-minute chart, the far left or oldest data is clearly

•112500

see accurate signals form in the real-time data entering the screen on

the old points to see if a three-minute chart is a better fit... maybe a
one-minute bar chart. What surprises me most is that I nearly always

•112500
•112000
-111500
•111000

•109500
-110500
RSI 40.94 20,00 80,00

land right on or within a minute of a Fibonacci number. Keep an

RSI 4946 20,00 80,00
*

eye on the old data as it relates to its moving averages. This is really
important: consider only the price data and moving averages; never
try to adjust the indicators plotted below the data. Let the indica-

'slob'' '^;i'2' ' 'M"

•5hy

90,00

^
*

•90,00

•30,00

•30,00

-60,00

•60,00

•eh'i" 'M

'6/06

'6/09

'6/10

Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

book created with unconventional time periods, this is the method

Figure 3.8 A e r o d y n a m i c I n v e s t m e n t s Inc., © 1996-2011,
www.aerolnvest.com

tors fall wherever they will. When you encounter bar charts in this

•

'

by which they were derived. It is very rare that I change the favored
the 13-minute chart forces the RSI to be pressed into the same 80

within intraday periods, and I rarely exceed 240 minutes.

peak with divergence near the 80 level. The same price high i n

periods for specific markets. Clearly, I can use this adjustment only

Some markets such as currencies require longer trading pairings

vals. I n this example the 88-minute chart is forming a second

with longer time horizons such as monthly-weekly chart pairings.

find just one pattern for confirmation between the two time inter-

stops the same time the order is entered. This concept works well

When you look for a market top, use this chart combination to

or buy into within a specific time period. Ensure that you enter

500 futures market and charted i n 88- and 13-minute intervals.

not interpreted in any other way except to find the extremes to sell

ure 3.8 is an 11-period RSI calculated from the September S&P

until you are interested in using it to buy the market. The RSI is

and ignore all other squiggles the indicator may produce. Fig-

of the screen; in fact, don't even look at this screen combination

up a condition so as to look for a specific oscillator formation

any reason. Ignore the fact that the oscillators roll to the bottom

lators do not travel between 0 and 100. In this case we w i l l set

to exit a position as I don't hesitate when a target is realized for

0 and 100. In the first chapter a strong case was made that oscil-

method will help the timing of entering a position. It is not used

period is deliberately used to move an oscillator freely between

the last trigger after everything else you monitor is i n place. This

periodicity of an oscillator. I n the following example, a shorter

level boundary. That's all there is to this signal i f you need only

We need to cover times when you w i l l want to change the
