
About the Author
Corey Rosenbloom, CMT, founded the trading education site www.afraidtotrade.com, where he
offers a variety of services and market analysis. A Chartered Market Technician, Rosenbloom speaks
regularly at industry trading conferences. His work appears on a number of other trading web sites,
such as www.greenfaucet.com, traderkingdom.com, moneyshow.com, www.dailymarkets.com,
www.wallstreetcheat.com, www.bestwaytoinvest.com, and others. His strategies have also appeared
in Dr. Brett Steenbarger's book The Daily Trading Coach. Rosenbloom earned a masters degree in
political science and a bachelor's degree in psychology from the University of Alabama in Huntsville.

Bibliography
Appel, Gerald. Technical Analysis: Power Tools for Active Investors. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2005.
Aronson, David. Evidence-Based Technical Analysis. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Achelis, Steven. Technical Analysis from A to Z. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Bensignor, Rick, editor. New Thinking in Technical Analysis: Trading Models from the Masters.
New York, NY: Bloomberg Press, 2000.
Bellafiore, Michael. “Old-School Lessons for Mastering Today's Markets,” SFO Magazine (June
2010) 26–35.
Bellafiore, Michael. One Good Trade: Inside the Highly Competitive World of Proprietary
Trading. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons: 2010.
Bellafiore, Michael. “Traders Ask: What is the Proper Exit on a Swing Trade,” SMB Training Blog.
May 29, 2010. <http://www.smbtraining.com/blog/traders-ask-what-is-the-proper-exit-on-a-swingtrade>
Bollinger, John. Bollinger on Bollinger Bands. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Boroden, Carolyn. Fibonacci Trading: How to Master the Time and Price Advantage . New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Boucher, Mark. The Hedge Fund Edge. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Brown, Constance. “The Derivative Oscillator: a New Approach to an Old Problem,” Journal of
Technical Analysis (Winter-Spring 1994) 45–61.
Brown, Constance. Technical Analysis for the Trading Professional. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
1999.
Brown, Constance. Fibonacci Analysis. New York, NY: Bloomberg Press, 2008.
Brooks, Al. Reading Price Charts Bar by Bar: The Technical Analysis of Price Action for the
Serious Trader. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons: 2009.
Bulkowski, Thomas. Encyclopedia of Candlestick Charts. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Bulkowski, Thomas. Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2005.
Bulkowski, Thomas. Trading Classic Chart Patterns. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
Carter, John. Mastering the Trade. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Chande, Tushar. Beyond Technical Analysis. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Colby, Robert. The Encyclopedia of Technical Market Indicators . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
2003.
Connors, Laurence and Linda Bradford Raschke. Street Smarts. Los Angeles: M. Gordon Publishing,
1996.
Connors, Laurence and Conor Sen. How Markets Really Work: A Quantitative Guide to Stock
Market Behavior. Sherman Oaks, CA: Trading Markets Publishing Group, 2004.

Coppola, Al. The Step-by-Step Guide to Profitable Pattern Trading. Greenville, SC: Trader's Press,
2007.
Covel, Michael. Trend Following: How Great Traders Make Millions in Up or Down Markets .
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2004.
Dalton, James F., Robert B. Dalton, and Eric T. Jones. Markets in Profile: Profiting from the
Auction Process. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Davis, Ned. Being Right or Making Money. Venice, FL: Ned Davis Research, 2000.
De Bondt, W.F.M. “Betting on Trends: Intuitive Forecasts of Financial Risk and Return,”
International Journal of Forecasting (1993) 9, 355–371.
Derman, Emanual. My Life as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Desmond, Paul. “Identifying Bear Market Bottoms and New Bull Markets,” Journal of Technical
Analysis (2002) 57, 38–42.
Detry, P.J., and PhilippeGregoire. “Other Evidences of the Predictive Power of Technical Analysis:
The Moving Averages Rules on European Indexes” European Finance Management Association:
2001
Lugano
Meetings.
Available
at
Social
Science
Research
Network:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=269802.
Dewey, Edward. Cycles: The Mysterious Forces that Trigger Events . New York: Hawthorn Books,
1971.
Douglas, Mark. Trading in the Zone. New York: New York Institute of Finance, 2000.
Douglas, Mark. The Disciplined Trader: Developing Winning Attitudes . New York: New York
Institute of Finance, 1990.
Dunlap, Richard. The Golden Ratio and Fibonacci Numbers. Singapore: World Scientific, 1997.
Edwards, Robert, and John Magee. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 8th ed., 2003. 1948 edition
revised by W.H.C. Bassetti, Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press.
Ehlers, John. “MESA Adaptive Moving Averages,” Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
(September 2001) 19:9, 30–35.
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
Elder, Alexander. Entries and Exits: Visits to 16 Trading Rooms . New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons, 2006.
Elder, Alexander. Trading for a Living. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
Fama, Eugene. “The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices,” The Journal of Business (1965). University
of Chicago, 38, 1.
Fisher, Mark. The Logical Trader. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
Forman, John. The Essentials of Trading: From the Basics to Building a Winning Strategy .
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Fosback, Norman. Stock Market Logic: A Sophisticated Approach to Profits on Wall Street .
Chicago, IL: Dearborn Financial Publishing, 1976 (1993 edition).

Frost, A.J., and Robert Prechter. Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Market Behavior , 20th Anniversary
Edition. Gainsville, GA: New Classics Library, 2000.
Gehm, Ralph. Quantitative Trading and Money Management. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons,
1983.
Grant, Kenneth. Trading Risk: Enhanced Profitability through Risk Control . Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2004.
Granville, Joseph. A New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing for Maximum Profit . Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1976.
Grimes, Adam. “Technical Analysis: A Little Background and History.” SMB Training Blog. May 5,
2010. <http://www.smbtraining.com/blog/technical-analysis-a-little-background-and-history>
Gujral, Ashwani. “ADX: The Key to Market Trends,” Futures Magazine (May 2005) 34–36.
Hamilton, William. The Stock Market Barometer: A Study of its Forecast Value Based on Charles
H. Dow's Theory of the Price Movement, reprint of the 1922 edition. New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons, 1998.
Harris, Michael. Short-Term Trading with Price Patterns. Greenville, NC: Traders Press, Inc, 2000.
Hayes, Timothy. “Momentum Leads Price: A Universal Concept with Global Applications,” Journal
of Technical Analysis (Winter-Spring 2004) 19–24.
Horowitz, Andrew. The Disciplined Investor: Essential Strategies for Success. Weston, FL: HF
Factor Publishing, 2008.
Hutson, Jack. Charting the Stock Market: The Wyckoff Method . Seattle, WA: Technical Analysis,
Inc., 1986.
Ilinski, Kirill. Physics of Finance: Gauge Modelling in Non-Equilibrium Pricing. New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Kamich, Bruce. How Technical Analysis Works . New York, NY: New York Institute of Finance,
2003.
Kaufman, Perry. New Trading Systems and Methods, 4th ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2005.
Kirkpatrick, II, Charles, and Julie Dahlquist. Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for
Financial Market Technicians. New Jersey: FT Press, 2006.
Knapp, Volker. “The RSI Trend System,” Active Trader Magazine (August 2004). 5:8, 64–65.
Kurczek, Dion, “Basic Pullback Buyer,” Active Trader Magazine (March 2003) 4:3, 9.
Kurczek, Dion, “Two-bar Breakout System,” Active Trader Magazine (November 2003) 4:11, 56.
Landry, David. Dave Landry's 10 Best Swing Trading Patterns and Strategies. Los Angeles, CA:
M. Gordon Publishing Group, 2003.
Lane, George C. “Lane's Stochastics: The Ultimate Oscillator,” Journal of Technical Analysis (May
1985) 37–42.
Lind, Douglas, William Marchal, and Samuel Wathen. Basic Statistics for Business and Economics.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 2002.
Link, Marcel. High Probability Trading. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2003.

Livio, Mario. The Golden Ratio: The Story of Phi, the World's Most Astonishing Number . New
York: Broadway Books, 2002.
Lo, Andrew, and A. Craig MacKinlay. “Stock Market Prices do not Follow Random Walks:
Evidence from a Simple Specification Test,” Review of Financial Studies (1998) 1, 41–66.
Lo, Andrew. A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street ,Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1999.
Lo, Andrew, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang. “Foundations of Technical Analysis: Computational
Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical implementation,” Journal of Finance (2000) 55, 4.
Lucas, R. “The Usefulness of Historical Data in Selecting Parameters for Technical Trading
Systems,” Journal of Futures Markets (1989) 9, 55–65.
Mackay, Charles. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds . Petersfield,
Hampshire, UK: Harriman House, 2003.
Mandelbrot, Benoit. “The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices,” Journal of Business (1963) 36,
394–419.
Merrill, Arthur. “Advance-Decline Divergences as an Oscillator,” Stocks and Commodities
Magazine (September 1988) 6:9, 354–355.
Miner, Robert. High Probability Trading Strategies. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Murphy, John. Intermarket Technical Analysis. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1991.
Murphy, John. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets . New York, NY: New York Institute of
Finance, 1999.
Nassar, David, and William Lupien. Market Evaluation and Analysis for Swing Trading: Timeless
Methods and Strategies for an Ever-Changing Market. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Nassar, David. Rules of the Trade: Indispensable Insights for Active Trading . New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Neely, Glenn. Mastering Elliott Wave. Brightwaters, NY: Windsor Books, 1990.
Nison, Steve. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques , 2nd ed. New York: New York Institute of
Finance, 2001.
Osler, Carol. “Identifying Noise Traders: the Head and Shoulders Pattern in U.S. Equities,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (1998).
Painter, William. “On Balance Open Interest Indicator,” Journal of Technical Analysis , Fall-Winter
1995, 48–56.
Pesavento, Larry. Trade What You See: How To Profit from Pattern Recognition . New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Pesavento, Larry and Steven Shapiro. Fibonacci Ratios With Pattern Recognition. Greensville, SC:
Traders Press, 1997.
Plummer, Tony. The Psychology of Technical Analysis . Chicago, IL: Probus Publishing Company,
1989.
Poser, Steven. Applying Elliott Wave Theory Profitably. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.

Pring, Martin. Martin Pring on Market Momentum. Homewood, IL: Irwin Professional Publishing,
1993.
Pring, Martin. Pring on Price Patterns: The Definitive Guide to Price Pattern Analysis and
Interpretation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Pring, Martin. Technical Analysis Explained, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Pruden, Hank. The Three Skills of Top Trading: Behavioral Systems Building, Pattern Recognition,
and Mental State Management. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Rhea, Robert. The Dow Theory: An Explanation of its Development and an Attempt to Define its
Usefulness as an Aid to Speculation, reprint of 1932 Barron's Publishing edition Burlington, VT:
Fraser Publishing, 1993.
Raschke,
Linda
B.
“Capturing
Trend
Days.” TradersLog.
Website:
www.traderslog.com/capturingtrend-days.htm. Accessed November 1, 2010.
Raschke, Linda B. “Classic Technical Trading: Become a Technical Purist ,” International Traders
Expo presentation, Ft. Lauderdale, FL: June 10, 2006.
Raschke, Linda B. “Swing Trading and Underlying Principles of Technical Analysis.” Quoted in
Bensignor, Rick, editor. New Thinking in Technical Analysis: Trading Models from the
Masters.New York, NY: Bloomberg Press, 2000.
Raschke, Linda B. “Tape Reading.” Traderslog. www.traderslog.com/tape-reading/. July 29, 2009.
Rotella, Robert. The Elements of Successful Trading. New York, NY: New York Institute of
Finance, 1992.
Schwager, Jack. Getting Started in Technical Analysis. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Schwager, Jack. Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders . New York: New York Institute of
Finance, 1989.
Schwager, Jack. The Market Wizards: Conversations with America's Top Traders . New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons, 1995.
Schwager, Jack. Technical Analysis. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
Schabacker, Robert. Stock Market Theory and Practice. New York, NY: B.C. Forbes Publishing,
1930.
Schabacker, Robert. Technical Analysis of Stock Market Profits . New York, NY: Puttman
Publishing, 1932.
Shannon, Brian. Technical Analysis Using Multiple Timeframes . Centennial, CO: LifeVest
Publishing, 2008.
Shaw, Alan. Technical Analysis, reprinted by the Market Technicians Association from the
Financial Analysts Handbook, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1988.
Shefrin, M., and M. Statman. “The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too Long:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance (1985) 40, 777–790.
Shiller, Robert J. Irrational Exuberance. New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2000.
Shiller, Robert. Irrational Exuberance, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2001.
Shleifer, A. Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. New York, NY: Oxford

University Press, 2000.
Steenbarger, Brett. The Psychology of Trading: Tools and Techniques for Minding the Markets .
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Steenbarger, Brett. Enhancing Trader Performance: Proven Strategies from the Cutting Edge of
Trader Psychology. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Steenbarger, Brett. The Daily Trading Coach: 101 Lessons for Becoming Your own Trading
Psychologist. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Steenbarger, Brett. “Market Context: The Importance of Non-Confirmations,” TraderFeed Blog, July
24, 2009. <http://traderfeed.blogspot.com/2009/07/market-context-importance-of-non.html>
Taleb, Nassim N. The Black Swan. New York, NY: Random House, 2007.
Tharp, Van K. Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Toma, Michael. Trading with Confluence: A Risk-Based Approach to Trading Equity Index
Futures. Denver, CO: Outskirts Press, 2010.
Wilder, J. Welles Jr. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems . Greensboro, SC: Trend
Research, 1978.
Williams, Larry. Long-Term Secrets to Short-Term Trading . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons,
1999.
Wyckoff, Richard D. Studies in Tape Reading . New York, NY: Traders Press, 1910. Reprinted in
1982 by Fraser Publishing, Burlington, VT.
Wyckoff, Richard D. Stock Market Technique , 2 vols. New York, NY: Traders Press, 1933.
Reprinted in 1984 by Fraser Publishing, Burlington, VT.
Yoder, Bo. Optimize Your Trading Edge. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Zweig, Martin. Martin Zweig's Winning on Wall Street , 4th ed. New York, NY: Warner Books,
1997.

Index
A
Acceleration
Accumulation/distribution cycles
Accuracy edge
ADX indicator
Aggressive traders and tactics
AIG
Amazon.com
Appel, Gerald
Apple Inc.
Average Directional Index. See ADX indicator
Average True Range (ATR)

B
Bar charts
Bear markets
Bears
Bellafiore, Michael
Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques Revealed (Nison)
The Black Swan (Taleb)
Boeing
Bollinger Bands
Bollinger Band Squeeze Play
Bollinger, John
Bollinger on Bollinger Bands (Bollinger)
Breadth indicators
Breakaway Gaps
Breakout trades. See also Price patterns
Bulkowski, Thomas
Bull flags
Bullish U.S. Dollar Index ETF (UUP)
Bulls
Buyers

C
Candlestick charts
benefits
construction
doji
dragonfly doji
engulfing
fade trades and
gravestone doji
hammers
hanging man
inverted hammer
Marabozu
scenarios
shooting stars
spinning tops
terminology
Tri-Star Doji
The Candlestick Course (Nison)
Chart patterns. See Candlestick charts; Price patterns
Coca-Cola
Commissions
Common Components of Any Trade
Common Gaps
Confidence
Conservative traders and tactics
Contract position-sizing
Costs
Coyle, Daniel
Cradle Trades

D
Dahlquist, Julie
The Daily Trading Coach (Steenbarger)
Derman, Emanuel
Distribution/accumulation cycles
Divergences
3/10 MACD and

fade trades and
negative vs. positive
rate of change indicator and
Doji candles
Douglas, Mark
Dow, Charles
Downtrends
defined
Dow Theory and
Moving Average Method and
Pure Price Method and
Dragonfly doji candles

E
eBay
Edge
Edwards, Robert
Electronic Arts
Elliott, Ralph
Elliott Wave Principle
The Elliott Wave Principle (Frost and Prechter)
Emotions
The Encyclopedia of Candlesticks (Bulkowski)
The Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns (Bulkowski)
Engulfing candles
Enhancing Trader Performance (Steenbarger)
Entry
Exhaustion Gaps
Exits
Expectancy
Exponential moving average (EMA)
Exxon-Mobil

F
Fade trades
Feedback loops
Fibonacci retracements. See also Retracement trades
bull flags and

confluence zones
drawing grids
example
price support
in trading
uses of
Fixed-dollar strategy
Fixed-share size
Fixed unit size strategy
Ford Motor Company
FreeStockCharts.com
Frequency of trades
Frost, A.J.

G
Gaps
Gold prices
Google
Gravestone doji candles
Grimes, Adam

H
Hammers
Hanging man candles
Hayes, Timothy
Head and shoulders price patterns. See also Inverse head and shoulders price patterns
How I Trade in Stocks and Bonds (Wyckoff)

I
Ilinski, Kirill
Impulse
breakout
bull flags and
buy/sell trades
defined
momentum gaps and
range expansion and
Indicators

3/10 MACD
ADX
Bollinger Bands
breadth
momentum
range contraction
range expansion
rate of change
relative strength index (RSI)
standard deviation
stochastic
volume
Inverse head and shoulders price patterns. See also Head and shoulders price patterns
Inverted hammers
Investors

J
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (Nison)
Johnson and Johnson

K
Kickoffs
Kirkpatrick, Charles

L
Life cycles of stocks. See Price moves; Trade setups
Limit orders
Long-term moving average

M
Magee, John
Management
Marabozus
Market orders
Mark-up/mark-down
Martin Pring on Price Patterns (Pring)
McClellan Oscillator
Mean departure strategies

breakout trades
retracement trades
Mean reversion strategies
fade trades
Johnson and Johnson example
reversal trades
Measured Gaps
Momentum
3/10 MACD and
acceleration/deceleration
definition and overview
gaps
indicator
prices and
rate of change indicator and
retracement trades and
trend and
Momentum Burst
Momentum Indicator
Momentum Principle. See Momentum
Monetary edge
Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)
Moving Average Method. See also Cradle Trades; Exponential moving average
Multi-timeframe analysis
My Life as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance (Derman)

N
New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems (Wilder)
Nison, Steve

O
Open positions
Opportunities
Orders
Oscillators
3/10 MACD
ADX
Bollinger Bands

divergence and
McClellan
momentum indicator and
overbought/oversold
price swings and
rate of change indicator and
relative strength index (RSI)
stochastic
Overbought/oversold oscillators

P
Parker-Hannifin
Percent-risked strategy
The Physics of Finance (Ilinski)
Position size
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan
Prechter, Robert
Price. See also Price Alternation Principle; Price moves; Price patterns
Moving Average Method
Pure Price Method
support
swings
Price Alternation Principle. See also Price
accumulation, distribution, and
ADX indicator
Bollinger Bands
breakout trades and
buyers and sellers
consolidation phase
contraction phase
defined
expansion phase
fade trades and
feedback loops
moving averages
relative strength index (RSI)
stochastic
triangles and

Price moves
accumulation phase
charts
distribution phase
realization phase
real-time identification of
trade setups and
Price patterns
bull flags
definition and overview
head and shoulders
inverse head and shoulders price patterns
rounded reversal
triangles
use of
Pring, Martin
Probability
Pruden, Hank
Pullbacks. See Retracement trades
Pure Price Method

R
Random Walk Theory
Range contraction indicators
Range expansion indicators
Raschke, Linda Bradford
Rate of change (ROC) indicator
Realization phase
Relative strength index (RSI)
Research in Motion
Retracement trades. See also Cradle Trades; Fibonacci retracements
Reversal strategies. See also Cradle Trades
Reward-to-risk relationshp
Rinse and wash situations
Risk
Rounded reversal price patterns
R-value strategy

S
Schabacker, Richard
Sears Holdings
Sellers
Shooting stars
Short sellers
Short-term moving average
Sigma Bands
Simple moving average
Slippage
Small money investors
Smart money investors
Software
Spinning tops
Standard deviation indicators
Steenbarger, Brett
Stochastic index
StockCharts.com
Stock Market Techniques (Wyckoff)
Stop-gun situation
Stop-loss orders
Swings

T
Taleb, Nassim
The Talent Code (Coyle)
Technical analysis
Technical Analysis Explained (Pring)
Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits (Schabacker)
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (Edwards and Magee)
Technical Analysis, Power Tools for Active Investors (Appel)
Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians (Kirkpatrick and
Dahlquist)
Tharp, Van
3/10 MACD Indicators
Timeframe price structure analysis
The Top Three Skills of Top Trading (Pruden)
Trade execution tactics

limit orders
market orders
risk
stop-loss orders
Trade exits
Trade management
Traders
Trade setups
Bollinger Band Squeeze Play
classification of
components
confidence
Cradle Trades
Impulse Buy/Sell
life cycle
mean departure strategies
mean reversion strategies
multi-timeframe analysis
Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom (Tharp)
Trading in the Zone (Douglas)
Trend. See also Downtrends; Uptrends
defined
fade trades and
identification of
momentum and
Momentum Burst and
Moving Average Method
Pure Price Method
retracement trades and
reversals
weight of the evidence
Trend Continuity Principle. See Trend
Triangles
ascending and descending
Price Alteration Principle and
rules for entry, stops, and targets
symmetrical
Tri-Star Doji candles

U
United Technologies
Uptrends
defined
Dow Theory and
fade trades and
Fibonacci retracement grids and
Moving Average Method and
Pure Price Method and
U.S. Steel

V
Visa, Inc.
Volatility
Volume indicators

W
Wilder, Wells
Wyckoff, Richard

Y
Yahoo Inc.

