
TESTS OF THE ORIGINAL SES
To test the original SE& the random entry method is used (described in the
“Introduction” to Part III). The exits are the usual standard exits (with exit restricted

on the close) that were used throughout the study of entries. The rules for the SES
are as follows: If, at the close, the market is more than some multiple (the money
management stop parameter) of the 50-bar average true range below the entry price,
then exit; this is the money management stop. If the price at the close is greater than
some other multiple (the profit tzuget limit parameter) of the same average true range
above the entry price, then exit; this is the profit target limit. These rules are for long
positions, and the exit is restricted to the close. For short positions, the placement of
the thresholds are reversed, with the money management exit placed above the entry
price and the profit target exit placed below. If, after 10 days, neither the money
management stop nor profit target limit has been hit, close out the trade with a market-at-close order. The code that follows implements these rules, as well as the random entry. There are three tests, one for each type of entry order (at open, on limit,
and on stop). The standard software test platform and portfolio are used.
s t a t i c void Model (float *parms, float ‘dt, float *op. float *hi,
float *lo. float *cls. float *vol. float *oi, float *dlrv, int nb,
TRDSIM 6rts. float *eqclsl {
,, Implements the random encry model with the Standard exit
I/ File = xl9modOl.c
vector [I. .MAxPRMl Of parameters
// pa=ms
vector ,l..rlb, Of dates i n
YYMMDD form
/I dt
vector
Cl.
.nbl
of
opening
prices
// oPn
vector [I. .nbl of high prices
// hi
vector [I. .“bl Of low prices
// 10
vector [I. .nbl of closing prices
// ClS
YeCtor L1. .nbl O f “Ol”mes
// vo1
vector Il..nbl Of open interest numbers
// oi
,, dlrv
vector Ll..nbl of average dollar volatilities
number Of bars in data series or vectors
I/ nb
Erading siln”latOl class i n s t a n c e
// ts
vector [I..*1 of closing equity levels
// eqc1s
// declare local scratch variables
static int rc, c b , ncontracts, maxhold. ordertype, signal;
s t a t i c f l o a t mmstp, ptlim, stpprice, limprice, tmp;
s t a t i c float eritatrbmxBAR+1,, mum;
static int ranseed;
static long iseed;
// copy parameters to local variables for clearer reference
ranseed
= parms~81; ,, used t o select random seed
ordertype = parmsL91; // e n t r y : kopen, 2dimit. 3=stop
maxhold = 10;
,, maximum holding period

2%

// perform whole-series calculations
A”gTr”eRangeS(exitatr,hi,lo,cls,50,nb);

,, ATR for exit

case 2: tS.buylimitc’2’, limprice, *contracts,; break;
case 3: ts.buystop~~3’.
stpprice, ncontractsl; break;
default: nrerrOr~‘I*“alid buy order selected”);
I
I
e l s e if~ts.positionO >= 0 && s i g n a l = = -1) (
switch(ordertype) ( I/ select desired order type
case 1: ts.sellopen~~4’,
ncontractsl; break;
case 2 : ts.selllimitl‘S’,
limprice, ncontracts); b r e a k ;
case 3: t?..6e11*tOp~‘6’, stpprice, ncontracts~; break;
default: nrerror~“lnvalid
sell order selected”);
)
I
// instruct simulator to employ standard exit strategy
tmp = exitatrLcb1 ;
ts. Sb3exitC1s
C‘X’ , ptlim*tmp,
mmstp*tmp. maxholdh
) ,, process next bar
1

The code is similar to that presented in earlier chapters. Only the generation
of the entry signals has changed. Entry signals are now issued using a pseudo-random number generator (RNG). Before entering the loop that steps through bars to
simulate the process of trading, the RNG is initialized with a unique seed. The initialization seed is determined by the market number and by a parameter (ranseed).
By changing the parameter, a totally different sequence of random entries is generated. The exact seed values are irrelevant in that, for every seed, a unique series
will be generated because the period of the RNG is extremely large.
The RNG used is the one described as ran2 in Numen’cal Recipes in C (Press
et al., 1992). The period of this RNG is greater than 2 multiplied by 10’“. This
RNG is by far better than those that normally come as part of a programming language library. Inside the loop, where trading actually takes place, signals are generated based on random numbers. The steps are very simple. On each bar, a
uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 1 is obtained from the RNG.
If the random number is less than 0.025, a short signal is generated. The probability of a short being generated on any bar is 0.025; i.e., a short signal should
occur every 40 bars, on average. If the random number is greater than 0.975, a long
signal is issued, these signals should also occur, on average, every 40 bars. In other
words, on average, a long or a short trading signal should occur every 20 bars. The
limit and stop prices are calculated in the usual way. Orders are placed and exits
specified in the usual manner.
The steps that are used to conduct each of the three tests are as follows: On
the in-sample data and for each entry order type, 10 distinct series of random

entries are generated and traded. The best of those sequences are then examined
on the verification or out-of-sample data. The process mimics that of optimizing a
parameter in a real system by stepping it from, e.g., 1 to 10; here the parameter
simply selects a totally different series of random entries for each value.

Test Results
Tables 13-1, 13-2, and 13-3 present the portfolio performance that resulted from
trading random entries with the standard exit strategy. Each of the numbers in the
column RAND represents a seed modifier (ranseed) that causes the RNG to generate a different sequence of random entries. NET = the total net profit, in thousands of dollars. NETL = the total net profit for the longs. NETS = the total net
profit for the shorts, PFAC = the profit factor. ROA% = the annualized return on
account. ARRR = the annualized risk-reward ratio. PROB = the statistical significance or probability, DRAW = the drawdown, in thousands of dollars. TRDS =
the number of trades. WIN% = the percentage of wins. AVTR = the average trade,
in dollars. TRDB = the average bars per trade, rounded to the nearest integer. VER
zz the performance for the random sequence that provided the best in-sample performance when this sequence is continued and then tested on the verification sample. AVG = the average in-sample value of the numbers in rows 1 through 10.
STDEV = the standard deviation for the in-sample performance data shown in
rows 1 through 10.
Test I: SES with Random Entries at the Open. This system did not perform very
well in-sample. The average trade, over all 10 randomizations, lost $2,243, with a
TABLE

13-I

Results for the Standard Exit with Random Entries at the Open

T A B L E

13-2

Results for the Standard Exit with Random Entries on a Limit

T A B L E

13-3

Results for the Standard Exit with Random Entries on a Stop

standard deviation of $304. In terms of average dollars-per-trade. the less attractive
systems that were tested when studying entries were on par with the results for the
current system. In fact, some of them performed significantly worse than chance.
The percentage of wins was very stable, with the average at 36.91% and a standard
deviation of only 0.7%. The total number of trades taken per commodity, over the
lo-year in-sample period, was 3,703, about the number it should be, given the probability of taking a random entry on any bar.

3w

Out-of-sample, performance was within the expected range, consistent with
in-sample performance. The percentage of wins was 37%, very close to that for insample results. The average loss per trade was $1,883, which is within 1 standard
deviation of the in-sample estimate. Obviously, the standard exit was unable to
pull a profit out of trades entered randomly.
Test 2: SES with Random Entries on Limit. Table 13-Z is identical to Table 131, except that it shows portfolio behavior for the standard exit with random entries
taken on a limit order. In-sample, the average loss per trade of $1,930 was somewhat less, demonstrating the effect of the limit order in reducing transaction costs.
The standard deviation was somewhat higher: $477. The percentage of winning
trades (38.73%) was just under 2% better, due to the better prices achieved with a
limit entry. As was anticipated, other than such small changes as those described,
nothing else in Table 13-Z is of any great interest.
Out-of-sample, the system lost $3,056 per trade, just over 2 standard deviations
worse than in-sample behavior. For whatever reason, the limit order may have had
some real effect with random entries, making the system perform more poorly in
recent yearn. The percentage of wins was also slightly worse, i.e., 37%, just under 2
standard deviations below in-sample behavior, but on par with entty at the open.
Test 3: SES with Random Enhies on Stop. Table 13-3 contains information
about the portfolio behavior for the standard exit when trades were entered randomly on a stop. In terms of dollars-per-trade, in-sample performance was
between that of the other two orders, with a loss per trade of $2,039. The standard
deviation was $391. The percentage of wins was lower, 36.36%, with a standard
deviation of 1.12%. The lower percentage of wins probably reflects the poorer
entry prices achieved using the stop.
Out-of-sample, the average trade and percentage of wins were within 2 Standard deviations plus or minus the in-sample figures, demonstrating that out-ofsample performance was within the statistically expected range and fundamentally
no different from in-sample performance.
The performance figures in Tables 13-l through 13-3 provide a baseline (in
the form of means and standard deviations) that can serve as a yardstick when
evaluating ,the entries studied in Part Il of this book. For this purpose the $TRD
and WIN% figures are the best ones to use since they are not influenced by the
number of trades taken by a system.
Market-by-Market Performance for SES with Random Entries at Open, In
Table 13-4, the behavior of the standard exit with random entries taken at the open
is broken down by market and by sample. The particular randomization used was
the one that produced the best in-sample performance (in terms of annualized riskto-reward ratio) in Test 1. The leftmost column (SYM) contains the commodity

301

TABLE

13-4

Market-by-Market Results for the Standard Exit with Random Entries
at the Open

symbol. The remaining columns contain information about various aspects of performance, both in-sample and out-of-sample. NETL and NETS are the net profits
for long and short positions (respectively), in thousands of dollars. ROA% = the
annualized return-on-account. AVTR = the average dollars profit or loss per trade.
WIN% = the percentage of winning trades. TRDS = the number of trades taken.
The last two rows (AVG and STDEV) show the averages and standard deviations

302

(respectively) across all markets for the various performance figures.
In-sample, the British Pound, the Japanese Yen, Feeder Cattle, Live Hogs,
and Lumber were the only markets that bad positive returns. Only the
Deutschemark had a strong return on account at 25.9% annualized. Out-of-sam
ple, the NYFE, the Japanese Yen, Light Crude, COMEX Gold, Palladium, Live
Hogs, Soybeans, Soybean Meal, Coffee, and Orange Juice had positive returns.
Only the Japanese Yen and Live Hogs were profitable in both samples. The random entry system was among the least consistent systems of those examined in the
study of entries.
The average trade, across all markets, lost $1,731 in-sample and $1,734 outof-sample. Long trades lost less than shorts, a finding observed many times. Insample, all the currencies, except the Canadian Dollar and Eurodollars, were
profitable on the long side. These are trendy markets, and therefore, such profitability is likely due to the behavior of the standard exit, not to chance factors
involved in the random entries.
The analysis of the standard exit with random entries taken using various
entry orders should serve well as a baseline of comparison for both the real, nonrandom entries (studied in earlier chapters) and the more sophisticated exits (to be
studied in subsequent chapters).

TESTS OF THE MODIFIED SES
The next test involves changing the SES a bit, thus producing the modifkd standard exit strategy (MSES). The SES is made more realistic by allowing the money
management stop and profit target limit to function inside the bar, not merely at
the close. To avoid ambiguities in the simulation when using end-of-day data, all
entries are now restricted to the open. This allows complete freedom to explore a
wide range of exit strategies. Other than lifting the restriction to the close, the
MSES is identical to the original SES used when testing entries. The rules for the
MSES are as follows: Upon entry, set up an exit stop below (long positions) or
above (short positions) the entry price and an exit limit above (long) or below
(short) the entry price. Place the exit stop some multiple (the money management
stop parameter) of the average true range away from the entry price. Place the exit
limit some other multiple (the profit target parameter) of the average true range
away from the entry price. Exit on the close after 10 days have elapsed if neither
the money management stop nor the profit target limit has yet closed out the trade.
A 50.bar average true range is used in these rules. The code below implements
random entries at the open together with the modified standard exit strategy.

CHAPTER 13

The Standard Exit strategy

The code used to run the current test is identical to the code used for the earlier test, except for changes required by the modified exit strategy. A trade is
entered on a random signal that is generated as discussed earlier. However, buying
and selling occur only on the open. In addition, information is recorded about
entry activity, i.e., whether an entry (long, short, or none) was posted on the current bar (entryposted), the price (entryprice) at which the entry took place (if one
was posted), and the bar on which it took place (entrybar). This data is required in
computing the exits. The exits are then generated. If an entry is posted for the next
bar (i.e., if the market is entered long or short at the open of the next bar), a profit target and a stop loss are also posted for that bar. For the longs, the stop loss, or
money management stop, is set at the entry price minus a parameter that is multiphed by the average true range. The limit price for the profit target is set as the
entry price plus another parameter that is multiplied by the average true range. If,
on the current bar, a short entry is posted for the next open, then orders are also
posted to exit the resulting short position on a limit or a stop. The limit and stop
are calculated in a manner similar to that for the longs, except the directions are
flipped around. If a given bar is not an entry bar, a check is made to determine
whether there is an existing position after the close of the bar. If there is, two
orders (possibly three) are posted: the money management stop and profit target
limit orders, using the stop and limit prices calculated on the bar the entry was initially posted; and if the trade has been held for more than maxhold bars, an order
to exit on the close is also posted.
TEST RESULTS
Test 4: MSES with Random Entries at Open. Table 13-5, which has the same
format as Tables 13-l through 13-3, provides data on the portfolio performance of

