
82

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

trend that preceded the triangle deserves the benefit of the doubt. The
angles between triangle walls reflect the balance of power between bulls
and bears and hint at the likely direction of a breakout.
An ascending triangle has a flat upper boundary and a rising lower
boundary. The flat upper line shows that bears have drawn a line in the
sand and sell whenever the market comes to it. They must be a pretty

D
A

E

C

B

Figure 5.4 Triangles, Pennants, and Rectangles
Charts patterns are the footprints of bulls and bears. Patterns A and D are
called pennants—a tight weave of prices that follows a sharp move up or
down its flagpole. When a pennant flies in the direction of the trend (A), it is
usually followed by a sharp reversal. When it flies against the preceding trend
(D), it is a consolidation pattern and the trend usually continues. Place your
entry orders accordingly, above or below a pennant’s boundary.
Pattern B is a symmetrical triangle and pattern C is an ascending triangle.
Breakouts from triangles tend to follow the trends that preceded them, especially when triangles are compact, consisting of only a few bars. Pattern E is
a rectangle; notice how bulls and bears push against the rectangle walls, creating brief false breakouts—do not jump in too early. When prices decisively
break out of a rectangle, the reversal is complete.
At the right edge of the chart, prices are below a rectangle that provides
severe overhead resistance; the price is like a drowning man under an ice
floe. The trend is down, with rallies presenting shorting opportunities.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

83

powerful group, calmly waiting for prices to come to them before unloading. At the same time buyers are becoming more aggressive. They snap up
merchandise and keep raising the floor under the market.
On what party should you bet? Nobody knows who’ll win the election,
but savvy traders tend to place buy orders slightly above the upper line of
an ascending triangle. Since sellers are on the defensive, if the attacking
bulls succeed, the breakout is likely to be steep. This is the logic of buying upside breakouts from ascending triangles.
A descending triangle has a flat lower boundary and a declining upper
boundary. The horizontal lower line shows that bulls are pretty determined, calmly waiting to buy at a certain level. At the same time, sellers
are becoming more aggressive. They keep selling at lower and lower levels, pushing the market closer to the line drawn by buyers.
As a trader, which way will you bet—on the bulls or the bears? Experienced traders tend to place their orders to sell short slightly below the
lower line of a descending triangle. Let buyers defend that line, but if bulls
collapse after a long defense, a break is likely to be sharp. This is the logic
of shorting downside breakouts from descending triangles.
A symmetrical triangle shows that both bulls and bears are equally confident. Bulls keep paying up, and bears keep selling lower. Neither group
is backing off, and their fight must be resolved before prices reach the tip
of the triangle. The breakout is likely to go in the direction of the trend
that preceded the triangle.
Volume Each unit of volume represents the actions of two individuals—
a buyer and a seller. It can be measured by several numbers: shares, contracts, or dollars that have changed hands. Volume is usually plotted as a
histogram below prices. It provides important clues about the actions of
bulls and bears. Rising volume tends to confirm trends, and falling volume
brings them into question.
Volume reflects the level of pain among market participants. At each
tick in every trade, one person is winning and the other losing. Markets
can move only if enough new losers enter the game to supply profits to
winners. If the market is falling, it takes a very courageous or reckless bull
to step in and buy, but without him there is no increase in volume. When
the trend is up, it takes a very brave or reckless bear to step in and sell.
Rising volume shows that losers are continuing to come in, allowing the
trend to continue. When losers start abandoning the market, volume falls,
and the trend runs out of steam. Volume gives traders several useful clues.

84

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A one-day splash of uncommonly high volume often marks the beginning of a trend when it accompanies a breakout from a trading range. A
similar splash tends to mark the end of a trend if it occurs during a wellestablished move. Exceedingly high volume, three or more times above
average, identifies market hysteria. That is when nervous bulls finally
decide that the uptrend is for real and rush in to buy or nervous bears
become convinced that the decline has no bottom and jump in to sell short.
Divergences between price and volume tend to occur at turning points.
When prices rise to a new high but volume shrinks, it shows that the
uptrend attracts less interest. When prices fall to a new low and volume
falls, it shows that lower prices attract little interest and an upside reversal
is likely. Price is more important than volume, but good traders always
analyze volume to gauge the degree of crowd involvement. For a more
objective rating of volume use an indicator called Force Index (see next
section). Changes in volume detected by Force Index give important messages to traders.

INDICATORS—FIVE BULLETS TO A CLIP
I had a friend who drove a tank in World War ll, fighting his way from
Stalingrad to Vienna. He maintained his tank with only three tools—a big
hammer, a big screwdriver, and the Russian version of “f... you.” He won
the war with a few simple tools, and we can apply his lessons to the dangerous environment of the markets.
An amateur tries to grab a bit of money here and there. He uses one
technique today and another tomorrow. His mind is scattered and he keeps
losing, enriching only his broker and floor traders. A new hunter walks into
the woods with a load of fancy gear on his back but soon discovers that
most of it only slows him down. An experienced woodsman travels light.
A beginner shoots at anything that moves, including his own shadow.
An old hunter knows exactly what prey he is after and brings only a few
bullets. Simplicity and discipline go hand in hand. To be a successful
trader, choose a small number of markets, select a few tools, and learn to
use them well. If you follow five stocks, your research will be deeper and
results better than if you follow 50. If you use five indicators, you’ll get
more mileage out of them than out of 25. You can always expand later,
once you make steady profits.
The indicators we are about to discuss represent the choice of one
trader. I call this approach “five bullets to a clip.” An old army rifle used to
take five bullets, and I analyze markets using no more than five indicators.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

85

If five do not help, 10 will not do any better because there probably is no
trade. I offer you this list as a starting point for selecting your own bullets.
Pay attention to the general principle of selecting indicators from different
groups to focus on different aspects of crowd behavior. The key idea is to
select a few core tools that fit your style of analysis and trading.
The tools we are about to review—moving averages, envelopes, MACD,
MACD-Histogram, and Force Index—are the building blocks of a trading system described in the following chapter. There is no magic indicator; they all
have advantages and disadvantages. It is important to be aware of both
because then we can combine several indicators into a system to take advantage of their strengths, while their disadvantages cancel each other out.

Choice of Tools
Markets can confound traders. They often run in two directions at once—
up on the weekly charts and down on the dailies. A market can reverse
without sending you an e-mail about its change of plans. A sleepy stock
can get so hot that it burns through stops, while a formerly hot stock
becomes so cold it freezes your capital along with your fingers.
Trading is a complex, nontrivial game. Markets consist of huge crowds
of people, and technical analysis is applied social psychology. We must
select several tools to identify different aspects of market behavior. Before
using any indicator, we must understand how it is constructed and what it
measures. We must test it on historical data and learn how it performs
under different conditions. Once you start testing an indicator, expect to
adjust its settings, turning it into a personal trading tool as reliable and
familiar as an old wrench.
Toolboxes vs. Black Boxes I keep seeing ads in traders’ magazines that
show computers with $100 bills coming out of their disk drives. I’d love to
get a hold of one of those models. The only ones I could find have the direction of money reversed. Computers can chew up cash, but pulling it out of
them takes a lot of hard work. Those ads sell black boxes—computerized
trading systems. Some clown has programmed a bunch of trading rules, put
them on a copy-protected diskette or a CD, and now sells you a tool with a
great track record. Feed it market data, and it will spit out an answer—when
to buy or sell! If you believe this magic, wait until you meet Santa Claus.
A fantastic track record of a canned system is meaningless because it
comes from fitting the rules to old data. Any computer can tell you which
rules worked in the past. Black-box programs self-destruct as soon as the

86

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

markets change, even if they include self-optimization. Black boxes appeal
to beginners who derive a false sense of security from them.
A good software package is a toolbox—a collection of tools for analyzing markets and making your own decisions. A toolbox can download
data, draw charts, and plot indicators, as well as any trading signals you
care to program. It provides charting and analytic tools but leaves you to
make your own trading decisions.
The heart of any toolbox is its collection of indicators—tools for identifying trends and reversals behind the noise of raw data. Good toolboxes
allow you to modify indicators and even design your own. Indicators are
objective; you may argue about the trend, but when an indicator is up, it’s
up, and when it is down, it’s down. Keep in mind that indicators are
derived from prices. The more complicated they are, the farther they are
from prices and the farther away from reality. Prices are primary, indicators are secondary, and simple indicators work best.
Trend-Following Indicators and Oscillators Learning to use indicators
is like learning a foreign language. You have to immerse yourself in them,
make typical beginners’ mistakes, and keep practicing until you rise to the
level of proficiency and competence.
Good technical indicators are simple tools that perform well when
market conditions change. They are robust, that is, relatively immune to
parameter changes. If an indicator gives great signals using a 17-day window but bombs when you try a 15-day window, then it’s probably useless. Good indicators give useful signals at a broad range of settings.
We can divide all technical indicators into three major groups: trend-following, oscillators, and miscellaneous. Whenever we use an indicator, we
must know to which group it belongs. Each group has its advantages and
disadvantages.
Trend-following indicators include moving averages, MACD (moving
average convergence-divergence), Directional System, and others. Big trends
mean big money, and these indicators help us stay long in uptrends and
short in downtrends. They have built-in inertia that allows them to lock
onto a trend and ride it. That same inertia causes them to lag at turning
points. Their advantages and disadvantages are the flip sides of each other,
and you cannot have one without the other.
Oscillators include Force Index, Rate of Change, and Stochastic, among
others. They help catch turning points by showing when markets are
overbought (too high and ready to fall) or oversold (too low and ready to

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

87

rise). Oscillators work great in trading ranges, where they catch upturns
and downturns. Taking their signals when prices are relatively flat is like
going to a cash machine—you always get something, although not very
much. Their downside is that they give premature sell signals in uptrends
and buy signals in downtrends.
Miscellaneous indicators, such as Bullish Consensus, Commitments of
Traders, and New High–New Low Index, gauge the current mood of the
market. They show whether the overall bullishness or bearishness is rising or falling.
Indicators from different groups often contradict one another. For example,
when markets rise, trend-following indicators turn up, telling us to buy. At the
same time, oscillators become overbought and start flashing sell signals. The
opposite occurs in downtrends, when trend-following indicators turn down,
giving sell signals, while oscillators become oversold, flashing buy signals.
Which should we follow? The answers are easy in the middle of a chart, but
much harder at the right edge, where we must make our trading decisions.
Some beginners close their eyes to complexity, choose a single indicator, and stick to it until the market whacks them from an unexpected
direction. Others create a homemade opinion poll; they take a battery of
indicators and average their signals. This is a meaningless exercise because its outcome depends on what indicators you include in your poll;
change the selection and you’ll change the outcome. The Triple Screen
trading system, described below, overcomes the problem of conflicting
indicators by linking them with different timeframes.
Time—The Factor of Five A computer screen can comfortably show
about 120 bars in an open-high-low-close format. What if you display a
monthly chart, each of whose bars represents one month? You’ll see 10
years worth of history at a glance, your stock’s big picture. You can display
a weekly chart and review its rallies and declines for the past two years. A
daily chart will show you the action for the past few months. How about
an hourly chart, each of whose bars represents one hour of trading? It will
let you zoom in on the past few days and pick up short-term trends. Want
to get even closer? How about a 10-minute chart, each of whose bars represents 10 minutes of market action?
Looking at all these charts, you quickly notice that markets can move in
different directions at the same time. You may see an upmove on the
weekly chart, while the dailies are breaking down. An hourly chart may be
sagging, while a 10-minute chart is rallying. Which trend to follow?

88

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Most beginners look at only one timeframe, usually daily. The trouble is
that a new trend, erupting from another timeframe, often hurts traders who
do not look beyond their noses. Another serious problem is that looking at
the daily chart puts you on par with thousands of other traders who also
look at it. What’s your advantage, what’s your edge?
Markets are so complex that we must always analyze them in more than
one timeframe. The Factor of Five, first described in Trading for a Living,
links all timeframes. Every timeframe is related to the next higher and the
next lower by the factor of five. There are almost five (4.3 to be exact) weeks
to a month, five days to a week, and close to five hours in many trading days.
We can break an hour into 10-minute segments and those into 2-minute bars.
The key principle of Triple Screen, which we will review later, is to
choose your favorite timeframe and then immediately go up to the timeframe one order of magnitude higher. There we make a strategic decision
to go long or short. We return to our favorite timeframe to make tactical
decisions about where to enter, exit, place a profit target and a stop.
Adding the dimension of time to our analysis gives us an edge over the
competition.
Use at least two, but not more than three, timeframes because adding more
only clutters up the decision-making process. If you are day-trading with
30- and five-minute charts, then a weekly chart is essentially irrelevant. If you
are trading market swings using a weekly and a daily, then the wiggles of a
five-minute chart are no more than noise. Choose your favorite timeframe,
add the timeframe one order of magnitude higher, and start your analysis at
that point.

Moving Averages
Moving averages (MAs) are among the oldest, simplest, and most useful
tools for traders. They help identify trends and find areas for entering
trades. We plot them as lines on price charts, each of whose points reflects
the latest average price.
What is the reality behind the moving averages, and what do they measure?
Each price is a momentary consensus of value among market participants, a snapshot of the market crowd at the moment of a trade. What if
you show me a snapshot of your friend and ask whether he is an optimist
or a pessimist, a bull or a bear? It is hard to tell from a single photo. If you
take his snapshot from the same position for 10 days in a row and bring
them to a lab, you can get a composite photo. When 10 pictures are super-

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

89

imposed upon one another, the typical features stand out, while the atypical fade away. If you start updating that composite each day, you’ll have a
moving average of your friend’s mood. If you lay a string of composite
photos side by side, it will be clear whether your friend is becoming happier or sadder.
A moving average is a composite photograph of the market. It adds
new prices as they occur and drops old ones. A rising moving average
shows that the crowd is becoming more optimistic—bullish. A falling
moving average shows that the crowd is becoming more pessimistic—
bearish.
A moving average responds not only to the data but to how we construct it. We must make several decisions to help separate the message of
our moving average from the construction noise. First, we need to decide
what data we’ll use. We need to select the width of our time window—
wider for catching longer trends, narrower for catching minor ones.
Finally, we need to choose the type of moving average.
What Data to Average? Traders who rely on daily and weekly charts
usually apply moving averages to closing prices. This makes sense,
because they reflect the final consensus of value, the most important price
of the day.
The closing price of a five-minute or an hourly bar has no such special
meaning. Day-traders are better off averaging not closing prices, but an
average price of each bar. For example, they can average Open + High +
Low + Close of each bar, divided by four, or High + Low + Close divided
by three.
We can apply moving averages to indicators, such as Force Index (see
below). A raw Force Index reflects price changes and volume for the day.
Averaging produces a smoother plot and reveals a longer-term trend of
Force Index.
How Long a Moving Average? Moving averages help identify trends. A
rising MA encourages you to maintain longs, whereas a falling MA tells
you to hold shorts. The wider the time window, the smoother is a moving
average. That benefit has a cost. The longer a moving average, the slower
it responds to trend changes. The shorter a moving average, the better it
tracks prices, but the more subject it is to whipsaws, temporary deviations
from the main trend. If you make your moving average very long, it will
miss important reversals by a wide margin. Shorter MAs are more sensitive

90

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

to trend changes, but those shorter than 10 bars defeat the purpose of a
trend-following tool.
At the time I wrote Trading for a Living, I was using 13-bar MAs, but in
recent years I switched to longer moving averages to catch more important
trends and avoid whipsaws. To analyze weekly charts, start with a 26-week
moving average, representing half a year’s worth of data. Try to shorten that
number and see whether you can do it without sacrificing the smoothness
of your MA. On the daily charts, start with a 22-day MA, reflecting roughly
the number of trading days in a month, and see whether you can make it
shorter. Whatever length you decide to use, be sure to test it on your own
data. If you track just a handful of markets, you’ll have enough time to try
different lengths of moving averages until you get smoothly flowing lines.
The width of any indicator time window is best expressed in bars rather
than days. The computer doesn’t know whether you are analyzing daily,
monthly, or hourly charts; it sees only bars. Whatever we say about a daily
MA applies to the weekly or the monthly. It’s better to call it a 22-bar MA
rather than a 22-day MA.
Mathematically savvy traders can look into using adaptive moving averages whose length changes in response to market conditions, as advocated by John Ehlers, Tushar Chande, and Perry Kaufman. Ehlers’ latest
book, Rocket Science for Traders, delves into adapting all indicators to current market conditions.
What Type of Moving Average? A simple MA adds up prices in its time
window and divides the sum by the width of that window. For example, for
a 10-day simple MA of closing prices, add up closing prices for the past 10
days and divide the sum by 10. The trouble with a simple MA is that each
price affects it twice—when it comes in and when it drops out. A high new
value pushes up the moving average, giving a buy signal. This is good; we
want our MAs to respond to new prices. The trouble is that 10 days later,
when that high number drops from the window, the MA also drops, giving
a sell signal. This is ridiculous because if we shorten a simple MA by one
day, we’ll get that sell signal a day sooner, and if we lengthen it by a day,
we’ll get it a day later. We can engineer our own signals by fiddling with the
length of a simple MA!
An exponential moving average (EMA) overcomes this problem. It reacts only to incoming prices, to which it assigns more weight. It does not
drop old prices from its time window, but slowly squeezes them out with
the passage of time.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

91

EMA = Ptoday • K + EMA yesterday • (1 − K)
2
N +1
N
= the number of days in the EMA (selected by trader)
Ptoday
= today’s price
EMA yesterday = the EMA of yesterday
where K

=

Few people calculate indicators by hand these days—computers do it
faster and more accurately. If we decide to look at a 22-bar EMA of closing prices, K = 2/(22 + 1) = 2 / 23 = 0.087. Multiply the latest closing price by
that figure, multiply yesterday’s EMA by 0.913 (i.e., 1 − 0.087), add the two,
and arrive at today’s EMA. Traders sometimes ask where to get an EMA in
the beginning. Begin by calculating a 22-bar simple MA and then switch to
the EMA. Most indicators require you to have one or two months of data
before they start giving meaningful signals.
Trading Signals The most important message of a moving average is the
direction of its slope. When the EMA rises, it shows that the crowd is becoming more optimistic and bullish, which is a good time to be long. When
it falls, it shows that the crowd is becoming more pessimistic and bearish. It
is a good time to be short.
When a moving average points up, trade that market from the long side.
When a moving average points down, trade that market from the short side. As
a trader, you have three options: go long, go short, or stand aside. A moving
average takes away one of those. When it points up, it prohibits you from
shorting and tells you to go long or stand aside. When it points down, it prohibits you from buying and tells you to look only for shorts or stay out. When
an EMA starts jerking up and down, it indicates a vacillating, trendless market; it is better to stop using trend-following methods. Continue to monitor
the EMA, but take its signals at a discount until a new trend emerges.
The only time when it is OK to override the message of a moving average is when trying to pick a bottom after a bullish divergence between
MACD-Histogram (described below) and price. If you do that, be sure to
use tight stops. If you succeed, bank your profits but do not think that the
rules of the game have changed. A trader who thinks he is above the rules
becomes careless and loses money.
Enter long positions in the vicinity of a rising MA. Enter short positions in
the vicinity of a falling MA. Use MA to differentiate between “value trades” and
