
How to Separate the Leaders from the Laggards:
Using Relative Price Strength
If you own a portfolio of stocks, you must learn to sell the worst performers
first and keep the best a little longer. In other words, always sell your mistakes while the loss is still small, and watch your better selections to see if
they progress into your big winners. Human nature being what it is, most
people do it backwards: they hold their losers and sell their winners, a formula that always leads to bigger losses.
How do you tell which stock is better and which is worse? The fastest
and easiest way is by checking its Relative Price Strength (RS) Rating in
Investor’s Business Daily.

L = Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock?

The proprietary RS Rating measures the price performance of a given
stock against the rest of the market for the past 52 weeks. Every stock in
the market is assigned a rating from 1 to 99, with 99 being best. An RS
Rating of 99 means that the stock has outperformed 99% of all other
companies in terms of price performance. A RS of 50 means that half of
all other stocks have done better and half have done worse.

If your stock’s RS Rating is below 70, it is lagging the better-performing
stocks in the overall market. That doesn’t mean that it can’t go up in price.
It just means that if by some chance it does go up, it’ll probably go up less.
From the early 1950s through 2008, the average RS Rating of the bestperforming stocks before their major run-ups was 87. In other words, the
best stocks were already doing better than nearly 9 out of 10 others when
they were starting out on their most explosive advance yet. So the rule for
those who are determined to be big winners in the stock market is: look
for the genuine leaders and avoid laggards and sympathy plays. Don’t buy
stocks with Relative Strength Ratings in the 40s, 50s, or 60s.

The Relative Price Strength Rating is shown each day for all stocks listed
in Investor’s Business Daily’s stock tables. You can’t find this information in
any other daily business or local newspaper. Updated RS Ratings are also
shown on the Daily Graphs Online charting service.
A stock’s relative strength can also be plotted on a chart. If the RS line has
been sinking for seven months or more, or if the line has an abnormally
sharp decline for four months or more, the stock’s price behavior is highly
questionable, and it should probably be sold.

Pick 80s and 90s That Are in Sound and
Proper Chart Base Patterns
If you want to upgrade your stock selection so that you’re zeroing in on the
leaders, restrict your purchases to companies showing RS Ratings of 80 or
higher. There’s no point in buying a stock that’s straggling behind. Yet that’s
exactly what many investors do—including some who work at America’s
largest investment firms.
I don’t like to buy stocks with Relative Price Strength Ratings less than
80. In fact, the really big moneymakers generally have RS Ratings of 90 or
higher just before they break out of their first or second base structure. The
RS Rating of a potential winning stock should be in the same league as a
pitcher’s fastball. The average big-league fastball is clocked at 86 miles per
hour, and the best pitchers throw “heat” in the 90s.

189

190 A WINNING SYSTEM
When you buy a stock, make absolutely sure that it’s coming out of a
sound base or price consolidation area. Also make sure that you buy it at its
exact buy, or pivot, point. As mentioned before, avoid buying stocks that are
extended more than 5% or 10% above the precise initial buy point. This will
keep you from chasing stocks that race up in price too rapidly and makes it
less likely that you will be shaken out during sharp market sell-offs.
The unwillingness of investors to set and follow minimum standards for
stock selection reminds me of doctors years ago who were ignorant of the
need to sterilize their instruments before each operation. They kept killing
off patients until surgeons finally and begrudgingly accepted studies by
researchers Louis Pasteur and Joseph Lister. Ignorance rarely pays off in
any walk of life, and it’s no different in the stock market.

Finding New Leaders during Market Corrections
Corrections, or price declines, in the general market can help you recognize
new leaders—if you know what to look for. The more desirable growth
stocks normally correct 1½ to 2½ times the general market averages. In
other words, if the overall market comes down 10%, the better growth
stocks will correct 15% to 25%. However, in a correction during a bull, or
upward-trending, market, the growth stocks that decline the least (percentagewise) are usually your best selections. Those that drop the most are normally the weakest.
Say the general market average suffers an intermediate-term correction
of 10%, and three of your successful growth stocks come off 15%, 25%, and
35%. The two that are off only 15% or 25% are likely to be your best investments after they recover. A stock that slides 35% to 40% in a general market
decline of 10% could be flashing a warning signal. In most cases, you should
heed it.
Once a general market decline is definitely over, the first stocks that
bounce back to new price highs are almost always your authentic leaders.
These chart breakouts continue week by week for about 13 weeks. The best
ones usually come out in the first three or four weeks. This is the ideal period
to buy stocks . . . you absolutely don’t want to miss it. Be sure to read the
chapter on general market direction carefully to learn how you determine it.

Pros Make Many Mistakes Too
Many professional investment managers make the serious mistake of buying
stocks that have just suffered unusually large price drops. Our studies indicate that this is a surefire way to get yourself in trouble.

L = Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock?

In June 1972, an otherwise capable institutional investor in Maryland
bought Levitz Furniture after its first abnormal price break—a one-week
drop from $60 to around $40. The stock rallied for a few weeks, then rolled
over and broke to $18.
In October 1978, several institutional investors bought Memorex, a leading supplier of computer peripheral equipment, when it had its first unusual
price break and looked to be a real value. It later plunged.
In September 1981, certain money managers in New York bought Dome
Petroleum on a break from $16 to $12. To them, it seemed cheap, and a
favorable story about the stock was going around Wall Street. Months later,
Dome sold for $1.
Institutional buyers snapped up Lucent Technologies, a Wall Street darling after it was spun off from AT&T in the mid-1990s, after it broke from
$78 to $50. Later that year, it collapsed to $5.
Also in 2000, many people bought Cisco Systems when it dropped to 50
from its early-year high of 82. The maker of computer networking equipment
had been a huge winner in the 1990s, when it soared 75,000%, so it looked
cheap at $50. It went to $8 and never got back to $50. In 2008, eight years after
those buyers saw value at $50, Cisco was selling for only $17. To do well in the
stock market, you’ve got to stop doing what got you into trouble in the past and
create new and far better rules and methods to guide you in the future.
Suppose Joe Investor missed buying Crocs, the footwear company, at a
split-adjusted $15 as it came out of the perfect cup-with-handle pattern in
September 2006. Suppose he also missed the next cup pattern in April 2007
at 28. Then the stock roars up to $75 by October, with earnings up 100%
every quarter. A month later, however, the stock drops to 47, and Joe sees
his chance to get into this big winner that he missed all the way up and that’s
now at a cheaper price. But the stock just keeps falling, and by January 2009
it’s trading at $1. Buying stocks on the way down is dangerous. You can get
wiped out. So stop this risky bad habit.
How about buying a blue chip, a top-flight bank that’s a leader in its
industry—Bank of America? In December 2006, it was $55 a share, but you
could have gotten it cheaper a year later at $40. Another year later, however,
it had plunged to $6. But you’re still a long-term investor, getting your 4cent dividend.
This is why I say don’t buy a supposed good stock on the way down and
why we recommend cutting all losses at 7% or 8%. Any stock can do anything. You must have rules to protect your hard-earned money. We all make
mistakes. You must learn to correct yours without vacillating.
None of the pros or individual investors who owned or bought Cisco,
Crocs, or BofA when they were falling recognized the difference between

191

192 A WINNING SYSTEM
normal price declines and highly abnormal big-volume corrections that can
signal potential disaster. But the real problem was they relied on stories
they’d heard and a method of fundamental analysis that equates lower P/E
ratios with “value.” They didn’t heed the market action that could have told
them what was really going on.
Those who listen and learn the difference between normal and abnormal
action are said to have a “good feel for the market.” Those who ignore what
the market says usually pay a heavy price. Anyone who buys stocks on the
way down in price because they look cheap will learn the hard way this is
how you can lose a lot of money.

Look for Abnormal Strength on a Weak Market Day
In the spring of 1967, I remember walking through a broker’s office in New
York on a day when the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down more than
12 points. That was a lot in those days, when the Dow was around 800 compared with 8,000 in 2008. When I looked up at the electronic ticker tape
moving across the wall and showing prices, I saw that Control Data—a pioneer in supercomputers—was trading at $62, up 3½ points on heavy volume. I bought the stock at once. I knew Control Data well, and this was
highly abnormal strength in the face of a weak overall market. The stock
later ran up to $150.
In April 1981, just as the 1981 bear market was getting underway, MCI
Communications, a telecommunications stock trading in the over-thecounter market, broke out of a price base at $15. It advanced to the equivalent of $90 in 21 months. This was another great example of highly abnormal
strength during a weak market.
Lorillard, the tobacco company, did the same thing in the 1957 bear market, Software Toolworks soared in the down market of early 1990, wireless
telecom firm Qualcomm made big progress even during the difficult
midyear market of 1999, and Taro Pharmaceutical late in 2000 bucked the
bear market that had begun that spring. Also in 2000, home builder NVR
took off at $50 and rode steadily lower interest rates up to $360 by March
2003. The new bull market in 2003 uncovered many leaders, including
Apple, Google, Research in Motion, Potash, and several Chinese stocks.
So don’t forget: It seldom pays to invest in laggard stocks, even if they look
tantalizingly cheap. Look for, and confine your purchases to, market leaders. Get
out of your laggard losers if you’re down 8% below the price you paid so that you
won’t risk getting badly hurt.

8

• CHAPTE R •

I = Institutional Sponsorship

It takes big demand to push up prices, and by far the biggest source of demand

for stocks is institutional investors, such as mutual funds, pension funds,
hedge funds, insurance companies, large investment counselors, bank trust
departments, and state, charitable, and educational institutions. These large
investors account for the lion’s share of each day’s market activity.

What Is Institutional Sponsorship?
Institutional sponsorship refers to the shares of any stock owned by such
institutions. For measurement purposes, I have never considered brokerage
research reports or analyst recommendations as institutional sponsorship,
although a few may exert short-term influence on some securities for a few
days. Investment advisory services and market newsletters also aren’t considered to be institutional or professional sponsorship by this definition
because they lack the concentrated or sustained buying or selling power of
institutional investors.
A winning stock doesn’t need a huge number of institutional owners, but
it should have several at a minimum. Twenty might be a reasonable minimum number in a few rare cases involving small or newer companies,
although most stocks have many, many more. If a stock has no professional
sponsorship, chances are that its performance will be more run-of-the-mill,
as this means that at least some of the more than 10,000 institutional
investors have looked at the stock and passed over it. Even if they’re wrong,
it still takes large buying volume to stimulate an important price increase.

193

194 A WINNING SYSTEM
Look for Both Quality and Increasing
Numbers of Buyers
Diligent investors dig down yet another level. They want to know not
only how many institutional sponsors a stock has, whether that number
has steadily increased in recent quarters, and, more importantly,
whether the most recent quarter showed a materially larger increase in
the number of owners. They also want to know who those sponsors are,
as shown by services reporting this information. They look for stocks that
are held by at least one or two of the more savvy portfolio managers who
have the best performance records. This is referred to as analyzing the
quality of sponsorship.
In analyzing the recorded quality of a stock’s institutional sponsorship,
the latest 12 months plus the last three years of the investment performance
of mutual fund sponsors are usually most relevant. A quick and easy way to
get this information is by checking a mutual fund’s 36-Month Performance
Rating in Investor’s Business Daily. An A+ rating indicates that a fund is in
the top 5% in terms of performance. Funds with ratings of B+ or higher are
considered the better performers. Keep in mind that the rating of a good
growth stock mutual fund may be a little lower during a bear market, when
most growth stocks will definitely correct.
Results may change significantly, however, if key portfolio managers leave
one money-management firm and go to another. The leaders in the ratings
of top institutional mutual funds generally rotate and change slowly as the
years go by.
Several financial services publish fund holdings and the investment performance records of various institutions. For example, you can learn the top
25 holdings of each fund plus other data at Morningstar.com. In the past,
mutual funds tended to be more aggressive in the market. More recently,
new “entrepreneurial-type” investment-counseling firms have cropped up
to manage public and institutional money.

Buy Companies That Show Increasing Sponsorship
As mentioned earlier, it’s less crucial to know how many institutions own a
stock than to know which of the limited number of better-performing institutions own a stock or have bought it recently. It’s also key to know whether
the total number of sponsors is increasing or decreasing. The main thing to
look for is the recent quarterly trend. It’s always best to buy stocks showing
strong earnings and sales and an increasing number of institutional owners
over several recent quarters.

I = Institutional Sponsorship

Note New Stock Positions Bought in the Last Quarter
A significant new position taken by an institutional investor in the most
recently reported period is generally more relevant than existing positions
that have been held for some time. When a fund establishes a new position,
chances are that it will continue to add to that position and be less likely to
sell it in the near future. Reports on such activities are available about six
weeks after the end of a fund’s three- or six-month period. They are helpful
to those who can identify the wiser picks and who understand correct timing and proper analysis of daily and weekly charts.
Many investors feel that disclosures of a fund’s new commitments are
published too long after the fact to be of any real value. But these individual
opinions typically aren’t correct.
Institutional trades also tend to show up on some ticker tapes as transactions of from 1,000 to 100,000 shares or more. Institutional buying and selling
can account for up to 70% of the activity in the stocks of most leading companies. This is the sustained force behind most major price moves. About half of
the institutional buying that shows up on the New York Stock Exchange ticker
tape may be in humdrum stocks. Much of it may also be wrong. But out of the
other half, you may have several truly phenomenal selections.
Your task, then, is to separate intelligent, highly informed institutional
buying from poor, faulty buying. This is hard at first, but it will get easier as
you learn to apply and follow the proven rules, guidelines, and principles
presented in this book.
To get a better sense for what works in the market, it’s important to study
the investment strategies of a well-managed mutual fund. When reviewing
the tables in Investor’s Business Daily, look for growth funds with A, A-, or
B+ ratings during bull markets and then call to obtain a prospectus. From
the prospectus, you’ll learn the investment philosophy and techniques used
by the individual funds as well as the type and caliber of stocks they’ve purchased. For example:

• Fidelity’s Contrafund, managed by Will Danoff, has been the best-per-

forming large, multibillion-dollar fund for a number of years. He scours
the country and international equities to get in early on every new concept or story in a stock.

• Jim Stower’s American Century Heritage and Gift Trust funds use computers to find aggressive stocks with accelerating percentage increases in
recent sales and earnings.

• Ken Heebner’s CGM Focus and CGM Mutual have both had superior
results for many years. His Focus fund concentrates in only 20 stocks.

195

196 A WINNING SYSTEM
This makes it more volatile, but Ken likes to make big sector bets that in
most cases have worked very well for him.

• Jeff Vinick was a top-flight manager at Fidelity who left and started what
is regarded as one of the country’s best-performing hedge funds.

• Janus 20, headquartered in Denver, runs a concentrated portfolio of
fewer than 30 growth stocks.

Some funds buy on new highs; others buy around lows and may sell on
new highs.

Is Your Stock “Overowned” by Institutions?
It’s possible for a stock to have too much institutional sponsorship.
Overowned is a term we coined in 1969 to describe stocks in which institutional ownership has become excessive. The danger is that excessive sponsorship might translate into large potential selling if something goes wrong
at the company or if a bear market begins.
Janus Funds alone owned more than 250 million shares of Nokia and 100
million shares of America Online, which contributed to an adverse supply/
demand imbalance in 2000 and 2001. WorldCom (in 1999) and JDS Uniphase
and Cisco Systems (in 2000 and 2001) were other examples of overowned
stocks.
Thus, the “Favorite 50” and other widely owned institutional stocks can
be poor, risky prospects. By the time a company’s strong performance is so
obvious that almost all institutions own the stock, it’s probably too late to
climb aboard. The heart is already out of the watermelon.
Look how many institutions thought Citigroup should be a core holding
in the late 1990s and 2000s. At one point during the 2008 bank subprime
loan and credit crisis, the stock of this leading New York City bank got down
to $3.00 and later $1.00. Only two years earlier it was $57. This is why, since
its first edition, How to Make Money in Stocks has always had two detailed
chapters on the subject of when to sell your stock. Most investors have no
rules or plan for when to sell. That is a serious mistake.
The same goes for American International Group. In 2008, AIG had
more than 3,600 institutional owners when it tanked to 50 cents from the
over $100 it had sold for in 2000. The government-sponsored Fannie Mae
collapsed to less than a dollar during the same financial fiasco.
America Online in the summer of 2001 and Cisco Systems in the summer of
2000 were also overowned by more than a thousand institutions. This potential
heavy supply can adversely affect a stock during bear market periods. Many
funds will pile into certain leaders on the way up and pile out on the way down.

I = Institutional Sponsorship

An Unassailable Institutional Growth Stock Tops
Some stocks may seem invincible, but the old saying is true: what goes up
must eventually come down. No company is forever immune to management problems, economic slowdowns, and changes in market direction.
Savvy investors know that in the stock market, there are few “sacred cows.”
And there are certainly no guarantees.
In June 1974, few people could believe it when William O’Neil + Co. put
Xerox on its institutional avoid or sell list at $115. Until then, Xerox had
been one of the most amazingly successful and widely held institutional
stocks, but our data indicated that it had topped and was headed down. It
was also overowned. Institutional investors went on to make Xerox their
most widely purchased stock for that year. But when the stock tumbled in
price, it showed the true condition of the company at that time.
That episode called attention to our institutional services firm and got us
our first major insurance company account in New York City. The firm had
been buying Xerox in the $80s on the way down until we persuaded it that
it should be selling instead.
We also received a lot of resistance in 1998 when we put Gillette, another
sacred cow, on our avoid list near $60 before it tanked. Enron was removed
from our new ideas list on November 29, 2000, at $72.91, and we stopped
following it. (Six months later it was $45, and six months after that it was
below $5 and headed for bankruptcy.)
Here is a list of some of the technology stocks that were removed from
our New Stock Market Ideas (NSMI) institutional service potential new
ideas list in 2000, when most analysts were incorrectly calling them buys.
The lesson: don’t be swayed by a stock’s broad-based popularity or an analyst advising investors to buy stocks on the way down in price.

Institutional Sponsorship Means Market Liquidity
Another benefit to you as an individual investor is that institutional sponsorship provides buying support when you want to sell your investment. If
there’s no sponsorship, and you try to sell your stock in a poor market, you
may have problems finding someone to buy it. Daily marketability is one of
the big advantages of owning high-quality stocks in the United States. (Real
estate is far less liquid, and sales commissions and fees are much higher.)
Good institutional sponsorship provides continuous liquidity for you. In a
poor real estate market, there is no guarantee that you can find a willing
buyer when you want to sell. It could take you six months to a year, and you
could sell for a much lower price than you expected.
