at a higher low than during its previous decline. It shows that market professionals are using the decline for buying, and a rally is coming (Figure 29.2).

A

B

FIGURE 29.2â•… GOOG daily, Accumulation/Distribution Index. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Accumulation/Distribution
“Coming events cast their shadows before” is an old proverb with a lot of meaning for technical analysts. Google Inc. (GOOG) was trending lower for months, but the uptrend of the
Accumulation/Distribution Index (A/D) showed that big money was buying. The stock has
fallen lower at point B than at A, but the A/D Index traced out a much higher bottom. Just
as important, it broke out to a new high (marked with a vertical green arrow) before prices
gapped up following a surprisingly good earnings announcement. Somebody knew what
was coming, and their massive buying was identified by the A/D accumulation pattern and
its upside breakout. Technical analysis helps even out the imbalance of knowledge between
outsiders and insiders.

112

VOLUME AND TIME

More on Accumulation/Distribution
When you go long or short, following a divergence between A/D and price, remember that even market professionals can go wrong. Use stops and protect yourself by
following the Hound of the Baskervilles rule (see Chapter 23).
There are important parallels between A/D and Japanese candlestick charts, since
both focus on the differences between opening and closing prices. A/D goes further
than candlesticks by taking volume into account.

■■30. Force Index
Force Index is an oscillator developed by this author. It combines volume with prices
to discover the force of bulls or bears behind every rally or decline. Force Index can
be applied to any price bar for which we have volume data: weekly, daily, or intraday. It brings together three essential pieces of information—the direction of price
change, its extent, and the volume during that change. It provides a practical way of
using volume for making trading decisions.2
Force Index can be used in its raw form, but its signals stand out much more
clearly if we smooth it with a moving average. Using a short EMA of Force Index
helps pinpoint entry and exit points. Using a longer EMA helps confirm trends and
recognize important reversals.

How to Construct Force Index
The force of every move is defined by three factors: direction, distance, and volume.
1. If prices close higher than the close of the previous bar, the force is positive. If
prices close lower than the close of the previous bar, the force is negative.
2. The greater the change in price, the greater the force.
3. The bigger the volume, the greater the force.
Force Index = Volumetoday • (Closetoday − Closeyesterday)
A raw Force Index can be plotted as a histogram, with a horizontal centerline at
a zero level. If the market closes higher, Force Index is positive and rises above the
centerline. If the market closes lower, Force Index is negative and extends below
the centerline. If the market closes unchanged, Force Index is zero.
The histogram of a raw Force Index is very jagged. This indicator gives much
better trading signals after being smoothed with a moving average (see Chapter 22).

2

Remember, we’re talking about the force of market crowds, not the formula in physics.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

30. FORCE INDEX

113

A 2-day EMA of Force Index provides a minimal degree of smoothing. It is
useful for finding entry points into the markets. It pays to buy when the 2-day
EMA is negative and sell when it’s positive, as long as you trade in the direction of
the trend.
A 13-day EMA of Force Index tracks longer-term changes in the force of bulls
and bears. When the 13-day EMA crosses above the centerline, it shows that bulls
are in control and suggests trading from the long side. When the 13-day EMA turns
negative, it shows that bears are in control and suggests trading from the short side.
Divergences between a 13-day EMA of Force Index and prices identify important
turning points.

Trading Psychology
When the market closes higher, it shows that bulls won the day’s battle, and when
it closes lower, it shows that bears carried the day. The distance between today’s and
yesterday’s closing prices reflects the margin of victory by bulls or bears. The greater
this distance, the larger the victory achieved.
Volume reflects the degree of emotional commitment by market participants (see
Chapter 28). High-volume rallies and declines have more inertia and are more likely
to continue. Prices moving at high volume are like an avalanche that gathers speed as
it rolls. Low volume, on the other hand, shows that the supply of losers is thin, and a
trend is probably nearing an end.
Prices reflect what market participants think, while volume reflects the strength
of their feelings. Force Index combines price and volume—it shows whether the
head and the heart of the market are in gear with each other.
When Force Index rallies to a new high, it shows that the force of bulls is high
and the uptrend is likely to continue. When Force Index falls to a new low, it shows
that the force of bears is intense and the downtrend is likely to persist. If the change
in prices is not confirmed by volume, Force Index flattens and warns that a trend is
about to reverse. It also flattens and warns of a nearing reversal if high volume generates only a small price move.

Trading Rules
Short-Term Force Index

A 2-day EMA of Force Index is a highly sensitive indicator of the short-term force of
bulls and bears. When it swings above its centerline, it shows that bulls are stronger,
and when it falls below the centerline, it shows that bears are stronger.
Since the 2-day EMA of Force Index is a sensitive tool, we can use it to fine-tune
signals of other indicators. When a trend-following indicator identifies an uptrend,
the declines of the 2-day EMA of Force Index below zero pinpoint the best buying

114

VOLUME AND TIME

points: buying pullbacks during a long-term rally (Figure 30.1). When a trendfollowing tool identifies a downtrend, rallies of a 2-day EMA of Force Index mark
the best shorting areas.
1. Buy when a 2-day EMA of Force Index turns negative during uptrends.
Even a fast and furious uptrend has occasional pullbacks. If you delay buying
until the 2-day EMA of Force Index turns negative, you’ll buy closer to a shortterm bottom. Most people chase rallies and then get hit by drawdowns they find
hard to tolerate. Force Index helps find buying opportunities with lower risks.
When a 2-day EMA of Force Index turns negative during an uptrend, place a
buy order above the high price of that day. When the uptrend resumes and prices
rally, you’ll be stopped in on the long side. If prices continue to decline, your

weekly trend is up

weekly trend is up

weekly trend is up

FIGURE 30.1â•… ADBE daily, 26-day EMA, 2-day Force Index. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Short-Term Force Index
Later in this book we’ll return to the all-important topic of using multiple timeframes to
make trading decisions. For example, you may make your strategic decision—to be a bull
or a bear—on a weekly chart and then make your tactical decisions on where to buy or sell
short using a daily chart.
In the case of Adobe Systems, Inc. (ADBE), there is a steady uptrend on the weekly
chart, confirmed by its rising EMA (not shown). When the weekly trend is up, a 2-day Force
Index on the daily chart provides an ongoing series of signals that identify buy points.
Instead of chasing strength and buying high, it’s better to buy during short-term pullbacks,
when a wave goes against the tide. Those waves are marked by the 2-day Force Index
dropping below zero. Once the 2-day Force Index goes negative, it makes sense to start
placing buy orders above the latest bar’s high. This will ensure you’ll be stopped into a long
trade as soon as the downwave loses it power.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

30. FORCE INDEX

115

order will not be executed. Keep lowering your buy order to near the high of
the latest bar. Once your buy stop is triggered, place a protective stop below the
latest minor low. This tight stop is seldom touched in a strong uptrend, but it’ll
get you out early if the trend is weak.
2. Sell short when a 2-day EMA of Force Index turns positive in a downtrend.
When trend-following indicators identify a downtrend, wait until the 2-day
EMA of Force Index turns positive. It reflects a quick splash of bullishness—a
shorting opportunity. Place an order to sell short below the low of the latest
price bar.
If the 2-day EMA of Force Index continues to rally after you place your sell
order, raise your order the next day to near the previous bar’s low. Once prices
slide and you enter a short trade, place a protective stop above the latest minor
peak. Move your stop down to a break-even level as early as possible.
Additionally, a 2-day EMA of Force Index helps decide when to pyramid positions.You can add to longs in uptrends each time Force Index turns negative; you
can add to shorts in downtrends whenever Force Index turns positive.
Force Index even provides a glimpse into the future. When a 2-day EMA of
Force Index falls to its lowest low in a month, it shows that bears are strong and
prices are likely to fall even lower. When a 2-day EMA of Force Index rallies to
its highest level in a month, it shows that bulls are strong and prices are likely
to rise even higher.
A 2-day EMA of Force Index helps decide when to close out a position. It
does it by identifying short-term splashes of mass bullishness or bearishness. A
short-term trader who bought when this indicator was negative can sell when
it turns positive. A short-term trader who went short when this indicator was
positive can cover when it turns negative. A longer-term trader should get out of
his position only if a trend changes (as identified by the slope of a 13-day EMA
of price) or if there is a divergence between the 2-day EMA of Force Index and
the trend.
3. Bullish divergences between the 2-day EMA of Force Index and price give strong
buy signals. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low while
Force Index makes a more shallow low.
4. Bearish divergences between the 2-day EMA of Force Index and price give strong
sell signals. A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high while
Force Index traces a lower second top.
5. Whenever the 2-day EMA of Force Index spikes down to five times or more its
usual depth and then recoils from that low, expect prices to rally in the coming
days.
Markets fluctuate between overbought and oversold, and when they recoil from
a down spike, we can expect a rally. Note that this signal doesn’t work well in
uptrends—markets recoil from down spikes but not from up spikes. Spikes that

116

VOLUME AND TIME

point down reflect intense fear, which doesn’t persist for very long. Spikes
that point up reflect excessive enthusiasm and greed, which can persist for quite
a long time.
A 2-day EMA of Force Index fits well into the Triple Screen trading system
(see Chapter 39). Its ability to find short-term buying and selling points is especially useful when you combine Force Index with a longer-term trend-following
indicator.
Intermediate-Term Force Index

A 13-day EMA of Force Index identifies longer-term changes in the balance of power
between bulls and bears. When it rises above zero, the bulls are stronger, and when

FIGURE 30.2â•… SSYS daily, 26-day EMA, 13-day Force Index. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Long-Term Force Index
Stratasys, Inc. (SSYS) is one of the two leading companies in the rapidly emerging additive manufacturing (AM) market. In the two years since I wrote the world’s first popular
e-book on investing in this technology, AM stocks have become investors’ favorites. A
technical pattern has emerged, with rallies driven by amateurs piling in and sharp declines
as they panic and bail out. The 13-day Force Index does a good job of catching those
waves.
When the 13-day Force Index crosses above its zero line (marked by vertical green
arrows), it shows that buying volume is coming in. That’s where a longer-term trader buys
and holds. When the 13-day Force declines below its zero line and stays there, it shows
that bears predominate.
Near the right edge of the screen, we see a record low of Force Index, but then bears
begin to weaken, as Force Index starts inching towards zero. Keep your powder dry as
you wait for an accumulation pattern to emerge and be confirmed by Force Index crossing
above zero. This see-saw movement of stocks passing from strong hands into weak ones
near the tops and back again near the lows goes on forever. Force Index can help you position yourself with the right group.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

31. OPEN INTEREST

117

it falls below zero, the bears are in charge. Its divergences from prices identify intermediate and even major turning points (Figure 30.2). Its spikes, especially near the
bottoms, mark approaching trend reversals.
The raw Force Index identifies the winning team in the battle between bulls and
bears in any price bar, be it weekly, daily, or intraday. We get much clearer signals by
smoothing the raw Force Index with a moving average.
1. When a 13-day EMA of Force Index is above the centerline, bulls are in control
of the market. When it is below the centerline, bears are in charge.
When a rally begins, prices often jump on heavy volume. When a 13-day EMA
of Force Index reaches a new high, it confirms the uptrend. As an uptrend grows
older, prices tend to rise more slowly, and volume becomes thinner. That’s when
a 13-day EMA of Force Index starts tracing lower tops. When it drops below its
zero line, it signals that the back of the bull has been broken.
2. A new peak of the 13-day EMA of Force Index shows that bulls are very strong
and a rally is likely to continue. A bearish divergence between a 13-day EMA of
Force Index and price gives a strong signal to sell short. If prices reach a new
high but this indicator traces a lower peak, it warns that bulls are losing power
and bears are ready to take control.
Note that for a divergence to be legitimate, this indicator must make a new peak,
then fall below its zero line, and then rise above that line again, but tracing a
lower peak, which creates a divergence. If there is no crossover, then there is no
legitimate divergence.
3. A new low in the 13-day EMA of Force Index shows that a downtrend is likely
to continue. If prices fall to a new low but this indicator rallies above zero and
then falls again, but to a more shallow low, it completes a bullish divergence. It
reveals that bears are losing power and gives a buy signal.
When a downtrend begins, prices usually drop on heavy volume. When a 13-day
EMA of Force Index falls to a new low, it confirms the decline. As the downtrend
grows old, prices fall more slowly or volume dries up—that’s when a reversal is
in the cards.
Adding an envelope to the chart of Force Index can help you detect its extreme deviations from the norm, which tend to lead to price trend reversals.This
method for catching deviations and potential reversals works well with weekly
charts, but not with the daily and intraday charts.This is truly a longer-term tool.

■■31. Open Interest
Open interest is the number of contracts held by buyers or owed by short sellers in
any derivative market, such as futures or options. If you are unfamiliar with futures
or options, skip this chapter and return to it after you have read Chapters 44 on
options and 46 on futures.

118

VOLUME AND TIME

