
205

Statistical Analysis
R
E
L
A
T
I
V
E

F

R
E

Q

u
E

N
C

0.2 - 1 1 - - - - - - - - - 0.1 8 - 1 1 - - - - - - - - 0.1 6 - 1 1 - - - - - - - 0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

o

y

o

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

f-g
FIGURE 4.27

Relative frequency distribution: fog. (sample size = 20, number of

samples=50).

R
E
L

A
T
I
V
E

F
R
E
Q

u
E
N

C

0.2 - R - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0.18
0.16 - - - l l - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0.14 - 1 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0.12
0.1
0.08 - - - l l - - - - - - - - - 0.06 - f t - - - - - 0.04 - 1 1 - - - - 0.02

y

o -+--.-----1'o

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

f-g
FIGURE 4.28
samples=50).

Relative frequency distribution: fog. (sample size = 20, number of

206 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
decision to reject or not to reject the hypothesis will be treated in Chapter 5. The important point for now is that the width of the sampling distribution is critically important in answering this question.

Sampling Distribution of Trading Performance
A sampling distribution can be formed for any statistic: the average
(mean), the median, the standard deviation, and many other statistics
used in statistical inference. 29 Each has its own sampling distribution.
This discussion here is confined to the sampling distribution of the
mean because the performance statistic used to evaluate TA rules in this
book is a rule's mean rate of return. However, there are many other performance measures that might be used: the Sharpe ratio,30 the profit factor,31
the mean return divided by the Ulcer Index,32 and so forth. It should be
pointed out that the sampling distributions of these alternative performance
statistics would be different from the sampling distribution of the mean.
It should also be pointed out that the methods used in this book to
generate the sampling distribution of the mean may be of limited value in
generating sampling distributions for performance statistics with elongated right tails. This can occur with performance statistics that involve
ratios such as the Sharpe ratio, the mean-return-to-Ulcer-Index ratio, and
the profit factor. However, this problem can be mitigated by taking the log
of the ratio to shorten the right tail.

The Three Distributions of Statistical Inference
Statistical inference actually involves three different distributions, one of
which is the sampling distribution. They are easy to confuse. This section
is intended to clarify their differences. In the context of rule testing the
three distributions are:

1. Data distribution of the population: an infinite sized distribution
comprised of all possible daily rule returns, which we assume extends
into the immediate practical future.
2. Data distribution of the sample: a distribution comprised of a finite
number (N) of daily rule returns from the past.
3. Sampling distribution: an infinite-sized distribution of the sample
statistic-in this case it is the rule's mean return. It represents the
mean returns of the rule, if it were to be tested in an infinite number
of random samples of size N extracted from the population.
There are two points to emphasize. First, the observations comprising
the data distribution of the population and the data distribution of the

207

Statistical Analysis

sample (1 and 2 in the preceding list) are comprised of single-day rule returns. In contrast, the observations comprising the sampling distribution
are sample statistics in which each observation represents the mean return of the rule computed over a sample of days. Second, both the population distribution and the sampling distribution are theoretical in the sense
that they refer to an infinite number of possible observations. In contrast,
the data distribution of the sample is composed of a finite number of observations from a historical back test.
The relationship between these three distributions can be visualized
by imagining an experiment similar to the box-of-beads experiment. In
this case, however, you are to imagine a population distribution of daily
rule returns that is infinite in size. Imagine taking 50 independent samples
from the population, where each sample is comprised of a substantial
number of daily rule returns. Next, determine the mean return for each
sample and then plot the sampling distribution of the 50 means. This is illustrated in Figure 4.29. 33
The Real World: The Problem of One Sample

The preceding discussion was theoretical in the sense that we imagined
what it would be like if we could observe 50 independent samples from a

Data
Distribution
in the
Population
(daily returns)

1
Data
Distribution
in the
Sample
of Size n
(daily returns)

• • • • • Sample # SO of n

Daily Returns

.l
Sampling
Distribution

50
Sample Means

Distribution of the Means
of Sample Size n

FIG HE 4.29 The three distributions of statistical inference.

208 METHODOLOGICAL. PSYCHOLOGICAL. PHILOSOPHICAL. STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Population
Mean
(not known)

Distribution of Daily Returns
Comprising the Population

Daily Returns
One Value for Sample
Mean
(known)

Distribution of Daily Returns
Comprising the Sample

Daily Returns

FIGURE 4.30 The real world: one sample and one value of the test statistic.

parent population. In most real-world statistical problems, there is only
one sample of observations and thus one value for the sample mean. The
problem is that with only one sample mean available we have no notion of
the sample statistic's variability. The problem of one sample and one mean
is illustrated in Figure 4.30.
Fortunately, we can learn a lot about a sample statistic's variability
and its sampling distribution by looking at the single available sample.
The discovery of how to do this, early in the twentieth century, is what
made the field of statistical inference possible. In fact, statisticians have
developed two distinct approaches for estimating the sampling distribution of a statistic from a single san1ple of observations: classical and computer intensive. Although both will be discussed, the computer-intensive
approach will be used for the rule tests performed in Part Two.

DERIVING THE SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION:
THE CIASSICt\L APPROACH
This classical approach is the one most often taught in basic statistics
courses. It is attributed to the two fathers of mathematical statistics, Sir
Ronald Fisher (1890-1962) and Jerzy Neyman (1894-1981). It utilizes
probability theory and integral calculus to derive the sampling distribution on the basis of a single observed sample. It provides estimates of the
sampling distribution's dispersion, its mean, and its basic shape (normal).

Statistical Analysis

209

In other words, it provides everything needed to quantify the reliability of

an inference based on a single sample of observations.

The Sampling Distribution of the Sample Mean
Every statistic has its own sampling distribution. This discussion will focus on the sampling distribution of the mean (average), because it is the
statistic used in Part Two to evaluate TA rules.
Classical statistical theory tells us several things about the sampling
distribution of the mean.
1. The mean of a large sample is a good estimate of the mean of the population distribution from which the sample was obtained. The larger
the sample, the more closely the sample mean conforms to the population mean.
2. The dispersion of the sampling distribution depends on the size of the
sample. For a given population, the larger the sample, the narrower
the sampling distribution.
3. The dispersion of the sanlpling distribution also depends on the
amount of variation within the parent population data. The bigger the
variation in the parent population, the wider the sanlpling distribution.
4. Under the conditions that apply to the evaluation of TA rules, the
shape of the sampling distribution of the mean will tend towards the
so-called normal or bell shape, with the conformity to the normal
shape increasing as the sample size increases. Other sample statistics,
such as ratios, can be profoundly nonnormal.
Each of these concepts is now explained.
The Mean of a Large Sample Is a Good Estimate of the ropulation Mean. This is a manifestation of The Law of Large Numbers,

which we met previously in the context of a coin-flipping experiment. To
recap, The Law of Large Numbers tells us that the larger the nunlber of
observations comprising the sanlple, the more closely the sample mean
will approximate the population mean. There are some qualifying conditions 34 attached to this promise, but they need not concern us here.
The graph of the coin-flipping experiment illustrated the action of the
Law of Large Numbers (Figure 4.18). As the number of coin tosses increased, the proportion of heads gradually converged to its theoretically
correct value of 0.50. In the early stages of the experiment, when the sample size was small, there were large departures from 0.50. These departures illustrate the large role that chance plays in small sanlples. In four

210 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

tosses, though values of 0.75 or 0.25 are not the most probable, they are
quite common. However, when the number of coin tosses reaches 60, the
probability of 0.75 or 0.25 is less than 1 in 1,000. The important lesson: Increased sample size diminishes the role of chance.
The Dispersion of the Sampling Distribution Depends on the
Size of the Sample: the Larger the Sample the Less the Dispersion. Imagine a very large population of observations on some vari-

able whose standard deviation is 100. Usually, we do not lmow the
population standard deviation, but in this case we will assume that we do.
In Figure 4.31, I show the parent population distribution at the bottom. Above it are two sampling distributions for the variable's mean for
sample sizes of 10 and 100. Notice that the width of the sampling distribution is cut by approximately one-third each time the sample size is increased by a factor of 10. One of the lessons from classical statistics is
that the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the mean is inversely proportional to the square root of the sample size. 35 Thus, if the
sample size is increased by a factor of 10, the width of the sampling distribution is reduced a factor of 3.16, the square root of 10. The parent distrib-

Sampling Distribution
of the Mean
Sample Size = 100
Standard Error = 10

10

Sampling Distribution
of The Mean
Sample Size = 10
St. Error = 31 .62

-4k31.62

Distribution of Data
in the Population
St. Deviation = 100

100
FIGURE 4.31
pie size.

The narrowing of the sampling distribution with increased sam·

Statistical Analysis

211

ution can be thought of as a sampling distribution with a sample size of
one (one mean-the population mean). The sampling distribution for a
sample size of 100 is one-tenth the width of the parent population. The essential message is the larger the sample size, the less the uncertainty
about the value of a sample statistic. Incidentally, the standard deviation
of the sampling distribution of the mean is given a special name in statistics, the standard error of the mean (see later explanation).
With some qualifications,36 the Law of Large Numbers tells us that the
larger the sample size, the more accurate our lmowledge of the population's average. With some caveats,37 therefore, we would like to work with
samples that are as large as possible so as to minimize the width of the
sampling distribution as much as possible.
l'he Dispersion of the Sampling Distribution of the Mean Also
Depends On the Amount of Variation within the Data Comprising the Parent Population. There is another factor that impacts the

width of the sampling distribution-the amount of variation within the
parent population from which the sample was taken. The greater the variation within the population data, the greater will be the variation (dispersion) of the sampling distribution.
You can visualize this by thinking about a population that has no variation at all. For example, if all people in the population weighed 150 lbs,
every sample is going to have an average weight of 150 lbs. Therefore,
zero variation among the members of the population would lead to zero
variation in the sample average, and consequently a sampling distribution
that has no dispersion whatsoever. Conversely, if there is great variation
among the individuals comprising the population, there is going to be
greater variation in the san1ple averages, which translates to a fat sampling distribution.
Shape of' the Sampling Distribution Tends Toward

ormal.

The Central Limit Theorem, a foundational principle of classical statistics,
states that as the size of a sample gets larger, the sampling distribution of
the mean, with some qualifications,38 converges toward a specific shape irrespective of the shape of the population distribution, In other words, no
matter how weirdly shaped the distribution of the data in the parent population, the shape of the sampling distribution approaches a specific shape
that statisticians refer to as the normal distribution, also lmown as the
Gaussian distribution.
The normal distribution is the shape of the most common probability distribution. Often referred to as the bell curve because it has the silhouette of the Liberty Bell, the normal distribution characterizes
continuous variables that describe many real-world phenomena.

212 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

There are a few points about the normal distribution that should be
understood:
• It is completely described by its mean and its standard deviation. If
these two facts are mown, you mow every thing that there is to mow
about the distribution.
• About 68 percent of the observations lie within one standard deviation of the mean, and about 95 percent lie within two standard deviations of the mean.
• The tails of the distribution become quite thin beyond two standard
deviations. Thus values beyond three standard deviations are rare and
beyond four are extremely rare.

The normal distribution, which is illustrated in Figure 4.32, is so common that it has been called a fundamental feature of the natural world. Its
shape is caused by the additive effects of many independent factors acting
on the same situation. For example, systolic blood pressure is affected by
genetic factors, diet, weight, lifestyle, aerobic conditioning, and a multitude of other factors. When they interact, the probability distribution of
blood pressures in a large group of randomly selected people will have the
bell-shaped distribution.
Figure 4.3339 shows several very nonnormal population distributions
along with the shape of the sampling distribution of the mean. Note how
the sampling distribution converges to a normal shape as a sample size is
increased irrespective of the shape of the distribution of the data in the

2 0"

10"

+10"

+20"

\"c"

I 68% of the Area I

r
95% of the Area

FIGURE 4.32 The normal distribution.

213

Statistical Analysis

Parent
Population

Sampling
Distribution: n=2

Sampling
Distribution: n=5

... ...

Sampling
Distribution: n=30

...
f'IGURE 4.33

Given sufficient sample size the sampling distribution of the
mean approaches normal shape irrespective of the variable's distributional shape.

parent population. There is nothing magical about the number 30. The rate
at which the sampling distribution converges to a normal shape as a function of sample size depends on the shape of the parent distribution. Note
that for three of the cases in the figure, a sample size of five produces a
nearly normally shaped sampling distribution of the mean. However, for
the bottom case in the figure, the sampling distribution of the mean does
not become normal-like until a sample size of 30.
The Standard Error of the Mean
We are now in a position to take the final step toward defining the sampling distribution of the mean as it is done in classical statistics. So far, it
has been established that:
1. The sampling distribution of the mean converges to the shape of a
normal distribution as the sample size is increased.
2. A normal distribution is fully described by its mean and its standard
deviation.

214 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

3. The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the mean, also
known as the standard error of the mean, is directly related to the
standard deviation of the population from which the samples were
taken.
4. The standard error of the mean is inversely related to the square root
of the sample size.
The standard error of the mean is equal to the standard deviation of
the population divided by the square root of the sample size. This is a true
statement but not of practical use because the standard deviation of the
population is not known. This is simply a consequence of the fact that the
full population is not observable. However, the standard deviation of the
population can be estimated from the sample. This estimate, which is designated by sigma-hat, is shown in equation in Figure 4.34. The little roof or
hat over the sigma is statistical symbolism for a quantity that has been estimated. You will note that the divisor within the radical sign is n - 1,
rather than n. This modification compensates for the fact that the sample
standard deviation understates the standard deviation of the population.
This expression is used to estimate the standard deviation of the parent population, which is then used in the equation in Figure 4.35 to estimate the standard error of the mean.
With the standard error of the mean in hand, and the assumption that
the sampling distribution is normal, it is now possible to form a good esti-

Estimate of Population Standard Deviation
Based on a Sample of Observations

a- J
Where:

X·I

Is an individual observation on variable X in the population

X

Is the sample mean on variable X

n

Is number of observations in the sample

FIGURE 4.34
observations.

Estimate of population standard deviation based on a sample of

215

Statistical Analysis

Standard
Error
of
the Mean
FIGURE 4.35 The standard error of the mean.

mate of the sampling distribution of the mean. And recall all this was on
the basis of a single sample.
There is one problem with the traditional approach. It assumes that
the sampling distribution is normally shaped (bell curve). If this proves
not to be so, the conclusions reached will be inaccurate. For this reason, I
have chosen to use an alternative method for estimating the sampling distribution of the mean, based on computer simulation.

DERIVING THE SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION WITH
THE COMPUTER·llVfENSIVE APPROACH
Until about 30 years ago there was no alternative to the classical approach
for deriving the sampling distribution from a single sample. Now there isthe computer-intensive approach. By systematically resampling the single
available sample many times, it is possible to approximate the shape of the
sampling distribution. This procedure is described in this section.
The next chapter will present two computer-based methods: bootstrap resampling and Monte Carlo permutation. Although each method
has its limitations, as is true for any statistical method, they are useful alternatives to the classic approach.
The bootstrap is so named because it seemingly lifts itself up, as if by
its own bootstraps, to approximate the shape of the sampling distribution. In this book, it will be used to approximate the shape of the sampling distribution of the average return for rules that have no predictive
power. The Monte Carlo permutation method is named after the famed
European gambling casino because it uses the computer as if it were a
roulette wheel.
By whatever means it is generated, the sampling distribution serves
the same purpose. It tells us how much the back-tested return of a nonpredictive rule can vary above or below zero due to the random effects of
sampling. Thus, it serves as the benchmark for evaluating rule performance. If the rule's mean return is too high to be due to sampling variability, the rule is judged to have predictive power.

216 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

PREVIEW OF NEXT CIIAPTER
We have already made a number of references to using statistical inference
to test claims. The official title for this activity is hypothesis testing. The
next chapter discusses the rationale and mechanics of hypothesis testing.
It will also consider another use of statistical inference, estimating
confidence intervals. A confidence interval is a range that contains the
true value of the population parameter with a specified level of confidence. For example, if the observed mean return of a rule is 15 percent
the 95 percent confidence interval might indicate that the rule's true return lies between 5 percent return and 25 percent return. The width of the
confidence interval, in this case 20 percentage points, is derived from the
same sampling distribution that is used for hypothesis testing.

Hypothesis Tests
and Confidence
Intervals

TWO TYPES OF STATISTICt\L INFERENCE
Statistical inference encompasses two procedures: hypothesis testing and
parameter estimation. Both are concerned with the unknown value of a
population parameter. A hypothesis test determines if a sample of data is
consistent with or contradicts a hypothesis about the value of a population parameter, for example, the hypothesis that its value is less than or
equal to zero. The other inference procedure, parameter estimation, uses
the information in a sample to detern1ine the approximate value of a population parameter. 1 Thus, a hypothesis test tells us if an effect is present or
not, whereas an estimate tells us about the size of an effect.
In some ways both forms of inference are similar. Both attempt to
draw a conclusion about an entire population based only on what has
been observed in a sample drawn from the population. In going beyond
what is known, both hypothesis testing and parameter estimation take the
inductive leap from the certain value of a sample statistic to the uncertain
value of a population parameter. As such, both are subject to error.
However, important differences distinguish parameter estimation
from hypothesis testing. Their goals are different. The hypothesis test
evaluates the veracity of a conjecture about a population parameter
leading to an acceptance or rejection of that conjecture. In contrast, estimation is aimed at providing a plausible value or range of values for
the population parameter. In this sense, estimation is a bolder endeavor
and offers potentially more useful information. Rather than merely
telling us whether we should accept or reject a specific claim such as a
217
