
He became a punching bag for the Americans, who pinned blame for the
crash squarely on the British government. Why were the limeys insisting
on continuing their sale of the state-owned British Petroleum? The
traders, who thought pretty much exclusively in terms of short-term
market forces, felt that the multibillion-dollar sale of BP shares imposed
on the market a weight it could not bear. The whole stock-buying world
was panicking at the thought of a new supply of stock. Never mind that
the United States was running a trillion dollars' budget deficit, or that
the dollar was unstable, or that busts, like their better halves, booms,
usually have a logic all their own. A few of the Americans were jumping all
over the Brit for the behavior of his countrymen. One said, sneer-ingly,
"You guys did just this sort of thing after the war too, you know."
You would think that the battle lines on this day would be drawn along
the borders of financial interest instead of the borders of nations.
Everyone around the table at the credit meeting was on the same team,
but people didn't behave like it. The xenophobia was by no means limited
to Salomon Brothers. An American partner of Goldman Sachs, a firm also
stuck with a hundred-million-dollar loss on its shares in BP, called a
senior Brit at Salomon and blamed him for the problem. But why? It
turned out the Goldman partner wasn't thinking of his Salomon
counterpart as a representative of Salomon but as a Brit. "Your people
damn well better pull it [the BP issue]," he shouted. "If it wasn't for us,
you'd all be speaking German."
The shrewder players in our shop weren't looking to affix blame but to
find a way out: How could we avoid losing a hundred million dollars on our
stake in British Petroleum? Or, to put a finer point on it, how could we
persuade the British government to take back its shares at the price it
had sold them to us? One of the managing directors from London, who
happened to be in New York, actually took me aside to practice an
argument he planned to put to the Bank of England. He had
calculated the sum of the losses of the banks underwriting BP to be
seven hundred million dollars. He said that the world financial system
might not withstand this drain of capital from the system. Another panic
could ensue. Right? Amazing. He was so desperate to avoid the loss that
I think he actually believed his lie. Sure, why not? I said. It's worth a
try. Basically, it was an old ploy. My boss wanted to threaten the British
government with another stock market crash if it didn 't take back its oil

company.* (Note to members of all governments: Be wary of Wall
Streeters threatening crashes. They are tempted to do this whenever
you encroach on their turf. But they can't cause a crash any more than
they can prevent one.)
Later that day, the last day I clearly recall of my time at Salomon
Brothers, I spent an uneasy hour in the training class talking to 250
blank stares. The trainees had reached that state of high despair that
resembles accounts I have read of the Black Death of the fourteenth
century. They had lost all hope and decided that since they were going to
be fired anyway, they might as well do whatever they please. So they all
became back-row people. I dodged a paper wad as I entered the room
and an impressive amount of apathy as I spoke. It was an audience only
Rodney Dangerfield could have appreciated. They didn't care what I had
to say on my assigned topic: "Selling to Europeans." But they were
vaguely curious if there were any job opportunities in the London office
and if I knew when they would be fired. They were sure that they were
alone in not knowing what was happening to our company. How blissfully
naive! They were, in particular, angry and frustrated that Jim Massey
(who had made the same gung ho speech to them as he had to us) hadn't
made at least a token appearance before them. Did they still work for
the Brothers, or what?
They were left to wonder for only two hours more. The speaker who
followed me was interrupted by the entrance of Jim Massey, flanked by
two men who looked like bodyguards, but were only traders. He bore the
fate of the 250 trainees. Before making it known, however, he explained
in merciless detail how difficult the firings had been on senior
management, how ultimately they would make the firm stronger, and how
these sorts of decisions were always painful to make. And then:
*It didn't work As John Gutfreund explained to our beleaguered
shareholders m our 1987 annual report, "By honoring our commitment to
our client and proceeding with our underwriting of British Petroleum in
the wake of the crash, the firm incurred a $79 million pre-tax loss "
"We have made our decision regarding the training program . . . and we
have decided . . . [long pause] ... to maintain our commitment." You can
stay! A handful of people scrambled back into the front row as soon as
Massey had left. But the news wasn't as cheery as it sounded. There
were no vacancies on the trading floor. At the end of the program most

of the trainees became clerks in the back office.
December 17, 1987: Bonus Day • A strange and glorious day. The firm,
for the first time in its history, broke the compensation bands. It was
lucky for me. My bonus was meant to fall within the band, which would
have limited it to about $140,000. Instead, it paid me $225,000 (275
with benefits, but who's counting?), which is more than it has ever paid
any employee two years out of the training program, or so I have been
told. I am now the highest-paid member of my training class. But that
means less than it did. More than half my class has either quit or been
fired.
It is now clear that given time, and only time, the firm would make me a
rich man. Doing the same level of business, I would be paid 350 or so
next year, 450 the year after that, and 525 the year after that. And so
on, with lesser increases but higher totals each year until I did or did
not become a managing director.
But it was sad, and a bit ridiculous, to break the bands and pay selected
employees more than ever before in the worst year in the recent history
of the firm. The firm cleared $142 million, an abysmal return on $3.5
billion in capital. The numbers looked even worse when you considered
that the firm for most of the year had been twice the size of three
years before. Why was it paying me now?
I had an idea. When the head of sales presented me with my bonus, he
tried to ensure that I appreciated what a monumental gift was being
made to me (and he told me not to tell anyone). The clue to the large sum
was in his eyes: panic. Salomon Brothers, in a sense, made a trade by
putting a price on the services of an employee, and now, having lost a
great number of people, it was less composed than usual as it traded.
One thing is for sure: It did not pay me a premium because it thought it
was the right and proper thing to do. A few good men at the top of the
Brothers did what was right and proper, including, I am proud to say, my
rabbis, but most did oTily what was necessary. It paid me more because
it thought that would compel me to stay, seal my loyalty.
What loyalty I had was already sealed. I felt loyal to a handful of
individuals: Dash; Alexander; my jungle guide; my rabbis. But how can you
speak of loyalty to the firm when the firm is an amalgam of small and
large deceptions and riven with strife and discontent? You can't. And
why even try? But now it was abundantly clear that the money game

rewarded disloyalty. The people who hopped from firm to firm and, in the
process, secured large pay guarantees did much better financially than
people who stayed in one place.
Salomon's senior management had never before tried to purchase the
loyalty of its people. The managers weren't much good at the game. They
could have seen, had they looked at me with the eyes of a Liar's Poker
champion, that I would never leave or stay because of money. I'd never
have gone to another firm for a higher paycheck. I'd leave Salomon
Brothers for other reasons, however. And I did.
Epilogue
I LEFT Salomon Brothers in the beginning of 1988, but not for any of
the obvious reasons. I didn't think the firm was doomed. I didn't think
that Wall Street would collapse. I wasn't even suffering from growing
disillusionment (it grew to a point, still bearable, then stopped). Although
there were many perfectly plausible reasons to jump ship, I left, I think,
more because I didn't need to stay any longer. My father's generation
grew up with certain beliefs. One of those beliefs is that the amount of
money one earns is a rough guide to one's contribution to the welfare and
prosperity of our society. I grew up unusually close to my father. Each
evening I would plop into a chair near him, sweaty from a game of
baseball in the front yard, and listen to him explain why such and such
was true and such and such was not. One thing that was almost always
true was that people who made a lot of money were neat. Horatio Alger
and all that. It took watching his son being paid 225 grand at the age of
twenty-seven, after two years on the job, to shake his faith in money. He
has only recently recovered from the shock.
I haven't. When you sit, as I did, at the center of what has been possibly
the most absurd money game ever and benefit out of all proportion to
your value to society (as much as I'd like to think I got only what I
deserved, I don't), when hundreds of equally undeserving people around
you are all raking it in faster than they can count it, what happens to the
money belief? Well, that depends. For some, good fortune simply
reinforces the belief. They take the funny money seriously, as evidence
that they are worthy citizens of the Republic. It becomes their guiding
assumption-for it couldn't possibly be clearly thought out-that a talent
for making money come out of a telephone is a reflection of merit on a
grander scale. It is tempting to believe that people who think this way

eventually suffer their comeuppance. They don't. They just get
richer. I'm sure most of them die fat and happy.
For me, however, the belief in the meaning of making dollars crumbled;
the proposition that the more money you earn, the better the life you
are leading was refuted by too much hard evidence to the contrary. And
without that belief, I lost the need to make huge sums of money. The
funny thing is that I was largely unaware how heavily influenced I was by
the money belief until it had vanished.
It is a small piece of education, but still the most useful thing I picked
up at Salomon Brothers. Almost everything else I learned I left behind. I
became fairly handy with a few hundred million dollars, but I'm still lost
when I have to decide what to do with a few thousand. I learned humility
briefly in the training program but forgot it as soon as I was given a
chance. And I learned that people can be corrupted by organizations, but
since I remain willing to join organizations and even to be corrupted by
them (mildly, please), I'm not sure what practical benefit will come from
this lesson. All in all, it seems, I didn't learn much of practical value.
Perhaps the best was yet to come and I left too soon. But having lost my
need to stay at Salomon Brothers, I discovered a need to leave. My job
became nothing more than showing up every morning to do what I had
already done, the reward for which was simply more of the same. I
disliked the lack of adventure. You might say that I left the trading
floor of Salomon Brothers in search of risk, which was as stupid a
financial decision as I hope I'll ever make. In the markets you don't take
risk without being paid hard cash at the same time. Even in the job
market it's a handy rule, and I have broken it. I am now both poorer and
more exposed than I would have been had I remained on the trading
floor.
So, on the face of it, my decision to leave was an almost suicidal trade,
the sort of thing a customer might do if he fell into the hands of a geek
salesman at Salomon. I believe I walked away from the clearest shot I'll
ever have at being a millionaire. Sure, Salomon Brothers had fallen on
hard times, but there was still plenty of gravy on the tray for a good
middleman; that is the nature of the game. And if Salomon turns itself
around, the money will flow even more freely. As it happens, I still own
shares in Salomon Brothers because I believe it will eventually recover.
The strength of the firm lies in the raw instincts of people like John

Meriwether, the Liar's Poker champion of the world. People with those
instincts, including Meriwether and his boys, are still trading
bonds for Salomon. Anyway, business at Salomon simply couldn't get
much worse. The captains have done their level best to sink the ship, and
the ship insists on floating. In leaving, I was sure I was making the
beginner's mistake of selling at the bottom, which I could only partially
offset by buying a few shares in the company as I walked out the door.
If I made a bad trade, it's because I wasn't making a trade. I was given
pause, however, after I had decided to vamoose, to think that maybe
what I was doing wasn't so foolish after all. Alexander insisted at our
farewell dinner that I was making a great move. The best decisions he
has made in his life, he said, were completely unexpected, the ones that
cut against convention. Then he went even farther. He said that every
decision he has forced himself to make because it was unexpected has
been a good one. It was refreshing to hear a case for unpredictability in
this age of careful career planning. It would be nice if it were true.

About the Author
MICHAEL LEWIS grew up in New Orleans and holds degrees from
Princeton and the London School of Economics. Before joining Salomon
Brothers he worked with various degrees of success as a stockboy for a
New York art dealership, a cabinetmaker, and a tour guide for teen-aged
girls in Europe. His journalism appears in many periodicals including The
New Republic, The Economist, The Wall Street Journal, The Spectator,
and Manhattan Inc. He now lives in a cottage in London with his wife, an
investment banker.

