 Beginning in 2010, my Bridgewater colleagues and I began to see the emergence of a debt crisis in Europe. We had looked at how much debt had to be sold and how much could be bought for a number of countries and determined that many Southern European nations were likely to come up short. The resulting crisis could be as bad as or worse than the one in 2008–09. 
 As in 1980 and 2008, while our calculations clearly pointed to a debt crisis ahead, I knew that I could be wrong. Because it would be a big deal if I was right, I wanted to discuss what I was seeing with top policymakers both to alert them and to have them correct me if they saw things differently. I encountered the same sort of resistance without good explanations that I had encountered in Washington in 2008, only this time in Europe. Things were stable at the time, and though I knew there was no reason to believe they would stay that way, most of the people I spoke to weren’t ready to listen to my reasoning. I remember a meeting I had with the head of the International Monetary Fund when we were still in the calm before the storm. He doubted my seemingly crazy conclusions, and he wasn’t interested in going through the numbers. 
 Just as U.S. policymakers had before 2008, the Europeans did not fear what they hadn’t experienced before. Because things were good at the time and the picture I was painting was worse than anything they’d experienced in their lifetimes, they found what I was saying implausible. They also didn’t possess a granular understanding of who the borrowers and lenders were and how their abilities to borrow and lend would change with changing market conditions. Their understandings of how markets and economies work were oversimplified, like those of academics. For example, they looked at investors as a single thing they called “the market,” rather than an amalgam of different players who bought and sold for different reasons. When the markets did badly, they wanted to do things that increased confidence, figuring that if they built confidence the money would come and the problems would disappear. They didn’t see that whether they were confident or not, specific buyers didn’t have enough money and credit to buy all the debt that had to be sold. 
 Just as all human bodies work in essentially the same way, so do the economic machines in different countries. And just as physical diseases infect people without regard to nationality, so do economic diseases. So, while the policymakers were at first skeptical, I approached my conversations with them by looking at the physiology of the case at hand. I would diagnose the economic disease they were suffering from, and show them how its symptoms progress by referencing prior analogous cases. Then I’d explain the best practices for treating the disease at its different stages. We would have high-quality back-and-forths about the linkages and the evidence. 
 Yet even when I did succeed in helping them see the linkages, the political decision-making systems they had to work within were dysfunctional. Not only did they have to decide what they would do as individual countries, the nineteen countries of the European Union had to agree with each other before they could act—in many cases unanimously. There was often no clear way of resolving disagreements, which was a big problem because what needed to be done (printing money) was objectionable to German economic conservatives. As a result, crises would intensify to breaking points while Europe’s leaders grappled in long closed-door meetings. Those power struggles tested the nerves of everyone involved. I can’t possibly convey the amount of bad behavior these policymakers had to endure for the benefit of the people they represented. 
 For example, in January 2011, a few weeks after he’d been appointed minister of economy and competitiveness by Spain’s new president, I met Luis de Guindos, a man I learned to admire for his forthrightness, intelligence, and heroic willingness to sacrifice himself for his country’s well-being. The old government in Spain had been thrown out and the new government took office as Spanish banks were about to collapse. The new Spanish policymakers were immediately forced to haggle with representatives from the IMF, the European Union, and the European Central Bank (the “Troika” as it was called). They did this into the wee hours of the morning and at the end were required to sign a loan agreement that essentially handed over control of their banking system to the Troika in exchange for the financial support they desperately needed. 
 My meeting with Minister de Guindos took place the morning after the first and most difficult of these negotiations. With bloodshot eyes but a very alert mind, he patiently and forthrightly answered all my difficult questions and shared his thoughts about what reforms Spain should undertake to deal with their problems. During the next couple of years, over considerable objections, he and his government pushed these controversial reforms through. He never got the praise he deserved, but he didn’t care because his satisfaction came from seeing the results he produced. To me, that is a hero. 
 As time passed, the European debtor countries fell into deeper depressions. This led Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, to make the bold decision to buy bonds in September 2012. This move averted the imminent debt crisis, saved the euro, and, as it would turn out, made a lot of money for the ECB. But it failed to immediately stimulate credit and economic growth in the countries that were in depression. Inflation, which the ECB was mandated to get to about 2 percent, was below that target and falling. While the ECB had offered loans on attractive terms to banks in an attempt to solve this issue, banks weren’t taking them up on the offer sufficiently to make a difference. I believed that things would continue to worsen unless the ECB “printed money” and pushed it into the system by buying more bonds. The move toward quantitative easing appeared obvious and necessary to me, so I visited Draghi and the ECB’s executive board to share my concerns. 
 At the meeting, I told them why this approach would not be inflationary (because it is the level of spending, which is money plus credit, and not just the amount of money, that drives spending and inflation). I focused on how the economic machine works because I felt that if we could agree on that—most importantly, how buying bonds moves money through the system—we could agree on its impacts on inflation and economic growth. In that meeting, and in all such meetings, I shared our calculations as well as the important cause-effect relationships as I saw them, so that together we could assess whether the conclusions made sense. 
 A major impediment to this action was that there is no single bond market for the entire Eurozone, and the ECB, like most central banks, isn’t supposed to favor one area/country over another. Given those conditions, I shared my theory for how the ECB could do quantitative easing without breaking its rules by buying bonds proportionately across every member country, even though Germany didn’t need or want the easing that such purchases would bring them. (The German economy was doing relatively well and inflation fears were beginning to emerge there.) 
 In the course of those eighteen months, I met with several top European economic policymakers, perhaps most importantly German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble, whom I judged to be exceptionally thoughtful and selfless. I also saw how politics within Germany and Europe worked. 9 When push came to shove, the ECB would have to do what was best for Europe, which was to print the money and buy the bonds in the way I had suggested. Doing that was consistent with the ECB’s mandate, and the Southern European debtor countries had the votes to allow it to do that, so I figured that it would be the Germans who would get overruled and face the decision to leave the Eurozone, which they would ultimately not do because their leaders had a strong commitment to the Eurozone with Germany as part of it. 
 Draghi finally announced the move in January 2015. It had a great effect and created a precedent that would allow more quantitative easings in the future if they were needed. The market reaction was very positive. On the day of Draghi’s announcement European equities were up a percent and a half, government bond yields fell across the major European economies, and the euro fell 2 percent against the dollar (which helped stimulate the economy). These moves continued over the following months, stimulating European economies, supporting a pickup in growth, and reversing the decline in inflation. 
 The ECB’s decision was obviously the right thing to do, for reasons that were relatively simple. But seeing how controversial its move was, it occurred to me that the world needed a simple explanation of how the economic machine works, because if everyone understood the basics, then economic policymakers would be able to do the right things a lot faster and with less angst in the future. That led me to make a thirty-minute video, How the Economic Machine Works , which I released in 2013. Besides explaining how the economy works it provides a template that helps people assess their economies and gives them guidance about what to do and what to expect during a crisis. It had a much bigger impact than I expected, as it was watched by more than five million people in eight languages. A number of policymakers told me in private that they found it helpful for their own understanding, for dealing with their constituents, and for finding better paths forward. This was very rewarding to me. 
 From my contacts with policymakers in a number of countries I learned quite a bit about how international relations really works. It is quite different from what most people imagine. Countries behave in a more self-interested and less considerate way than what most of us would consider appropriate for individuals. When countries negotiate with one another, they typically operate as if they are opponents in a chess match or merchants in a bazaar in which maximizing one’s own benefit is the sole objective. Smart leaders know their own countries’ vulnerabilities, take advantage of others’ vulnerabilities, and expect the other countries’ leaders to do the same. 
 Most people who haven’t had direct contact with the leadership of their own and other countries form their views based on what they learn in the media, and become quite naive and inappropriately opinionated as a result. That’s because dramatic stories and gossip draw more readers and viewers than does clinical objectivity. Also, in some cases “journalists” have their own ideological biases that they are trying to advance. As a result, most people who see the world through the lens of the media tend to look for who is good and who is evil rather than what the vested interests and relative powers are and how they are being played out. For example, people tend to embrace stories about how their own country is moral and the rival country is not, when most of the time these countries have different interests that they are trying to maximize. The best behaviors one can hope for come from leaders who can weigh the benefits of cooperation, and who have long enough time frames that they can see how the gifts they give this year may bring them benefits in the future. 
 These conflicts of vested interests don’t just play out internationally; it can also be nasty within countries. Finding out what’s true and trying to do what’s in everyone’s best interests is rare, though most policymakers pretend that’s what they’re doing. More typically, they act in support of their constituents’ interests. For example, representatives of those with greater income will say higher taxes stifle growth while representatives of those with less income will say the opposite. It’s hard to get everyone to even try to look at the whole picture objectively, let alone to operate in the interests of the whole. 
 Nonetheless, I came to respect most of the policymakers I worked with and to feel sorry for them because of the terrible positions they were in. Most are highly principled people who are forced to operate in unprincipled environments. The job of a policymaker is challenging under the best of circumstances, and it’s almost impossible during a crisis. The politics are horrendous and distortions and outright misinformation from the media make things worse. A number of the policymakers I met—including Draghi, de Guindos, Schäuble, Bernanke, Geithner, Summers, and many others—were real heroes, meaning that they put others and the mission they committed to above themselves. Unfortunately, most policymakers enter their careers as idealists and leave disillusioned. 
 One of those heroes I have been fortunate enough to learn from and, I hope, help is China’s Wang Qishan, who has been a remarkable force for good for decades. To explain what he is like and the journey that took him to the top of China’s leadership would take more of this book than I can spare. In brief, Wang is a historian, a very high-level thinker, and a very practical man. I have rarely known a person to be both extremely wise and extremely practical. A leading shaper of the Chinese economy for decades who is also responsible for eliminating corruption, he is known to be a no-nonsense man who can be trusted to get stuff done. 
 Every time I go to China, we meet for sixty to ninety minutes. We talk about what’s happening in the world, and how that relates to thousands of years of history and the never-changing nature of mankind. We discuss a wide range of other topics as well, ranging from physics to artificial intelligence. We are both keenly interested in how most everything happens over and over again, the forces behind those patterns, and the principles that work and don’t work in dealing with them. 
 I gave Wang a copy of Joseph Campbell’s great book The Hero with a Thousand Faces , because he is a classic hero and I thought it might help him. I also gave him The Lessons of History , a 104-page distillation of the major forces through history by Will and Ariel Durant, and River Out of Eden by the insightful Richard Dawkins, which explains how evolution works. He gave me Georgi Plekhanov’s classic On the Role of the Individual in History. All these books showed how the same things happened over and over again throughout history. 
 Most of my conversations with Wang are at the principle level; he sees the rhyme of history and puts the particulars we speak of in that context. “Unattainable goals appeal to heroes,” he once told me. “Capable people are those who sit there worrying about the future. The unwise are those who worry about nothing. If conflicts got resolved before they became acute, there wouldn’t be any heroes.” His advice has helped me in my planning for Bridgewater’s future. For example, when I asked him about checks and balances of power, he pointed to Julius Caesar’s overthrow of the Roman Senate and Republic as an illustration of how important it is to make sure no one person is more powerful than the system. I took his advice to heart as I set out to improve Bridgewater’s governance model. 
 Every time I speak with Wang, I feel like I get closer to cracking the unifying code that unlocks the laws of the universe. He uses his timeless perspective to see the present and the likely future more clearly. 
 Being around such people, especially if I can help them, is thrilling to me. 
 RETURNING THE BOON 
 Joseph Campbell’s The Hero with a Thousand Faces , one of the books I gave to Wang as well as a number of other heroes I know, was introduced to me by my son Paul in 2014. While I had seen Campbell on television nearly thirty years earlier and remembered being impressed by him, I hadn’t read his book. In it, Campbell looks at large numbers of “heroes” from different cultures—some real and some mythical—and describes their archetypal journeys through life. Campbell’s description of how heroes become heroes aligned with my thinking about shapers. And it gave me powerful insights about the heroes I know and the patterns of my own life. 
 For Campbell, a “hero” isn’t a perfect person who always gets things right. Far from it. A hero is someone who “found or achieved or [did] something beyond the normal range of achievement,” and who “has given his life to something bigger than himself or other than himself.” I had met a number of such people throughout my life. What was most interesting about Campbell’s work was his description of how they got that way. Heroes don’t begin as heroes; they just become them because of the way one thing leads to another. The diagram on the following page shows the archetypal hero’s journey. 
 They typically start out leading ordinary lives in an ordinary world and are drawn by a “call to adventure.” This leads them down a “road of trials” filled with battles, temptations, successes, and failures. Along the way, they are helped by others, often by those who are further along the journey and serve as mentors, though those who are less far along also help in various ways. They also gain allies and enemies and learn how to fight, often against convention. Along the way, they encounter temptations and have clashes and reconciliations with their fathers and their sons. They overcome their fear of fighting because of their great determination to achieve what they want, and they gain their “special powers” (i.e., skills) from both “battles” that test and teach them, and from gifts (such as advice) that they receive from others. Over time, they both succeed and fail, but they increasingly succeed more than they fail as they grow stronger and keep striving for more, which leads to ever-bigger and more challenging battles. 
 Heroes inevitably experience at least one very big failure (which Campbell calls an “abyss” or the “belly of the whale” experience) that tests whether they have the resilience to come back and fight smarter and with more determination. If they do, they undergo a change (have a “metamorphosis”) in which they experience the fear that protects them, without losing the aggressiveness that propels them forward. With triumphs come rewards. Though they don’t realize it when they are in their battles, the hero’s biggest reward is what Campbell calls the “boon,” which is the special knowledge about how to succeed that the hero has earned through his journey. 

 Joseph Campbell’s Hero’s Journey schema from The Hero with a Thousand Faces (New World Library), copyright © 2008 by the Joseph Campbell Foundation ( jcf.org ), used with permission. 

 Late in life, winning more battles and acquiring more rewards typically becomes less exciting to heroes than passing along that knowledge to others—“returning the boon” as Campbell called it. Once the boon is returned, the hero is free to live and then free to die, or, as I see it, to transition from the second phase in life to the third phase (in which one is free to savor life until one passes away). 
 Reading Campbell, I saw that heroes, like shapers, come in varying sizes—there are big ones and small ones—that they are real people, and that we all know some. I also saw that being a hero is typically not all it’s cracked up to be—they get beat up a lot, and many are attacked, humiliated, or killed even after they triumph. In fact, it’s hard to see the logic for choosing this hero role, if one were to choose. But I could see and relate to how a certain type of person would start and stay on that path. 
 While Campbell’s description of the hero’s journey captured the essence of my own journey through life and the journeys of many of the people I call shapers, “hero” is not a word that I would use to describe myself and I certainly would not put my own accomplishments on the level of the heroes Campbell wrote about. 10 But learning about the hero’s journey did help me crystallize my understanding of where I was in my own journey, and what I should do next. The section on returning the boon spoke to me in a personal way, as though Campbell knew exactly what I was wrestling with. With the reflections it prompted, I could see that my life would be over in a relatively short time and that what I’d leave behind could be more important, last longer, and affect many more people than just those at Bridgewater and my family. That helped make clear that I needed to pass along the things I had that could help others beyond me, most importantly the principles in this book, but also my money. 
 As the saying goes, “You can’t take it with you.” My need to start thinking about who should get what wasn’t just because of my age and the time it would take to do it well; it was also instinctive. Over time, the circle of people and things I cared about had broadened from just me when I was young, to me and my family when I became a parent, to my community when I was a bit more mature, to people beyond my community and the whole environment now. 
 WRESTLING WITH THE QUESTIONS OF PHILANTHROPY 
 My first exposure to “philanthropy” 11 occurred back in the late 1990s when I was approaching fifty. At that time, Matt was sixteen, spoke Mandarin, and visited a Chinese orphanage to help someone, where he learned that a $500 surgery could save or radically improve some lives. We and our friends gave him money to help. Then, my friend Paul Tudor Jones taught Matt how to create a 501(c)(3) foundation and Matt, just a junior in high school, created the China Care Foundation in 2000. Matt brought our family to the orphanages, so we had close contact with these special-needs children and fell in love with them. We also watched Matt struggle to decide which children would live and which would die because there wasn’t enough money to save them all. Imagine being faced with the choice between a big night out on the town or saving a child’s life. That was essentially the choice we constantly faced. This experience led us to become more involved with philanthropy, so in 2003 we set up our own foundation to provide support in more organized ways. We wanted to do our philanthropy together, as a family activity, which has proven to be fabulous. 
 Figuring out how to best give away money is as complex an undertaking as figuring out how to make it. Though we now know a lot more about it than we did when we started, we still don’t always feel capable to make the best decisions possible, so my family and I are still feeling our way through it. I will give you a few examples of the questions we have been wrestling with and how our thinking about them has evolved, starting with the question of how much money should be saved for my family relative to how much should go to people and causes that are more distant, yet more desperately in need. 
 Long before I had a lot of money, I had determined that I wanted my sons to have only enough to afford excellent health care, excellent education, and an initial boost to help their careers get started. My perspective was influenced by my own journey through life, which took me from having nothing to having a lot. That taught me to struggle well and made me strong. I wanted the same for the people I loved. So, when I had earned a lot of money, I felt I had plenty of money to give away to others. 
 Over time, as we gained experience in trying to help in a number of areas, I learned how fast money goes and that we didn’t have nearly enough to take care of everything we cared about. Additionally, when my first grandchild was born, it prompted me to wonder how many generations I should budget to protect. Speaking to others in comparable positions, I discovered that even the richest people feel short of the money they need to do the things they want to do. So I studied how other families approach the question of how much to set aside for family and how much to give away at what pace. While our family still has not answered these questions definitely, I know that I personally will give more than half of my money to those beyond my family. 
 Which causes we should donate to was another big question. Barbara’s biggest passion has been helping students in the most stressed public school districts in Connecticut, especially those students who are called “disengaged and disconnected.” 12 A study she funded showed that 22 percent of high school students fall into one of these two categories, which was shocking because most will probably become adults who will suffer and be burdens on society rather than flourishing contributors to it. Because she has a lot of direct contact with these children and their teachers, she understands their needs. When she learned that 10,000 of them didn’t have winter coats, she felt compelled to provide them. What she showed me opened my eyes. How can clothing and nutrition be so severely deficient in this “land of opportunity”? Everyone in our family believes that equal opportunity, which is one of the most fundamental human rights, requires equal educational opportunity—and that educational opportunities are terribly unequal. The economic costs—in the forms of crime and incarceration—as well as the social costs of not investing in improving these conditions are immense. While we have felt compelled to help, we’ve discovered it is very difficult to have a significant impact relative to the size of the problem. 
 I feel deeply connected to nature, especially the oceans. The oceans are our world’s greatest asset, covering 72 percent of its surface and comprising 99 percent of its livable space. It thrills me to support scientists who are exploring the oceans and media showing them in the incredible environments they visit. I’m on a mission to make clear that ocean exploration is even more important and exciting than space exploration so that our oceans get more support and will be more sensibly managed. To add to my excitement, my son Mark is a wildlife filmmaker who shares my passion, so we get to pursue it together. 
 Matt’s passion is to bring inexpensive, effective computing to the developing world as a way of expanding and improving education and health care. Paul’s passion is mental health and his wife’s is fighting climate change. Devon is more focused on his career than on philanthropy now, but his wife cares deeply about animal welfare. Our family continues to support special-needs children in China, as well as an institute that teaches best practices to Chinese philanthropists. We also support the teaching of meditation to children in stressful environments and to veterans with PTSD, cutting-edge heart research, microfinance and other social enterprises, and much more. 
 We view our donations as investments and want to make sure that we have high philanthropic returns on our money. So another big question we wrestle with is how to measure those returns. It’s much easier to measure efficiency in a business by seeing how much its revenue exceeds its cost. Because of this, we developed an attraction to sustainable social enterprises. Still, I saw that so many philanthropic investments could pay off economically as well as socially, and it tormented me that our society passes them up. 
 We also wrestled with how big our organization should be and what governance controls we should have in order to ensure the quality of our philanthropic decision making. I approached these decisions the same way I explain in Work Principles—by creating formalized principles and policies for our decision making. For example, because we are bombarded with more requests for grants than we can intelligently look at, I mandated a policy not to review unsolicited requests so our staff has the time to sort through the areas we want to be focused on. We are continuously improving all our principles and policies, and I dream about building decision-making algorithms for our philanthropic efforts, though that’s beyond my reach at the moment. 
 As you might have guessed, we also seek advice from the most experienced and respected people possible. Bill Gates and the people we met through our participation in his, Melinda Gates’s, and Warren Buffett’s Giving Pledge have been enlightening. Others such as Muhammad Yunus, Paul Jones, Jeff Skoll, the Omidyar folks, and the people at TED have been very helpful. The most important thing we’ve learned is that there’s no one right way to do philanthropy, though there are plenty of wrong ways. 
 Giving away the money that I acquired during my lifetime—and doing that well—has been a joy, a challenge, and the appropriate thing to do at this stage in my life. 
 BRIDGEWATER TURNS FORTY 
