
- 144 -

John Grisham

The Broker

cacies while watching the reflections in the glass. If they were following, he
didn't want them to know he was suspicious. And the practice was
important. Luigi had told him more than once that soon he would be gone,
and Marco Lazzeri would be left alone in the world.
The question was, how much could he trust Luigi? Neither Marco Lazzeri
nor Joel Backman trusted anyone.
There was a moment of anxiety at the train station when he walked inside,
saw the crowd, studied the overhead schedules of arrivals and departures,
and looked about desperately for the ticket window. By habit, he also
searched for anything in English. But he was learning to shove the anxiety
aside and push on. He waited in line and when a window was open he
stepped up quickly, smiled at the little lady on the other side of the glass,
offered a pleasant "Buon giorno," and said, "Vado a Milano." I'm going to
Milan.
She was already nodding.
"Alle tredici e venti," he said. At 1:20.
"Si, cinquanta euro," she said. Fifty euros.
He gave her a one-hundred-euro bill because he wanted the change, then
walked away clutching his ticket and patting himself on the back. With an
hour to kill, he left the station and wandered down Via Boldrini two blocks
until he found a cafe. He had a panino and a beer and enjoyed both while
watching the sidewalk, expecting to see no one of any interest.
The Eurostar arrived precisely on schedule, and Marco followed the crowd
as it hurried on board. It was his first train ride in Europe and he wasn't
exactly sure of the protocol. He'd studied his ticket over lunch and saw
nothing to indicate a seat assignment. Selection appeared to be random and
haphazard and he grabbed the first available window seat. His car was less
than half full when the train began moving, at exactly 1:20.
They were soon out of Bologna and the countryside was flying by. The rail
track followed M4, the main auto route from Milano to Parma, Bologna,
Ancona, and the entire eastern coast of Italy. After half an hour, Marco was
disappointed in the scenery. It was hard to appreciate when zipping along at
one hundred miles an hour; things were rather blurry and a handsome
landscape was gone in a flash. And there were too many factories bunched
along the line, near the transportation routes.

- 145 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He soon realized why he was the only person in his car who was remotely
interested in things outside. Those above the age of thirty were lost in
newspapers and magazines and looked completely at ease, even bored. The
younger ones were sound asleep. After a while Marco nodded off too.
The conductor woke him, saying something completely incomprehensible in
Italian. He caught the word "biglietto" on the second or third try and quickly
handed over his ticket. The conductor scowled at it as if he might toss poor
Marco off at the next bridge, then abruptly marked it with a punch and gave
it back with a wide toothy grin.
An hour later a rush of gibberish over the loudspeaker announced something
to do with Milano, and the scenery began to change dramatically. The
sprawling city soon engulfed them as the train slowed, then stopped, then
moved again. It passed block after block of postwar apartment buildings
packed tightly together, with wide avenues separating them. Ermanno's
guidebook gave the population of Milano at four million; an important city,
the unofficial capital of northern Italy, the country's center for finance,
fashion, publishing, and industry. A hard-working industrial city with, of
course, a beautiful center and a cathedral worth the visit.
The tracks multiplied and fanned out as they entered the sprawling rail yards
of Milano Centrale. They came to a stop under the vast dome of the station,
and when Marco stepped onto the platform he was startled at the sheer size
of the place. As he walked along the platform he counted at least a dozen
other tracks lined in perfect rows, most with trains waiting patiently for their
passengers. He stopped at the end, in the frenzy of thousands of people
coming and going, and studied the departures: Stuttgart, Rome, Florence,
Madrid, Paris, Berlin, Geneva.
All of Europe was within his reach, just a few hours away.
He followed the signs down to the front entrance and found the taxi stand,
where he waited in line briefly before he hopped in the backseat of a small
white Renault. "Aeroporto Malpensa," he said to the driver. They crawled
through heavy Milano traffic until they reached the perimeter. Twenty
minutes later they left the autostrada for the airport. "Quale compagnia
aerea?" the driver said over his shoulder. Which airline?
"Lufthansa," Marco said. At Terminal 2 the cab found a spot at

- 146 -

John Grisham

The Broker

the curb, and Marco turned loose another forty euros. The automatic doors
opened to a mass of people, and he was thankful he had no plane to catch.
He checked the departures and found what he wanted-a direct flight to
Dulles. He circled around the terminal until he found the Lufthansa check-in
desk. A long line was waiting, but with typical German efficiency things
were moving quickly.
The first prospect was an attractive redhead of about twenty-five who
appeared to be traveling alone, which was something he preferred. Anyone
with a partner might be tempted to talk about the strange man back at the
airport with his rather odd request. She was second in line at the businessclass desk. As he watched her he also spotted prospect number two: a
denim-clad student with long scruffy hair, unshaven face, well-worn
backpack, and a University of Toledo sweatshirt-the perfect fit. He was well
back in the line, listening to music on bright yellow headphones.
Marco followed the redhead as she left the counter with her boarding card
and carry-on bags. The flight was still two hours away, so she drifted
through the crowd to the duty-free shop, where she stopped to inspect the
latest in Swiss watches. Seeing nothing to buy, she wandered around the
corner to a newsstand and bought two fashion magazines. As she was
headed to the gate, and the first security checkpoint, Marco sucked in his gut
and made his move. "Excuse me, miss, excuse me." She couldn't help but
turn and look at him, but she was too suspicious to say anything.
"Are you by chance going to Dulles?" he asked with a huge smile and the
pretense of being out of breath, as if he'd just sprinted to catch her.
"Yes," she snapped. No smile. American.
"So was I, but my passport has just been stolen. Don't know when I'll get
home." He was pulling an envelope out of his pocket. "This is a birthday
card for my father. Could you please drop it in the box when you get to
Dulles? His birthday is next Tuesday, and I'm afraid I won't make it. Please."
She looked at both him and the envelope suspiciously. It was just a birthday
card, not a bomb or a gun.
He was yanking something else out of his pocket. "Sorry, there's no stamp.
Here's a euro. Please, if you don't mind."

- 147 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The face finally cracked, and she almost smiled. "Sure," she said, taking
both the envelope and the euro and placing them in her purse.
"Thank you so much," Marco said, ready to burst into tears. "It's his
ninetieth birthday. Thank you."
"Sure, no problem," she said.
The kid with the yellow headphones was more complicated. He, too, was an
American, and he also fell for the lost passport story. But when Marco tried
to hand over the envelope, he looked around warily as if they might be
breaking the law.
"I don't know, man," he said, taking a step back. "I don't think so."
Marco knew better than to push. He backed away and said as sarcastically as
possible, "Have a nice flight."
Mrs. Ruby Ausberry of York, Pennsylvania, was one of the last passengers
at check-in. She had taught world history in high school for forty years and
was now having a delightful time spending her retirement funds traveling to
places she'd only seen in textbooks. This was the last leg of a three-week
adventure through most of Turkey. She was in Milano only for a connecting
flight from Istanbul to Washington. The nice gentleman approached her with
a desperate smile and explained that his passport had just been stolen. He
would miss his father's ninetieth birthday. She gladly took the card and
placed it in her bag. She cleared security and walked a quarter of a mile to
the gate, where she found a seat and made herself a nest.
Behind her, less than fifteen feet away, the redhead reached a decision. It
could be one of those letter bombs after all. It certainly didn't seem thick
enough to carry explosives, but what did she know about such things? There
was a waste can near the window-a sleek chrome can with a chrome top
(they were, after all, in Milano)-and she casually walked over and dropped
the letter into the garbage.
What if it explodes there? she wondered as she sat back down. It was too
late. She wasn't about to go over and fish it out. And if she did, then what?
Track down someone in a uniform and try to explain in English that there
was a chance she was holding a letter bomb? Come on, she told herself. She
grabbed her carry-on and moved to the other side of the gate, as far away as
possible from the waste can. And she couldn't keep her eyes off it.
The conspiracy grew. She was the first one on the 747 when they began
boarding. Only with a glass of champagne did she finally relax.

- 148 -

John Grisham

The Broker

She'd watch CNN as soon as she got home to Baltimore. She was convinced
there would be carnage at Milano's Malpensa airport.
Marco's taxi ride back to Milano Centrale cost forty-five euros, but he didn't
question the driver. Why bother? The return ticket to Bologna was the samefifty euros. After a day of shopping and traveling he was down to around one
hundred euros. His little stash of cash was dwindling rapidly.
It was almost dark when the train slowed at the station in Bologna. Marco
was just another wear)'' traveler when he stepped onto the platform, but he
was silently bursting with pride at the day's accomplishments. He'd
purchased clothing, bought rail tickets, survived the madness of both the
train station and the airport in Milano, hired two cabs, and delivered his
mail, a rather full day without a hint of anyone knowing who or where he
was.
And he'd never been asked to show a passport or any type of identification.
Luigi had taken a different train, the 11:45 express to Milano. But he stepped
off at Parma and got lost in the crowd. He found a cab and took a short ride
to the meeting place, a favorite cafe. He waited almost an hour for Whitaker,
who had missed one train in Milano and caught the next one. As usual,
Whitaker was in a foul mood, which was made even worse by having to
meet on a Saturday. They ordered quickly and as soon as the waiter was
gone, Whitaker said, "I don't like this woman."
"Francesca?"
"Yes, the travel guide. We've never used her before, right?"
"Right. Relax, she's fine. She doesn't have a clue."
"What does she look like?"
"Reasonably attractive."
"Reasonably attractive can mean anything, Luigi. How old is she?"
"I never ask that question. Forty-five is a good guess."
"Is she married?"
"Yes, no children. She married an older man who's in very bad health. He's
dying."

- 149 -

John Grisham

The Broker

As always, Whitaker was scribbling notes, thinking about the next question.
"Dying? Why is he dying?"
"I think it's cancer. I didn't ask a lot of questions."
"Perhaps you should ask more questions."
"Perhaps she doesn't want to talk about certain things-her age and her dying
husband."
"Where'd you find her?"
"It wasn't easy. Language tutors are not exactly lined up like taxi drivers. A
friend recommended her. I asked around. She has a good reputation in the
city. And she's available. It's almost impossible to find a tutor willing to
spend three hours every day with a student."
"Every day?"
"Most weekdays. She agreed to work every afternoon for the next month or
so. It's the slow season for guides. She might have a job once or twice a
week, but she'll try to be on call. Relax, she's good."
"What's her fee?"
"Two hundred euros a week, until spring when tourism picks up."
Whitaker rolled his eyes as if the money would come directly from his
salary. "Marco's costing too much," he said, almost to himself.
"Marco has a great idea. He wants to go to Australia or New Zealand or
someplace where the language won't be a problem."
"He wants a transfer?"
"Yes, and I think it's a great idea. Let's dump him on someone else."
"That's not our decision, is it, Luigi?" 1 guess not.
The salads arrived and they were quiet for a moment. Then Whitaker said, "I
still don't like this woman. Keep looking for someone else."
"There is no one else. What are you afraid of?"
"Marco has a history with women, okay? There's always the potential for
romance. She could complicate things."
"I've warned her. And she needs the money."
"She's broke?"
"I get the impression things are very tight. It's the slow season, and her
husband is not working."
Whitaker almost smiled, as if this was good news. He stuffed a large wedge
of tomato in his mouth and chomped on it while peering

- 150 -

John Grisham

The Broker

around the trattoria to see if anyone was eavesdropping on their hushed
conversation in English. When he was finally able to swallow, he said, "Let's
talk about e-mail. Marco was never much of a hacker. Back in his glory days
he lived on the phone-had four or five of them in his office, two in his car,
one in his pocket-always juggling three conversations at once. He bragged
about charging five thousand bucks just to take a phone call from a new
client, that sort of crap. Never used the computer. Those who worked for
him have said that he occasionally read e-mails. He rarely sent them, and
when he did it was always through a secretary. His office was high-tech, but
he hired people to do the grunt work. He was too much of a big shot."
"What about prison?"
"No evidence of e-mail. He had a laptop which he used only for letters,
never e-mail. It looks as though everyone abandoned him when he took the
fall. He wrote occasionally to his mother and his son, but always used
regular mail."
"Sounds completely illiterate."
"Sounds like it, but Langley's concerned that he might try and contact
someone on the outside. He can't do it by phone, at least not now. He has no
address he can use, so mail is probably out of the question."
"He'd be stupid to mail a letter," Luigi said. "It might divulge his
whereabouts."
"Exactly. Same for the phone, fax, everything but email."
"We can track email."
"Most of it, but there are ways around it."
"He has no computer and no money to buy one."
"I know, but, hypothetically, he could sneak into an Internet cafe, use a
coded account, send the e-mail, then clean his trail, pay a small fee for the
rental, and walk away."
"Sure, but who's gonna teach him how to do that?"
"He can learn. He can find a book. It's unlikely, but there's always a chance."
"I'm sweeping his apartment every day," Luigi said. "Every inch of it. If he
buys a book or lays down a receipt, I'll know it."
"Scope out the Internet cafes in the neighborhood. There are several of them
in Bologna now."
"I know them."

- 151 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Where's Marco right now?"
"I don't know. It's Saturday, a day off. He's probably roaming the streets of
Bologna, enjoying his freedom." "And he's still scared?" "He's terrified."
Mrs. Ruby Ausberry took a mild sedative and slept for six of the eight hours
it took to fly from Milano to Dulles International. The lukewarm coffee they
served before landing did little to clear the cobwebs, and as the 747 taxied to
the gate she dozed off again. She forgot about the birthday card as they were
herded onto the cattle cars on the tarmac and driven to the main terminal.
She forgot about it as she waited with the mob to claim her baggage and
plod through customs. And she forgot about it when she saw her beloved
granddaughter waiting for her at the arrival exit.
She forgot about it until she was safely at home in York, Pennsylvania, and
shuffling through her shoulder bag for a souvenir. "Oh my," she said as the
card fell onto the kitchen table. "I was supposed to drop this off at the
airport." Then she told her granddaughter the story of the poor guy in the
Milan airport who'd just lost his passport and would miss his father's
ninetieth birthday.
Her granddaughter looked at the envelope. "Doesn't look like a birthday
card," she said. She studied the address: R. N. Backman, Attorney at Law,
412 Main Street, Culpeper, Virginia, 22701.
"There's no return address," the granddaughter said.
"I'll mail it first thing in the morning," Mrs. Ausberry said. "I hope it arrives
before the birthday."

- 152 -

John Grisham

The Broker

At ten Monday morning in Singapore, the mysterious $3 mil
lion
sitting in the account of Old Stone Group, Ltd, made an electronic exit and
began a quiet journey to the other side of the world. Nine hours later, when
the doors of the Galleon Bank and Trust opened on the Caribbean island of
Saint Christopher, the money arrived promptly and was deposited in a
numbered account with no name. Normally it would have been a completely
anonymous transaction, one of several thousand that Monday morning, but
Old Stone now had the full attention of the FBI. The bank in Singapore was
cooperating fully. The bank on Saint Christopher was not, though it would
soon get the opportunity to participate.
When Director Anthony Price arrived in his office at the Hoover Building
before dawn on Monday, the hot memo was waiting. He canceled everything
planned for that morning. He huddled with his team and waited for the
money to land on Saint Christopher.
Then he called the vice president.
It took four hours of undiplomatic arm-breaking to shake the information
loose on Saint Christopher. At first the bankers refused to budge, but what
small quasi-nation can withstand the full might and fury of the world's only
superpower? When the vice president threat

- 153 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ened the prime minister with economic and banking sanctions that would
destroy what little economy the island was clinging to, he finally knuckled
under and turned on his bankers.
The numbered account could be directly traced to Artie Morgan, the thirtyone-year-old son of the former president. He'd been in and out of the Oval
Office during the final hours of his father's administration, sipping
Heinekens and occasionally dispensing advice to both Critz and the
President.
The scandal was ripening by the hour.
From Grand Cayman to Singapore and now to Saint Christopher, the wiring
bore the telltale signs of an amateur trying to cover his tracks. A professional
would've split the money eight ways and parked it in several different banks
in different countries, and the wires would've been months apart. But even a
rookie like Artie should've been able to hide the cash. The offshore banks he
selected were secretive enough to protect him. The break for the feds had
been the mutual-fund crook desperate to avoid prison.
However, there was still no evidence as to the source of the money. In his
last three days in office, President Morgan granted twenty-two pardons. All
went unnoticed except two: Joel Backman and Duke Mongo. The FBI was
hard at work digging for financial dirt on the other twenty. Who had $3
million? Who had the resources to get it? Every friend, family member, and
business associate was being scrutinized by the feds.
A preliminary analysis repeated what was already known. Mongo had
billions and was certainly corrupt enough to bribe anyone. Backman, too,
could pull it off. A third possibility was a former New Jersey state legislator
whose family made a bundle in government road contracts. Twelve years
earlier he'd gone to "federal camp" for a few months and now wanted his
rights restored.
The President was off in Europe, in the middle of his get- acquainted tour,
his first victory lap around the world. He wouldn't be back for three days,
and the vice president decided to wait. They would watch the money,
double- and triple-check the facts and details, and when he returned they
would brief him with an airtight case. A cashforpardon scandal would
electrify the country. It would humiliate the opposition party and weaken its
resolve in Congress. It would ensure that Anthony Price would head the FBI
for a few more years. It would

- 154 -

John Grisham

The Broker

finally send old Teddy Maynard off to the retirement home. There was
simply no downside to the launching of a full federal blitz against an
unsuspecting ex-president.
His tutor was waiting in the back pew of the Basilica di San Francesco. She
was still bundled, with her gloved hands stuck partially in the pockets of her
heavy overcoat. It was snowing again outside, and in the vast, cold, empty
sanctuary the temperature was not much warmer. He sat beside her and
offered a soft "Buon giorno."
She acknowledged him with just enough of a smile to be considered polite,
and said, uBuon giorno." He kept his hands in his pockets too, and for a long
time they sat like two frozen hikers hiding from the weather. As usual, her
face was sad and her thoughts were on something other than this bumbling
Canadian businessman who wanted to speak her language. She was aloof
and distracted and Marco was fed up with her attitude. Ermanno was losing
interest by the day. Francesca was barely tolerable. Luigi was always back
there, lurking and watching, but he, too, seemed to be losing interest in the
game.
Marco was beginning to think that the break was about to happen. Cut the
lifeline and set him adrift to sink or swim on his own. So be it. He'd been
free for almost a month. He'd learned enough Italian to survive. He could
certainly learn more by himself.
"So how old is this one?" he said after it became apparent that he was
expected to speak first.
She shifted slightly, cleared her throat, took her hands out of her pockets, as
if he'd awakened her from a deep sleep. "It was begun in 1236 by some
Franciscan monks. Thirty years later the main sanctuary here was complete."
"A rush job."
"Yes, quite fast. Over the centuries the chapels sort of sprang up along both
sides. The sacristy was built, then the bell tower. The French, under
Napoleon, deconsecrated it in 1798 and turned it into a customs house. In
1886 it was converted back to a church, then restored in 1928. When
Bologna was bombed by the Allies its facade was extensively damaged. It's
had a rough history."
"It's not very pretty on the outside."
"Bombing will do that."

- 155 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"I guess you picked the wrong side."
"Bologna did not."
No sense refighting the war. They paused as their voices seemed to float up
and echo slightly around the dome. Backman's mother had taken him to
church a few times each year as a child, but that halfhearted effort at
pursuing a faith had been abandoned quickly in high school and totally
forgotten over the past forty years. Not even prison could convert him,
unlike some of the other inmates. But it was still difficult for a man with no
convictions to understand how any style of meaningful worship could be
conducted in a such a cold, heartless museum.
"It seems so empty. Does anyone ever worship in this place?"
"There's a daily mass and sendees on Sunday. I was married here."
"You're not supposed to talk about yourself. Luigi will get mad."
"Italian, Marco, no more English." In Italian, she asked him, "What did you
study this morning with Ermanno?"
"La famiglia."
"La sua famiglia. Mi dica." Tell me about your family.
"It's a real mess," he said in English.
"Sua moglie?" Your wife?
"Which one? I have three."
"Italian."
"Quale? Ne ho tre."
"L'ultima." The last one.
Then he caught himself. He was not Joel Backman, with three ex-wives and
a screwed-up family. He was Marco Lazzeri from Toronto, with a wife, four
children, and five grandchildren. "I was kidding," he said in English. "I have
one wife."
"Mi dica, in Italiano, di sua moglie?" Tell me about your wife.
In very slow Italian, Marco described his fictional wife. Her name is Laura.
She is fifty-two years old. She lives in Toronto. She works for a small
company. She does not like to travel. And so on.
Every sentence was repeated at least three times. Every mispronunciation
was met with a grimace and a quick "Ripeta." Over and over, Marco went on
and on about a Laura who did not exist. And when he finished with her, he
was led to his oldest child, another ere
