
Index ....................................................................... 343

02 506455-ftoc.indd xix

9/24/09 10:03:40 PM

xx

Fundamental Analysis For Dummies

02 506455-ftoc.indd xx

9/24/09 10:03:40 PM

Introduction

I

f someone gave you a dollar for every newfangled stock-picking method
invented every year, well, you probably wouldn’t need a book on investing. You’d already be rich.
Investors are constantly barraged with new ways to pick stocks and buy
stocks. There’s no shortage of pundits, professional investors, and traders
who all claim to know the best ways to invest. The trouble is, most of their
advice is conflicting and often confusing.
Maybe it’s this constant swirl of investment babble that tempted you to pick
up this book. And if so, you made a wise decision. This book will help you
get back to the basics of investing and understanding business. Rather than
chasing hot stocks that whip around, Fundamental Analysis For Dummies will
show you how to study the value of a business. You’ll then use that information to make intelligent decisions about how to invest.
While faddish stock-picking systems come and go, fundamental analysis has
been around for decades. The ability to pore over a company’s most basic data
and get a good idea of how a company is doing, how skilled the management
team is, and whether or not a company has the resources to stay in business is
a valuable skill to have.
Fundamental analysis is best known as a tool for investors trying to get a
very detailed assessment of what a company is worth. But you might be surprised to learn you don’t have to be an investor to use fundamental analysis.
If you buy a warranty from a company and want to know if the company will
be able to honor it, that calls for fundamental analysis. If you just want to
know “how well” a company is doing, you might also want to use fundamental
analysis. And journalists, too, can use fundamental analysis to find stories
that will interest readers.
The aim of this book is to show you what fundamental analysis is and help
you use it as a way to better understand business and investment.

03 506455-intro.indd 1

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

2

Fundamental Analysis For Dummies

About This Book
Fundamental Analysis For Dummies is one of the most approachable texts
to tackle this somewhat complex topic. Rather than bog you down with the
nitty-gritty details that academics pull their hair over, I’ve attempted to lay
out all the main topics and techniques you’ll need to apply fundamental analysis to a variety of business tasks.
And while fundamental analysis is useful for anyone with an interest in business, I appreciate the fact you are likely hoping to make some money from
fundamental analysis. And for that reason, the book is largely targeted toward
investors who are either hoping to use fundamental analysis to manage their
portfolios or to enhance their current system of selecting stocks.
As the author, I can share the tricks, tips, and secrets I’ve learned from a
career writing about online investing for readers just like you. In the course
of writing for USA TODAY, including a daily online column about investing
called “Ask Matt” at USATODAY.com, I’ve answered thousands of reader questions that may be the same ones you have.
Fundamental Analysis For Dummies gives you all the tools you need to access
fundamental data, process them, and make decisions. The book, however,
stops short at showing you how to actually buy or sell stocks by choosing
a broker and entering orders. If you’re interested in the actual process of
buying or selling stocks, that topic is covered exhaustively in my Investing
Online For Dummies (Wiley).

Conventions Used in This Book
I want to help you get the information you need as quickly as possible. To
help you, I use several conventions:
✓ Monofont is used to signal a Web address. This is important, since there
are so many Web addresses in the book.
✓ Italics signal a word is a unique and important term for online investors.
✓ Boldfaced words make the key terms and phrases in bulleted and numbered lists jump out and grab your attention.
✓ Sidebars, text separated from the rest of the type in gray boxes, are
interesting but slightly tangential to the subject at hand. Sidebars are
generally fun and optional reading. You won’t miss anything critical if
you skip the sidebars. If you choose to read the sidebars, though, I think
you’ll be glad you did.

03 506455-intro.indd 2

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

Introduction

3

What You’re Not to Read
This book is a reference, which means you don’t have to read it from beginning to end (any more than you have to read a dictionary from beginning to
end to get what you need from it). If you’re in a hurry, you can even skip certain pieces of information and still get the gist of what you need. Here’s what
you can safely skip:
✓ Anything marked with a Technical Stuff icon: For more on this icon,
see the “Icons Used in This Book” section, later in this Introduction.
✓ Text in gray boxes, which are known as sidebars: Sidebars contain
interesting — but not essential — information.
✓ The copyright page: Sure, the publisher’s attorneys’ feelings will be
hurt, but you can skip the fine print without missing out on anything
important. Shh! I won’t tell.

Foolish Assumptions
No matter your skill or experience level with investing, you can get something out of Fundamental Analysis For Dummies. I’m fully aware that for a vast
majority of the public, the sight of tables of numbers in an annual report is
boring at best — and scary at worst. The first part of the book is designed
for you if you’re curious about fundamental analysis and wondering why it’s
a common tool used by successful professional investors. Hoping to spare
you from technical terms, I stick to plain English as much as possible. (When
I have no choice but to use investing jargon, I tell you what it means.) But I
also assume more advanced investors might pick up this book too, looking to
discover a few things they didn’t already know about fundamental analysis.
The book takes on more advanced topics as you progress through it, and it
carefully selects online resources that will add new tools to your investing
toolbox.

How the Book Is Organized
All the chapters in this book are self-contained and can be read by themselves. If you’ve been dying to learn how to do a discounted cash flow analysis, go on, skip ahead and dive in. Believe it or not, the discounted cash flow
analysis is one of the most common things USA TODAY readers ask me about.
Jump around. Flip through. Scan the index and find topics you’ve been dying

03 506455-intro.indd 3

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

4

Fundamental Analysis For Dummies
to read about for years. And don’t fear that you’ll get in over your head if
you read the back of the book first. If there are concepts you need to know at
any point, I’ve carefully added references to those pages in the book, so you
can jump around. This book is a reference, and you shouldn’t feel as if you
need to suffer through topics you already know or don’t care to know. With
that said, though, the book is assembled in a logical order. My goal is to start
simple, and then ramp things up as the book goes on.
The book is divided into five parts, and the following sections give you a brief
description of what you can find within each part.

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis
Is and Why You Should Use It
If you’ve heard investors talk about fundamental analysis, but were never
quite sure what it was, this part is for you. You’ll discover not only what fundamental analysis is, but also why it’s so powerful. You’ll even find out how
fundamental analysis might help boost your investment success even if you
have other methods of buying and selling stocks. After reading the chapters
in this part, you should have a good idea of what’s entailed in fundamental
analysis and how it can benefit you.

Part II: How to Perform
Fundamental Analysis
Here’s where we roll up our sleeves and start getting into specifics.
Fundamental analysis starts with the fundamental data companies provide
about themselves. You’ll uncover what kinds of data companies generate and
provide to the public, as well as what the numbers mean. And rather than setting you on a wild goose chase to find the data yourself, I give you very specific instructions on the best ways to retrieve all the fundamental data you’ll
need. In this part, too, you’ll get an understanding of how to start not just
reading fundamental data, but digging in and gleaning insights from them.

Part III: Making Money from
Fundamental Analysis
Look. I’m not going to flatter myself and believe you’re reading this book
because you want to read all my clever analogies. You’re probably interested
in fundamental analysis because you want to make money or at least get a

03 506455-intro.indd 4

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

Introduction

5

better understanding on how to gauge the health and success of companies.
Investors who use fundamental analysis to get a solid understanding of businesses and their values get a huge advantage over those who blindly chase
stocks. In this part, you’ll get exposed to some of the more advanced techniques fundamental analysts use to get insights about companies that aren’t
apparent to some investors.

Part IV: Getting Advanced with
Fundamental Analysis
The chapters in this part take fundamental analysis even further, highlighting
some of the more thorough techniques available. You’ll find how to analyze
an industry, the broad economy, and even how to marry fundamental analysis with other methods of evaluating investments.

Part V: The Part of Tens
The tens chapters break down concepts in a top-ten list structure. You can
discover what financial secrets fundamental analysis allows you to uncover
(Chapter 20), you can zero in on the things you should look at when analyzing a company (Chapter 21), and you can find out once and for all what fundamental analysis can’t do (Chapter 22).

Icons Used in This Book
When you’re flipping through this book, you might notice several icons that
catch your attention. That’s done on purpose. I use several distinct icons to
alert you to sections of the book that stand out. Those icons are
These icons highlight info that you should etch on the top of your brain and
never forget, even when you’re getting caught up in the excitement of
fundamental analysis.

Read these sections to quickly pick up insider secrets that can boost your success with fundamental analysis.

03 506455-intro.indd 5

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

6

Fundamental Analysis For Dummies
Some of the things covered in the book get a bit hairy and complicated. This
icon flags such sections for two reasons. First, you may decide to avoid the
headache and skip over them, since the info isn’t vital to your understanding
of fundamental analysis. Second, the icon is a heads-up that the paragraph is
probably loaded with investment jargon. Don’t be embarrassed if you need to
read the section a second or third time. Hey, you didn’t want this book to be
too easy, did you?
Avoid the landmines scattered throughout Wall Street that can decimate your
good intentions at building wealth with these sections.

Where to Go from Here
If you’re a new investor or just curious about fundamental analysis, you might
consider starting from the beginning. That way, you’ll be ready for some of
the more advanced topics I introduce later in the book. If you’ve already
been using fundamental analysis or wondering if fundamental analysis might
enhance a strategy you think is working for you, you might skip to Part II.
And if you’re dying to know about a specific topic, there’s nothing wrong with
looking up those terms in the index and flipping to the appropriate pages.

03 506455-intro.indd 6

9/24/09 10:04:07 PM

Part I

What Fundamental
Analysis Is and
Why You Should
Use It

04 506455-pp01.indd 7

9/24/09 10:04:45 PM

I

In this part . . .

f you’re not sure what fundamental analysis is or how it
can help you invest, this part is for you. In this part, I
define fundamental analysis and explain how understanding
how a company makes money can help you make money.
You find out how fundamental analysis compares with other
ways of investing and get a quick description of how some
successful investors put fundamental analysis to work.
Lastly, give you a quick rundown on the accounting that
companies use to record their fundamentals for all to see.

04 506455-pp01.indd 8

9/24/09 10:04:45 PM

Chapter 1

Understanding Fundamental
Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Getting a solid overview of why fundamental analysis is worth your time
▶ Stepping through some of the main concepts that are critical to fundamental analysis
▶ Understanding the ways that fundamental analysis can fit into many investment strategies
▶ Grasping how to use this book to further your understanding of fundamental analysis

B

efore you gulp down that neon-colored energy drink or pour yourself
a bowl of super-sweetened cereal that looks like it was made by Willy
Wonka himself, you probably do something first. More times than not, you just
might take a glance at the nutrition label that spells out what’s in the box.
You might not know what guar gum, guarana, or other ingredients that often
show up on the labels of such processed foods are, but you can get a pretty
good idea of what’s good for you and what’s not. If a bottle of apple juice, for
instance, has a list of ingredients longer than your arm and is filled with stuff
you can’t pronounce, you know you’re not drinking squeezed apples. Being
aware of what’s in a food may or may not sway your decision to eat it, but at
least you know what you’re putting into your body.
Companies and stocks, too, come with similar labels. All companies that are
publicly traded, or that lure money from the investing public, are required to
disclose what they’re all about. Just as food processors must list all the ingredients that go into their products, companies must tell investors what they’re
composed of.
Unfortunately, though, a giant multinational company can’t put all the information investors need to know inside a tiny rectangle as food companies can.
Instead, the key elements that make up a company are broken down at length
in a series of financial statements and other sources of fundamental data.

05 506455-ch01.indd 9

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

10

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Reading these critical financial statements and gleaning insights from them
are the most basic goals of fundamental analysis. Fundamental analysis is the
skill of reading through all the information companies provide about themselves to make intelligent decisions. Just as you’d want to know what’s in that
Frankenfood you’re about to bite into, you want to know what’s in an investment you’re thinking about adding to your portfolio.

Why Bother with Fundamental Analysis?
You might wonder why you need to hassle with fundamental analysis. After
all, at every family picnic there’s undoubtedly the loudmouthed relative
who’s filled with all sorts of can’t-go-wrong stock tips. Why bother with technical things like net income or discounted cash flow analysis when you can
just turn on the TV, write down a couple of stock symbols, buy the stocks and
hope for the best?
Similarly, you might figure learning how companies operate is just needless
information. After all, you don’t need to know about fuel injection systems,
suspensions, and car battery technology to drive a car. And you don’t need
to know what’s going on behind the curtain to enjoy a play. Some investors
figure they can just pick a couple of hot stocks, buy them, and drive off to
riches.
If the vicious bear market that began in 2007 taught investors anything, it’s
that blindly buying stocks just because you might “like” a company or its
products was hardly a sound way to tune up a portfolio. Chasing hunches and
personal opinion about stocks is often not a great way to invest, as you’ll find
out in Chapter 20.

Some of the real values of
fundamental analysis
Ever notice how there’s always a new wonder diet promising to make you
skinny, and a new pill to make you healthier? More times than not, though, it
seems these things never work. Getting healthy comes back to the basics — a
balanced diet and exercise.
The same goes with investing. Believe it or not, investing can be somewhat
full of fads. There’s always a new investment pundit or economist with a new
way to pick winning stocks. And just as an hour on the treadmill will do you

05 506455-ch01.indd 10

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

Chapter 1: Understanding Fundamental Analysis

11

more good than a bottle full of miracle pills, successfully choosing stocks
often comes back to fundamental analysis.
Fundamental analysis is the classic way to examine companies and investments for a variety of reasons, including the fact it is:
✓ Based on fact, not opinion: It’s easy to get caught up in general enthusiasm about what a company is doing or the products it’s selling. But
fundamental analysis blinds you to this investment hype and gets you
focused on cold-hard business realities. It doesn’t matter if all the kids
in your neighborhood are buying a company’s products, if the company
isn’t making any money at selling them.
✓ Good at pinpointing shifts in the business’ health: If a company’s success is starting to fade, you’ll see it show up on the fundamentals. No,
there won’t be a giant sign saying “Sell this stock.” But there are clues if
you know how to look, as you’ll discover in Chapter 18. Companies are
required to disclose key aspects of their business, so if there’s a problem, a fundamental analyst will often be early at spotting some trouble.
✓ All about execution: Companies’ CEOs are usually good at getting investors focused on the future and how things are going to get better next
quarter. But the fundamentals are based in reality. Just think of children
who say how hard they’re working at school. The report card is still the
tangible evidence of how things are actually going.
✓ A way to put price tags on companies: What’s a painting worth? What’s
a used car worth? Just as with anything else with subjective value,
the price is generally what someone is willing to pay for it. The stock
market, an auction of buyers and sellers, does a good job putting price
tags on companies. But fundamental analysis gives you another way to
see just how much investors, by buying or selling stock, are paying for a
stock.

Driving home an example
One of the best recent examples of how fundamental analysis can help you
and your portfolio is General Motors. For decades, GM represented the might
of U.S. industriousness, know-how, and creativity. GM commanded a massive market value of $3.5 billion in 1928, says Standard & Poor’s. I’ll step you
through what market value means in more detail in Chapter 3, but for now,
just know that GM was the most valuable company by far in 1928.

05 506455-ch01.indd 11

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

12

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

GM vs. Ford
Even months before GM filed for bankruptcy
protection, fundamental analysis could have
served you well.
Back in January 2009, seeing both GM and Ford
facing intense financial strain, many investors
wondered if either one was worth taking a bet
on. Some helpful fundamental analysis tools,
including an analysis of the statement of cash
flows, could have determined whether you lost
a fortune or enjoyed a big gain.
I’ll show you how to read the statement of cash
flow in detail in Chapter 7. But for now, I’m just
giving you a real example of why fundamental
analysis matters to whet your appetite. At the
beginning of 2009, both Ford and GM were constantly in the news. Both faced a tough business climate and both had depressed stock
prices: Ford began 2009 at $2.46 a share and
GM $3.65.
But a quick fundamental analysis showed Ford
was the much better bet. Ford ended the quarter
with $27.5 billion in cash and burnt $600 million

in cash. Don’t let the numbers scare you at this
point. I’m just exposing you to a basic free cash
flow analysis, as you’ll learn about later. Just for
now, know that at the quarterly rate, Ford had
enough cash to last nearly 46 quarters.
Over at GM, however, the company ended
the quarter with just $15.9 billion in cash.
Meanwhile, it burnt through $8.9 billion during
the quarter. A fundamental analyst knew right
away the company wasn’t going to make it
through the year at that rate. That’s critical
information to have known.
Knowing how to do this one type of fundamental analysis may make a world of difference
for investors. In the following six months,
shares of Ford jumped 149% to $6.13. Ford
also did not accept government funding assistance. Meanwhile, shares of GM crashed 79%
to 75 cents.
Makes you want to read the rest of the book,
doesn’t it?

For decades, investors figured a dollar invested in GM was money in the
bank. The company slugged through upturns and downturns and was a lasting power that helped drive the U.S. economy. The company kept paying fat
dividends and kept powering profits higher.
But investors who blindly bet GM would remain a lasting force and ignored
the fundamental signs of trouble suffered a brutal blow on June 1, 2009. On
that day, which will forever remain one of the lowlights of capitalism, GM
became the fourth-largest public company to seek bankruptcy protection,
according to BankruptcyData.com. Shares of GM stock collapsed to just 75
cents a share, down 97% from their level just three years before.
Fundamental analysis may not have helped you predict this shocking outcome of GM. Concrete elements from the company’s financial statements,
though, could have tipped you off to just how challenged GM was well before
it became a penny stock.

05 506455-ch01.indd 12

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

Chapter 1: Understanding Fundamental Analysis

13

Putting fundamental analysis to work
It’s easy to get consumed with the fast-money trading aspects of stocks.
Exciting TV reports about stocks on the move and companies that have new
products practically turn investing into a sporting event. In fact, if you listen
to some traders talk, they rattle off companies’ ticker symbols in rapid-fire
delivery just as sports fans talk about teams. Flashing arrows and rapid trading can become an addiction for people who get into it.
And it’s exactly the headache and insanity fundamental analysis is trying
to help you avoid. After all, stocks rise and fall each minute, day, and week
based on a random flow of news. The constant ups and downs of stocks can
sometimes confound logic and reason. Many readers of my Ask Matt column
at USATODAY.com are baffled when a stock falls even after the company
reports what appears to be good news. Trying to profit from these short-term
swings is a game for gamblers and speculators. It’s futile on a long-term basis.
But that’s not to say investing is gambling. Remember that those stock symbols you see flashing red and green aren’t dice, horses, or cards. They’re
more than just the two, three, or four letters of their ticker symbol.
When you buy a stock, you’re buying a piece of ownership in companies that
make and sell products and services. You’re buying a claim to the companies’
future profits. Owning a piece of a real business over time isn’t gambling, it’s
capitalism.
Fundamental analysis forces you to focus on investing in businesses, not stocks.
You’re not buying a lottery ticket, but a piece of ownership in a company.
If jumping in and out of stocks at the right time isn’t the way to riches, then
what is the trick to successful investing? The answer is to stop thinking of
stocks as just symbols that gyrate each day. The goal of fundamental analysis
is to help you step away from the short-term trading and gambling of stocks.
Instead, you approach investing as if you’re buying a business, not rolling the
dice.
Fundamental analysis ideally helps you identify businesses that sell goods
and services for more than what they paid to produce them. Fundamental
analysis is your tool to evaluate how good a company is at turning raw materials into profits.
Certainly, famed investor Warren Buffett is one of the best-known users of
fundamental analysis. You will read more about how Buffett applies fundamental analysis to investing in Chapter 3.
