
What advice do you have for novices?
Either go at it full force or don't go at it at all. Don't dabble.

Is there anything pertinent that we haven't talked about?
It is very important to me to treat people with fairness and civility.
Maybe it's a reaction to all the abuse I took in the New York trading
rooms. But, whatever the reason, the everyday effort to treat others
with decency has come back to me in many positive ways.

Stuart Walton had no burning desire to be a trader, no special
analytical or mathematical skills, and was prone to emotional trading decisions that caused him to lose all or nearly all his money on

Persistence. He did not let multiple failures stop him.
Self-awareness. He realized his weakness, which was listening to
other people's opinions, and took steps to counteract this personal
flaw. To this end, he decided to work entirely alone and to set aside a
small amount of capital—too small to do any damage—to vent his
tip-following, gambling urges.
Methodology. Walton became successful exactly when he developed a specific market philosophy and methodology.
Flexibility. Although Walton started out by selling powerhouse
stocks and buying bargains, he was flexible enough to completely
reverse his initial strategy based on his empirical observations of
what actually worked in the market. If he believes a stock he previously owned is going higher, he is able to buy it back at a higher price
without hesitation. If he realizes he has made a mistake, he has no
reservation about liquidating a stock, even if it has already fallen far
below his purchase price. Finally, he adjusts his strategy to fit his
perception of the prevailing market environment. In Walton's words,
"One year it might be momentum, another year it might be value."
Diagnostic capability. Most great traders have some special skill
or ability. Walton's talent lies in not only observing the same news
and information as everyone else, but also in having a clearer insight
into the broad market's probable direction—sometimes to the point
where the market's future trend appears obvious to him. This market
diagnostic capability is probably innate rather than learned. As an
analogy, two equally intelligent people can go to the same medical
school, work equally hard, and intern in the same hospital, yet one
will have much greater diagnostic skill because ability also depends
on intrinsic talent.
Walton's case history demonstrates that early failure does not preclude later success. It also exemplifies the critical importance of
developing your own methodology and shutting out all other opinions.

T H E W I S D O M OF V A L U E , THE F O L L Y OF FAD
Another notable feature of Lauer's performance is that even though

MICHAEL LAUER

The Wisdom of Value,
the Folly of Fad
Just to set the record Straight, Michael Lauer was reluctant to do this interview. Nothing personal, you understand. In fact, he admits being a fan of
the earlier Market Wizard books. It's just that he doesn't think he qualifies as a "market wizard"—at least not yet. "Perhaps after I've done this
for ten years, maybe then I'll qualify," he says.
Well, Lauer hasn't been managing a fund for ten years, but in the
seven plus years that he has, very few can match his combination of stellar returns and low risk. Since inception in January 1993, Lauer's flagship
fund has realized a 72 percent average annual compounded return net
after deducting all fees (an estimated 97 percent gross return*, trouncing
the corresponding 13 percent return for the Russell 2000 (the stock
index that most closely matches Lauer's investment universe) and the 20
percent return for the S&P 500. A $1.0 million investment in Lauer's
fund at inception would have grown to an astounding $51.7 million in
just over seven years (net to investors after deducting fees), compared
with corresponding figures of $2.4 and $3.7 million for investments in
the Russell and S&P 500 indexes.
You might think that with such lofty returns, Lauer must be taking
some huge risks. Amazingly, Lauer has achieved his stratospheric returns
while keeping losses both small and short-lived. The maximum peak-tovalley equity decline in Lauer's flagship fund was a moderate 8.7 percent, and it has never taken more than four months for the fund to reach
a new high.
*Gross return figures were not available. This number represents the author's estimate,
based on reported net returns and stated fees.

30

over 90 percent of his returns were earned on the long side, he has managed to do remarkably well during declining market periods. Since the
inception of his Lancer Offshore fund nearly five years ago*, the S&P
500 has registered sixteen monthly declines for an aggregate loss of 60
percent. During those same losing months, Lauer's fund earned a cumulative positive return of 66 percent.
Although Lauer emphasized what he considers the relative brevity of
his track record, his trading experience (a personal account) predates his
fund manager career by over a decade. He acknowledged that the average return for his personal account was even higher than for his funds,
but he downplayed this track record as irrelevant, because it was
achieved using leverage and involved a much lower asset base.
Lauer's flagship fund currently manages over $700 million. The capital under management could be significantly greater, but he is closed to
new investors and even returns assets when profits cause the funds he
manages to grow beyond what he considers an optimal size. Since Lauer
deliberately restricts himself to a small number of major stock investments at any given time (for reasons detailed in the interview), he could
increase the amount of money he manages by simply expanding the small
number of his holdings. Lauer, however, explains that he is very happy
with the status quo. His operation currently consists of only two traders,
two analysts, and several support staff—and he likes this cozy arrangement. He has no desire to increase the size of the firm.
As a college student, Lauer supported himself by driving a cab during
the night shift, an experience he considers far more relevant to his later
success than his formal education. He graduated in 1979 with a B.A.
degree in international relations (he later earned an M.B.A. in finance).
Being fluent in several arcane languages, Lauer briefly went to work for
one of the government intelligence services, an experience he declined to
discuss for confidentiality reasons.
In 1980 an influential family friend, whose judgment he respected,
advised Lauer that he could find a more attractive career path in the
Lauer's performance numbers prior to the start of this fund are available only on a quarterly basis, making monthly comparisons with the S&P 500 index prior to this point
impossible.

financial sector. He arranged for Lauer to be interviewed by Oppenheimer & Co. Lauer landed a job in the stock research department,
where he eventually became a multi-industry and technology analyst.
During his career as a stock analyst, which spanned three brokerage
firms (his subsequent affiliations included Cyrus J. Lawrence and Kidder, Peabody), Lauer was selected to be a member of the Institutional
Investor All-Star analyst team for seven consecutive years—a streak that
ended when he decided to become a portfolio manager in 1993.
The interview was conducted in a conservatively decorated, windowless conference room at Lauer's firm. Lauer's passion for investing and
confidence in the superiority of his own approach came across very
strongly. "I am sure I could explain to you every holding we have, and you
would agree that it makes absolute sense as a compelling investment."
He was also surprisingly opinionated about what he considered the folly
of some of his peers.
Our conversation began with the reason why Lauer does not include
as part of his track record the documented recommendations he made as
an analyst, which date back to 1982 (eleven years prior to the initiation
of his fund).
Note: Although the performance statistics in this introduction were
updated through March 2000, the interview itself (the first one I did for
this book), which contains a number of prognostications regarding specific stocks and funds, was conducted on May 4, 1999.

I guess your recommendations as an analyst cannot really be
turned into a meaningful track record unless you assume that
you would have traded the same percent of equity on each recommendation. But, of course, in real life, it doesn't work that

way. I'm sure you take much larger positions in some trades than
in others.
Absolutely. In fact, many analysts blow out when they become fund
managers because they do not have the conviction level that is essential to put on a big position. I tell my guys that if we come up with a

good idea, and as a firm we only buy 50,000 or 100,000 shares instead
of a million plus, then that trade is a mistake. This is also the reason
why we limit ourselves to a maximum of fifteen major positions (on
the long side).
I take it then that you disagree with the premise that more diversification is better.
For a number of reasons. Concentration is critical to superior performance. The greater the number of stocks you hold, the more marketlike your performance becomes, and the less value you add as a
money manager. Those who preach diversification as a risk control
measure are essentially hedging their fundamental ignorance of their
own holdings.
Also, one of my objectives is to be able to make money in any market climate, which means that I have to decouple my performance
from the market indexes. Limiting myself to a relatively small number
of positions is essential to achieving this goal.
Finally, from a purely practical perspective, it is much easier to
find and stay on top of fifteen positions. I believe that few, if any, fund
managers are as well informed about our fifteen stocks as we are.
Why fifteen as opposed to five or fifty?
There has been some convincing academic research showing that
with fifteen different stocks one can achieve approximately 80 percent of the benefits of much broader diversification. Keep in mind,
though, that to achieve our twin goals of exceptional performance
and low correlation with the broader market, we don't want to diversify too much.
Is this a fixed number?
At any given time, our holdings will exceed fifteen stocks because of
the frequent rotation of our portfolio—the divesting of some of our
positions and the addition of others. But fifteen positions will usually
account for more than 75 percent of the portfolio's value.
What is your correlation with the major indexes?
It's been inconsequential. The closest correlation to an index would
be with the Russell 2000, and only because most of my long positions
happen to be the Russell 2000-type names.

T H E W I S D O M OF VA1UE, THE F O L L Y OF F A D
In your recent letters to clients you've been surprisingly critical
of some mutual fund managers.
What is happening now [May 1999] in the fund industry is not only
dangerous but it's also downright insidious. Many of the largest public funds that individual investors believe are being actively managed,
with stocks presumably being selected based on fundamental merits,
are actually closet index funds.
What do you mean?
Take Fidelity Magellan as an example. When Peter Lynch managed
the fund, he typically held one thousand to two thousand stocks. He
picked stocks based on value and earnings expectations, and his performance was exemplary. During his thirteen-year stewardship, the
fund averaged a 29 percent return, nearly doubling the S&P 500
gains of 16 percent. Now the fund holds only about three hundred
stocks, with most of the money concentrated in about twenty-five
core positions, even though assets have mushroomed from $12 billion
to $90 billion since Peter Lynch's departure.
The fact that their portfolio is composed almost entirely of the
highest capitalization S&P 500 stocks and a few other high capitalization stocks tells you that they are not picking stocks based on fundamental research. Magellan is only masquerading as an actively
managed fund, when in reality it has become nothing more than an
"enhanced index fund"—that is, an S&P 500 index fund that is
weighted to the top-tier stocks. The same can be said of many of
Magellan's peers. You could call this now prevalent investment style
"turbo-indexing."
If the strategy is working in terms of return, what is wrong with
that?
The problem is that their approach depends on the "greater fool"
premise. [It's okay to buy a stock that is grossly overpriced, as long as
you sell it to someone else—a greater fool—even higher.] This
process always ends in tragedy for those left holding the bag, which in
this case will likely be mutual fund investors.
The theoretical case for indexing is actually quite persuasive. It
allows the investor to own a representative piece of the market, with
presumably lower risk due to the index's diversification. In addition,

because of their low turnover of stock holdings, index funds also offer

the benefits of lower management fees and more favorable tax treatment. Frankly, there is nothing wrong with this argument. Indexation,
as it was intended, is a reasonable investment strategy.
As index funds outperformed the majority of other funds at lower
costs, however, they attracted a steadily expanding portion of investment flows. This shift, in turn, created more buying for the stocks in
the index at the expense of much of the rest of the market, which
helped the index funds outperform the vast majority of individual
stocks, and so on. As a result, what started out as a strategy for
investors to link their fortunes to the market via an index has been
turned on its head, with the index responding to the ever-increasing
share of index-linked investment capital.
How do funds such as Fidelity Magellan fit into this picture?
The managers of these funds are not being evaluated based on their
absolute performance, but rather on how their performance compares
with the benchmark—the S&P 500. Thus, their goal has become to
beat the benchmark and is not necessarily linked to their clients' paramount objective: making money.
As a consequence, to advance and preserve their careers, the professional managers have shaped their portfolios to essentially overlap
the S&P 500 index. To the extent that they slightly modify the portfolio,
there has been a strong bias toward a greater concentration in the highest capitalization stocks. This has caused the highest tier of the S&P
500 stocks to become even more extremely overpriced relative to the
rest of the index. Thus, we now have a phenomenon of the top fifty
stocks in the S&P 500 trading at an average of over fifty times estimated earnings, compared with an average of only about twenty for the
remaining 450 stocks in the index, and the high teens for a broaderbased index, such as the Russell 2000. The bottom line is that in the
present perverse incentive structure of benchmark-guided portfolios,
there is more risk for fund managers in not owning certain grossly overvalued mega-capitalization stocks than in abstaining from them.
Including enhanced index funds, such as Fidelity Magellan, the
S&P 500 index funds now account for over two-thirds of new equity
investments. What happens when the enhanced index funds want to

MICHAEL LAUER

lighten or liquidate their current positions, which are overwhelmingly
concentrated in severely overpriced stocks? Who are they going to sell
to? This is an amazingly small community. Only about 25 mutual fund
institutions control almost one-third of total equity assets in this country, and every one of those guys knows what the others are doing. It
may become quite uncivil if they all run for the exits at the same time.
So you're saying that many individual investors who believe they
have placed their money into the most conservative stock funds
are unwittingly holding high-risk investments.
Absolutely. What started out as a conservative, passive investment
strategy has metamorphosed into a "greater fool" investment pyramid.
When this situation begins to unravel, the losses will be horrific. People talk in terms of a bear market being a 20 percent or 30 percent
decline. I can make a case why a stock such as Microsoft—which is
by far the largest component of the S&P 500, and not surprisingly the
biggest holding in Magellan (and most other mutual funds)—could
decline by as much as 80 or 90 percent. I believe that the risk is
potentially quite dreadful, not only to Microsoft, but also to the
indexes that it dominates, and by extension to the unsuspecting individual investors in index-related funds.
That's an intriguingly provocative assertion. Please elaborate.
Microsoft is arguably one of the great success stories of the century
and a terrific company. However, at a market capitalization in excess
of $600 billion, it is valued at over twenty times its annual revenues—
that's revenues, not earnings. To put it in a different perspective, the
market is valuing Microsoft higher than the total GDP for Canada, a
G7 member. And this for a company whose growth rates have been
diminishing and whose primary product line—computer operating
systems—is threatened with obsolescence by alternative solutions. In
addition to the Justice Department, nearly the entire technology
industry is trying to undermine Microsoft—a process that has already
begun to happen.
You cite Microsoft's ratio of capitalization to revenue being very
high at twenty. What would be a normal ratio?
It depends on the industry, but for the stocks in our current portfolio,
market capitalization is typically smaller than revenues. For example,

J-HE W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y O F F A D

one recent holding, Tektronix, had revenues of about $2 billion and a
market capitalization of only $500 million at our cost basis. So in this
case, capitalization was a fraction of the revenues. That's what value
focus is about.
It sounds as if in the case of Microsoft you believe not only that
profits will fail to grow remotely enough to justify the current
valuation, but also that profits may actually be squeezed.
It is interesting that the operating system prices have not yet
declined, but the average selling price of a computer has declined by
over 20 percent in just the last year. All the PC manufacturers are taking the hit, and even Intel is having trouble selling its Pentium 3 chip.
Meanwhile, Microsoft is still charging the same prices they were two
or three years ago. Many of the PC manufacturers are clearly
unhappy that they were left absorbing all the compression in profit
margins. This situation can't last, and I submit to you, most future
compromises will come from Microsoft.
Nor will the forthcoming likely humbling of Microsoft be particularly unique from a historical perspective. We have seen market dominant companies come and go. Think of all the computer companies
of the 1980s that are no longer with us or have become inconsequential players: Burroughs, Sperry Wang, DEC, Data General, Prime
Computer, etcetera. This is a list of companies that thrived for a while
but eventually succumbed to competitive dynamics. When I joined
the business, DEC was the sexiest growth company and IBM was the
reigning technology king. The former was taken out of its misery by
Compaq (which then proceeded to stumble), while the latter is still
trying to redefine itself after several restructuring attempts. In either
case, the investors who stayed with these stocks did rather badly, particularly relative to the market.
I remember when I was working as a junior analyst, Prime Computer had gone from $4 to $40 when the senior analyst recommended
it. That was a terrific lesson for someone who was just beginning. An
institutional salesman asked my "mentor": "With the stock having
gone from $4 to $40, what do you see that the rest of the world
doesn't? Obviously some of the good fortunes that you're talking
about are already reflected in the valuation." His rejoinder was that he

M

CUM!

IAUER

now had a "higher conviction level." It seemed to me that his conviction was grounded in the fact that just about every other major brokerage firm was recommending the stock—a circumstance that
implied he would receive credit if the stock surged, while having the
comfort of lots of company if it plunged. A couple of years later, the
company was essentially out of business. That's what happens in
industries where the technology is so dynamic that it blinds people to
the competitive realities.
What lesson did that experience teach you?
That market perception, not the prevailing fundamentals, determines
a company's valuation. It was the market's perception that drove the
stock from $4 to $40, not the fundamentals. The fundamentals can
be very ephemeral, especially in the technology industry, as I believe
will prove to be the case with Microsoft and, for that matter, much of
the Internet phenomenon. The irony is that, with few exceptions, the
same factors that make an industry exciting also make it a potentially
ruinous investment because it will attract excess financial and intellectual capital.
In other words, the more profitable a business, the more competition it will attract, driving down profit margins.
Exactly. That's why Microsoft has been so resolute about keeping
competitors at bay.
I take it by your comments that you believe the government's
antitrust suit against Microsoft has merit.
Yes, but the case itself will become a moot point because competition from evolving alternative technologies will make their key
product—the operating system—obsolete, or certainly much less
ubiquitous.
Okay, you've made a convincing argument for why Microsoft
stock is on the precipice just waiting for someone to push it off
the cliff. Are you short?
Not now, although we have been from time to time. Keep in mind
that since Microsoft is an institutionally overowned, highly liquid
mega-cap stock—as is typical of most of our shorts—we can put on a
significant short position within an hour or less. Magellan and its
„. peers will take considerably longer to unload it, but with highly bruis-

T H E W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF F A D
ing consequences. Will I be short at the top? Of course not, but I
don't have to be. If the stock goes down 80 percent, as I believe is
possible, there will be plenty of room left on the downside.
But what I am getting at is: What will get you from the concept
into the actual position?
An event that triggers changes in how the company is perceived by
the investment community to something less stellar than it is now.
Another thing we monitor very closely is institutional ownership.
Microsoft has a 95 percent institutional ownership. Who is going to
absorb all of that supply if Fidelity and other benchmarking copycats
decide to reduce their holdings? When the institutional ownership
begins to dwindle, it is a safe bet that the stock will go down under
the weight of its own supply.
