
RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIGURE 14.4
Always keep one eye on overhead supply when considering a 3rd watch setup. This Emisphere pattern shows a perfect
retracement and breakout but the intermediate high just above the entry level may limit reward. The most powerful 3rd
watch events push price into uncharted territory. But excellent setups still execute through breakouts within larger
congestion. Take the entry as long as the pattern shows an adequate profit target before the required exit.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

APPLICATIONS
3rd watch breakouts occur through all time frames. The daily setup offers a small subset of the
trading possibilities with this versatile pattern. Learn to recognize the many forms and variations
that this opportunity takes. The pattern wields more power when tight congestion builds below the
second high and generates a smaller breakout before the major resistance gets taken out. Congestion
above the high may trigger frustration. The formation can induce a trendline of rising highs that
limits momentum acceleration.

WATCH ECHO
One good pattern deserves another. This fascinating setup illustrates the importance of fractals in
trend development. The price chart draws one complex 3rd watch breakout and immediately moves
to a new high, where it draws another similar pattern. Close examination also reveals that both
handles form complete 3rd watch patterns by themselves.
Description
Market draws a new high and failed second top.
Price retests the failed top in a smaller time frame and pulls back.

Price rises into a new test that synchronizes through both time frames.
The market breaks out through resistance in both time frames.
The chart starts the same process again at a higher price level.
The vertical distance from the base low to high resistance measures a price target for the
breakout.
Don’t plan for a watch echo, but evaluate this complex pattern when it appears. The repeating
nature predicts retracement levels and multi-time frame breakout points.
FIGURE 14.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 14.5)
•
•
•

Global Industries prints a major high at 11-½ (1).
Price sells off into a small double bottom and retraces 62%, where it fails in a doji reversal
(9).
A test of the lows at (4) sets up a Big W bottom.

•
•
•
•

Price completes first rise (2) and fails in a double top test (3).
The next low pulls back to the 62% retracement (6), forms a double bottom, and starts to
rally.
Congestion (7) builds under the second high. This completes a 3rd watch variation (5) with a
breakout point just below 10-½.
Price breaks out (8) of the small 3rd watch and larger pattern in 3 bars.
FIGURE 14.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 14.6)
•

•
•
•

Enter long when the smaller pattern breaks near 10-½. Hold through a test of the horizontal
high at 11-¼ because odds favor a breakout through that level on the third try. This offers a
30% profit before whipsaws start a shakeout under 14 (7).
A new 3rd watch pattern (4) starts to form at (1). The lows (2) print at the 62% retracement
of the rally leg.
The lows (2) also mark the first pullback to the prior 3rd watch and offer an excellent entry
point. Place a tight stop loss just below 11.
The new high fails a test over 15 (3).

•
•
•

The next pullback ends in a long hammer. Price rises to 15-½, retreats for one bar, and
releases to higher prices (5). Enter on the breakout with a stop loss just below 15.
A quick shakeout tests the position (8).
The first pullback to the 3rd watch top (6) offers another low-risk entry.

Reward:Risk
This less-volatile stock reduces risk while allowing nice profits. Risk remains under 1-point through
most opportunities while reward stands at 2–3 points. The smaller movement rules out very shortterm strategies and favors longer position trades. Note how well the pullbacks respond to the
support of the 3rd watch highs. These natural barriers offer low-risk dip trip plays.

3rd WATCH CLASSIC
This setup presents the classic cup and handle breakout that appears through daily chart
examination. These represent position trade opportunities unless the short-term action offers quick
profits. The fun starts after the initial breakout, when momentum strategies produce the best
rewards. Buy pullbacks as long as the underlying market stays strong.
Description
•
•
•
•
•
•

The stock prints a long-term high and strong reversal.
A base forms that persists for at least 1–3 months.
Price rises into a test of the old high and fails.
The next pullback remains on top of support that forms during the basing period.
The stock rallies back into the old highs and breaks out strongly.
The vertical distance from the base low to high resistance measures a price target for the
breakout.

The setup signals after the new high breakout. This increases initial risk because the crowd has
joined the action. Try to wait for a pullback or get promising candidates into the watch list a few
sessions before price reaches the new high test. These breakouts tend to show great strength. This
limits early pullbacks and may force a simple trend-following strategy with an arbitrary stop loss.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 14.7)
Idec Pharmaceuticals ends a long rally with a double top (5) that breaks down in a hole-in-thewall (1) gap.
Strong resistance (4) sets up in the long shadow at the top of the pattern.
Price pulls back to a 50% retracement of the rally and finds support through a 2B bottom (2)
test.
The stock rallies back into the first high and fails in a new hole-in-the-wall (3) gap.
The pullback finds support above the base low (6) and starts to rally for the third time.

FIGURE 14.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 14.8)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

A long expansion bar (2) thrusts into the September high (1) and signals the 3rd watch
breakout.
The next morning opens with a small gap (7). This marks an excellent intraday entry if the
swing trader can watch first-hour action to confirm that the gap will hold.
Place a stop loss just below the September shadow for a longer-term position trade. Place a
stop loss just behind the gap for an intraday or short-term swing trade.
The next two bars shoot out the top Bollinger Band and demand a quick exit.
First pullback (3) to the 3rd watch high requires great skill to enter because it doesn’t reach
support. The shorter-term chart may reveal a low-risk intraday opportunity.
The two pullbacks to 100 (5) both offer good entry but require fast hands.
Trendline (4) forms from the pullbacks.

•

A final pullback (6) bounces and breaks through the trendline into a hole-in-the-wall that
ends the rally.

FIGURE 14.8

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
The setup requires wide stop loss and great risk tolerance. High volatility makes this a dangerous
environment for short-term entry but a rewarding one for position trades. The market offers one
excellent opportunity for all traders at the small gap that breaks the 3rd watch into new highs. Many
classic setups feature a single point in price and time that marks a perfect execution.

SWING WATCH
Short-term markets set up many 3rd watch variations. These often appear within congestion and
require defensive management. The 60-minute chart provides the logical starting point to identify
these swing opportunities. Don’t demand perfect horizontal S/R for the intraday watch breakout.

This volatile arena prints many small violations, and swing traders need to apply skilled vision to
measure setup reward and risk.
Description
•
•
•
•

The intraday market prints a failed double top across 5–10 daily sessions.
Price pulls back no further than 62% and rallies into the testing zone.
The market breaks out to new highs.
The vertical distance from the base low to high resistance measures a price target for the
breakout.

The pullback can violate deep Fibonacci levels by a few ticks, but stand aside when it drops toward
a 100% retracement. That signals a possible trend change or a different congestion pattern. Try to
find the logical breakout point when chart noise makes interpretation difficult. Remember that time
of day impacts short-term setups. Small 3rd watch breakouts often align better with time than with
price.
FIGURE 14.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 14.9)

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Texas Instruments prints a doji (4) at 75 that signals the end of a swing.
Related price bars set up a resistance line (1) at 74-¼.
The first high breaks down in an island reversal (9).
Price gaps repeatedly (3) through the 50-bar EMA.
The double top test (5) generates a down trendline (2).
Price pulls back to the 62% retracement and prints a small double bottom (7).
The next rally pushes back into the trendline (2) and congests (6) for 1 day.
A morning gap (8) breaks though both the trendline (2) and resistance line (1).

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 14.10)
Enter on the gap (1) after first-hour testing. The narrow range of the breakout bar reduces risk.
Price rises throughout the day with few whipsaws, prints a NR7, and breaks to a new high in the
last hour (2). The stock sits at the daily high near close and encourages an overnight hold.
The next morning prints a strong gap (3) and wide-range bar. The 5-point gap encourages a fast
exit. The expansion bar also signals the need to take profits.
The 3rd watch breakout stands at the midpoint (5) for the entire rally.
Over the next six sessions, price action draws a tight symmetrical triangle (4) that finally breaks
down, fills the gap, and reverses the market.
FIGURE 14.10

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
A 2-day swing trade could easily yield a 10-point profit with very limited risk. The breakout over
the 3rd watch high faces few whipsaws. The price action encourages an overnight position. A fast
exit without an overnight hold still books a 1–3-point profit. The greatest risk comes from buying
the wide gap. But this type of risky strategy never shows up in the swing trader’s playbook.

PART THREE
MAKING THE TRADE

15 CHAPTER
PRECISE TRADE EXECUTION

TIMING AND METHODS
Bad execution ruins a perfect setup. Seek highly favorable conditions for trade entry or stay out of
the market until they appear. Apply the right strategy when pulling the trigger and manage the
position into a profitable exit.

EXECUTION TARGET
The execution target (ET) defines where to buy or sell short. A promising setup points to this
narrow price level through detailed S/R analysis, pattern recognition, and evaluation of reward:risk
considerations. Swing traders also review all external elements that might affect the opportunity
before picking this important number. Keep in mind that the ET changes dynamically as new data
supplement the prior analysis. A single tick may impact the calculated reward:risk and remove the
position from consideration for execution.
The execution zone (EZ) stands between short-term price movement and the prechosen ET. It
marks an attention boundary for impending entry. Swing traders shift their focus toward the ET
when price penetrates the EZ. Draw this interface at a distance that allows sufficient time to
examine whether or not to execute the setup when price hits the target. Use common sense to
identify useful EZs. One simple method just looks at recent volatility and measures an adequate
fixed distance from the ET. Another finds the last intermediate S/R that the stock must pass before
reaching the ET and places it there.
Watch short-term chart and tape action closely as price moves through the EZ. Substantial evidence
should appear to confirm the setup analysis and anticipated execution. Time, crowd, and trend
movement must all validate that the predicted reversal, breakout, or fade will print as expected.
Often a burst of activity on the time and sales ticker will supply all the required confirmation. But
remember that some excellent signals require a lack of participation. For example, entry into a
contracting empty zone interface offers a very narrow EZ and low-risk ET.
FIGURE 15.1
Nextel pulls back after a morning gap. The big hole survives the opening hour and raises the odds of a successful
test. A trendline sets up at whole number 60 and the 38% retracement. Logic places the execution target around
59-3/4 since the pattern promises a low-risk entry under 60. The execution zone fits well right under the small
bounce at 61. The swing trader then places a limit order that can be lifted quickly if price action turns sour
through the EZ.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The swing trader must choose to execute or stand aside as price strikes the ET. This important
decision requires both skill and experience. The markets never provide enough information to make
fully confident choices. All opportunities carry risk and limited odds for success. Even perfect trade
setups will yield very bad positions under certain circumstances. So learn to think and act logically
in this uncomfortable environment and realize that pulling the trigger will never be easy.
The required EZ feedback changes with every new setup. But this attention process yields
successful trades quickly. It promotes low-risk and high-opportunity because it relies upon the best
execution price for a particular pattern. In addition to building profits, a well-managed EZ strategy
enables swing traders to avoid losers as they uncover the secrets of time and tape before risking
capital.
Longer-term positions require less active time management. Execute setups as soon as price strikes
predefined targets and avoid small details on the real-time screen. Rely on well-placed physical
stops to enter the market rather than elusive EZs. But time and timing gain importance as holding
period shortens and undivided attention becomes a vital element in every trade decision. The
intraday chart takes precedence over the daily view for most swing traders. Rely on it to confirm or
refute short-term setup analysis and execution planning. When the real-time chart and tape action
don’t support the intended trade, pass it up and move on to the next opportunity.

Always filter timing considerations through the personal trading plan. This additional analysis
forces the swing trader to stand aside on many good setups. For example, an ET that strikes during
the first hour will not trigger a position if chosen tactics avoid that time period. Opportunity must
also match execution. A low-risk ET may not signal a good trade within the predefined holding
period, or a lack of liquidity may prevent a complete fill at the expected price.
FIGURE 15.2
Broadvision gets ready to break out of a downtrend. A Fib grid over the first hour range shows rising congestion
right at the trendline and 62% retracement shortly after 11 a.m. The stock mounts the trendline and starts a first
pullback. Place an EZ under the breakout bar and buy at support if conditions stay favorable. But the 1-min chart
quickly draws a small head and shoulders pattern while price drops below the 62% retracement on the 5-minute
chart. These two strong warnings should be enough to stand aside or exit the new trade quickly.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

THE TRADING DAY
Decide how actively to manage trade executions and open positions during each session.
Professionals watch every tick and respond to very short-term market turns. Investor hobbyists just
read the morning paper and gather enough information to follow their favorite stocks. Most active
swing traders fall somewhere in between these two extremes. They often have full-time jobs in

other professions but can access real-time markets periodically through a network or dial-up
connection.
Overnight positions benefit greatly from real-time market access. One–three-day and 3–7-day
strategies require solid execution skills to maximize profits. Daily bars lack the important details
that swing traders need to manage short-term tactics. Both of these multiday holding periods
respond well to the 60-minute charting landscape. This broad intraday view reacts slowly so
participants can carry on their other responsibilities. It also allows them to check real-time market
development at regular intervals and make informed decisions.
This important time zone responds to a variety of execution strategies that take advantage of
opportunity and control risk. But a standard direct-access interface may not provide the limit order
options needed to manage these longer holding periods. While the classic discount broker offers one
alternative, first investigate broker-dealer hybrids that permit execution through market makers and
specialists as well as a variety of ECNs. These versatile order screens allow greater flexibility for
the part-time participant who steps in and out of the market.
Each trading day signals unexpected opportunities. Trending markets may generate fresh patterns or
economic reports may push price into new territory. In either case, the swing trader must quickly
separate the ETs that represent good profit setups from those that carry danger. Liquid stocks under
intensive examination prior to the new session offer the most dependable prospects. Intraday price
action invokes confident strategies when major swing levels have already imprinted deeply into
short-term memory.
Overall sentiment, shock events, and volatility all affect the success of swing trade execution.
Always try to take positions that converge with current market conditions. Watch for the major
indices and NYSE TICK to line up just as the ET strikes. Good profits can come from hot picks
that swim against the stream. But both %WIN and AvgWIN improve when short-term market
cycles support positions. This natural alignment provides a powerful filter for consistent risk
management and builds trader longevity.
Use time of day knowledge to track the 90-minute cycles that drive short-term markets. Look for
the hidden buy-and-sell swing within the restless intraday crowd. This classic oscillation follows a
larger 3-day cycle that alternates buy, sell, and sell short days. With a little practice, swing traders
can find their place within all of this quirky market behavior and employ strategies to take
advantage of those that execute against the clock.
Watch for first- and last-hour action to disrupt important cycles as larger influences unwind through
the markets. Shock events will shift emotional behavior and establish new timing considerations as
they strike a hidden reset button that changes the flow of buying and selling. This sudden imbalance
offers opportunity when swing traders shift gears quickly to take advantage of new conditions.
Pay close attention to intraday signposts for evidence of unusual price behavior. A third-bar reversal
often tests and fades the opening trend. One side may capitulate near the first hour’s end and trigger
a sharp trend move. Whipsaws and false moves may characterize the session as it treads into the
lunch hour. Look for the early afternoon to bring new bursts of volume and interest. Observe 2:30
p.m. closely for a selloff as the bond market enters the final half hour. Check for a last fade at 3:30
p.m. just before the market day draws to a conclusion. And always remember that markets can
reverse quickly into contrary movement if signpost events fail to show up on time.
Stand apart from the crowd and avoid its irrational behavior. Emotional bursts of buying and selling
often signal opportunity in the opposite direction. This contrary mechanism reveals a frustrating

characteristic of modern markets: profit rarely follows the direction of the herd. Consider that price
may move opposite to the current popular wisdom through all time frames and opportunities.
Choose the reaction and avoid the emotion whenever possible. Successful careers can be built on
divergent opinion. And the most profitable trades come in the most uncomfortable situations.
FIGURE 15.3
Time execution to broader market forces and improve results. Altera spends a full day building a significant mesa
top. Price then approaches the breakdown level at 104 just as Nasdaq starts the last leg of a small descending
triangle. Support breaks and begins a midday decline after it pulls back to pick up well-timed short sales.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

BUILDING EXECUTION SKILLS
Successful execution requires logic and simplicity. The 7-Bells and watch lists locate classic setups
on the verge of sharp price expansion. Pattern Cycles measure opportunity through many time
frames in a single glance. Time of day places the setup into a favorable or unfavorable cycle while
the charting landscape focuses attention toward the lowest risk entry. Advancing price pierces the
execution zone, and the swing trader pulls the trigger just as it strikes the execution target.
FIGURE 15.4
Chiron swings repeatedly through short-term reversals on the 60-minute chart. Note how often price bars reach

toward a new high or low but immediately jump back in the opposite direction. Only the trend from 34 to 43
rewards momentum players, while noisy violations and painful whipsaws mark the balance of chart activity.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Consistent performance requires original thinking and seeing. Maintain an open mind and allow
intuition to point out new trade prospects. Then apply execution tools to filter bias and confirm the
obvious. Swing traders miss many opportunities when tactics depend on rigid definitions or narrow
systems. Each setup looks different than the last one. Never trade anything the same way twice.
Avoid head games and just enter at the ET when a setup presents major convergence. The CV×4
represents one such profitable opportunity. When an ET cross-verifies in four or more ways,
consider the trade on price alone. Setups produce a very high signal-to-noise ratio when they point
repeatedly to a single number. This sharply raises the odds of a successful position. However, this
strategy can also trigger major discomfort. It often requires buying a down gap or breaking a
personal strategy rule. So take care to require narrow precision through each verifying element and
pinpoint entry to within a few ticks. Then exercise defensive loss management should the trade go
badly.
Experiment with many execution methods until they embed themselves firmly into your
subconscious mind. Effortless entry comes when the skilled intellect can quickly digest complex
information in original ways. Fortunately, the trading puzzle contains only a limited number of
