
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

369

unfortunate because the forex markets tend to be the most random and least predictable
of all the major markets in many time frames—it is difficult to derive a quantifiable shortterm edge in the currency market. One reason might be that a lot of the activity in the
forex markets is driven by a complex web of factors and much of the activity in these
markets is secondary.
Futures are also problematic for many new traders, because even with mini contracts, considerable risk capital is needed to navigate these markets. A stock trader might
be able to start trading and, using odd lots (odd lots are less than 100-share lots), might
be able to limit her entire risk to $10,000, risking perhaps $50 on a trade. It takes a long
time to lose $10,000 in $50 increments, which is exactly how the beginner should be
thinking. For most futures traders, $50,000 is probably a realistic initial risk to allocate to
their learning period. Many traders are drawn to stocks because they come from investing backgrounds and owning stock is intuitive, but these traders are at a disadvantage
because shorting stocks also needs to quickly become intuitive.
Choose a Time Frame The primary question here is do you want to day trade, swing
trade, or invest for the long haul? Details of whether you want to use 10- or 15-minute
bars are considerably less important than this big-picture time frame decision. There are
advantages to day trading, especially for the new trader. A swing trader might see a few
hundred patterns in a year, but a day trader will see hundreds in a single week. The
immersion and focus on pattern assimilation can result in a greatly accelerated learning
curve, provided the trader can enter into the right psychological state to take advantage
of the opportunity. In addition, the more times you apply a statistical edge, the more
consistent and larger your profits will be; no other time frame offers as many “at bats” as
day trading does.
However, the costs and challenges of day trading are severe; the impact of transaction costs alone presents an insurmountable barrier for many traders. For instance,
imagine a trader with a $250,000 account who does 10 trades a day and who likes to
trade stocks in the $150 to $200 range that might have, on average, $0.05 spreads. Furthermore, assume this trader pays $0.001 commission per share and no exchange or electronic communication network (ECN) fees on balance. (These are extremely favorable
assumptions.) Last, assume the trader consistently bids or offers for his exits and enters
trades with market orders, so he is paying the spread on 50 percent of the shares he
trades. If he does 10 trades a day on 1,000 shares, transaction costs will total $502 a day,
meaning that he has to make about $126,000 a year just to cover costs. This is a 50 percent annual return, again, just to break even. To put that in perspective, the Renaissance
Technologies Medallion Fund, widely considered to be the best of the best, has averaged
an annual return just under 40 percent since its inception; traders and funds that can
make 25 percent a year are rock stars in this industry. This is a tremendous vig for the
new trader, so consider this carefully.
The other issue with day trading is that the psychological demands are extreme.
Day traders ride the complete emotional roller coaster from euphoria to despair, usually
several times in a single trading day. Unless you have the emotional control of a Buddhist

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

370

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

monk, day trading will play on every psychological weakness you have, and you will
frequently find yourself under a degree of stress that challenges the open receptiveness
needed for optimal learning. I am not saying that no one should day trade, but you need
to be aware of the costs and challenges of this type of trading.
On the opposite end of the spectrum are long-term investors who intend to hold
positions for years. For many of these players, a month is a short time frame and they
consider anything on the weekly chart to be pure noise. At this level, infrequent trading
and position adjustment become barriers to the trader who needs to assimilate patterns
and to learn to make decisions. It is not that technical patterns do not work in the long
term. The balance of mean reversion and range expansion is a little different in some time
frames, but technical tools retain their validity even at long time horizons. The problem
for the long-term investor is that you will not get to see them work very often and it is
difficult to build intuition about the market’s movements if you are making only a few
decisions a year.
In the middle of the spectrum are the swing traders. Properly, the term swing trading does not define a specific time frame, but rather a specific style of trading—looking
to target and to profit from one specific swing in the market, usually the next one, while
tolerating as little pain as possible. A swing trader will attempt to position long as the
market turns into an uptrend, and will usually not be interested in sitting through retracements in that trend. Some swing traders may aim for holding periods of two days to
two weeks, while others may look to hold for two weeks to three months, and still others
may focus on swing trading hourly charts with holding periods ranging from a few hours
to two days. For many traders, the swing trading approach in an intermediate time frame
of several days to several weeks offers an excellent balance: Trading is frequent enough
that learning takes place quickly, and most analysis can be done outside of market hours,
minimizing the decisions that must be made under pressure. This has the dual advantage
of allowing the trader to enter into an open, receptive state, while also allowing time for
deep reflection and analysis of the patterns being considered.
Choose a Style Though there are a thousand subtleties to a trading style, and every
successful trader creates a style that fits some key elements of his or her personality,
there are two key questions to consider: are you a trend follower or countertrend trader,
and do you want to be a scalper or hold for bigger moves? It is impossible for a new
trader to answer these questions without some exposure to markets and to the actual
trading process; the answer may change for a trader at different points in a career, but
finding the answers to these questions is a key part of knowing who you are as a trader.
As a group, most traders have strong personalities, are opinionated, and are contrary to the extreme. As a result, they also tend to be distrustful of consensus and groupthink, and most traders find that fading (going against) moves comes more naturally
than following the trend. In addition, there is a tendency to regard markets that have
made large, sudden moves as being mispriced, either on sale or ridiculously overpriced.
However, traders who would focus exclusively on fading moves need to deal with an important issue: with-trend trades are usually easier and offer better expected value than

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

371

countertrend setups. The most effective fade traders lie in wait until markets reach
ridiculous emotional extremes on the time frame they are trading, and then they pounce.
This requires extreme patience, discipline, and maturity. If you go into the market constantly looking for opportunities to fade, you will find them, but you will often be steamrollered as markets simply keep going. The crowd may be dumb, but they are often right
and trends can go much further than anyone would expect.
There are advantages to trend following: with-trend trades tend to be less transactionally oriented, and it is possible for a single successful trend trade to make many multiples of the amount risked on that trade. However, trend traders will accumulate many
small losses while they work to find the one market that will trend. It certainly is a viable
strategy, but it is not the answer for all traders. There are strong statistical tendencies
for mean reversion, and traders working a disciplined approach to fade trades may find
that they can achieve higher returns and more effective deployment of capital, albeit at
the expense of much harder work and many more transactions.
Scalping refers to a style of trading that focuses on a large number of very small
trades. We usually think of this on very short time frames, but it is also possible to scalp
on a daily or higher time frame; the key is simply that the expected profit or loss is a very
small percentage of the average-sized move on that time frame. Scalpers are exposed to
very high transaction costs, and are rarely involved for the big swing. Scalpers may take
five cents out of an intraday swing that moves two or three points. So, why scalp? The
best answer is that some people and some personality types are good at scalping, and it
can offer these people consistent profits. If you believe you want to be a scalper, realize
that these edges have been significantly eroded in recent years by more efficient market
microstructure, and the game could well be completely over for the human trader within
the next decade. Many traders choose to scalp because they lack the discipline to wait
for actual trade setups—but this is not a good reason to scalp. If you choose to scalp, do
so because it is the right answer for your personality, not because you are undisciplined
and impatient.
Let me share my personal perspective on these questions: the best answer for most
traders is to reach some kind of middle ground. Though traders should focus on a handful of patterns to trade, especially at first, it is probably best if some of those patterns are
with-trend and some are countertrend. If you have only one set of tools, you will tend to
force every market pattern into the context of that set of tools. If you trade only countertrend trades, you will always be looking for places to fade. If you trade only with the
trend, you will ignore the spots when trends might be overextended and will always be
focused only on finding the next spot to enter with the trend. In other words, if the only
tool you have is a hammer, every problem you encounter will look like a nail!
Discretionary or Systematic? The choice between discretionary trading and systematic trading is also important. This book has been written for the discretionary
trader, but some traders may discover they are more suited for a systematic approach.
They may find that they are not good at handling the stress of making decisions under
pressure and that they function better in an analytical context far removed from the heat

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

372

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

of battle. These traders are not doomed to failure, and they could be well-equipped to do
quantitative system development. Some traders also find success with a hybrid approach,
utilizing a trading system and making intuitive interventions in that system’s decisions at
critical points. A word of warning is in order here: If you are going to do this, carefully
monitor your hybrid results and compare them to the raw system results to be sure that
you are actually adding something of value. Many traders who do this intervene based on
their emotional reactions to risk, and their actions are rarely constructive. Another point
(which would seem to be obvious) is that your system must actually work and must actually show a profit after all costs are considered. If your system does not show a solid
track record in properly done backtests and forward tests, it probably will not work in
the market.
Also, if you choose to be a discretionary trader, carefully consider why you made
that choice. Many discretionary traders avoid the systematic route because of laziness
or because they lack the quantitative skills to really understand system development.
This is a mistake. Discretionary trading is probably the hardest trading there is; it takes
more work, more time, more analysis, more self-reflection, and more self-control to
achieve success in this arena than in any other type of trading. In addition, if you are
a discretionary trader, you are the most important element of your system. Any outside stress—whether it be illness, financial problems, relationship problems, sickness,
or injury—that compromises your emotional balance can seriously jeopardize your trading results. Good discretionary traders who find success over the long haul develop a
system to monitor themselves and their emotional state, and usually reduce their risk at
times when they are not at their peak performance level.

SUMMARY
Though I have made this point repeatedly throughout this book, it bears repeating here:
one of the most important keys to successful trading is consistency. Consistency applies
to your actions and interactions with the market, but also to seemingly mundane points
like your daily schedule, record keeping, analysis of your results, and review of your
journals. Good trading is, to a large degree, boring and predictable. This is another key
reason that many traders fail: they are drawn to the markets and to trading by what they
perceive as a challenging, glamorous adventure, and are unable to make the adjustment
when confronted with the reality of competent trading, which is very different. If you are
seeking excitement in the market, you will find it. Trade too much risk on one trade, take
reckless entries, skip a few days’ review of your positions, put on large size before an
impending economic report—any of these things will generate an exciting outcome, but
probably not a good one. Creating excitement is often at odds with creating profits; good
traders strive for consistency first and foremost.
Consistency is important from at least two perspectives. First, it is not possible to
evaluate the efficacy of any trading system or rule set if you are not applying it with

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

373

perfect consistency and discipline. Imagine that you have a trading system that is performing poorly but you are also trading it inconsistently; the bottom-line results are a
combination of both the system’s actual performance and your own inconsistent application of that system. It would be extremely illogical to make adjustments to the system
rules based on this performance, but this is an error many developing traders make. The
market is such a random environment that your first task should be to remove degrees
of freedom affecting your results. If you are a self-directed trader, this should be the focus of your early development: remove degrees of freedom whenever possible. If you are
an institutional trader, the confines of your job description will take care of this mandate, which is one reason that traders in clearly defined roles develop competence much
faster than most self-directed traders. Second, for traders in both roles, consistency in
your planned study times, review, and even specific screen setups will foster the rapid
assimilation of market patterns on a deep level, quickly leading to the growth of real
market sense and flow.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 12

Becoming a Trader

Intention, good or bad, is not enough.
—John Steinbeck

ost of this book applies equally well to individual or institutional traders across a
wide range of time frames and asset classes. The lessons of statistical tendencies
and market structure are universal; ideas regarding trade and risk management
are important for everyone, and can even be adapted to work in conjunction with Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) in some applications. This chapter is different; it is written
specifically for the individual self-directed trader trying to manage all of the complex
tasks of trading on his or her own. The rest of the book has given you many of the pieces
you need to be successful. Without a firm understanding of all of those pieces, you are
not likely to be successful in the long run, but even if you are able to master the individual parts, success may still be elusive. Putting it all together into a coherent whole,
building a trading methodology that fits your personality, and living through the learning
curve make up a monumental challenge.
This chapter also is intended to be a reality check. If there is one message for new
traders to take away from this book, it is this: trading is hard—very hard. It will challenge
you in ways that you cannot imagine, and it will take much longer than you expect to
reach a level of competence. Your success will be incremental and ephemeral at first.
Expect an emotional roller coaster where progress is followed by errors and failures
that erase most of that progress in the next period. Remember that most people who try
to trade will fail, or trading will remain a marginal hobby that has no real financial impact
on their net worth. If you are determined to make it something more, you have a long,
hard journey ahead, and you must be prepared.

M

375

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

376

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

THE PROCESS
The challenges of becoming a trader are similar in many ways to those faced by doctors,
lawyers, or engineers in that a period of education is followed by a grueling period of
apprenticeship and on-the-job training. Many people give up and fail at some point in the
process and move to other careers, but some make it through and become competent.
Fewer still achieve real mastery and rise to the top of their profession—the elite in any
discipline are rare. Trading differs from those careers in that the path to mastery is not
as clearly laid out, and there are no prizes for second best. In many professions, people
can develop the skills to become competent but not exceptional and can make a good living. In trading, especially for the individual trader, only the superstars make substantial
profits over a long period of time.
In the interest of moderating expectations, it might be useful to lay out a rough road
map of the typical path of trader development. In some ways, this is an artificial exercise
because individual traders will have dramatically different experiences at some points
due to differences in environment, innate ability, mentoring, or pure luck. Traders’ development will also depend, to a large degree, on the specific market environment in which
they begin their education—some years are more challenging than others. However, the
following stages are a useful guide:

r Pretrader. Everything is new at this stage, and everything is difficult. This is the point
where the trader is learning the very basics of charting and of market structure and
is also just starting to explore the marketplace. A trader at this stage has no business actually placing trades, because the emotional charge will hinder the learning
process, and losses are virtually assured. Most traders should probably spend three
months or so in this stage. Papertrading (trading a simulated, not real money, account) has limited utility, but it can be useful at this stage to acclimate the trader
to the process of making decisions under uncertainty and in response to market
movements.
r Novice trader. This trader is still guaranteed to lose, so his maxim must be “Stay
small.” At this stage, traders are not trading to make money; they are trading for
experience and to begin to deal with the emotional challenges of trading. Introspection and constant journaling are critical in this stage of development, which may
last six months to a full year. Mistakes are common in this stage, but they are also
learning opportunities, so trade size must be kept small enough that they are not too
destructive to trading capital or emotional balance. If the trader neglects the process
of journaling and trade review, these mistakes simply become losses and fall short
of being the learning experiences they should be. One of the main signs of progress
in this stage is that the trader will start to lose money more slowly than before. The
novice trader is still losing, but losing less often and less consistently.
r Early competent trader. The first step toward making money is to stop losing money.
A trader whose wins and losses balance out (before commissions) has taken the first

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

Becoming a Trader

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

377

steps to competence. Reaching this stage may take a year or more of very hard work.
At this stage, the trader is still losing money every month due to transaction costs and
other fees.
r Competent trader. The first stage of real competence is achieved when the trader is
able to cover transaction costs with trading profits. Most traders find that they begin to develop emotional balance and control at this stage, and that they are not too
attached to results and can focus more on the process. The trader will have an established routine for market review, execution, and trade review. Journaling is still
important, but many of the psychological hurdles have been conquered and attention can shift to understanding how probabilities change while a trade is in progress.
Reaching this stage may take a year and a half to two years for some traders. Consider this carefully—two years into the journey, a realistic expectation is to finally
have accomplished the goal of being able to pay for your transaction costs. This may
not seem like much, but very few individual traders ever survive to this stage.
r Proficient trader. Here the trader starts making money. Errors and mistakes are far
less frequent, but when they do happen, they are corrected and reviewed, and the
lessons are quickly assimilated. The trader has been exposed to the stressors of trading so many times that they have now lost most of their emotional charge and the
trader is able to approach the markets in an open, receptive state. Trading returns
are still variable and there may be significant losing periods, but the trader is able
to match or beat appropriate benchmarks for most periods. As competence grows,
the trader can look to manage larger and larger pools of money; developing the skills
of trading larger size and risk becomes a focus at this stage. Most individual traders
will be able to depend on income from their trading operation at some point in this
stage, provided that they have access to sufficient capital. Expect that getting here
may well take three to five years for the average trader.
r Experienced trader. It is difficult to imagine a trader becoming a true veteran without living through a complete bull/bear market cycle—about a decade in most cases.
This trader has finally seen it all and has also become cognizant of the unknown
and unknowable risks that accompany all market activity. It is possible for developing traders to gain much of this veteran trader’s knowledge through study at earlier
stages of development, but there is no substitute for experience and seeing events
unfold in the market in real time. Even this experienced trader is not immune to losing periods. For instance, it is not uncommon for very proficient traders to stumble
in the presence of an outside influence such as illness or family issues, but these
traders usually have the control to know when to scale back their operations to limit
the damage.
