
P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

Fundamental Trading Strategies

171

This difference between countries that offer high interest rates versus
countries that offer low interest rates is what makes carry trades possible.
Let’s take another look at the previous carry trade example, but in a
slightly more detailed way:
Imagine an investor in Switzerland who is earning an interest rate of
0.25 percent per year on her bank deposit of Swiss francs. At the same
time, a bank in Australia is offering 4.75 percent per year on a deposit
of Australian dollars. Seeing that interest rates are much higher with the
Australian bank, this investor would like to find a way to earn this higher
rate of interest on her money.
Now imagine that the investor could somehow trade her deposit of
Swiss francs paying 0.25 percent for a deposit of Australian dollars paying
4.75 percent. What she has effectively done is to sell her Swiss franc deposit
and buy an Australian dollar deposit. After this transaction she now owns
an Australian dollar deposit that pays her 4.75 percent in interest per year,
4.50 percent more than she was earning with her Swiss franc deposit.
In essence, this investor has just done a carry trade by “buying” an
Australian dollar deposit, and “selling” a Swiss franc deposit.
The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capital
flows out of Switzerland and into Australia as investors take their Swiss
francs and trade them in for Australian dollars. Australia is able to attract
more capital because of the higher rates it offers. This inflow of capital
increases the value of the currency (see Figure 10.6).
To summarize: Carry trades are made possible by the differences in
interest rates between countries. Because they prefer to earn higher interest rates, investors will look to buy and hold high-interest-rate-paying
currencies.

When Do Carry Trades Work Best?
Carry trades work better during certain times than others. In fact, carry
trades are the most profitable when investors as a group have a very specific attitude toward risk.

FIGURE 10.6 Eﬀects of a Carry Trade: AUD/CHF Carry Trade Example 1

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

172

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

How Much Risk Are You Willing to Take? People’s moods tend
to change over time—sometimes they may feel more daring and willing
to take chances, while other times they may be more timid and prone to
being conservative. Investors, as a group, are no different. Sometimes they
are willing to make investments that involve a good amount of risk, while
other times they are more fearful of losses and look to invest in safer assets.
In financial jargon, when investors as a whole are willing to take on
risk, we say that they have low risk aversion or, in other words, are in riskseeking mode. In contrast, when investors are drawn to more conservative
investments and are less willing to take on risk, we say that they have high
risk aversion.
Carry trades are the most profitable when investors have low risk aversion. This statement makes sense when you consider what a carry trade
involves. To recap, a carry trade involves buying a currency that pays a
high interest rate while selling a currency that pays a low interest rate. In
buying the high-interest-rate currency, the investor is taking a risk—there
is a good deal of uncertainty around whether the economy of the country
will continue to perform well and be able to pay high interest rates. Indeed,
there is a clear chance that something might happen to prevent the country
from paying this high interest rate. Ultimately, the investor must be willing
to take this chance.
If investors as a whole were not willing to take on this risk, then capital
would never move from one country to another, and the carry trade opportunity would not exist. Therefore, in order to work, carry trades require
that investors as a group have low risk aversion, or are willing to take the
risk of investing in the higher-interest-rate currency.
To summarize: Carry trades have the most profit potential during
times when investors are willing to take the risk of investing in highinterest-paying currencies.

When Will Carry Trades Not Work?
So far we have shown that a carry trade will work best when investors have
low risk aversion. What happens when investors have high risk aversion?
Carry trades are the least profitable when investors have high risk aversion. When investors have high risk aversion, they are less willing as a
group to take chances with their investments. Therefore, they would be
less willing to invest in riskier currencies that offer higher interest rates.
Instead, when investors have high risk aversion they would actually prefer
to put their money in “safe haven” currencies that pay lower interest rates.
This would be equivalent to doing the exact opposite of a carry trade—in
other words, investors are buying the currency with the low interest rate
and selling the currency with the high interest rate.

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

Fundamental Trading Strategies

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

173

Going back to our earlier example, assume the investor suddenly feels
uncomfortable holding a foreign currency, the Australian dollar. Now, instead of looking for the higher interest rate, she is more interested in keeping her investment safe. As a result, she swaps her Australian dollars for
more familiar Swiss francs.
The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capital flows out of Australia and into Switzerland as investors take their Australian dollars and trade them in for Swiss francs. Because of this high investor risk aversion, Switzerland attracts more capital due to the safety
its currency offers despite the lower interest rates. This inflow of capital
increases the value of the Swiss franc (see Figure 10.7).
To summarize: Carry trades will be the least profitable during times
when investors are unwilling to take the risk of investing in high-interestpaying currencies.

Importance of Risk Aversion
Carry trades will generally be profitable when investors have low risk
aversion, and unprofitable when investors have high risk aversion. Therefore, before placing a carry trade it is critical to be aware of the
risk environment—whether investors as a whole have high or low risk
aversion—and when it changes.
Increasing risk aversion is generally beneficial for low-interestrate-paying currencies: Sometimes the mood of investors will change
rapidly—investors’ willingness to make risky trades can change dramatically from one moment to the next. Often these large shifts are caused by
significant global events. When investor risk aversion does rise quickly, the
result is generally a large capital inflow into low-interest-rate-paying “safe
haven” currencies (see Figure 10.6).
For example, in the summer of 1998 the Japanese yen appreciated
against the dollar by over 20 percent in the span of two months, due mainly

FIGURE 10.7 Eﬀects of a Carry Trade When Investors Have High Risk Aversion:
AUD/CHF Carry Trade Example 2

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

174

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

to the Russian debt crisis and Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund
bailout. Similarly, just after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks the
Swiss franc rose by more than 7 percent against the dollar over a 10-day
period.
These sharp movements in currency values often occur when risk aversion quickly changes from low to high. As a result, when risk aversion shifts
in this way, a carry trade can just as quickly turn from being profitable to
unprofitable. Conversely, as investor risk aversion goes from high to low,
carry trades become more profitable, as detailed in Figure 10.8.
How do you know if investors as a whole have high or low risk aversion? Unfortunately, it is difficult to measure investor risk aversion with a
single number. One way to get a broad idea of risk aversion levels is to look
at the different yields that bonds pay. The wider the difference, or spread,
between bonds of different credit ratings, the higher the investor risk aversion. Bond yields can be found in most financial newspapers. In addition,
several large banks have developed their own measures of risk aversion
that signal when investors are willing to take risks and when they are not.

Other Things to Bear in Mind When Considering
a Carry Trade
While risk aversion is one of the most important things to consider before
making a carry trade, it is not the only one. The following are some additional issues to be aware of.

FIGURE 10.8 Risk Aversion and Carry Trade Proﬁtability

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

Fundamental Trading Strategies

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

175

Low-Interest-Rate Currency Appreciation By entering into a carry
trade, an investor is able to earn a profit from the interest rate difference, or
spread, between a high-interest-rate currency and a low-interest-rate currency. However, the carry trade can turn unprofitable if for some reason
(like the earlier risk aversion example) the low-interest-rate currency appreciates by a large amount.
Aside from increases in investor risk aversion, improving economic
conditions within a low-interest-paying country can also cause its currency
to appreciate. An ideal carry trade involves a low-interest currency whose
economy is weak and has low expectations for growth. If the economy
were to improve, however, the country might then be able to offer investors a higher rate of return through increased interest rates. If this were
to occur—again using the earlier example, say that Switzerland increased
the interest rates it offered—then investors may take advantage of these
higher rates by investing in Swiss francs. As seen in Figure 10.7, an appreciation of the Swiss franc would negatively affect the profitability of the
Australian dollar–Swiss franc carry trade. (At the very least, higher interest
rates in Switzerland would negatively affect the carry trade’s profitability
by lowering the interest rate spread.)
To give another example, this same sequence of events may currently be unfolding for the Japanese yen. Given its zero interest rates,
the Japanese yen has for a very long time been an ideal low-interest-rate
currency to use in carry trades (known as “yen carry trades”). This situation, however, may be changing. Increased optimism about the Japanese
economy has recently led to an increase in the Japanese stock market. Increased investor demand for Japanese stocks and currency has caused the
yen to appreciate, and this yen appreciation negatively affects the profitability of carry trades like Australian dollar (high interest rate) versus
Japanese yen.
If investors continue to buy the yen, the “yen carry trade” will grow
more and more unprofitable. This further illustrates the fact that when the
low-interest-rate currency in a carry trade (the currency being sold) appreciates, it negatively affects the profitability of the carry trade.
Trade Balances Country trade balances (the difference between imports and exports) can also affect the profitability of a carry trade. We
have shown that when investors have low risk aversion, capital will flow
from the low-interest-rate-paying currency to the high-interest-rate-paying
currency (see Figure 10.6). This, however, does not always happen.
To understand why, think about the situation in the United States. The
United States currently pays historically low interest rates, yet it attracts
investment from other countries, even when investors have low risk aversion (i.e., they should be investing in the high-interest-rate countries). Why

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

176

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

does this occur? The answer is because the United States runs a huge trade
deficit (its imports are greater than its exports)—a deficit that must be financed by other countries. Regardless of the interest rates it offers, the
United States attracts capital flows to finance its trade deficit.
The point of this example is to show that even when investors have
low risk aversion, large trade imbalances can cause a low-interest-rate currency to appreciate (as in Figure 10.7). And when the low-interest-rate currency in a carry trade (the currency being sold) appreciates, it negatively
affects the profitability of the carry trade.
Time Horizon In general, a carry trade is a long-term strategy. Before
entering into a carry trade, an investor should be willing to commit to a
time horizon of at least six months. This commitment helps to make sure
that the trade will not be affected by the “noise” of shorter-term currency
price movements. Also, not using excessive leverage for carry trades will
allow traders to hold onto their positions longer and to better weather market fluctuations by not getting stopped out.
To summarize: Carry trade investors should be aware of factors such
as currency appreciation, trade balances, and time horizon before placing
a trade. Any or all of these factors can cause a seemingly profitable carry
trade to become unprofitable.

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING
STRATEGY: STAYING ON TOP OF
MACROECONOMIC EVENTS
Short-term traders seem to be focused only on the economic release of the
week and how it will impact their day trading activities. This works well
for many traders, but it is also important not to lose sight of the big macro
events that may be brewing in the economy—or the world for that matter.
The reason is because large-scale macroeconomic events will move markets and will move them big time. Their impact goes beyond a simple price
change for a day or two because depending on their size and scope, these
occurrences have the potential to reshape the fundamental perception toward a currency for months or even years at a time. Events such as wars,
political uncertainty, natural disasters, and major international meetings
are so potent due to their irregularity that they have widespread psychological and physical impacts on the currency market. With these events
come both currencies that appreciate vastly and currencies that depreciate just as dramatically. Therefore, keeping on top of global developments,
understanding the underlying direction of market sentiment before and after these events occur, and anticipating them could be very profitable, or
at least can help prevent significant losses.

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

15:40

Fundamental Trading Strategies

Printer: Yet to come

177

Know When Big Events Occur

r Significant G-7 or G-8 finance ministers meetings.
r Presidential elections.
r Important summits.
r Major central bank meetings.
r Potential changes to currency regimes.
r Possible debt defaults by large countries.
r Possible wars as a result of rising geopolitical tensions.
r Federal Reserve chairman’s semiannual testimony to Congress on the
economy.
The best way to highlight the significance of these events is through
examples.

G-7 Meeting, Dubai, September 2003
The countries that constitute the G-7 are the United States, United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, Italy, Germany, and France. Collectively, these countries account for two-thirds of the world’s total economic output. Not all
G-7 meetings are important. The only time the market really hones in on
the G-7 finance ministers meeting is when big changes are expected. The
G-7 finance ministers meeting on September 22, 2003, was a very important
turning point for the markets. The dollar collapsed significantly following
the meeting at which the G-7 finance ministers wanted to see “more flexibility in exchange rates.” Despite the rather tame nature of these words,
the market interpreted this line to be a major shift in policy. The last time
changes to this degree had been made was back in 2000.
In 2000, the market paid particular attention to the upcoming meeting
because there was strong intervention in the EUR/USD the day before the
meeting. The meeting in September 2003 was also important because the
U.S. trade deficit was ballooning and becoming a huge issue. The EUR/USD
bore the brunt of the dollar depreciation while Japan and China were intervening aggressively in their currencies. As a result, it was widely expected
that the G-7 finance ministers as a whole would issue a statement that was
highly critical of Japan’s and China’s intervention policies. Leading up to
the meeting, the U.S. dollar had already begun to sell off, as indicated by
the chart in Figure 10.9. At the time of the announcement, the EUR/USD
shot up 150 pips. Though this initial move was not very substantial, between September 2003 and February 2004 (the next G-7 meeting), the dollar fell 8 percent on a trade-weighted basis, 9 percent against the British
pound, 11 percent against the euro, 7 percent against the yen, and 1.5 percent against the Canadian dollar. To put the percentages into perspective, a
move of 11 percent is equivalent to approximately 1,100 pips. Therefore the

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

178

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 10.9 EUR/USD Post G-7 Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

longer-term impact is much more significant than the immediate impact, as
the event itself has the ability to change the overall sentiment in the market. Figure 10.9 is a weekly chart of the EUR/USD that illustrates how the
currency pair performed following the September 22, 2003, G-7 meeting.

Political Uncertainty: 2004 U.S.
Presidential Election
Another example of a major event impacting the currency market is the
2004 U.S. presidential election. In general, political instability causes perceived weakness in currencies. The hotly contested presidential election in
November 2004 combined with the differences in the candidates’ stances
on the growing budget deficit resulted in overall dollar bearishness. The
sentiment was exacerbated even further given the lack of international
support for the incumbent president (George W. Bush) due to the administration’s decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein. As a result, in the three
weeks leading up to the election, the euro rose 600 pips against the U.S.
dollar. This can be seen in Figure 10.10. With a Bush victory becoming increasingly clear and later confirmed, the dollar sold off against the majors
as the market looked ahead to what would probably end up being the maintenance of the status quo. On the day following the election, the EUR/USD
rose another 200 pips and then continued to rise an additional 700 pips before peaking six weeks later. This entire move took place over the course

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

15:40

Fundamental Trading Strategies

Printer: Yet to come

179

FIGURE 10.10 EUR/USD U.S. Election
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

of two months, which may seem like eternity to many, but this macroeconomic event really shaped the markets; for those who were following it, big
profits could have been made. However, this is important even for shortterm traders because given that the market was bearish dollars in general
leading up to the U.S. presidential election, a more prudent trade would
have been to look for opportunities to buy the EUR/USD on dips rather
than trying to sell rallies and look for tops.

Wars: U.S. War in Iraq
Geopolitical risks such as wars can also have a pronounced impact on the
currency market. Figure 10.11 shows that between December 2002 and
February 2003, the dollar depreciated 9 percent against the Swiss franc
(USD/CHF) in the months leading up to the invasion of Iraq. The dollar
sold off because the war itself was incredibly unpopular among the international community. The Swiss franc was one of the primary beneficiaries
due to the country’s political neutrality and safe haven status. Between
February and March, the market began to believe that the inevitable war
would turn into a quick and decisive U.S. victory, so they began to unwind
the war trade. This eventually led to a 3 percent rally in USD/CHF as investors exited their short dollar positions.
Each of these events caused large-scale movement in the currency
markets, which makes them important events to follow for all types of

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

180

September 15, 2008

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 10.11 USD/CHF War Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

traders. Keeping abreast of broad macroeconomic events can help traders
make smarter decisions and prevent them from fading large uncertainties
that may be brewing in the background. Most of these events are talked
about, debated, and anticipated many months in advance by economists,
currency analysts, and the international community in general. The world
changes and currency traders need to be prepared for that.

COMMODITY PRICES AS A LEADING
INDICATOR
Commodities, namely gold and oil, have a substantial connection to the
FX market. Therefore, understanding the nature of the relationship between them and currencies can help traders gauge risk, forecast price
changes, as well as understand exposure. Even if commodities seem like
a wholly alien concept, gold and oil especially tend to move based on
similar fundamental factors that affect currency markets. As we have previously discussed, there are four major currencies considered to be commodity currencies—the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the New
Zealand dollar, and the Swiss franc. The AUD, CAD, NZD, and CHF all have
solid correlations with gold prices; natural gold reserves and currency laws
in these countries result in almost mirror-like movements. The CAD also
tends to move somewhat in line with oil prices; however, the connection
here is much more complicated and fickle. Each currency has a specific

P1: JYS
c10
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

Fundamental Trading Strategies

15:40

Printer: Yet to come

181

correlation and reason as to why its actions reflect commodity prices so
well. Knowledge of the fundamentals behind these movements, their direction, and the strength of the parallel could be an effective way to discover
trends in both markets.

The Relationship
Gold Before analyzing the relationship gold has with the commodity currencies, it is important to first understand the connection between gold and
the U.S. dollar. Although the United States is the world’s second largest
producer of gold (behind South Africa), a rally in gold prices does not produce an appreciation of the dollar. Actually, when the dollar goes down,
gold tends to go up, and vice versa. This seemingly illogical occurrence is a
by-product of the perception investors hold of gold. During unstable geopolitical times, traders tend to shy away from the dollar and instead turn to
gold as a safe haven for their investments. In fact, many traders call gold
the “antidollar.” Therefore, if the dollar depreciates, gold gets pushed up as
wary investors flock from the declining greenback to the steady commodity. The AUD/USD, NZD/USD, and USD/CHF currency pairs tend to mirror
gold’s movements the closest because these other currencies all have significant natural and political connections to the metal.
Starting in the South Pacific, the AUD/USD has a very strong positive
correlation (0.80) with gold as shown in Figure 10.12; therefore, whenever
gold prices go up, the AUD/USD also tends to go up as the Australian dollar
appreciates against the U.S. dollar. The reason for this relationship is that
Australia is the world’s third largest producer of gold, exporting about $5
billion worth of the precious metal annually. Because of this, the currency
pair amplifies the effects of gold prices twofold. If instability is causing an
increase in prices, this probably signals that the USD has already begun
to depreciate. The pairing will then be pushed down further as importers
of gold demand more of Australia’s currency to cover higher costs. The
New Zealand dollar tends to follow the same path in the AUD/USD pairing because New Zealand’s economy is very closely linked to Australia’s.
The correlation in this pairing is also approximately 0.80 with gold (see
Figure 10.13 for the chart). The CAD/USD has an even stronger correlation
with gold prices at 0.84, caused in large part by analogous reasons to the
AUD’s connection; Canada is the fifth largest exporter of gold.
In Europe, Switzerland’s currency has a strong relationship with gold
prices as well. However, the CHF/USD pairing’s 0.88 correlation with the
metal is caused by different reasons than the NZD’s, AUD’s, and CAD’s
connections. Switzerland does not have substantial natural gold reserves
like Australia or Canada and therefore it is not a notable exporter of the
metal. However, the Swiss franc is one of the few major currencies that
still adheres to the gold standard. A full 25 percent of Switzerland’s bank
