
THINKING IN PROBABILITIES
Money management is primarily a function of risk control. It is not possible
to predict within a series of trades which ones will be winners and which
ones will be losers. Another factor that cannot be predicted with 100 percent accuracy is the amount of profit that a trade will produce. That leaves
one element of the trading equation that can be controlled—the risk factor. It is a natural thinking process of most traders to focus on how much
money can be made on a trade. Unfortunately, one important aspect is often overlooked: how much can be lost. The trader must learn to focus on
controlling the risk of loss in each trade. This can be accomplished by applying sound money management techniques, which include:
Ĺ Allocating small percentages of total trading capital to each trade.
Ĺ Using stop-loss protection.
Ĺ Taking profits when available.
It is important to understand that the trader must keep trading—
continue pulling the handle, so to speak, as in playing a casino slot machine. We are not suggesting that any trader overtrade; rather, we are suggesting that when their edge is present they trade it each and every time.
We mention casino slot machines here because there is an important
correlation, and that is in the edge. Casinos have an edge, and successful

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:14

Trade Management

Char Count=

155

traders have an edge. Casinos know the percentage edge they maintain
over the players and play each hand. If you have ever watched a blackjack dealer at a casino, you probably have never seen (and will never see)
any dealer pass on a hand or deviate from the house rules. However, on
the other side of the table you can observe blackjack players doing the opposite most of the time. Decisions are made based on emotions, and the
higher the stakes, the higher the emotions. Usually when players base decisions on emotions they destroy any edge they may have had. The casino
has a positive expectancy of winning over time, and the random gambler a
negative expectation of winning over time.
How do traders learn to think in probabilities? It’s a process that gaining market experience and skill will teach. Thinking in probabilities is first
intellectualized by the trader. It is then brought into the trading process by
the trader correctly executing a series of trades that begin to incorporate
the concept into the experience of trading. It then becomes something the
trader does without thinking; it becomes an inherent and essential part of
the trading process and the trader.
In his book Trading in the Zone, Mark Douglas eloquently and thoroughly outlines and describes this process and gives excellent exercises to
learn to think in probabilities. We have included this classic book in the
recommended reading section in the back of this book.
Traders must set up their trading so that they are trading a plan in a
repetitious manner so as to determine if there is an edge present. The plan
must be traded over a large sample of trades to be able to analyze this.
Once traders can tell statistically that there is an edge present, they can
then begin to see that there are winning streaks and losing streaks present.
They can then understand how valuable a well-thought-out trading plan
with sound money management principles is.
One thing that is certain is that if the trader alters the edge of the trading method by taking random trades that are not part of the trading method,
or late entries, early exits, and the like, it will be difficult to ever learn
trading as being probabilistic. Take the approach to learn the good execution skills and trade management skills necessary to let the edge play
out.

WARNING SIGNS AND CONFIRMATION SIGNS
As mentioned previously, the trader must learn to recognize varying market conditions that will either increase or decrease the probability of a
successful trade. We do this by using specific warning signs and confirmation signs.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

156

August 14, 2007

13:14

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Warning Signs
These are the primary warning signs that we use to either prevent us from
entering a trade or alert us to wait for signs that the momentum has slowed
enough to enter the trade:
Ĺ Gaps in the CD leg.
Ĺ Long, wide range bars at or toward the completion point.
Ĺ Tail closes at or near the pattern completion point.
Ĺ Very steep CD leg as compared to the AB leg.
When monitoring an entry, the trader wants to look at the structure of
the pattern and be alert for the aforementioned warning signs. Figure 11.1
shows an AB=CD pattern that formed on a daily chart of Intel (INTC). We
can see a large gap present in the CD leg, long range bars, and tail closes.
These warning signs are telling the trader there is excessive downward momentum in this stock, and the price could exceed the D completion point.
The price move down caused by the large gap is a steep descent in the CD
leg and is also a warning for the trader.

Figure 11.1 Intel (INTC) daily chart with warning signs present in the CD leg:
gap down in the CD leg, long range bars, tail closes, and steep angle of the
CD leg.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Trade Management

August 14, 2007

13:14

Char Count=

157

Confirmation Signs
Now we look at the daily INTC chart in Figure 11.2 and see how we could
use confirmation techniques to enter the trade at a low-risk point. The primary confirmation signs we use are:
Ĺ Tweezer bottom or top.
Ĺ Gap in the direction of the trade.
Ĺ Tail closes or long, wide range bars in the direction of the trade.
Ĺ Confirmation bar—waiting one time bar before entering the trade.
Looking at Figure 11.2, on the left side of the chart we can see the
original pattern completion point of D as was outlined in Figure 11.1. The
pattern completion at point D is two full points above where the stock
actually turned up. Had traders been patient and waited for a slowing of
momentum using one of the aforementioned confirmation techniques, they
would have been able to locate a low-risk entry point.
The tweezer bottoms and the gap-up open are certainly signs of slowing momentum to the downside and potential for the price to turn up. The
risk in the trade could be easily quantified by placing a stop below the
tweezer bottoms.

Figure 11.2 Intel (INTC) daily chart showing conﬁrmation signs for trade entry.
Conﬁrmation techniques allow a low-risk entry point into this trade.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

158

August 14, 2007

13:14

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

The technique of waiting one time bar on the time frame the trader
is trading (i.e., daily time frame waits one daily bar, 5-minute time frame
waits one 5-minute bar, etc.) can be implemented once the trader has seen
tweezer bottoms, a gap in the direction of the trade, or long range bars in
the direction of the trade. In the example shown in Figure 11.2, the daily
bar on the day of the gap-up open would have been the entry bar for the
trader following the tweezer bottom. This would have allowed the trader
to place the stop-loss order just below the tweezer bottom and would have
provided a low-risk entry point.
Waiting one time bar can be used when the trader has reason to believe, based on price behavior, that price may exceed the completion point
of a pattern. This is never a guarantee of a profitable trade, but it does give
the trader a tool to use in varying market conditions.
Let’s take a look at an example of a chart that is showing definite warning signs up to the completion point. Figure 11.3 shows an AB=CD sell
pattern. There are three gaps up on three consecutive openings to the completion point at D. This is the market’s way of showing us that there is
strength to the upside and that the bulls are in control. The bars increase
in size with the closing prices at the upper ends of the ranges. This would
certainly be a consideration for any trader trying to sell this market short.

Figure 11.3 NASDAQ-100 (QQQQ) daily chart of AB=CD sell pattern with warning
signs. Three gap-up openings and wide range bars are deﬁnite warning signs for this
AB=CD pattern.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Trade Management

13:14

Char Count=

159

There is nothing wrong with passing on a setup such as this. A market can
always be entered on a retracement pattern or Gartley pattern if necessary.
As we can further see in Figure 11.3, the market trends up from this point.
There are shallow pullbacks and an acceleration of price to the upside. Had
a trader entered on the AB=CD pattern before realizing the warning signs,
the trade could be managed as a countertrend trade in trend conditions as
outlined in Chapter 10. We do not see tail closes in the CD leg, but the gapup openings and the wide range bars are sufficient to warrant the trader’s
attention. All warning signs do not have to be present for the trader to make
a trading decision to stand aside or wait for further confirmation.

MONEY MANAGEMENT
Money management is the most important element of a trading plan. It is
a function of risk control and, if utilized properly, will allow traders to
trade through periods of drawdowns and losing streaks without blowing
out their accounts. In order to trade professionally and successfully, you
must learn to follow your trading plan, which includes a plan for money
management. Money management begins with an attitude: Again, traders
must learn to think in terms of probabilities and not certainties. This is particularly true with regard to the patterns we have shown throughout this
book, because they have a positive expectation if traded consistently with
sound trading principles, including money management.
One important side note on poor money management: Added to the
obvious loss of financial resources is the emotional stress that is placed
on the trader. This stress can be manifested in the form of depression or
addictive behaviors such as alcoholism or drug abuse. To prevent these
very destructive behaviors from occurring due to lack of proper money
management, traders can set up a structure in their trading to start with
good habits such as always using stop-loss orders.
If a real broker is used, an order structure can be implemented so that
each time a trade is placed a stop-loss order must also be placed or the
broker does not place the order. Electronic trading does not allow for this
type of structure, so before beginning trading live with real capital it would
be best for traders to commit fully to themselves that they will always use
stop-loss orders and never violate a money management rule.

Using a Percentage of Total Trading
Capital as Risk
Using a small percentage of total trading capital on any one trade is an
excellent way of preventing blowing out an account. We can use an exam-

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

160

13:14

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

ple of a $100,000 trading account to illustrate this point. If the trader were
to risk 100 percent of the $100,000 on any one trading idea and lose, he
would have brought the account balance to zero in one swift drawdown.
If the trader were to risk 50 percent of the account on each of two trades
and lose both times, he would have brought the account balance to zero in
two trades.
Since trading is a game of probabilities, we know that there will be winning streaks and losing streaks. We do not, however, know in what order
they will play out; then it is only logical to structure the money management to allow us to stay in the game long enough to not be blown out of
the game by drawdowns that will occur. This is why it is going to be important to always commit only a small percentage of capital to any one
trading idea.
We suggest using a risk in the range of 1 percent to 3 percent of total
trading capital on any one trade. This will prevent any catastrophic losses
on any particular trade. In the example of the $100,000 trading account,
using a 1 percent risk or $1,000, the trader has to be wrong 100 times in
a row to bring the account balance to zero. Using 3 percent or $3,000, the
trader would have to be wrong approximately 33 times in a row to bring
the account balance to zero.
Novice traders should certainly use the 1 percent level, and as they gain
more experience they could consider using the 3 percent level. We do not
believe going above the 3 percent risk of your trading capital on any one
trade should ever be implemented. The trade setup may look absolutely
foolproof and the trader may believe that it cannot fail; but it is only one
trade in many and never worth the risk. There is an old saying in trading:
Never go for broke—you just might get it.
One of the great benefits of the patterns presented in this book is they
can all be traded with the amount of capital at risk, the stop-loss orders,
and the profit objectives figured before the pattern completes. Figure 11.4
shows a trade example using 3 percent of the total trading capital at risk
and how to determine the number of shares appropriate for the trade. We
use a hypothetical $100,000 trading account. Here are the steps to follow
to calculate the number of shares for this trade:
1. 100,000 × 3% = $3,000. This is the total amount of risk for this trade.
2. The entry point is at $37.50 and the stop-loss will be set at $2.00 per

share and placed at $35.50.
3. We then take the amount of the stop-loss order, $2.00 in this case, and

divide it into the total amount of risk, $3,000 in this trade.

4. $3,000 ÷ $2.00 = 1,500. This gives us the number of shares to trade;

1,500 shares can be traded in this setup using a 3 percent risk

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Trade Management

August 14, 2007

13:14

Char Count=

161

Figure 11.4 Calculating the correct number of shares for an AB=CD buy pattern
trade setup on a Sandisk Corporation (SNDK) daily chart.

parameter with a $2.00 per share stop-loss order (1,500 shares stopped
out at $2.00 per share equal $3,000).
In this example, the maximum amount the trader can lose is $3,000 or 3
percent of the trading capital. We never want to risk more than 10 percent
of a stock’s price using a stop-loss order. As an example, if the stock is
a $50 stock, we would never risk more than $5.00 as a stop-loss order.
Around 5 percent is usually quite reasonable. We have said this several
times throughout the book and we will repeat it again here: If the risk is too
great in the trade, then pass and find another trade setup with suitable risk.
As discussed and shown in the previous chapters, the exits can be determined using several methods. If we were to use an equal amount of risk
($2.00 in this example), take the first exit at $39.50 per share, and move
the stop-loss order to breakeven, this would allow us to take a profit that
is equal to the original risk in the trade, and moving the stop-loss order to
breakeven puts us in a risk-free trade.
Ĺ Using 2 percent risk in this trade example, the total amount of capital
at risk would be $2,000 and the correct number of shares would be
1,000.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

162

August 14, 2007

13:14

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Ĺ Using 1 percent risk in this trade example, the total amount of capital
at risk would be $1,000 and the correct number of shares would be 500.
Each trader will have a different tolerance level for risk. It is very important to determine ahead of time what your risk tolerance level is.
The trader can calculate for each trade how many shares can be traded.
If the account balance is down due to losses, the trader must recalculate
downward the percentage of risk being used. If the account balance has
increased, the trader can recalculate upward the percentage of risk being
used. This ensures that when there is a losing streak the trader is trading fewer shares, and when there is a winning streak the trader can trade
more shares. Most important, it prevents traders from devastating their accounts.
Here is a recap of what steps the trader can calculate ahead of time:
Ĺ Total amount of risk based on a predetermined percentage of the total
amount of trading capital available.
Ĺ The use of a stop-loss order; how and where it will be placed.
Ĺ The profit targets.
Ĺ How the stop-loss order will be moved or trailed.
Now let’s look at an example of a trader who wants to trade the S&P
E-mini contract and is starting with an account size of $20,000. (We want
to make an important point here before looking at this example. Many brokerages advertise low margins for day trading the S&P E-minis, perhaps
something along the lines of being able to day trade the S&P E-minis at
$1,000 per contract. Based on this, a trader with a $10,000 account might
think he could trade 10 contracts. Most likely that trader, unless very experienced, will not survive using that as a money management system. It is
inconsequential and has nothing to do with calculating and applying sound
money management techniques.)
We can use the same approach we used before to calculate the number
of contracts traded using the Gartley sell pattern in Figure 11.5 as an example. The entry into this trade would be at 1405.50 and the stop-loss order
would be placed above the X point of the pattern at 1407.75. This is a stoploss of 2.25 points or $112.50 per contract. Using a hypothetical $20,000
account, let’s calculate the number of contracts using 1 percent risk and
assume this is a novice trader:
1. $20,000 × 1% = $200. This is the total amount of risk in the trade.
2. $200 ÷ $112.50 = 1.7. The correct amount of contracts based on this

risk profile is 1. You want to round down any uneven numbers.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Trade Management

13:14

Char Count=

163

Figure 11.5 Example of S&P E-mini 5-minute chart of Gartley sell pattern—
calculating the correct number of contracts.

3. The entry point is 1405.50, and the stop-loss order is placed at 1407.75,

which is 2.25 points or $112.50 per contract.
4. We take the amount of risk, $200 in this example, and divide by where

the stop-loss order is placed; in this example the correct placement is
just above the D point at 1407.75 or 2.25 points.
The maximum amount the trader can lose on this trade is $112.50. Until
the account balance is increased to a level that can add on a contract, the
trader must plan trades with one exit. There is an advantage to this, and
that is the trader will be learning excellent execution skills at this point
in his trading. Novice traders are most likely at this point in their trading
careers to lose on more trades because they are still gaining market experience. This is the time to keep risk very small and build trading skills.
In this particular example, the trader could use an exit strategy of taking a profit equal to the amount of risk in the trade. In this case that would
be at 1403.25, which would provide a $112.50 or 2.25-point profit.
Ĺ Using 2 percent risk in this trade example, the total amount of risk
would be $400 or three contracts.

c11

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

164

13:14

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Ĺ Using 3 percent risk in this trade example, the total amount of risk
would be $600 or five contracts.
If the stop-loss order were 5 points or $250, the trader would have to
pass on that type of setup and wait for a setup that had an appropriate
stop-loss placement based on the percent of risk being used. The risk using
a 5-point stop would exceed the $200 maximum allowable loss per trade. It
is a mistake to use stops that are too close; this will result in unnecessary
losses and frustration on the trader’s part. It is an art and a skill learning to
place stops correctly.
Each trader needs to decide based on one’s risk tolerance profile and
trading experience what percentage of capital to risk. An important consideration in this decision is the number of trades the trader has open at
one time. The less experienced the trader, the fewer open trades the trader
should have. A very hard lesson to learn is watching several open (overtrading) positions turn into losses at the same time.
Traders should take into account a worst-case scenario if trading more
than one open position. They should know how much of a drawdown the
account would sustain if the worst-case scenario occurred. Our suggestion
would be to concentrate on learning one or two patterns in one or two
markets and become proficient with them. There will be time to add in
more patterns and markets if the trader so chooses.
Here are several trading mistakes that can devastate a trader’s account.
They are all violations of sound money management practices:
Ĺ Not placing stop-loss orders. This allows a small loss to turn into a
large loss and is a cardinal sin in trading.
Ĺ Overtrading. Here traders are either trading outside of their trading
plans, taking random trades, or having too many open positions at one
time.
Ĺ Moving stop-loss orders to avoid a loss. Never increase a predetermined stop-loss amount.
Ĺ Exceeding the amount of capital risked on one trade or multiple open
trades.
Ĺ Not taking profits when available. This is letting a winning trade turn
into a losing trade and should absolutely be avoided.
We leave you with the most important rules at the end of this chapter:
1. Rule #1: Always use stop-loss orders.
2. Rule #2: Never violate Rule #1.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 12

Using Options
with the
Fibonacci Ratios
and Patterns

T

his chapter covers how to use options with extension patterns, such
as the Butterfly pattern or the 1.272 and 1.618 extensions. We assume
you have some knowledge of options and how they work. If not, we
recommend checking out the Chicago Board Options Exchange web site
(www.cboe.com). The site is an excellent source of educational material
for all levels of options traders, including tutorials that can be downloaded
free of charge.

CALL AND PUT OPTIONS DEFINED
The call option gives the buyer, or owner, the right—but not the
obligation—to purchase the underlying instrument at a specified price,
known as the strike price, for a specified time period (i.e., until the expiration date). The writer of the call option, the one who sells the option,
is obligated to sell the underlying instrument at the specified (strike) price
if that option is assigned.
The put option gives the owner the right to sell the underlying instrument at a specified price, known as the strike price, within a fixed period
of time (i.e., until the expiration date). The writer of the put option, the one
165
