
TradeKing
TradeKing offers a range of basic trading services in stocks, bonds, and
options, both online and through mobile applications. The company’s most
unique feature is the community offerings on its site, where customers can
create blogs, track each other’s trades, share commentary, and send messages in hopes that they all make better, smarter trades. A lot of traders
appreciate the support and the ability to share ideas through the community
features.
For more information, go to www.tradeking.com.

TradeStation
TradeStation offers a huge range of services for people who day trade stocks,
options, futures, and foreign exchange. A software-based system, TradeStation
includes a rich set of features, especially for developing and testing trading
strategies. Traders who have strong systems will like the automatic trading
features that signal — and can even act — when appropriate trading opportunities occur. TradeStation’s services are especially popular with traders who
like to develop their own systems and work on their own programs.
For more information, go to www.tradestation.com.

Chapter 11: All About Accounts

Brokers for options and futures
To effectively day trade options and futures, you need an account with a
broker that has direct access to the exchanges’ electronic communications
networks. Several of the full-service firms listed in the preceding section
offer that service, as do the brokers listed here, which specialize in these
particular markets.

Infinity Futures
Infinity Futures offers software-based trading in the options, futures, and
foreign exchange markets; it also has trading education services and
access to live brokers who can answer questions. Customers can choose
from several platforms, depending on trading needs. The firm particularly
supports traders working in the stock index futures offered by the CME
Group.
For more information, go to www.infinityfutures.com.

MB Trading
MB Trading handles stocks and foreign exchange as well as derivatives,
but the company is best known for its services for forex traders. The
company seems to add features constantly. The firm has both software and
web platforms, training programs, community features, and customer alert
settings to help you find trades that suit your system. In addition, MB Trading
offers a lot of support for developers who want to build software around its
platform.
For more information, go to www.mbtrading.com.

OptionsHouse
OptionsHouse was founded by a major options-trading firm and has its
offices on the original Chicago Board of Trade trading floor. Between that
pedigree and the company’s name, it’s no surprise that it offers direct access
web-based trading in options and their underlying stocks. Its software tools
are designed to help you identify and analyze profitable opportunities in the
options market. The firm also has online training programs, blogs, and other
information to help you learn more about options and different strategies for
trading them.
For more information, go to www.optionshouse.com.

201

202 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
optionsXpress
The company optionsXpress is designed for people trading options and
the stocks underlying them. It offers a lot of educational services and live
customer support as well as phone apps, if you’re so inclined. The optionsXpress platform has changed over the years as the company adds more
services to meet customer demand. One of its nifty features is an automatic
execution service for subscribers of participating research services (you can
find out more about research services in Chapter 13). The company is owned
by Charles Schwab, but its platform is independent — at least as I write this.
For more information, go to www.optionsxpress.com.

TradeMONSTER
TradeMONSTER is designed for options and futures traders, although this
broker handles stock and mutual fund trades as well. The company offers a
suite of tools to help traders do research, develop and test strategies, and
refine them over time. Some of its features are wonderfully practical, like the
ability to rearrange the data windows across multiple screens to suit your
preferences.
For more information, go to www.trademonster.com.

Brokers for foreign exchange
The foreign exchange, or forex, market is the largest trading market in the
world and offers lots of opportunities for day traders to make (or lose)
money. Most forex trades take place between banks, corporations, and
hedge funds directly, without the use of a broker. If you want to trade foreign
currency directly, you need to use a trading firm that is tied in to these
networks. Many of the brokers listed in the preceding sections offer forex.
The following sections list those that do little else.

Gain Capital Group’s FOREX.com
Gain Capital Group deals mostly with institutional investors and money managers, but it makes its platform available to individual day traders through
its FOREX.com site. There, you can download software that lets you analyze
markets and place trades. The company offers a lot of educational programs
and practice accounts for traders interested in foreign exchange; it also has a
mobile application for those who want to trade by phone.
For more information, go to www.forex.com.

Chapter 11: All About Accounts
InterbankFX
Want to try your hand at trading forex? In addition to demo accounts,
InterbankFX lets customers start trading with as little as $250, making it an
option for day traders who want to trade currency along with other types of
securities. It also offers charting and automatic trading services to help
customers design and adhere to their strategies.
For more information, go to www.ibfx.com.

203

204 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies

Part III

Necessities and Niceties for
Successful Day Trading
A Sample Profit-and-Loss Spreadsheet
Profit and Loss
1/3/07
1/4/07
1/5/07
1/8/07
1/9/07
1/10/07
1/11/07
1/12/07
1/16/07
1/17/07
1/18/07
1/19/07
1/22/07
1/23/07
1/24/07
1/25/07
1/26/07
1/29/07
1/30/07
1/31/07

Initial Capital Net Profit (Loss) Ending Capital Percentage Change Hourly Wage
$ 161,298
$ 134
$ 161,432
0.08%
$ 16.75
$ 161,432
$ (268)
$ 161,164
-0.17%
$ (33.50)
$ 161,164
$ 450
$ 161,614
0.28%
$ 56.25
$ 161,614
$ (183)
$ 161,431
-0.1 1%
$ (22.88)
$ 161,431
$ 192
$ 161,623
0.12%
$ 24.00
$ 161,623
$ 598
$ 162,221
0.37%
$ 74.75
$ 162,221
$ (168)
$ 162,053
-0.10%
$ (21.00)
$ 162,053
$ 987
$ 163,040
0.61%
$ 123.38
$ 163,040
$ (196)
$ 162,844
-0.12%
$ (24.50)
$ 162,844
$ 59
$ 162,903
0.04%
$ 7.38
$ 162,903
$ (273)
$ 162,630
-0.17%
$ (34.13)
$ 162,630
$ (124)
$ 162,506
-0.08%
$ (15.50)
$ 162,506
$ 689
$ 163,195
0.42%
$ 86.13
$ 163,195
$ (397)
$ 162,798
-0.24%
$ (49.63)
$ 162,798
$ 967
$ 163,765
0.59%
$ 120.88
$ 163,765
$ (387)
$ 163,378
-0.24%
$ (48.38)
$ 163,378
$ 469
$ 163,847
0.29%
$ 58.63
$ 163,847
$ 798
$ 164,645
0.49%
$ 99.75
$ 164,645
$ (129)
$ 164,516
-0.08%
$ (16.13)
$ 164,516
$ 723
$ 165,239
0.44%
$ 90.38

January:

$ 161,298

$ 3,941

$ 165,239

2.44%

$

24.63

2/1/07

$ 165,239

$

$ 165,982

0.45%

$

92.88

743

Ever wondered if you could get great tips from chat rooms? Get the lowdown on online
forums at www.dummies.com/extras/daytrading.

In this part…
✓ Approach day trading as a business. Develop a plan, set a budget, and treat it like a job.
✓ Find the support services you need to research trades and to
get through the treacherous days with your sanity intact and
your positions under control.
✓ Discover how to pay taxes on your gains and figure out how
well your time, energy, and trading paid off. (Yes, day trading is
a taxable activity.)
✓ Develop the discipline that can set you apart from traders who
don’t take the markets or their time seriously.

Chapter 12

Equipping to Day Trade
In This Chapter
▶ Choosing your equipment
▶ Finding good mobile trading apps

T

o perform the job of day trader well, you need to commit to the necessary space and the equipment at home. If you skimp on your Internet
connection, for example, it may be unable to handle the data on a big market
day. If you skimp on your PC, it may go down, leaving you scrambling to get it
back up — a rotten position to be in if you have open positions.
In this chapter, I go over the basics of your office setup, discuss the pros and
cons of mobile trading, and give you some advice on finding trading apps —
even if you trade on a big old computer.

Setting Up Your Trading Laboratory
Twenty years ago, you would have had to pay millions of dollars for the
equipment and telecommunications networks that you can now have in your
own home for just a few thousand bucks or so.
You may be thinking, I can do it for free! I have an iPhone, so what else do I
need? Ah, but you need plenty. Remember, successful day traders approach
trading as a professional activity. That means starting with an adequate work
space and dedicated equipment, as the following sections explain.

Where to sit, where to work
First, you need to find an area to work. If you can’t give up an entire room
in your house, find a corner or hallway where you can put a desk and a computer
just for day trading. Going to an area dedicated to day trading will clear your
mind so that you can focus on the work at hand.

208 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
You also need a table and a chair. Instead of borrowing a chair from the
dining room, get a good desk chair that swivels and that you can adjust as
necessary while you work. You also need a shelf and a cabinet of some sort
to hold your files and documents.
Want to get more comfort for the dollar in a desk chair? Consider shopping for
used chairs at office-equipment dealers. They may come with a few scuffs but
will probably have more ergonomic settings than chairs at office-supply
superstores.
Although no rule stipulates the proper layout of your equipment, the more
you can see and do without getting up from your chair, the better off you’ll
be. If you find yourself getting sore at the end of the day, investigate ergonomic products such as special keyboards, contoured mice, wrist pads,
and foot rests, all of which are readily available at office-supply stores.

Counting on your computer
You can’t day trade without at least one computer, and you may want two or
three: one to trade from and one for everything else (such as spreadsheets,
e-mail, and instant messaging). Some traders keep a spare computer on hand
in case the trading computer goes down, but many smartphones can be set
up to work as a backup instead. (See the section “The department of
redundancy department: Backing up your systems” later in this chapter.)
Almost every personal computer on the market today has the power to
handle day-trading activities, so you don’t need to sweat over the details.
In general, faster processing speeds are better than slower ones, and more
memory and storage are preferable to less.
What about the manufacturer? Well, you may not want an Apple computer
for day trading, because you may discover that not all the software packages
you need will be Mac-compatible. If you are one of those die-hard Mac heads,
though, be sure to ask brokers and software vendors about compatibility.
Other than that, the manufacturer doesn’t matter much.

Seeing it on the big screen
Do yourself a favor and spend money on a big flat-screen monitor. Prices
have been falling and sizes have been increasing, so you should have no
trouble finding one. Or two! Or three! If you need to look at more than one
window at a time — to see charts and Level II quotes at the same time,

Chapter 12: Equipping to Day Trade
for example — consider using two or more monitors hooked to the same
PC. This arrangement gives you a clear view of necessary data. Most traders
work with at least two monitors, often extra-large ones, because the information they need is too valuable to be hidden by overlapping windows during a
work session.

Connecting to the Internet
If you’re day trading, hook up to the Internet with as much bandwidth as
possible. Ask around to find out the fastest time in your area. Your Internet
service provider may charge more for faster performance, but most day traders find the extra cost worth it. If prices are changing quickly, a delay of half a
second can be costly.
You need fast service, but don’t base your strategy on speed. Even if you pay
up for the fastest service in your area, the brokers and hedge funds of the
world will probably have faster service. NYSE Technologies, the data-services
business of exchange-operator NYSE Euronext, allows brokerage and trading
firms to put their servers on the floor of the exchange. This colocation can
reduce trade execution times to fractions of a second, allowing more trades to
be executed in less time than if the server were in, say, midtown Manhattan.
NYSE Euronext colocation isn’t cheap, but if you make thousands of trades a
day, it may be worth it.
As a day trader, you’re playing in a market with traders who pay good money
for the edge they can get from moving their servers closer to the exchange’s
servers. Hence, when choosing your Internet provider, you don’t want to go
with the low bidder.
Also make sure your trading computer is hooked up to the Internet provider’s wire. Wireless routers are less reliable and can slow you down. If other
people in your household want Internet access, consider getting two Internet
lines so that your son downloading videos in the family room doesn’t slow
you down.
A great source of information about the performance of different broadband
Internet providers is Broadband Reports, www.broadbandreports.com.

Staying virus- and hacker-free
Most operating systems have built-in firewall and virus protection that can
handle most likely threats with aplomb. You can also subscribe to different

209

210 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
virus protection services. No matter which way you go, be careful how you
set these up. Some pointers:
✓ Check compatibility. Check with your brokerage firm to make sure that
its system is compatible with the virus protection package you choose;
some are not. (That potential problem increasingly makes the built-in
options more practical.)
✓ Determine whether there’s a trade-off in access speed. Some types of
antivirus software protect your system at the expense of data speed,
which will hurt your trading execution.
		If you decide to go naked — operate without a firewall or virus scanner in
order to maintain optimal speed — be sure to have a backup computer at the
ready.
Whether you go with the built-in software or buy an outside package or are
a Mac or a PC, be sure to set automatic downloads, software upgrades, and
background scans to take place after market hours. You don’t want to be
slowed down because of an operating system update.

The department of redundancy department:
Backing up your systems
When you day trade, you are intentionally looking at volatile markets and
fast-moving securities because that’s where you have the most opportunity to
make money in a short time. You may very well be leveraged, either through
the use of borrowed money or by trading securities with built-in leverage,
such as futures. (I have a lot more to say about leverage in Chapter 9.) If
you’re in a position that moves against you and you can’t get out, you’re sunk.
Not being able to get out because the markets are melting down due to some
kind of global catastrophe is bad enough. But suppose you can’t get out
because the batteries in your wireless mouse have died and you can’t find new
ones? What if you spill your drink and short out your keyboard — or your PC?
What if the developer building a McMansion next door accidentally knocks out
your phone line and your DSL service? All these little workaday calamities have
happened to me — and trust me, they’re downright annoying even if you aren’t
trading. If you are trading, they can be ruinous. If you’re serious about making
money as a day trader, build in redundant systems as much as possible:
✓ Have high-speed data service on your smartphone or tablet computer in
case your primary Internet access goes out.
✓ Load your broker’s mobile app on your phone so that you can switch to
it should something odd happen to crash your computer.

Chapter 12: Equipping to Day Trade
✓ Keep extra supplies on hand: extra batteries, extra keyboard, and extra
mouse. You want to be able to react quickly when things go wrong.
(These items are all cheap to keep in inventory, too, because the
computer makers give keyboards and mice away with every new PC.)
✓ Invest in an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) backup for your PC
so that if the power goes down, your computer stays up. The backup
doesn’t have to last for hours, just long enough that you can close out
your positions. You don’t need a backup generator, though — unless you
think that you’d still want to trade after your town was devastated by an
earthquake or a hurricane. (Hey, crisis creates opportunities!)
✓ Finally, back up your computer regularly. You don’t want to lose your
tax records! You can back up online through Mozy (www.mozy.com) or
Carbonite (www.carbonite.com), or you can use an external hard drive
connected to your PC. Most backup systems can be set up to work automatically — but don’t back up during trading hours! It’ll slow you down.

Getting Mobile with the Markets
A growing number of brokerage firms and software developers are coming up
with applications that let you trade from a smartphone or a tablet computer.
At the time I’m writing this, I think these options are a bad idea for most day
traders. Even with 4G service, mobile networks can be slow and drop out,
and you can’t get enough information on a little screen to trade well.
However, technology changes fast, so maybe by the time you’re reading this,
mobile speeds have become as fast as wired ones. This may be especially
true if you live in a rural area without reliable high-speed Internet service.
The different brokerage firms (including those listed in Chapter 11 and
others) are adding new and better mobile capabilities. Some of the things to
look for are signaling and charting capabilities, ease of order entry, and synching to your desktop information. Also, make sure that the mobile service
handles whatever asset you usually trade. Mobile apps are still relatively new
as far as the trading world goes, and some can handle your strategy better
than others. Still, I remain skeptical that mobile trading is a good idea for
an active day trader. I live in Chicago near Wrigley Field, and cellphone service slows to a crawl on game days. Some 40,000 fans all e-mailing pictures
of themselves at the Friendly Confines to their friends takes a toll on cell
towers. Sometimes, my provider slows so much that only emergency service
is available on game days. It’s not a typical problem, to be sure, but it’s also
not something you want to deal with as a trader. Keep that in mind when
you see brokerage-firm commercials that talk about trading at the game.
If you’re a business traveler who gets a great idea on the road and who wants
to place one order to buy and hold, then great! Use your phone. If you are

211

212 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
a swing trader or an investor who trades more than average, using a mobile
device when exit or entry points happen to be great but you are out of the
office may be fine.
If you’re a day trader placing tens or hundreds of orders a day, your muscles
will cramp up from entering orders with a teensy keyboard, and your speed
could slow down when you least want it to. However, a mobile platform
makes a great backup system. If your broker offers phone trading, you can
use it to keep in the market — or close out efficiently — if your trading
system goes down or you can’t get access to it.
Although mobile trading isn’t the best idea for your primary trading, mobile
technology and the different apps that people develop for it can be really
useful. Here are a few great ones to try:
✓ Apps from the exchanges: Traders need good prices. These apps are
published by the different exchanges and give you price quotes and
news direct from the source. I list the biggies here, but apps are also
available for smaller markets like Warsaw and Dhaka.
• CME Group Mobile: This app takes you to the floor of the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange. It’s sophisticated, includes market education
modules, and is available for both Android and iPhone. However,
keep in mind that hardly any floor trading takes place at the Merc
anymore.
• NASDAQ Q Folio: The NASDAQ Stock Exchange has always been
popular with stock traders looking for small companies, and this
app gives you access to portfolio prices, watch lists, and real-time
quotes. It’s free for both main smartphone operating systems.
✓ News apps: Apps are a great way to get news and information about
the markets. You can use these to supplement your trading outside
of trading hours — or for additional insight.
• Bloomberg: Bloomberg is the leading news service for traders, and
its news feed is available in app form for both Android and Apple
devices.
• CNBC Real Time for Phones: In the olden days, traders often had a
TV turned to CNBC going in the background. Now, they can turn to
their Apple or Android phones to get real-time NYSE and NASDAQ
quotes along with CNBC news headlines. It’s free.
• Financial Times: The Financial Times is the United Kingdom’s
financial newspaper, and it has great information about business
from a European perspective. That’s especially useful if you trade
currencies. The app is free and gives you access to eight stories
a month. If you want more news, you have to pay to subscribe.

Chapter 12: Equipping to Day Trade
• StockTwits: This service draws a news feed from Twitter and other
social-media sources so that you can get an idea of what people
are talking about, where the trends are forming, and what new
ideas are heating up. The app is free for iPhone and Android users.
✓ Apps for fun: The following apps are all about trading, but they are more
fun than practical. That’s not a bad thing, though, is it?
• The Game of Stocks: This is a free stock-market simulator game
that lets you start with $22,000 in play money, trade based on real
prices in real time, and then see how you do. It’s only available
for Android.
• NYSE Euronext Options Quiz: This app is a good way to learn
about options. The quiz app lets you test what you know and earn
prizes — virtual prizes, but prizes nonetheless — as you progress.
• Pirates and Traders: Okay, this isn’t a day trading app, but it’s
a fun game for the Android system that lets you choose to be a
pirate of the high seas or the captain of a trading ship, and you can
then try to make money in your chosen role. If you’re thinking of
day trading because you’re bored, you may want to try
this instead.
• Trading Wisdom: This fun, free app gives you great quotes and
advice about trading. It was developed by Sriram Swaminathan
and is available for Android.
