
But recognizing changes in public taste and then reacting promptly
to these changes is not enough. As has been said before, in the business
world customers simply do not beat a path to the door of the man with
the better mousetrap. In the competitive world of commerce it is vital
to make the potential customer aware of the advantages of a product or
service. This awareness can be created only by understanding what the
potential buyer really wants (sometimes when the customer himself
doesn’t clearly recognize why these advantages appeal to him) and
explaining it to him not in the seller’s terms but in his terms.

Whether this is best done by advertising, by salesmen making calls,
by specialized independent marketing organizations, or by any combi-
nation of these depends on the nature of the business. But what is


The First Dimension of a Conservative Investment 183

required in every instance is close control and constant managerial
measurement of the cost effectiveness of whatever means are used. Lack
of outstanding management in these areas can result (a) in losing a sig-
nificant volume of business that would otherwise be available; (b) in
having much higher costs and therefore obtaining smaller profit on
what business is obtained; and (c) because of companies’ having varia-
tions in the profitability of various elements of their product line, in fail-
ing to attain the maximum possible profit mix within the line. An effi-
cient producer or operator with weak marketing and selling may be
compared to a powerful engine that, because of a loose pulley belt or
badly adjusted differential, is producing only a fraction of the results it
otherwise would have attained.

OUTSTANDING RESEARCH AND
TECHNICAL EFFORT

Not so very long ago it seemed that outstanding technical ability was
vital only to a few highly scientifically oriented industries such as elec-
tronics, aerospace, pharmaceutical and chemical manufacturing. As these
have grown, their ever-widening technologies have so penetrated virtu-
ally all lines of manufacturing and nearly all the service industries that
today to have outstanding research and technical talent is nearly, if not
quite, as important for a shoe manufacturer, a bank, a retailer or an
insurance company as it is for what were once considered the exotic sci-
entific industries that maintained large research staffs. Technological
efforts are now channeled in two directions: to produce new and better
products (in this connection, research scientists may, of course, do some-
what more for a chemical company than for a grocery chain) and to
perform services in a better way or at a lower cost than in the past. With
regard to the latter objective, outstanding technical talent can be equal-
ly valuable for either group. Actually, in some of the service businesses,
technological groups are opening up new product lines as well as paving
the way for performing old services better. Banks are an example. Low-
cost electronic input devices and minicomputers are enabling them to
offer accounting and bookkeeping services to customers, thus creating
a new product line for these institutions.

In research and technology, there is as much variation between the
efficiency of one company and another as there is in marketing. In new


184 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

product development, the complexity of the task almost guarantees this.
Important as it is, the degree of technical competence or ingenuity of
one company’s research staff as compared to that of another is only one
of the factors affecting the benefits that the company derives from its
research efforts. Developing new products usually calls for the pooling
of the efforts of a number of researchers, each skilled in a different tech-
nological specialty. How well these individuals work together (or can be
induced by a leader to work together and stimulate each other) is often
as important as the individual competence of the people involved. Fur-
thermore, to maximize profits, it 1s vital not to develop just any prod-
uct but one for which there will be significant customer demand, one
that (nearly always) can be sold by the company’s existing marketing
organization, and one that can be made at a price that will yield a
worthwhile profit. All of this requires efficient liaison between research
and both marketing and production. The best corporate research team
in the world can become nothing but a liability if it develops only prod-
ucts that cannot be readily sold. For true investment superiority a com-
pany must have above-average ability to control all these complex rela-
tionships yet at the same time not so overcontrol them. as to cause its
researchers to lose the drive and the ingenuity that made them out-
standing in the first place.

FINANCIAL SKILL

Again and again in this discussion of production, marketing and
research, the terms profit and profit margin have been used. In a large
company with a diverse product line, it is not a simple matter to be sure
of the cost of each product in relation to the rest, as most costs other
than materials and direct labor are spread over a number of such prod-
ucts, maybe over all of them. Companies with above-average financial
talent have several significant advantages. Knowing accurately how
much they make on each product, they can make their greatest efforts
where these will produce maximum gains. Intimate knowledge of the
extent of each clement of costs, not just in manufacturing but in selling
and research as well, spotlights in even minor phases of company activ-
ity the places where it is logical to make special efforts to reduce costs,
either through technological innovations or by improving people’s spe-
cific assignments. Most important of all, through skillful budgeting and


The First Dimension of a Conservative Investment 185

accounting, the truly outstanding company can create an early-warning
system whereby unfavorable influences that threaten the profit plan can
be quickly detected. Remedial action can then be taken to avoid the
painful surprises that have jolted investors in many companies. Nor do
the “goodies” that accrue to investors from superior financial skills stop
at this point. They usually lead to a better choice of capital investments
that bring the highest return on the company’s investment capital. They
also can lead to better control of receivables and inventory, a matter of
increasing importance in periods of high interest rates.

To summarize: The company that qualifies well in this first dimen-
sion of a conservative investment is a very low-cost producer or opera-
tor in its field, has outstanding marketing and financial ability and a
demonstrated above-average skill on the complex managerial problem
of attaining worthwhile results from its research or technological organ-
ization. In a world where change is occurring at an ever-increasing pace,
it is (1) a company capable of developing a flow of new and profitable
products or product lines that will more than balance older lines that
may become obsolete by the technological innovations of others; (2) a
company able now and in the future to make these lines at costs suffi-
ciently low so as to generate a profit stream that will grow at Icast as fast
as sales and that even in the worst years of general business will not
diminish to a point that threatens the safety of an investment in the
business; and (3) a company able to sell its newer products and those
which it may develop in the future at least as profitably as those with
which it is involved today.

This is a one-dimensional picture of a prudent investment—one
which, if not spoiled by the view from other dimensions, represents an
investment with which the investor is unlikely to become disillusioned.
But before going on to examine these other dimensions, there is one
additional point that should be fully understood. If the objective is con-
serving one’s funds, if the goal is safety, why have we been talking about
growth and the development of new and additional product lines? Why
isn’t it enough to maintain a business at its existing size and level of prof-
its without running all the risks that occur when new endeavors are
started? When we come to a discussion of the influence of inflation on
investments, other reasons for the importance of growth will present
themselves. But fundamentally it should never be forgotten that, in a
world where change is occurring at a faster and faster pace, nothing long
remains the same. It is impossible to stand still. A company will either


186 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

grow or shrink. A strong offense is the best defense. Only by growing
better can a company be sure of not growing worse. Companies that
have failed to go uphill have invariably gone downhill—and, if that has
been true in the past, it will be even more true in the future. This is
because, in addition to an ever-increasing pace of technological innova-
tion, changing social customs and buying habits and new demands of
government are altering at an ever-increasing pace the rate at which
even the stodgiest industries are changing.


2

The Second Dimension

The People Factor

riefly summarized, the first dimension of a conservative investment

consists of outstanding managerial competence in the basic areas of

production, marketing, research, and financial controls. This first
dimension describes a business as it is today, being essentially a matter of
results. The second dimension deals with what produced these results
and, more importantly, will continue to produce them in the future. The
force that causes such things to happen, that creates one company in an
industry that is an outstanding investment vehicle and another that is
average, mediocre, or worse, is essentially people.

Edward H. Heller, a pioneer venture capitalist whose comments
during his business life greatly influenced some of the ideas expressed
in this book, used the term “vivid spirit” to describe the type of indi-
vidual to whom he was ready to give significant financial backing. He
said that behind every unusually successful corporation was this kind
of determined entrepreneurial personality with the drive, the origi-
nal ideas, and the skill to make such a company a truly worthwhile
investment.

Within the area of very small companies that grew into consider-
ably larger and quite prosperous ones (the field of his greatest interest
and where he scored his most spectacular successes), Ed Heller was
undoubtedly right. But as these smaller companies grow larger on the


188 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

way to becoming suitable for conservative investment, Ed Heller’s view
might be tempered by that of another brilliant businessman who
expressed serious doubts about the wisdom of investing in a company
whose president was his close personal friend. This man’s reason for lack
of enthusiasm: “My friend is ore of the most brilliant men I’ve ever
known. He always has to be right. In a small company this may be fine.
But as you grow, your men have to be right sometimes, too.”

Here is an indication of the heart of the second dimension of a truly
conservative investment: a corporate chief executive dedicated to long-
range growth who has surrounded himself with and delegated consider-
able authority to an extremely competent team in charge of the various
divisions and functions of the company. These people must be engaged
not in an endless internal struggle for power but instead should be work-
ing together toward clearly outlined corporate goals. One of these goals,
which is absolutely essential if an investment is to be a truly successful
one, is that top management take the time to identify and train qualified
and motivated juniors to succeed senior management whenever a
replacement is necessary. In turn, at each level down through the chain
of command, detailed attention should be paid to whether those at this
level are doing the same thing for those one level below them.

Does this mean that a company that qualifies for truly conservative
investing should promote only from within and should never recruit
from the outside except at the lowest levels or for those just starting
their careers? A company growing at a very rapid rate may have such
need for additional people that there just isn’t time to train from with-
in for all positions. Furthermore, even the best-run company will at
times need an individual with a highly specialized skill so far removed
from the general activities of the company that such a specialty simply
cannot be found internally. Someone with expertise in a particular sub-
division of the law, insurance, or a scientific discipline well removed
from the company’s main line of activity would be a case in point. In
addition, occasional hiring from the outside has one advantage: It can
bring a new viewpoint into corporate councils, an injection of fresh
ideas to challenge the accepted way as the best way.

In general, however, the company with real investment merit is the
company that usually promotes from within. This is because all compa-
nies of the highest investment order (these do not necessarily have to be
the biggest and best-known companies) have developed a sct of policies
and ways of doing things peculiar to their own needs. If these special


The Second Dimension 189

ways are truly worthwhile, it is always difficult and frequently impossi-
ble to retrain those long accustomed to them to different ways of get-
ting things done. The higher up in an organization the newcomer may
be, the more costly the indoctrination can be. While I can quote no sta-
tistics to prove the point, it is my observation that in better-run com-
panies a surprising number of executives brought in close to the top
tend to disappear after a few years.

Of one thing the investor can be certain: A large company’s need to
bring in a new chief executive from the outside is a damning sign of
something basically wrong with the existing management—no matter
how good the surface signs may have been as indicated by the most
recent earnings statement. It may well be that the new president will do
a magnificent job and in time will build a genuine management team
around him so that such a jolt to the existing organization will never
again become necessary. Consequently, in time such a stock may
become one worthy of a wise investor. But such rebuilding can be so
long and risky a process that, if an investor finds this sort of thing hap-
pening in one of his holdings, he will do well to review all his invest-
ment activities to determine whether his past actions have really been
proceeding from a sound base.

A worthwhile clue is available to all investors as to whether a man-
agement is predominantly one man or a smoothly working team (this
clue throws no light, however, on how good that team may be). The annu-
al salaries of top management of all publicly owned companies are made
public in the proxy statements. If the salary of the number-one man is
very much larger than that of the next two or three, a warning flag is fly-
ing. If the compensation scale goes down rather gradually, it isn’t.

For optimum results for the investor it is not enough that manage-
ment personnel work together as a team and be capable of filling vacan-
cies above them.There should also be present the greatest possible num-
ber of those “vivid spirits” of Ed Heller’s—people with the ingenuity
and determination not to leave things just at their present, possibly quite
satisfactory, state but to build significant further improvements upon
them. Such people are not easy to find. Motorola, Inc., has for some
time been conducting an activity that the financial community has paid
little or no attention to that indicates it is possible to accomplish dra-
matically more in this area than is generally considered possible.

In 1967 Motorola management recognized that the rapid rate of
growth anticipated in the years ahead would inevitably require steady


190 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

expansion in the upper layers of management. It was decided to meet
the problem head on. In that year Motorola opened its Executive Insti-
tute at Oracle, Arizona. It was designed so that, in an atmosphere remote
from the daily details of the company’s offices and plants, two things
would happen: Motorola persorinel of apparent unusual promise would
be trained in matters beyond the scope of their immediate activities in
order to be able to take on more important jobs; top management
would be furnished significant further evidence as to the degree of pro-
motability of these same people.

At the time of the Executive Institute’s founding, skeptics within the
management questioned whether the effort would be worth the cost.
This was largely because of their belief that fewer than a hundred peo-
ple would be found in the whole Motorola organization with sufficient
talent to make it worthwhile from the company’s standpoint to pro-
vide them with this special training. Events have proven these skeptics
spectacularly wrong. The Institute handles five to six classes a year, with
fourteen in each class. By mid-1974 about 400 Motorola people had
gone through the school; and a significant number, including some pres-
ent vice-presidents, were found to have capabilities vastly greater than
anything contemplated at the time they were approved for admission.
Furthermore, those involved in this work feel that, from the company’s
standpoint, results in the more recent classes are even more favorable than
in the earlier ones. It now appears that, as total employment at Motorola
continues to expand with the company’s growth, enough promising
Motorola people can be found to maintain this activity indefinitely. All
of this shows, from the investor's standpoint, that if enough ingenuity is
used, even the companies with well-above-average growth rates can also
“grow” the needed unusual people from within so as to maintain com-
petitive superiority without running the high risk of friction and failure
that so often occurs when a rapidly growing company must go to the
outside for more than a very small part of its outstanding talent.

Everyone has a personality—a combination of character traits that
sets him or her apart from every other individual. Similarly, every cor-
poration has its own ways of doing things—some formalized into well-
articulated policies, others not—that are at least slightly different from
those of other corporations. The more successful the corporation, the
more likely it is to be unique in some of its policies. This is particularly
true of companies that have been successful for a considerable period of
time. In contrast to individuals, whose fundamental character traits


The Second Dimension 191

change but little once they reach maturity, the ways of companies are
influenced not only by outside events but by the reactions to those
events of a whole series of different personalities who, as time goes on,
follow one another in the top posts within the organization.

However much policies may differ among companies, there are
three elements that must always be present if a company’s shares are to
be worthy of holding for conservative, long-range investment.

1. The company must recognize that the world in which
it is operating is changing at an ever-increasing rate.

All corporate thinking and planning must be attuned to challenge what
is now being done—to challenge it not occasionally but again and
again. Every accepted way of doing things must be examined and re-
examined to be as sure as is permitted by human fallibility that this way
is really the best way. Some risks must be accepted in substituting new
methods to meet changing conditions. No matter how comfortable it
may seem to do so, ways of doing things cannot be maintained just
because they worked well in the past and are hallowed by tradition. The
company that is rigid in its actions and is not constantly challenging
itself has only one way to go, and that way is down. In contrast, certain
managements of large companies that have deliberately endeavored to
structure themselves so as to be able to change have been those pro-
ducing some of the most striking rewards for their shareholders. An
example of this is the Dow Chemical Company, with a record of
achievements over the last ten years that is frequently considered to sur-
pass that of any other major chemical company in this country, if not in
the entire world. Possibly Dow’s most significant departure from past
ways was to break its management into five separate managements on
geographical lines (Dow USA, Dow Europe, Dow Canada, ete. ). It was
believed that only in this way could local problems be handled quickly
as best suited local conditions and without suffering from the bureau-
cralic inefficiencies that so often accompany bigness. The net effect of
this as told by the president of Dow Europe: “The results that today
challenge us are being made by our sister [Dow] companies throughout
the world. They, not our direct competitors, are turning in the gains that
push us to be first.” From the investor's standpoint perhaps the most
important feature of this change was not that it was made but that it was
made when Dow still had a total sales volume much smaller than many


192 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

other multinational companies that were operating successfully in the
established way. In other words, change and improvement arose from
innovative thinking to make a workable system better—not from a
forced reaction to a crisis.

This is but one of the many ways this pioneering company has bro-
ken with the past to attain its striking competitive record. Another was
the unprecedented step for an industrial company of starting from
scratch to make a success of a wholly owned bank in Switzerland so as
to help finance the needs of its customers in the export market. Here
again the management did not hesitate to break with the past in ways
that engendered some risk in the early stages but that ended up by
enhancing the intrinsic strength of the company.

Many other examples could be cited from the record of this compa-
ny. However, just one more will be mentioned merely to show the
extreme variety of areas such actions may cover. Far earlier than most
other companies, Dow not only recognized the need to spend sizable
sums to avoid pollution but concluded that, if major results were to be
attained, something more was needed than just exhortations from top
management. It was necessary to obtain the consistent cooperation of
middle-level managers. It was decided that the surest way of doing this
was to appeal to the profit motives of those most directly involved. They
were encouraged to find profitable methods of converting the polluting
materials to salable products. The rest is now business history. With the full
power of top management, plant management, and highly skilled chemi-
cal engineers behind these projects, Dow has achieved a series of firsts in
eliminating pollution that has won them the praise of many environmen-
tal groups that are usually quite antibusiness in their viewpoints. Possibly
more important, they have avoided hostility in most, although not all, of
the communities where their plants are located. They have done this at
very little over-all dollar cost and in some cases at an operating profit.
