 Intelligent Investor. He shared that at age 76, he’s still running through the same thought processes he learned from the book at age 19. In an interesting point, Buffett again noted that you need something in your programming so that you don’t lose a lot of money. He claimed that his best ideas haven’t done better than others’ best ideas, but he’s lost less on his worst ideas. Comments on Risk In modern portfolio theory, beta is a measure of volatility, which, in turn, is seen as a measure of risk. The higher the beta, the higher the risk. At least that’s how the theory goes. Buffett begs to differ, asserting volatility does not measure risk. Beta is nice and mathematical, but it’s wrong. For example, a couple decades ago, farmland in Nebraska went from $2,000 to $600 per acre. The theory would say the “beta” of farms went way up, so you would be taking far more risk buying it at $600 (as Buffett did) than at $2,000/acre. That, of course, is nonsense. But stocks do trade, and math types like the ability of computers to model all those jiggles in prices. Buffett concluded, “This concept of volatility is useful for people whose career is teaching, but it’s useless to us.” Buffett believes that real risk comes from the nature of certain kinds of businesses, by the simple economics of the business and from not knowing what you’re doing. If you understand the economics and you know the people, then you’re not taking much risk. For example, Buffett noted that he’s willing to lose $6 billion in one catastrophe, but Berkshire’s insurance business over time is not very risky. Given time, the probabilities will play out. Similarly, if you own a roulette wheel, you sometimes have to pay 35 to 1, but that’s okay. He’d love to own a lot of roulette wheels. Munger put in his two cents, “At least 50% of what is taught is twaddle, but these people have very high IQs. We recognized early on that very smart people do very dumb things, and we wanted to know why and who so we could avoid them.” Ethanol Munger, ever the diplomat, weighed in on ethanol: “I think the idea of running vehicles on corn is one of the dumbest ideas I’ve ever seen. Governments under pressure do crazy things, but this is among the craziest. Raise the cost of food so you can run these autos around? You use up just about as much hydrocarbons making ethanol as it produces, and its cost doesn’t even factor in the permanent loss of topsoil. I love Nebraska to the core, but this was not my home state’s finest moment.” 6 Giving His Fortune Away Buffett provided a very interesting summary of his $30 billion (and growing) gift to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and to some other foundations run by his children. Buffett said he always felt that he would compound money at a rate higher than average, and it would have been foolish to give away a significant portion of that capital. He also thought his wife would have been the one giving it away, but things didn’t work out that way. The idea of finding talented people to do what they do best is one of Buffett’s driving principles. He noted that when he and Suzie had a baby, they hired an obstetrician—he didn’t try to do it himself. When his tooth hurts, he doesn’t turn to Charlie. Similarly, when it came time to giving his money away sensibly, he turned to Bill and Melinda Gates, people who are smart, energetic and passionate. He wanted to give the claim checks to someone who could follow generally what he would do himself if he were to do it. Buffett added that as far as he’s concerned, he hasn’t given up anything. He hasn’t changed his life. He couldn’t eat any better or sleep any better, so he really hasn’t given up anything. Someone giving up a trip to Disneyland to make a donation is the one making a real sacrifice. More Wisdom from Charlie We have often recommended to our friends and clients George Clason’s classic, The Richest Man in Babylon , so we were delighted to hear Charlie speak of it. He said that he read the book when he was young and that the book taught him to under-spend his income and invest the difference. Lo and behold, he did this, and it worked. He got the idea to add a mental compound interest as well. So he decided he would sell himself the best hour of the day to improving his own mind, and the world could buy the rest of his time. He said it may sound selfish, but it worked. He also noted that if you become very reliable and stay that way, it will be very hard to fail in doing anything you want. 1 A current example is the Bear Stearns High-Grade Structured Credit Fund, which, as we related in our Market Update, boasted 30 consecutive months of profits but is now facing heavy losses due to its combination of extreme leverage and illiquid mortgage securities. 2 Note to regulators—here’s a corporate governance model worth examining. 3 Which is identical to the view of FPA’s Bob Rodriguez, who sees “no value in bond land.” 4 Which is happening right now. 5 One of our favorites, Leucadia National Corp, was a very profitable player in the RTC process. 6 Munger is not alone in questioning the wisdom of the ethanol program. The July 15, 2007, Des Moines 
 Register featured a headline story debating the future of ethanol subsidies.

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 2008 Venue: Qwest Center Attendance: 31,000 Details About This Year:   The Qwest Center on the Berkshire weekend has become part meeting, part circus. There were country western singers, live bulls, speed boats, antique cars and an entire manufactured home from Clayton Homes. Some 25 Berkshire companies, from Justin Boots to Fruit of the Loom to GEICO insurance, sold their wares in the show room. Nebraska Furniture Mart had record sales of $7.5 million during the event. Fortune 500 Ranking: 11th Stock Price: $141,685 One dollar invested in 1964 would now be worth $14,454 . Berkshire’s per-share book value has grown from $19.46 to $70,530 (a rate of 20.3% compounded annually). The S&P 500 compounded at 10.3% annually for the same period.

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 Highlights From 2008’s Notes Buy the Business Asked how not to be an investment lemming, Buffett suggested reading his old standby, The Intelligent Investor by Benjamin Graham (especially chapters 8 and 20), which changed his life. Always remember that when you are buying a stock, you are really buying part ownership of a business. Buffett, after working at his grandfather’s grocery store, learned the importance of hard work. However, his grandfather was very negative about the stock market. Buffett stopped listening to him at that point. 1 If Buffett were teaching business school, he would make it shockingly simple. Teach 1) How to Value a Business, and 2) How to Think About Market Fluctuations—that the market is there to serve you, not influence you.” That would be it. Professors fill the time with all sorts of formulas. Just as the priesthood of Biblical scholars would not have much to do if the masses simply followed the 10 Commandments, so do business school professors need something to teach and impress the students. On the stock market, Buffett noted that the market represents thousands of businesses. So it should not matter where the stock market goes in the short run. He would be happy with his stocks if the market were closed several years. If you were buying a farm, for example, you would look at the farm’s production over time versus the purchase price. You would not be trading farms based on short-term swings in agricultural prices. Munger: “I have nothing to add.” Buffett: “He’s been practicing for months.” Future Returns: Lower Expectations Buffett noted that he will be very happy with a 10% total return on his stock portfolio. He predicted (for the umpteenth time) that Berkshire’s future returns will not even be close to the returns it has earned in the past. Given Berkshire’s size, it must look at companies with $50 billion market caps to move the needle. He concluded that “we’ll have decent results but not indecent results.” Munger added, “We’re happy making money at a reduced rate and suggest you do the same.” 2 3 Good Managers: We Cheat Buffett noted that he cheats when it comes to finding good managers. He simply buys the ones who are already running great companies. If he were shown 100 MBAs, Buffett asserted that it would be impossible for him to rank how they will actually perform as managers. He simply finds decades-long records of excellent performance. Then he seeks to retain them in a way that maintains their enthusiasm for the work. Buffett asks whether the manager loves the money or loves the business. If they love the business, they’ll be a good fit for Berkshire. In sum, Buffett looks for .400 hitters that can work for decades. He joked that Mrs. B (founder of Nebraska Furniture Mart) left at age 103 and died the next year. He hopes that’s a lesson for his managers. Ethics Buffett said he’s very proud of how the Berkshire managers, as a group, have behaved over the years. To maintain clarity, Buffett sends a letter every two years to the managers, asking who their successors would be and reminding them to be sure not to lose a shred of reputation for the company. 4 He suggests the “newspaper” standard: behave as if your actions will be on the front page of the local newspaper. Berkshire has no budgets or earning goals, which eliminates some of the perverse pressures that infect most other large companies. 5 Hedging the Dollar: Going International Buffett warned years ago that the U.S. dollar was at risk with our ever-expanding trade deficit. Given that there has been no meaningful change in U.S. economic policies, Buffett continues to be bearish about the dollar. As a result, Buffett is happy to earn profits in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. That can happen through stock ownership (Coca-Cola earns 80% of its profits overseas) or through the direct purchase of foreign companies. He’s actively looking to do more of the latter. Buffett is heading to Europe soon to tout the virtues of family-controlled companies selling to Berkshire. ISCAR in particular has opened Buffett’s eyes to the possibilities overseas. ISCAR opened a plant in China last year and its CEO, Eitan Wertheimer, is accompanying Buffett on his swing through Europe. ISCAR, by the way, has exceeded Buffett’s very high expectations. He noted that both the financial performance and the personal relationships have made it a “dream acquisition.” Buffett wants more family owners who, when they feel the need to monetize their business, will think of Berkshire Hathaway. That was the case recently for the Pritzkers and Marmon Group. It was the case a couple of years ago with the Wertheimers and ISCAR. Munger noted that Germany has a particularly evolved civilization, especially in terms of inventiveness and engineering. For example, in the printing business, to an amazing degree, the best equipment is German-made. Buffett reflected how he lost big time on Dexter shoes. Twenty years ago, the U.S. made one billion pair of shoes annually. He quipped that our shoe-wild culture made the U.S. a nation of Imelda Marcos’. Now, while we still buy shoes, the U.S. makes no shoes. All shoes are made abroad today, especially in China. Buffett noted how China is now unleashing its potential in a more open society. The talent was always there. It was just suppressed for so long. Municipal Bond Dislocations In his annual shot at modern portfolio theory, which claims that markets are always efficient, Buffett described what happened in the municipal bond market in early 2008. Once in a while, Buffett brings props, and this year’s was a set of municipal bond bid sheets. He noted that there were some $330 billion of auction rate securities (ARS) weekly. Voila—long-term funding with short-term rates. Good as long as it works. But when credit markets seized up in February, so did the ARS market. Chaos ensued. Buffett noted that Los Angeles County Museum bonds that yielded 4% in January suddenly were priced to yield as high as 10% in mid-February. Now, the bonds are back to a 4% yield. He also noted that during the panic, different bonds of the same issuer yielded anywhere from 6% to 11% at the same time! So much for the efficient market. It was a short-lived but very obvious opportunity for Buffett, and Berkshire acquired $4 billion of municipal bonds during the period. Munger noted how quickly the opportunity came and went. Hedge funds had to dump because of margin calls. If you cannot think fast and act resolutely, it does you no good. Like men spear fishing, you may wait a long time, and when opportunity comes, you must act. Berkshire Hathaway Assurance In a remarkable turn of events, Berkshire recently entered the municipal bond insurance industry as the mortgage crisis infected the other primary players. Buffett provided an update, noting that Ajit Jain started up Berkshire’s municipal bond insurance subsidiary at the end of last year. Buffett proudly announced that in a matter of months, BHA (Berkshire Hathaway Assurance) already has collected premium volume of $400 million, which may be more than all other municipal bond insurers—combined! It’s done 278 transactions, mostly secondaries, with just 30 people in the office. The Berkshire-insured bonds are trading at a premium to those of any other bond insurer. Buffett said that the premiums represent coverage that only pays if the primary insurer cannot pay. And Berkshire is getting better than 2% when the original insurance cost 1%. Munger shared that once, when he was asked what was Berkshire’s single best investment, he answered, “The fee for the corporate recruiter that brought us Ajit Jain.” Succession Buffett announced that the board has the names of several potential successors and reviews succession plans at each board meeting. Munger noted that Berkshire still has a rising young man in one Warren Buffett. Buffett wryly pointed out that the term “aging management,” so often used to describe Berkshire’s top brass, refers to all managers. Furthermore, given that he and Charlie average 80 years between them, they are aging at the rate of just 1.25% per year. Meanwhile, a 50-year-old manager is aging at a 2% rate and, therefore, is a much riskier bet. Munger, on what Warren wants said at his funeral: “That’s the oldest looking corpse I’ve ever seen.” Concentration Munger and Buffett were in complete agreement about the benefits for the professional investor of loading up on your best ideas. Buffett claimed that concentration is a good thing in investing, noting that he has had 75% of his non-Berkshire net worth invested in a single idea numerous times. It would be a mistake not to have 50% of your net worth in a really good situation. The big mistake is having 500 % of your net worth in things. Long-Term Capital Management had 25 times its net worth up, so it couldn’t play out its hand when things went against it. 6 Munger rued that elite schools teach that the secret of investment management is diversification. They have it backasswards he asserted. Non-diversification is the key. Oil The danger, according to Buffett, isn’t that we will run out of oil, as is sometimes heralded by the press, but that daily production will level out and then slowly decline over time. The world now produces 87 million barrels per day, the most ever, and yet we are probably at the lowest surplus capacity ever as demand marches ever higher. If we are at peak production, and it looks like we are, the world will have to adjust. Munger noted that it is stupid to use our limited supply of hydrocarbons as fast as we are. Munger believed that we need to use the sun—there is no other alternative. Ethanol Update Munger weighed in with his usual sunny assessment: “Corn to motor fuel is one of the dumbest ideas for the future of the world I’ve ever seen. It’s stunningly stupid. The idea is probably on its way out.” Investment Bank Follies Munger observed that Enron shocked the nation with its gross folly and misbehavior. That brought us Sarbanes-Oxley, which turned out to be like trying to shoot an elephant with a pea shooter. The convulsion underway now makes Enron look like a tea party. We will have more regulation, and it won’t work perfectly for everyone. Buffett felt that the Fed did the right thing with the Bear Stearns bailout. Bear would have failed, and the sorting out of some $14.5 trillion of derivative contracts with thousands of counterparties would have been a spectacle of unprecedented proportions with another big investment bank or two folding within a few days. These firms never dreamt that the world would stop lending to them. Buffett asserted that investment banks and big commercial banks are too big to manage the way they have been going. It works most of the time, so you don’t see the risk day to day. And if you’re a 62-year-old executive, you don’t worry too much about the very long run. What you need is a CEO with risk aversion in his DNA and the ability to resist employees who want to copy others to make money. OFHEO Spells Awful Regarding the difficulty of regulating complex financial enterprises, Buffett observed that OFHEO (Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) oversees two incredibly important entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. These two accounted for 40% of mortgage flow a few years back and perhaps some 70% today. OFHEO, with a staff of 200, existed solely for the purpose of watching these two companies. And what happened were two of the greatest accounting misstatements in history, billions and billions of dollars, while these 200 people had their jobs. They went two for two. Buffett concluded that when you combine “too big to manage” with a government that deems them “too big to fail,” you get interesting outcomes. Munger was more direct, calling it crazy that the government would allow the banks to get too big to fail, a product of a culture of greed and overreaching. Overconfidence in algorithms played a part as well. Munger called it demented to let derivative trading end up this way and regretted that so few spoke against it. GURF: Good Until Reached For Munger noted that so much of derivative accounting was not real profits. And he coined a new accounting term, GURF: “good until reached for.” Many investment banks carried assets that went “poof” when it ca