
r Part I (Chapters 1–4) — Theory and Practice
r Part II (Chapters 5 and 6) — Regimes and Crises
r Part III (Chapters 7–10) — The Real World of the Currency Market Practitioner
We begin this process with Chapter 1 (Fundamental Analysis: The Strengths and Weaknesses of Traditional Exchange Rate Models) which as the title suggests examines the
contribution of macroeconomics to the ﬁeld of currency analysis. As we have already seen
brieﬂy in this Introduction, economics has created a number of equilibrium-based valuation
models. Generally speaking, such models try to determine an equilibrium exchange rate based
on the relative pricing of goods, money and trade. In turn, this concept of relative pricing can be
broken down into four main types of long-term valuation model, which focus on international
competitiveness, key monetary themes, interest rate differentials and the balance of payments.
I would suggest that while such equilibrium exchange rate models are an indispensable tool for
analysing long-term exchange rate trends, their predictive track record for short-term moves is
mixed at best. Moreover, as we noted above, they are based on the concept of an equilibrium,
which rarely exists in reality and if it does exist is in any case a moving target. This is in no
way to attempt to downplay the immense contribution that economics has made to currency
analysis, rather it is to emphasize the different focus of the two disciplines. Whereas economics
seeks to determine the “big picture”, currency analysis seeks speciﬁc exchange rate forecasts

10

Currency Strategy

over speciﬁc time frames. Neither is “better” or “worse”. They are merely different analytical
disciplines responding to a different set of requirements. In the very act of attempting practical
modiﬁcations to the classical economic approach towards exchange rates, one pays homage to
the original work.
Precisely because currency markets are affected by so many different factors, it has proved an
extremely difﬁcult (if not impossible) task for economists to design fundamental equilibrium
models with predictive capacity for exchange rates for anything other than the long term. Thus,
Chapter 2 (Currency Economics: A More Focused Framework) seeks to go beyond these
theoretical models outlined in Chapter 1 to capture those elements of economics relevant to
the currency market and tie them into a loose analytical framework capable of giving a more
relevant and accurate picture of short- and medium-term currency market dynamics. Whereas
the classical economic approach has been to start with general economic rules and impose them
on exchange rates, the emphasis here is to start with the speciﬁc currency market dynamics
and use whichever aspects of economics are most appropriate to these, as characterized by
the label “currency economics”. The attempt here is not to create or deﬁne a new economic
discipline, but instead to use the existing qualities of economic and other analytical disciplines
to create a framework of exchange rate analysis that is more relevant and useful for currency
market practitioners.
For this purpose, we cannot rely on economics alone. As we analyse the speciﬁc dynamics of
the currency market we see that other analytical disciplines may also be relevant. In Chapter 3
(Flow: Tracking the Animal Spirits) we look at the ﬁrst of these, namely that of “ﬂow”
analysis. It is interesting to note that where once this discipline was not even recognized as
having worth, it is now at the forefront of ﬁnancial analysis. As barriers to trade and capital
have fallen over the last three decades, so the size and the importance of investment capital has
grown exponentially. While the classical approach has traditionally taken the view of the
efﬁcient market hypothesis, namely that information is perfect and that past pricing holds no
relevance in a market place where all participants are rational and proﬁt-seeking, there have
been a number of recent academic works looking at how “order ﬂow” can in fact be a crucial
determinant of future prices. Thus Chapter 3 seeks to take this view a stage further and look
at using order ﬂow — that is the sum of client ﬂows going through a bank — as a tool for
forecasting and trading exchange rates.
The tracking of capital ﬂows of necessity involves looking for apparent patterns in ﬂow
movement. Linked in with this idea is the discipline of tracking patterns in price. This discipline
is that of technical analysis. While the economic community appears to have ﬁnally taken the
discipline of ﬂow analysis to its heart, there remains considerable resistance to any similar
acceptance of technical analysis. Chapter 4 (Technical Analysis: The Art of Charting)
looks at this discipline, how it evolved and how it professes to work. Whatever the scepticism
and criticism of this discipline, the reality is that ﬂow and technical analysis have succeeded to
a far greater degree where equilibrium exchange rate models have failed in seeking to predict
short-term exchange rate moves. Technical analysis has come a very long way, even to the
point where some market practitioners base their investment decisions solely on the basis
of technical signals. Several public institutions have sought to investigate the phenomenon
of technical analysis and why it works, including no less than the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York. The reasons vary from market herding patterns, as noted by the ﬁeld of behavioural
ﬁnance, to economic and ﬁnancial cycles matching each other. Whatever the case, the results
of technical analysis are impressive, enough to persuade investment banks and hedge funds to
trade off them.
@Team-FLY

Introduction

11

Having looked at ﬂow and pricing patterns in Chapters 3 and 4, it is also important to examine
the structural dynamics that determine those patterns, which is the focus of Chapters 5 and 6.
Currency markets are widely viewed as volatile, yet there is also the perception that a clear
differentiation can be made between “normal” and “crisis” trading conditions. The structural
dynamics of the currency market can determine when and how this differentiation occurs.
A key structural dynamic concerns the type of exchange rate regime, which can signiﬁcantly
distort both fundamental and technical signals. Thus, in Chapter 5 (Exchange Rate Regimes:
Fixed or Floating?) we look at how the type of exchange rate regime can have potentially
major impact on the business decisions of currency market practitioners. To most modern-day
readers, at least those within the developed markets, the exchange rate norm is and has always
been freely ﬂoating. While this is now true for the most part within the developed markets it is
not so much the case in the emerging markets where the series of currency crises in the 1990s
would appear to conﬁrm that the type of exchange rate regime remains a pertinent issue for
investors and corporations alike. This chapter takes a brief but illuminating look at the history
of exchange rate regimes, noting a clear trend within the dynamic tension between governments
and the market place towards either completely freely ﬂoating exchange rate regimes or hard
currency pegs since the break-up of the Bretton Woods system in 1971–1973. There remains
a rich debate within academia as to the optimal currency regime, with free market ideologues
calling for freely ﬂoating exchange rate regimes as the only solution in a world of free and open
trade and capital markets, while at the other end of the spectrum some still call for a return to
ﬁxed exchange rates. Where there appears at least some degree of agreement is the idea that
within these two extremes semi- or “soft” currency peg regimes are no longer appropriate in
a world without barriers to the movement of capital. We touch on this academic debate only
for the purpose of seeing how the issues are relevant for currency market practitioners. Indeed,
to round off the chapter, we look at the issues of “exchange rate sustainability” and the “real
world relevance of the exchange rate system”, noting points that currency market practitioners
should be on the lookout for with regards to the relationship between the exchange rate regime
they are operating under and the speciﬁc currency risk they are exposed to.
The implicit assumption in Chapter 5 is that “normal” trading conditions apply. Yet, within
currency markets, there are periods of turbulence and distress so extreme that the dynamics of
“normal” trading conditions may no longer apply. Logically enough, we term this hurricane
or typhoon equivalent in the currency markets a “currency crisis”. As with our meteorological
counterparts, currency analysts have tried to examine currency crises in order to be able to
predict them. As with hurricanes, this is no easy task. Chapter 6 (Model Analysis: Can
Currency Crises be Predicted?) takes a look at the effort by the economic community to
model and predict currency crises. For the reason that I have worked on this subject for some
years, I enclose my own effort entitled the Classic Emerging Market Currency Crisis (CEMC)
model, which looks at the typical emerging market pegged exchange rate regime. In addition,
I enclose a model focusing on the “speculative cycle”, which takes place in freely ﬂoating
exchange rate regimes. Here, I make no claim to a deﬁnitive breakthrough. However, I do feel
these two models capture the essential dynamics of the currency crisis on the one hand and
the currency cycle on the other. The emphasis in this chapter is on the emerging markets for the
most part, largely because ever since the 1992–1993 ERM crises the developed markets have
no longer presented such easy targets. All major developed market exchange rates have been
freely ﬂoating, and the 15% ERM bands in the run up to the creation of the Euro on January 1,
1999 were sufﬁciently wide to eliminate the risk of a repeat attack on the mechanism. Under
freely ﬂoating exchange rates, currency crises take on a different form and are more reﬂective of

12

Currency Strategy

a loss of market conﬁdence rather than an actual crisis involving a pegged exchange rate which
ultimately involves desperate and futile defence followed by de-pegging and devaluation.
One could well argue that one of the prerequisites for developed country status is a freely
ﬂoating currency, though to be sure the creation of the Euro somewhat clouds the issue. In any
case, the emerging markets have provided a rich if unwanted source of currency crises to study,
including those of Mexico (1994–1995), Asia (1997–1998), Russia (1998), Brazil (1999) and
most recently Turkey (2001). Needless to say, following these violent and destructive events
the attempt at generating models able to predict currency crises has been greatly accelerated,
albeit with mixed success to date.
In Chapters 5 and 6, we have looked at exchange rate regimes, how they might affect currency
risk and in turn how they might drive the ultimate expression of currency market tension, the
currency crisis. In Chapters 7–10, we again seek to take the study of currency markets to the next
level and try to apply many of the lessons that we have learned to the real world of the currency
market practitioner. The ﬁrst chapter in this section, Chapter 7 (Managing Currency Risk
I — The Corporation) looks at how the multinational corporation should manage currency
risk. Before looking at currency hedging strategies and structures, we ﬁrst have to establish
what kinds of currency risks exist. For the multinational corporation, there are three types
of currency risk or exposure: transaction, translation and economic, each of which requires a
different approach. As with some investors, there are corporations ideologically ﬁxated with the
idea of not hedging. Others focus on the “natural” approach to hedging through the matching of
currency assets and liabilities. There is an understandable desire on the part of some corporate
executives to leave the issue of currency risk to the likes of currency dealers and speculators
and to “just get on with the company’s underlying business”. Unfortunately, few things in life
are as simple as one would like them. Whether it likes it or not, a corporation that has currency
exposure is by deﬁnition a currency market practitioner. It may not seek to manage currency
risk but even by doing so it is taking an active decision. There is no opt-out with regards to
currency risk or exposure. Fortunately, most major corporations have realized this and have
gone to great effort to establish sophisticated Treasury operations. There are still some who
hold out, and in any case even for these “progressives” there remains work to be done in
developing and maintaining skill levels to match those of their currency market counterparties.
Finally, after establishing what currency risk should be managed and why, we shall look at the
“how” by examining such concepts as optimization, balance sheet hedging, benchmarks for
currency risk management, strategies for setting budget rates, the corporation and predicting
exchange rates and a menu of advanced hedging strategies.
The worlds of the corporation and the investor may seem very different on the face of it, but
in fact they are very similar in a number of ways. Both view currency risk as an annoyance
and indeed there remain some on both sides who refuse to acknowledge it exists. Still to
this day, I come up against investors who have an almost ideological aversion to the idea of
managing currency risk. For the most part, this is on the view that investing in a country is
equivalent to investing in that country’s currency. If Chapter 8 (Managing Currency Risk
II — The Investor) succeeds in nothing else than to disabuse readers of such a view, then it
will have succeeded utterly and entirely. The case of South Africa already mentioned in this
Introduction may be seen as an extreme example, but it is far from unique. The structural
dynamics of asset market risk and currency risk are fundamentally different, and thus they
should be managed separately and independently. This is not to say that they have of necessity
to be managed by different people. However, the crucial point to be made is that these risks
should be managed differently and separately from one another, reﬂecting those different

Introduction

13

dynamics. When pressed, both the investor and the corporation for the most part seek defensive
strategies which can manage currency risk by reducing that exposure, limiting the vulnerability
of either the income statement or the portfolio. Indeed, readers will note that some strategies
mentioned in Chapters 7 and 8 are interchangeable between the corporation and the investor.
Thus, in this chapter, we will take a look into the world of the sophisticated institutional
investor and how they manage currency risk. As with the corporation, investors can choose
both passive and active currency risk management approaches for this purpose. Investors can
also use optimization as an important risk management tool, and the setting and use of currency
benchmarks is a further similarity. For both, the bottom line is that the currency exposure should
be managed in such a way as to limit any reduction and potentially enhance the total return.
The third set of currency market practitioners that we will examine is on the one hand the
largest grouping within the currency market and on the other the most misunderstood — the
currency “speculator”. For many, the very term triggers an instinctive reaction, frequently one
that is far from positive. For our purpose here, I deﬁne currency speculation as the trading of
currencies with no underlying attached asset within the transaction. Clearly, such a deﬁnition
is inexact, but it provides nonetheless a useful framework with which to analyse the subject.
Chapter 9 (Managing Currency Risk III — The Speculator) takes a look at the fascinating
but much misunderstood world of the currency speculator, how it works and how to be a better
speculator! Speculators have periodically been demonized by governments of the developed
and emerging countries alike, frequently in the wake of violent currency crises. Such crises
are however rarely caused by speculators, who are I would contend a symptom rather than
the disease itself. Indeed, in some cases speculation can actually be the cure, as when sterling
was ejected from the recessionary shackles of the ERM in September 1992, only for the UK
economy to recover strongly thereafter. Speculation can be both a positive and a destructive
force, but its intention is neither, rather to make a proﬁt. In this, it is neither moral nor immoral,
but rather amoral.
Currency speculation does not take place within a vacuum, but instead is a market and
indeed a human response to changes in ordinary fundamental and technical dynamics. For the
most part, currency speculators follow the same economic and technical analytical signposts
as corporations and investors. On occasion, both investors and corporations can act as currency
speculators. The term is certainly not limited to dealers or hedge funds. Moreover, currency
speculators generally provide exchange rate liquidity for the more productive elements of the
economy. It is my hope that readers of whatever hue will ﬁnd this chapter both interesting and
informative, concerning a subject which deserves at the least a chapter of its own if not an
entire and separate book. Undoubtedly, the issue of currency speculation is likely to remain
controversial for the foreseeable future. The aim here has been to take out some of the emotional
aspects of the issue and try to look at it coolly and dispassionately.
Speculators can accelerate change but they cannot cause it in the ﬁrst place. Moreover,
speculation provides a valuable need for the rest of the market in the form of liquidity. Yet,
speculation also remains only one part of the overall picture of the currency markets. As the
title might suggest, Chapter 10 (Applying the Framework) seeks as the ﬁnal chapter to bind
together all the strands of thought that we have looked at up to now into a coherent framework for
analysing the currency markets. One can have a reasonably informed idea about the prevailing
currency economics, the technical picture and the ﬂows, but it is only by combining those
that one sees the whole picture and therefore can come to an informed decision about how to
manage currency risk. For this purpose, I use a very simple “signal grid”, which combines
the individual signals of currency economics, technical analysis, ﬂow analysis and long-term

14

Currency Strategy

equilibrium model valuation, into a combined currency view. The signal grid should provide
an informed view as to exchange rates but at its most basic it will only say “buy” or “sell”.
What it cannot do is to suggest the type of currency instruments or structures needed. For that,
we need to apply the combined result of the signal grid to the currency market practitioner’s
own risk proﬁle. For both the corporation and the investor, their risk proﬁle is a function of
their tolerance of the volatility of their net proﬁt or total return.
No book should claim it can by itself make the reader an expert in its subject. Rather, this
is a book aimed at those who are already experts in their own respective ﬁelds, whether that it
is in ﬁxed income or equity investment, managing multi-billion dollar corporations, or trading
currency pairs such as Euro–dollar or dollar–rand. The purpose therefore of this book is to
help these experts become more proﬁcient in currency risk management to the extent where
it makes a real and measurable difference to their bottom line. In sum, this book aims a lot
higher than most written to date on exchange rates. I leave it to the reader to decide whether
or not it has succeeded in this regard.
Callum Henderson
London
May 2002

Part One
Theory and Practice

@Team-FLY

1
Fundamental Analysis:
The Strengths and Weaknesses of
Traditional Exchange Rate Models
The starting point of “fundamental” currency analysis is the exchange rate model, or the attempt
by economists to provide a logical framework with which to forecast exchange rates. In response
to the break-up of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system, the economics profession has spent
the last three decades trying to improve its exchange rate forecasting ability, mainly by reﬁning
the traditional exchange rate models and occasionally coming up with new ones. To date, the
results of this worthy effort have been mixed at best. We will go into why this is the case later.
In the meantime, it is worth spending some time looking at the various models, their practical
uses and individual track records, for to say their results have been mixed is not to suggest
they are without use. On the contrary, traditional exchange rate models provide a valuable
framework for analysing exchange rates, without which strategists would have few long-term
guides as to where exchange rates should be priced.
Most traditional exchange rate models derive from some form of equilibrium, which is
based on the relative pricing of a given commodity. Since an exchange rate is made up of
two currencies, it should logically reﬂect the relative pricing of a commodity between the two
countries concerned. Traditional exchange rate models are identiﬁed by the approach they take
towards determining or forecasting exchange rates, and therefore by the commodity whose
relative pricing they use for this purpose:

r The exchange rate as the relative price of goods — Purchasing Power Parity
r The exchange rate as the relative price of money — The Monetary Approach
r The exchange rate as the relative price of interest — The Interest Rate Approach
r The exchange rate as the relative price of current and capital ﬂows — The Balance of
Payments Approach

r The exchange rate as the relative price of assets — The Portfolio Balance Approach
Many readers will be familiar with some or all of these models. The attempt here is not merely
to describe them, thus perhaps going over old ground, but to discover their individual strengths
and weaknesses by relating them to the real world of currency trading.

1.1 PURCHASING POWER PARITY
