
and the company had been transformed.6 Since 2001, General Re had produced a 13.4 percent annualized
return on capital; a number that would be higher, CEO Joe Brandon noted in a letter to Buffett, were it not
for “a number of infamous legacy issues.”7 These included $2.3 billion of losses related to insurance and
reinsurance sold in prior years, and $412 million of charges for the run-off of Gen Re Securities, the
company’s derivatives unit. Nevertheless, General Re had escaped the fate of Salomon and overcome the
stigma of its Scarlet Letter. Buffett was finally able to praise it and its senior managers in some depth in his
2007 shareholder letter, saying “the luster of the company has been restored” by “doing first-class business in
a first-class way.”8
One large and lingering trace of General Re’s former problems remained. Its last act of ignominy before the
change of management in 2001 had been to create a Salomon-type scandal of its own in which it broke
Buffett’s rule of not “losing reputation for the firm.” This was the event that would, as it unfolded, adjust
Buffett’s perception to the new legal enforcement environment, in which showing extreme contrition and
cooperation produced no advantage in how a company was treated by prosecutors. Extreme contrition and
cooperation were now the expected minimum standard—in part because of Salomon. Anything short of
that—for a company to defend itself or its employees, for example—could be considered grounds for
indictment.
General Re had become entangled in legal and regulatory problems when New York Attorney General Eliot
Spitzer started investigating the insurance industry over “finite” reinsurance in 2004. “Finite” reinsurance has
been defined in many ways, but, put simply, it is a type of reinsurance used by the client mainly for financial
or accounting reasons—either to bolster its capital or to improve the amount or timing of its earnings. While
usually legal and sometimes legitimate, finite reinsurance had been subject to such widespread abuse that
accounting rulemakers have spent decades trying to rein it in.
Before working on Wall Street, I was one of those trying to rein it in, as a project manager at the Financial
Accounting Standards Board, the primary accounting rulemaker. I helped to draft rules that specify how to
account for finite reinsurance. After leaving the FASB, I became a financial analyst. While working at
PaineWebber, I covered the stock of General Re at the time it was acquired by Berkshire Hathaway. I first
met Warren in connection with the acquisition, and subsequently began to cover Berkshire. Warren had not
previously spoken with Wall Street analysts, but he made an exception for me. He told the New York Times
that he liked the way I thought and wrote.
In 2003, after I started working on this book, both General Re and Ajit Jain’s Berkshire Re were condemned
in a special investigation for selling finite reinsurance that allegedly contributed to the collapse of an
Australian insurer, HIH.9 Two years later, General Re was accused of fraud by insurance regulators and
policyholders in connection with the failure of a Virginia medical malpractice insurer, the Reciprocal of
America. While the Department of Justice investigated the allegations extensively, no charges were brought
against Gen Re or any of its employees.10 That same year, Eliot Spitzer’s investigation of the insurance
industry prompted an investigation by Berkshire’s law firm, Munger, Tolles & Olson, which discovered that
six employees, including General Re’s former CEO, Ron Ferguson, and its former chief financial officer,
Elizabeth Monrad, had allegedly conspired with a customer, AIG, to aid and abet an accounting fraud. The
alleged fraud was executed through a reinsurance transaction designed to deceive investors and Wall Street
analysts (including me) by transferring $500 million in reserves to AIG to window-dress AIG’s balance sheet.
In June 2005, two of the alleged conspirators, Richard Napier and John Houldsworth, plea-bargained and
testified for the prosecution, while five others—four senior managers from Gen Re and one from AIG—were
indicted on conspiracy and fraud charges.
The trial, conducted in federal court in Hartford, Connecticut, in January and February 2008, was noteworthy
for the prosecution’s use of taped telephone conversations in which several of the defendants had repeatedly
discussed the transaction in colorful terms. The defendants invoked the “Buffett defense,” saying that Buffett
had approved the outlines of the structured transaction and was involved in setting the fee. Buffett was not
charged with any wrongdoing, and prosecutors said he was not involved. General Re’s CEO Joseph Brandon,
who was listed among various unindicted co-conspirators in the case, was repeatedly cited by the defendants’
lawyers as having knowledge of the deal. He had cooperated with federal prosecutors without asking for

immunity. General Re chief operating officer Tad Montross was also named by the defendants as having
knowledge of the transaction. Neither he nor Buffett, however, was listed among the unindicted
co-conspirators. None of the three men testified in the case.
I was subpoenaed by the prosecution as both a fact witness and expert and testified that I would “almost
certainly” have not upgraded AIG to a “strong buy” in early 2000 had I known the company’s true financial
position. Under cross-examination I testified about my acquaintance with all of the defendants. I know some
of them better than others, but have always had high regard for all of them. I also testified about my
relationship with Warren, that I was writing this book, and that Joe Brandon has been a close friend since
1992. I wasn’t asked about Tad, but I’m also acquainted with him.
In February 2008, all five defendants were convicted on all counts in the indictment. They face sentencing as
this book goes to print; the potential sentences range up to life imprisonment, although the odds seem to be
that the terms will be much lower than that. The convicted defendants have said that they will appeal.
Currently I am also under subpoena from former AIG CEO Hank Greenberg in a related case brought against
him by the New York Attorney General’s office. At this writing, Berkshire Hathaway has settled with neither
the SEC nor the Department of Justice. In April 2008, General Re’s CEO Joe Brandon resigned to help
facilitate a settlement between the company and government authorities.
Accordingly, I cannot comment further on the case at this time. Warren Buffett’s personality, however, is
laid out in this book; readers should be able to form their own opinion about whether he would participate in
or condone the aiding and abetting of a fraud committed by a customer of Berkshire Hathaway.
Finally, New York Governor Eliot Spitzer, who launched the investigation, resigned only a month after the
defendants in the AIG trial were convicted, following revelations that he patronized the prostitutes of an
escort service called the Emperor’s Club.

Notes
Chapter 1
1. This quote, or its variation, “Behind every great fortune there is a great crime,” is cited endlessly without a
specific source: for example, in Mario Puzo’s The Godfather and in commentary on The Sopranos and on the
Internet bubble. This pithier version condenses what Honoré de Balzac actually wrote in Father Goriot: “The
secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out,
because it was properly executed.”
Chapter 2
1. Herbert Allen made an exception for Ken Auletta, the first and only time a writer was allowed to attend
and write about Sun Valley. “What I Did at Summer Camp” appeared in the New Yorker, July 26, 1999.
2. Interview with Don Keough. Other guests commented on Buffett’s role at Sun Valley as well.
3. Except Donald Trump, of course.
4. Dyan Machan, “Herbert Allen and His Merry Dealsters,” Forbes, July 1, 1996.
5. Elephant herds are matriarchal, and the females eject the males from the herd as soon as they are old
enough to become dominant and aggressive. Then the solitary males approach herds of females, trying to
mate. However, this isn’t exactly the way human elephant-bumping works.

6. Allen & Co. does not release the numbers, but the conference was said to cost around $10 million, more
than $36,000 per invited family. Whether $5 or $15 million, that pays for a lot of fly-fishing and golf over the
course of a long weekend. Much of the money pays for the conference’s exhaustive security and logistics.
7. Buffett likes to tell a joke about having worked his way up to this exalted state: starting from a trailer, then
the lodge, then a lesser condo, and so forth.
8. Herbert Allen’s son Herbert Jr. is usually referred to as “Herb.” However, Buffett refers to Herbert Sr. as
“Herb” as a mark of their friendship, as do a few other people.
9. This portrait of Sun Valley and the impact of the dotcom billionaires is drawn from interviews with a
number of people, including investment managers with no ax to grind. Most asked not to be named.
10. Allen & Co. and author estimate. This is the total assets under management of money managers who
attend the conference, added to the personal fortunes of the guests. It represents their total economic power,
not their consumption of wealth. By comparison, the capitalized value of the U.S. stock market at the time
was about ten trillion dollars.
11. $340,000 per car in Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Montana, New Hampshire, both Dakotas, Vermont,
Wyoming, and throw in Washington, D.C., to boot (since the District of Columbia is not a state).
12. Interview with Herbert Allen.
13. Buffett had spoken twice before at the Allen conference, in 1992 and 1995.
14. Buffett and Munger preached plenty to their shareholders at Berkshire Hathaway annual meetings, but
this preaching to the choir doesn’t count.
15. Al Pagel, “Coca-Cola Turns to the Midlands for Leadership,” Omaha World-Herald, March 14,1982.
16. Buffett’s remarks have been condensed for readability and length.
17. PowerPoint is the Microsoft program most often used to make the slide presentations so ubiquitous in
corporate America.
18. Interview with Bill Gates.
19. Corporate profits at the time were more than 6% of GDP, compared to a long-term average of 4.88%.
They have since risen to over 9%, far above historic standards.
20. Over long periods the U.S. economy has grown at a real rate of 3% and a nominal rate (after inflation) of
5%. Other than a postwar boom or recovery from severe recession, this level is rarely exceeded.
21. American Motors, smallest of the “Big Four” automakers, sold out to Chrysler in 1987.
22. Buffett is speaking metaphorically here. He admits to investing in things with wings a time or two, and not
with good results.
23. Buffett first used this story in his 1985 chairman’s letter, citing Ben Graham, who told the story at his
tenth lecture in the series Current Problems in Security Analysis at the New York Institute of Finance. The
transcripts of these lectures, given between September 1946 and February 1947, can be found at
http://www.wiley.com//legacy/products/subject/finance/bgraham/ or in Benjamin Graham and Janet Lowe,
The Rediscovered Benjamin Graham: Selected Writings of the Wall Street Legend. New York: Wiley, 1999.
24. A condensed and edited version of this speech was published as “Mr. Buffett on the Stock Market,”

Fortune, November 22, 1999.
25. PaineWebber-Gallup poll, July 1999.
26. Fred Schwed Jr., Where Are the Customers’ Yachts? or, A Good Hard Look at Wall Street. New York,
Simon & Schuster, 1940.
27. Interview with Bill Gates.
28. Keynes wrote: “It is dangerous…to apply to the future inductive arguments based on past experience,
unless one can distinguish the broad reasons why past experience was what it was,” in a book review for
Smith’s Common Stocks as Long-Term Investments in Nation and Athenaeum in 1925 that later became the
preface for Keynes, The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. Vol. 12, Economic Articles and
Correspondence; Investment and Editorial. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
29. The comedian Mort Sahl used to end his routine by asking, “Is there anyone I haven’t offended?”
30. According to a source who overheard them and would rather remain nameless.
31. Interview with Don Keough.
Chapter 3
1. Interview with Charlie Munger.
2. Parts of Munger’s explanation are taken from three lectures on the psychology of human misjudgment, and
his commencement address to the Harvard School on June 13, 1986, both as found in Poor Charlie’s
Almanac, The Wit and Wisdom of Charles T. Munger, edited by Peter D. Kaufman. Virginia Beach, Va.:
Donning Company Publishers, 2005. The rest is from interviews with the author. Remarks have been edited
for brevity and clarity.
3. Interview with Charlie Munger.
4. Munger’s driving habits are described in Janet Lowe, Damn Right! Behind the Scenes with Berkshire
Hathaway Billionaire Charlie Munger. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
5. Required to produce a doctor’s note to prove he was blind in one eye and qualified for a special license at
the California Department of Motor Vehicles, Munger refused and offered to take out his glass eye instead.
6. Munger’s doctor used an older type of surgery that had a higher complication rate. Rather than blame the
doctor, Munger claims he should have done more research on doctors and types of surgery himself.
7. Buffett’s interest in such products as pig stalls and egg counters is limited; he reviews some of these
statistics in a summarized form.
8. Despite the complaints of passengers, Buffett has never, to the author’s knowledge, been responsible for
an accident, only near heart attacks.
9. Beth Botts, Elizabeth Edwardsen, Bob Jensen, Stephen Kofe, and Richard T. Stout, “The Cornfed
Capitalist,” Regardie’s, February 1986.
Chapter 4
1. Buffett predicted up to 6% growth in the market per year, but gave historical ranges of no growth, and the
underlying math suggested that figure could be high. The 6% was a hedged bet.

2. S&P is Standard & Poor’s Industrial Average, the most widely used measure of the overall stock market’s
performance. S&P includes reinvested dividends. Berkshire does not pay a dividend. All numbers are
rounded.
3. “Toys ‘R’ Us vs. eToys, Value vs. Euphoria,” Century Management, http://www.centman.com/Library
/Articles/Aug99/ToysRUsvsEtoys.html. In March 2005, Toys “R” Us agreed to a takeover offer from private
equity firms Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., Bain Capital, and real estate group Vornado Realty Trust in a
deal valued at $6.6 billion.
4. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
5. Buffett, speaking to the Oquirrh Club, “An Evening with Warren Buffett,” October 2003.
Chapter 5
1. Warren’s sister Doris Buffett, the family genealogist, has done extensive research on the Buffett family
tree. This abbreviated account of the early ancestors is drawn from her research.
2. Either Nathaniel or Joseph.
3. This was the largest and finest of the livery stables in town, with seventy horses at its peak, boasting
sleighs, buggies, a circus bateau, and even a hearse. It prospered for a number of years but disappeared
sometime around the early days of the automobile. “Six Generations Prove That Buffett Family Is Really
Here to Remain,” Omaha World-Herald, June 16, 1950.
4. Orville D. Menard, “Tom Dennison…The Rogue Who Ruled Omaha,” Omaha, March 1978. John Kyle
Davis, “The Gray Wolf: Tom Dennison of Omaha,” Nebraska History, Vol. 58, No. 1, Spring 1977.
5. “Dry Law Introduced as Legislators Sing,” Omaha World-Herald, February 1, 1917.
6. “Omaha’s Most Historic Grocery Store Still at 50th and Underwood,” Dundee and West Omaha Sun, April
25, 1963.
7. Zebulon Buffett, letter to Sidney Buffett, December 21, 1869.
8. Sidney’s store was originally named Sidney H. Buffett and Sons, where both brothers, Ernest and Frank,
worked. The store originally sat at 315 South 14th Street downtown, where it stayed until its closing in 1935.
Frank took over as sole proprietor after Sidney’s death in 1927. In 1915, Ernest opened a branch store, which
moved west to 5015 Underwood Avenue in Dundee in 1918. (At the time Dundee was a separate town,
eventually annexed by Omaha.)
9. A third child, named Grace, died in 1926. Three more, George, Nellie, and Nettie, died at young ages in the
nineteenth century.
10. Warren Buffett quoting Charlie Munger.
11. According to Doris Buffett, she was born Daisy Henrietta Duvall and began to call herself Henrietta
(after her mother) rather than Daisy by the time she arrived in Omaha.
12. Charles T. Munger letter to Katharine Graham, November 13, 1974.
13. Ernest Buffett letter to Barnhart & Son, February 12, 1924.
14. Interview with Charlie Munger. His mother told him this story, although, he notes, “she may have been
garnishing it just a bit.” But others recall the notebook.

15. In letters like one to his son Clarence in January 1931, he analyzed the effect of railroad automation on
unemployment and suggested that the best solution for the Great Depression was a great public-works
project. It seems ironic that he and his son Howard became such foes of Roosevelt when he initiated the
Works Progress Administration after the next election.
16. Ernest Buffett letter to Fred and Katherine Buffett, undated, “ten years after you were married,” circa
June 1939.
17. He died young, in 1937, in an auto accident in Texas.
18. Coffee with Congress, radio interview with Howard, Leila, Doris, and Roberta Buffett, WRC Radio,
October 18, 1947, Bill Herson, moderator. (Note: This description is based on a tape of the broadcast.)
19. Interview with Doris Buffett.
20. Based primarily on family files.
21. Bryan’s “Cross of Gold” speech, delivered on July 9, 1896, has been called the most famous political
speech in American history. Bryan is best remembered for opposing the gold standard and for getting
involved in the Scopes case, where the famous lawyer Clarence Darrow made him look foolish for testifying
against teaching evolution in schools. In fact his interests were broader and less extreme and his
contemporary influence greater than he is generally remembered for today.
22. Family files. Bernice blamed her father for marrying into a family with genetic mental defects, begetting
children who would suffer the result.
23. Leila was a freshman at Nebraska during the 1923–24 academic year, according to the Cornhusker
yearbook, when Howard was a junior. On Coffee with Congress, Howard noted that they met in the fall of
1923, when Leila was 19. Because students usually entered college at 17, this suggests she worked for about
two years before starting. She pledged Alpha Chi Omega as a freshman in the 1923–24 school year, but was
still classified as a freshman in 1925, suggesting she went home to work on the newspaper and returned in the
spring of 1925.
24. Probably in fall 1923.
25. Howard was secretary of the Innocents (Daily Nebraskan, September 27, 1923). This group persisted for
many more years, until, as Buffett puts it, “the day came when they couldn’t find thirteen who were
innocent.”
26. Coffee with Congress.
27. Interview with Roberta Buffett Bialek.
28. At Harry A. Koch Co., whose motto was “Pays the Claim First.” He made $125 a month.
29. Receipt from Beebe & Runyan, December 21, 1926, annotated by Leila.
30. They were married December 26, 1925.
31. February 12, 1928.
32. Howard became a deacon in 1928 at the age of 25.
33. Address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, Washington, D.C., January 25, 1925.
Chapter 6

1. Even so, only three in a hundred Americans owned stocks. Many had borrowed heavily to play the market,
entranced by John J. Raskob’s article, “Everybody Ought to Be Rich” in the August 1929 Ladies’ Home
Journal and Edgar Lawrence Smith’s proof that stocks outperform bonds (Common Stocks as Long-Term
Investments. New York: The MacMillan Company, 1925).
2. “Stock Prices Slump $14,000,000,000 in Nation-Wide Stampede to Unload; Bankers to Support Market
Today,” New York Times, October 29, 1929; David M. Kennedy, Freedom from Fear, The American People
in Depression and War, 1929–1945. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999; John Brooks, Once in
Golconda, A True Drama of Wall Street; 1920–1938. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. Roger Babson’s
famous warning, “I repeat what I said at this time last year and the year before, that sooner or later a crash is
coming,” was useless.
3. Kennedy, Freedom from Fear. Kennedy notes that interest payment on the national debt rose from $25
million annually in 1914 to $1 billion annually in the 1920s due to World War I, accounting for one-third of
the federal budget. The actual budget in 1929 was $3.127 billion a year (Budget of the U.S. Government,
Fiscal Year 1999—Historical Tables, Table 1.1—Summary of Receipts, Outlays, and Surpluses or Deficits:
1789–2003. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office).
4. By the bottom tick on November 13, the market had lost $26 to $30 billion of its roughly $80 billion
precrash value (Kennedy, op. cit., Brooks, op. cit.). World War I cost approximately $32 billion (Robert
McElvaine, The Great Depression: America, 1929–1941. New York: Three Rivers Press, 1993; also Hugh
Rockoff, It’s Over, Over There: The U.S. Economy in World War I, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 10580).
5. Charlie Munger reported that all the Buffetts, including those employed elsewhere, worked at the store, in
a letter to Katharine Graham dated November 13, 1974.
6. Coffee with Congress.
7. Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996.
8. Roger Lowenstein, in Buffett, cites Leila Buffett’s memoirs for this fact.
9. Ernest Buffett letter to Mr. and Mrs. Clarence Buffett and Marjorie Bailey, August 17, 1931.
10. “Union State Bank Closes Doors Today: Reports Assets in Good Condition; Reopening Planned,” Omaha
World-Herald, August 15, 1931. Characteristically, the story understated the bank’s dire situation. It went
into reorganization under regulatory supervision and filed for bankruptcy.
11. Howard had borrowed $9,000 to buy $10,000 of stock in the bank. The stock was now worthless. The
house and mortgage were in Leila’s name. Standard Accident Insurance Company, Howard Homan Buffett
application for fidelity bond.
12. “Buffett, Sklenicka and Falk Form New Firm,” Omaha Bee News, September 8, 1931. Statement of
