
indexes, currencies, interest rates, and so on. In 2010 one of the big winners was cotton.This was a market that the big funds could possibly get into but exiting would have
been difficult and full of slippage. Investing with other commodity trading advisors is
an essential aspect of my way of compounding wealth over time.
As in your own trading as well as investing with money managers you need an
exact plan.

■ Have a Plan and Follow it

■ A Lesson in Compounding: The Dentist
The dentist invested $200,000 in a robust trend in 1979. He let that money compound
over time. Today the dentist has pulled out over $12,000,000 over the years and has
a $5,000,000 trading account as well as accounts for his children and grandchildren.
The dentist did not have any magical holy grail formula!
He is a trend follower who had a simple robust methodology and, more importantly, knew how to properly condition his thought processes to get through all the
tough drawdowns and long periods when he did not make money (even though he
complained about it).

7
MY JOURNEY AS A TREND FOLLOWER

It is surprising to me that such a large number of traders who enter the markets have
no plan whatsoever or no plan based on risk. Too many traders do not have the vaguest
concept of how they plan to succeed in the long run. They are so anxious to actually
get started that they have not thought of any of the preparations that are necessary. In
the futures markets they are cannon fodder for the 10 percenters who take money out
of the market over time. This lack of preparation explains the reason for the extremely
high rate of failure of traders. The next great danger in trying to trade for a living is
the danger of high expectations. To highlight this example, I had a conversation with a
new trader who told me he expected to make at least 25 percent a year on his money.
I asked him if he had ever heard of the rule of 72 (how many years it takes to double
your money). Clearly he never heard of it. I enlightened him and expressed to him
that some of the best traders who manage the risks, who have a plan, ONLY make,
over time, on average 15 percent. These money managers are managing in excess of
hundreds of millions of dollars. Traders that focus too much on the money end up losing their money. New traders need to focus on their learning and perfecting their plan
to be consistent. I cannot say that enough!
As far as my personal trend following journey, I wanted to learn from my broker
who was succeeding at his firm and what they were doing right. The most successful
client of the brokerage was a dentist. He was not a Harvard graduate nor a partner in
Morgan Stanley or Goldman Sachs.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

8

The dentist was the exception, though. Most clients of the brokerage were not successful. The vast majority of them lost money and ended up quitting. I did not want to
be one of those unsuccessful clients that lost money and quit. My goal in this book is
to help you to not become the typical trader who loses money and quits.
My goal is to help traders like you to achieve your trading goals, so that you, too,
can live the lifestyle you want, afford to buy the things you want to have, be more
relaxed, and have more time for the things you enjoy doing and that are important to
you. Do not expect overnight success. There will be losses and drawdowns. You will
need to work on your patience and discipline. The dentist’s goal was, and still is, compound money over long periods of time.
I want to teach you to think like a successful trend follower. I am giving you exactly
the methodologies I have used on a daily basis for the last 18 years. They are not any
magical holy grail; rather, they are robust ideas that give you the ability to make low‐
risk trades and try to catch trends when they are present.
You can take my ideas and apply them to your own personality and risk tolerance.
Your trading must match your personality. An example of this is Dave Druz, who learned
under Ed Seykota. Dave took ideas from Ed and matched them to his own trading. Both
of them are trend followers, yet they trade different styles matching their personality.
Hopefully this will be the same with you as well. I will share with you and instill
in you all of my knowledge gained over the last 18 years. However, we are dealing in
the unknown, and there are also risks when trend following. You need to apply your
own risk tolerances.
If you are interested, I will teach you how to invest with other trend followers via my
courses or webinars. The reality is that some years I outperform the money managers I
invest with, and then there are years I underperform them. I am not on any ego trip as
my ultimate goal is to compound money over long periods of time and diversify. I do not
care if I do better than the group of money managers or if some do better than me. The
bottom line is that I am compounding my way to wealth, and this is the key to success.
I do a combination of things in order to try to smooth out my returns and compound money over time. As I have previously stated, I invest with groups of trend
followers as well as do my own trend following. There are many who believe that all
trend followers are the same. I know for a fact that this is not the case as I have money
invested in various money managers via managed accounts. Sometimes we can be in
the same trades. However, we get in or out at different points or have different position
sizing, thus we generate different returns. My goal is to compound money over time.
I do not allocate more than 5 percent of my family’s net worth to any trading idea
and look to let the odds work over time. In many cases I allocate even less with the
goal to diversify.
The fact that I can compound money over these years means you might be able to
as well if you have the mental fortitude! The dentist compounded money over all of
these years and you might be able to as well!

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 1

Get a Savvy Start
Can You Really Make a Living
as a Trend Follower?

W

hat I have said to countless people is: If I can do this, you can do this. I did
not go to Harvard nor is it even needed to succeed as a trend follower. However, it will be a journey! Many first‐time traders want to start too quickly without a
well‐thought‐out plan. This can be very dangerous to one’s financial health. Very few
of these new traders are successful right off, and if they get lucky on a trade, this can
even be worse for them. They learn not to have a strong appreciation of the inherent
risks in the markets. What does that help, though, if you have learned via a mentor or
had a pedigree education at another trading firm? Many of the traders I have invested
with over the years have come out of other successful organizations and have learned
there. I had people help me along my journey. Not with the elusive holy grail; rather,
how to think, how to accept the inherent risks in the market, and how to implement
additional risk filters in my trading models.
Understand, trend following is full of risks, and you need to risk your money to
trade. I assume you heard this warning several times: “Don’t trade with money that
you can’t afford to lose.” You might think that this is just the typical disclaimer that
every professional in the trading industry has to use, but it’s not. It’s much more.You
need to be realistic and start slow. I would not suggest you quit your day job to start
trend following. Even the most successful trend followers who have been trading for
decades on average over time return approximately 15 percent.What makes you think
you will outperform them?
In one of the further sections I detail some examples of some of these trend followers. Do not think their returns are representative of those of all trend followers or

9

that you can easily generate these numbers. The reality is probably that you can’t, and
the databases are full of trend followers who blow up or do not achieve these returns.
As I stated in one of the earlier sections, I do my own trend following and I am
sharing with you my exact methodology. I also invest with groups of other trend followers who I feel understand risk as I do. However, anything can and will happen when
we are trading.
Successful trading requires knowledge, skill, and experience.
Trend following can be simple, but don’t make the mistake of thinking it is easy!
There are countless websites and late‐night infomercials that try to tell you differently.
They make you think that you just have to read a few pages or attend an online class,
and then, magically, you’ll become a successful trader.

■ Trading as a Profession
If you have a regular job or run your own business, the probability is that you’re working at least 40 hours per week.
Comparing trend following to any business is an eye opener. Consider
the following differences:

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

10

■

No employees to hire.

■

No set, exact hours to keep.

■

No inventory.

■

No rent.

■

No overhead.

■

No customers who complain.

■

No accounts receivable.

■

Very little equipment needed.

■

No bank loans needed.

You are truly dependent on yourself! In order to start you need to take the following seven steps:
1. Determine how much you want to start trading and risking.
2. Open a brokerage account.
3. Decide on which trading platform you want to use.
4. Decide on which group of markets you want to trade. Do you want to trade
stocks, forex, or futures?

5. Have a well‐thought‐out plan and trading methodology with exact rules for
entries, exits with a loss, exits with a profit, what markets to trade, and have
built‐in risk controls such as stop‐loss orders to “try” to minimize or mitigate your drawdowns.
6. Back‐test and truly believe in the viability of your strategy.
7. Be mentally prepared for the inevitable drawdowns.
Simply, trend following is not like any other business venture. The only
three fixed costs you have are:
1. A computer or laptop.
2. An Internet connection for your data.
3. A trading platform.
Trading is like every other profession: You learn the basics, you apply them, you
gain experience, and then you take the attributes and make them part of your personality.

■ Trend Following Is a Journey

GET A SAVVY START

I am glad you realize this is a journey or rather a marathon. It is full of ups and downs.
Actually more times there are drawdowns and nothing happening than up and profitable periods. Drawdowns are the bane of trading. When you are profitable, you do not
think of these inevitable losses. When the losses mount, however, the doubts increase.
This is why I am presenting the reality to diminish your disappointment when reality
sets in and there are the eventual drawdowns. There are times the drawdowns extend
for periods of times that it actually becomes painful. Doubts about returning to prior
equity peaks are brought up. In my personal experience, at the darkest moments were
the upcoming light and the end of the drawdown. Drawdowns are not easy to digest.
However, when you experience a drawdown and have been conditioned ahead of time
what to expect, it becomes less painful. If you never anticipated that you would go
through a 20 percent‐plus drawdown and you are in the thick of it, it is much harder
than if you had been educated that drawdowns can even be worse than this and that
your worst drawdown is ahead of you. If you really never accepted the fact that you
will encounter a drawdown like so many other traders, it will be very difficult to maintain your trading posture and confidence. This leads me to enlighten you on what you
can realistically expect from your trading, both the good and bad, in terms of potential
profitability and potential losses.
I’m glad you’re different from the masses that want a stock tip or insider information.

11

You decided on my book of trend following because you’re serious about becoming a successful and consistent trader over time. My goal is to help you in your quest
to achieve this. However, please be aware and be realistic. Just reading this book will
not automatically make you an instant millionaire. There is nothing instant with trend
following.You will hear the word marathon quite often.

Lifetime Strategy

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

12

Trend following is a lifetime strategy for me, full of challenges and obstacles.
You’ll learn the basic ideas and concepts about trend following, but in order to
make the most out of this book and become the trader you want to be, you’ll have to
internalize and believe in them. I will present you with example after example and
most importantly help you in order to achieve the proper trend following mindset.
You don’t have to go to college for years to learn trend following. Unlike most other
professions, years of experience are not necessary either. You have to have the desire
and passion. I firmly believe that everybody can learn how to become a successful
trader. (Later in this book you will learn about the turtles who did exactly this.)
I am resolute that this manual will save you both money and time when it comes
to your trading goals. I’m convinced that it will help you become the trader you
want to be. You made the right choice. You could have done as I did for almost a decade, looking to pick up ideas and concepts regarding trading, but now you have me
as your mentor. You will learn from all of my costly mistakes throughout the years.
The irony I want to point out is that I had people who had helped me along the way,
and I can even call them mentors, however, only when I truly internalized what they
were trying to teach me did I succeed.

Yes, You Need a Broker
You may wonder if you really need a broker. The answer is yes. If you intend to trend
follow, then you must have a broker. And it doesn’t matter whether you are trading
stocks, futures, forex, or options: Unless you are a member of the exchange, you
won’t be able to place your orders without a broker. Stock, futures, and options brokers are required to pass different tests in order to obtain their licenses. These tests
ensure that the broker knows his or her business and will be able to support you if
needed. I personally go directly to a futures commodity merchant (FCM). Trading
in this fashion, I get the best price for my trades and I trade through the commodity
trading advisor desk.
What you will not need is a full‐service broker. After you finish the book you
will be able to make your own decisions based on the trend following methodology. If you want, I will share with you the name of one of the brokers I use personally. Just shoot me an email.

Don’t Be Misled!
There are no shortcuts in trend following. My own experience has been a journey
of almost a decade of learning and finally internalizing what was needed in order to
succeed over time when trend following.
As in all professions, you need a solid education before you get started. Many go to
college for years in order to learn and earn a degree. Even with going to college there
is no guarantee of success, especially these days. My goal of trend following has been
to compound money over time and achieve financial freedom. My goal was never to
work by the hour, but to create a lifestyle that many think is unachievable.
What is shocking is that many aspiring traders think they don’t have to learn a single
thing. Some believe that they can buy a “magic system” or “trading robot” that will be
retirement in a box. Some beginning traders think that they can learn everything they
need to know from a “free” e‐book that they downloaded from the Internet. Then there
are those who read the Wall Street Journal, Barron’s, Smart Money, and countless other magazines looking for tips in which to invest. If it were only that easy, we would all be rich!

■ Make Sure You Are Properly Funded

before You Start

13
GET A SAVVY START

If you don’t have sufficient funds to trade, then you need to start doing something
about it now. Either save more money or do not even begin. Trading without being
amply funded will only lead to disaster. With a small account one can trade stocks or
mini commodity contracts.
The question is asked, “How much do I really need to start trading?”
That is a personal question. It depends on your time frame and the markets you
want to trade. The lower the time frame, the less funds are needed. If you decided to
trend follow stocks, you need less than if you trend follow futures. If one were to day
trade via trend following, one would not need much money due to margin requirements. This is regardless of stocks, forex, or futures.
I personally prefer a daily time frame as it gives me greater freedom and no pressure. If looking at dailies, I suggest for stocks a minimum could be $10,000. For futures traded on a daily time frame the minimum is at least $50,000 and quite possibly
more, up to $100,000. Regardless of these estimations, it is a personal decision, and
you do not want to risk more than 1 percent of your account on any one trade. This
would be the best formula for you to decide how much you should start trading with.
Start slowly and build confidence over time. Rome was not built overnight nor will
your trading career. Focus on learning before trying to make money.
Many beginning traders think they should trade all of their savings. This is financially reckless and increases trading pressure. To determine how much money you should

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

14

trade, you must first determine how much you can actually afford to lose and what
your financial goals are. There is a traders’ joke among futures traders. The question is,
what is the easiest way to make a million dollars trading futures? The answer is to start
with two million. In all seriousness this is the reality.You do not want to impact your
or your family’s lifestyle. This only puts more pressure on you.
The more capital you can afford to lose without negatively affecting your lifestyle, the greater the possibility that you will be successful. The more money you
start with gives you greater longevity and cushion in the event of a drawdown. There
will always be drawdowns and losses. There will always be ugly periods. These bad
periods can extend not just for months but personally I have lived through periods
of durations that were greater than two years. The more capital accompanied with
proper risk management such as a risk per trade of 1 percent reduces the emotional
drag on your psyche.
You do not want to be emotionally attached to the aspect of money. Successful
traders look at percentages, not money. Thinking of money in terms of itself is a terrible thing for a trader to do. They think of the things they could have purchased or
done with the money. I think of money as chips. I am betting and I have a small edge.
I have heard traders say, after a winning trade, I am going to buy this car or that car. I
know at this point they are destined to fail. I think what happens when they have a losing streak; they clearly will not be buying that car. Trading must be thought of a game.
You need to play the game without emotions such as fear and greed.
Let’s begin by determining how much of your savings should remain in your savings account. It’s important to keep at least six months of living expenses in a readily
accessible savings account, so set that money aside, and don’t trade it!You should never
trade money that you may need immediately or for daily living expenses. Do not borrow money from your parents or in‐laws (even though David Einhorn did and now is
managing billions of dollars).
Take a good look at how much money you can currently afford to trade.
I would not suggest you even think about trading if you have less than $10,000.
The reason I say this is that I am a strong believer that you should not risk more than 1
percent of your account on any trade. One percent of $10,000 is $100. That is really
tough to do in the real world. It is the lower limit if you plan on day trading stocks.
The above concept accentuates why it is better to have a larger trading account. Better
means a greater chance to succeed over time.
If you have the fear of losing this money, it will almost become a self‐professing
reality. As well, if you cannot afford to lose this money, my opinion is that you will lose
this money either by fear or through mistakes. If you do not have enough money, wait!
You don’t want other parts of your life to suffer when you tie your money up in
a trade or lose money on a trade. I promise you, you will have many losing trades, so
make sure to consider what these savings were originally for. Never borrow money to
trade, and never use money that you can’t afford to lose!

If you do not have enough money to trade, some traders rationalize that they
can just specialize in one market. They are deluding themselves. I know there will
be those that will disagree with me, however, there will be periods or time frames
when nothing seems to happen in any particular stock or market. As well, there
will be times in which the volatility will be too great in which they cannot put on
a low‐risk trade (1 percent of their account size). These traders think to lower the
time frame and go to tick charts. They end up being cannon fodder for floor traders
or the 10 percenters (consistently successful traders over time). At first thought it
would seem that it would be easier to focus all of their energy on a single market and
supposedly become an expert in that market. However, in reality I believe that it is
extremely hard to always make money in any single market. As I am an open person,
I would assume some traders have succeeded focusing on just one market; however,
I believe this is the realm of floor traders or market makers in stocks.
I am a proponent of utilizing a robust trading methodology that trades all markets
and time frames the same (more on this in Chapter 2). I want to make myself available
for potential opportunities.The way I do this is to trade a basket of diversified markets.
I never know which market is going to move. I know that markets go from periods of
quiet orderly trading to volatile periods. It is very difficult to trade volatile markets.
