
Trade Setup #1: AB=CD Sell Pattern
Market: S&P 500 E-mini
Contracts: 2
In the trade shown in Figure 4.13, the S&P E-mini market completes
a picture-perfect AB=CD sell pattern. A limit order would be used on this
entry at approximately 1286 to go short, just below the completion point at
D. Once the order is filled, a stop-loss buy order is placed 5 points above
the entry. In this case the stop-loss buy order would be placed at 1291.
The first exit is at the .618 retracement of the AD swing. We shade
the exit order, meaning we place orders just above or below the actual
exit, just as we do the entry orders, about .50 to 1 point away to try to
ensure a fill. The exit order would be placed at 1279.50, just above the .618
retracement. Occasionally the market may trade just at but not through the
price, and it will be up to the individual trader’s discretion how to handle
these situations. We prefer to exit if the price is traded at, even if it means
slightly less profit. We don’t want a winning trade to turn into a losing trade.
Risk-Free Trade Once a profit is realized on the first part, the stop-loss
order is then moved to the breakeven point. This accomplishes two very
important things:
1. Reduces the risk in the trade.
2. Books a profit.

At this point in the trade we have a 6.5-point profit and our stop has
been moved to the breakeven point. Our second profit objective is at the
.786 retracement level from the A–D swing. We place a limit order to exit
the second contract at 1277.25, just above the .786 retracement level. Once

c04

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

52

13:3

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 4.13 This is a picture-perfect S&P E-mini day trade of the AB=CD sell pattern. The market turns down almost exactly at the completion of D (15-minute chart).

the second profit objective is filled, we then remove our stop-loss order.
The second contract profit nets 8.75 points for a total profit of 15.25 points.
Alternate Trade Management As mentioned earlier, there are many
ways to manage trades. In this particular example, a trader could choose to
exit both contracts at the initial .618 profit objective. In this case the trader
would have netted +13 points. In terms of 5 points being risked initially for
a total of 10 points of risk, this is perfectly acceptable trade management. If
the trade had been stopped out after the first profit objective was reached,
then the trader would have netted +6.5 points on the trade. We have found
that it is best to take profits when available and not worry about what the
market does after you have reached your profit objectives. Always keep in
mind that you are trading to make profits. In our trading we use both methods to exit our trades. Which method we use depends on current market
conditions.

Trade Setup #2: AB=CD Buy Pattern
Market: S&P 500 E-mini
Contracts: 2

c04

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:3

The AB=CD Pattern

Char Count=

53

Figure 4.14 S&P E-mini 15-minute chart showing an AB=CD buy pattern trade
where shading the order just above the actual completion point deﬁnitely helped us
to get into the trade.

The S&P E-mini buy pattern setup shown in Figure 4.14 is a very good
example of why we want to shade the orders to try to ensure a fill. This
trade has an entry at 1232. Once the order is filled, an initial 5-point sell
stop is placed. The first objective is easily reached within two time bars.
On the chart you can see the long bar up from the entry point; this gives
an indication that the price will make it to the .618 retracement. Once the
first profit objective is reached, the stop is moved to breakeven to protect
profits and to put us in a risk-free trade. The second profit objective is at
the .786 retracement. Once the second profit objective is reached, the stoploss order is canceled and that trade is over. This particular trade would
have netted the trader +19 points.
Alternate Trade Management A full exit at the .618 level would have
been a perfectly acceptable way to manage this trade. That would have
given the trader a net profit of 16 points.

Trade Setup #3: 60-Minute Failed AB=CD
Buy Pattern
Market: Wal-Mart (WMT) Stock
Shares: 200

c04

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

54

August 14, 2007

13:3

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 4.15 This AB=CD buy pattern trade (60-minute chart) of Wal-Mart (WMT)
stock illustrates a very important point: Always use stop-loss orders.

An example of a failed AB=CD buy pattern is shown in Figure 4.15. As
noted on the chart, there are gaps and a steep CD leg down to the completion point. Sooner or later traders will find themselves in a gap-open
situation against their position. Usually the first loss is the best loss, and a
trader must always use stop-loss orders. This is a lucky exit with the stop
placement. Had the position been open with the gap down, then a stop can
be placed just below the immediate low of the day to ensure no additional
loss is incurred and then the trade can be exited on the first rally. (Refer to
Figure 4.15 for stop-loss placement on this trade.) A $2.00 stop-loss would
have been used, and the trader would have been stopped out for a loss of
$400 on 200 shares.
The use of stop-loss orders is essential in good trading and money management. We never know which trades will win or lose, and controlling the
risk allows us to move on to the next trade.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

CHAPTER 5

The Gartley
“222” Pattern

T

he Gartley “222” pattern is certainly one of the classic retracement
patterns. It offers the trader early entry with minimum risk into a
potential longer-term trend reversal. For short-term day traders, the
pattern can be used effectively to buy and sell tests of highs and lows
on an intraday basis. Gartley said to buy or sell the first AB=CD pattern
in a new bear or bull market, and that is what this pattern can achieve
along with entries into an already established trend. A major reversal may
not always follow with this pattern, but even so the trader can still gain
profits using good trade management skills (assuming the pattern is not a
failure pattern).

HISTORY OF THE GARTLEY “222” PATTERN
The Gartley “222” pattern is named for the page number it is found on
in H.M. Gartley’s book, Profits in the Stock Market. Since then, multiple
books have been written describing the Gartley “222” pattern and charting
software that applies it. Ensign Software was the first to mathematically
55

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

56

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

provide the pattern in its charting software to be used on any actively
traded stock, commodity, or futures market.
Of the almost 500 pages in H.M. Gartley’s book, none are more important than pages 221 and 222. This is where the author described this particular pattern in greater detail than any of the other patterns in his book.
Gartley referred to it as one of the best trading opportunities. The most revealing part of the Gartley pattern is somewhat hidden on page 222 under
Figure 27, which is reproduced here as Figure 5.1.
The greatest challenge with these two pages was trying to interpret
the description of this pattern, as it is not as clear as one might expect.
Gartley did not give an explanation of this pattern as we use it today. The
biggest question that comes to mind is the discrepancy between the two
patterns in Figure 27 in Gartley’s book. The diagram labeled A shows a
simple retracement in a downtrend, but if you look closely at the diagram
labeled B, this shows a more complex correction in an uptrend. Diagrams
A and B both use the addition of A, B, and C labels that were shown in

Figure 5.1 Reproduction of Figure 27 in Proﬁts in the Stock Market by H.M.
Gartley. Source: H.M. Gartley, Proﬁts in the Stock Market (Pomeroy, WA: LambertGann Publishing, 1935).

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

The Gartley “222” Pattern

Char Count=

57

Gartley’s Parallel Trend Lines chart (refer back to Figure 4.1). These
distinct differences between the simple and complex corrections led to the
Gartley “222” pattern that we know today. This provided a clearer picture
of what the pattern was all about; realizing the differences of the corrections led to a breakthrough after many attempts to understand the concept.
The next step in the development of this pattern was the addition of
the mathematical relationships of sacred geometry (which includes the
Fibonacci summation series). Adding the Fibonacci ratios to this pattern
gave the pattern recognition swing trader the tools to determine price entry, exit points, and stop levels for risk control. The final step was empirically and statistically testing the validity of these patterns. Gartley had
emphasized that the pattern was correct approximately 70 percent of the
time. Testing weekly, daily, and intraday patterns over the past 40 years
has proven that Gartley’s original premise was indeed accurate.

GARTLEY “222” PATTERN DESCRIPTION
While Gartley described both buy and sell patterns identically, he had different diagrams for each. It was the AB=CD pattern within the Gartley sell
pattern that led to the nickname Gartley “222.” Gartley applied this particular pattern to all the market indexes, and he also published it in his weekly
newsletter.
The difference between Figure 5.1 (Figure 27 in Profits in the Stock
Market by H.M. Gartley) and the Gartley “222” pattern that we use today is
in the combination of two of Gartley’s patterns:
1. The practical use of trend lines diagram from page 249 of Gartley’s

book (Figure 4.1).
2. Gartley’s retracement pattern coupled with the AB=CD pattern

(Figure 5.1).
Combining both of these elements creates a buy pattern and a sell pattern.
Larry Pesavento found about 20 years ago that by further adding the ratios from the Fibonacci summation series, he could develop a solid trading
pattern. Gartley also used ratios of one-third and two-thirds with this pattern but did not use ratios from the Fibonacci summation series. The main
Fibonacci retracement ratios that we apply to the Gartley pattern include:
.382 (used with strong trends), .50, .618, and .786. As mentioned in the following section on pattern structure, the 1.00 can be used for a double top
or bottom.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

58

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Gartley stated in his 1935 masterpiece that over a 30-year period he
found these patterns to be profitable in 7 out of 10 cases. The statistics
validating this are still the same as Gartley suggested over 70 years ago.

GARTLEY “222” PATTERN STRUCTURE
The structure of the Gartley “222” pattern is almost identical to the AB=CD
pattern, with one main difference: It has one added leg that anchors the
AB=CD. Whereas the AB=CD pattern is formed with three legs, the Gartley pattern is formed with four legs. The Gartley pattern must contain an
AB=CD in order for it to be a valid Gartley pattern. The pattern is labeled
from its initiation with an “X.” Once this leg is complete, the high or low
from “X” begins the AB=CD formation. (See Figure 5.2.)
As with the AB=CD pattern (Chapter 4), the Gartley pattern is also
found in all time frames and in all markets. The pattern is a retest of a high
or low price and offers the trader an entry into a trade in the direction of
the trend. The same rules apply to the AB=CD within the Gartley pattern.
It is important to know what invalidates the Gartley “222” pattern. Here
are three items that invalidate the pattern (refer to Figure 5.3).
1. The D completion point cannot exceed X.
2. The C point cannot exceed A. C can be a 1.00 or double top or double

bottom of X, though; this is a rare pattern but it is valid.
3. The B point cannot exceed X.

Figure 5.2 Examples of the shapes of both buy and sell Gartley “222” patterns
with the AB=CD within the Gartley pattern.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

59

The Gartley “222” Pattern

C cannot exceed A.

B and / or D cannot exceed X.

Figure 5.3 Soybeans daily chart illustrating the conditions that would invalidate
a Gartley buy pattern.

The same warning signs apply to the Gartley pattern as to the AB=CD
pattern: gaps in the CD leg near the completion point, wide range bars, and
tail closes. (See Chapter 11.)

IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
GARTLEY “222” PATTERN
The Gartley pattern can be broken down into four segments that relate to
the labeling of the swings. Point X is the high or low point of the swing
and is the starting point of the pattern. The X can be found on longer time
frames at major highs or lows. However, the X can also sometimes be found
as a top or bottom within a larger trend; in other words, the pattern can
form within a larger swing or leg without the X being a major top or bottom.
(Refer to Figure 5.4.) It is important to remember that most traders will not
be initiating trades at exact tops and bottoms the majority of the time, but
the Gartley pattern offers the trader a retracement entry into the trend at
low-risk trading points and with quantified risk levels.
The X point becomes the fulcrum or anchor price that all technical
traders watch daily. After point X is formed and the market begins to move
in one direction, the XA leg starts to form; at this stage it is impossible to

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

60

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 5.4 Daily chart of 30-year bonds showing a good example of a downtrend
and the Gartley sell patterns that formed with the X point being within the trend.

determine where the completion of the XA leg may be. There are certain
characteristics of how this first swing embarks that give clues to the length
and thrust of the XA leg: If there are gaps, wide range bars, and tail closes
in the direction of the trend, it may be some time before a correction takes
place. (Refer back to Figure 4.7.)
As this first leg accelerates, it will take out old support or resistance
levels from past chart data. The only way to visually know that the XA
leg is complete is by the formation of the second leg, labeled AB. Near the
completion of A, many times a doji bar and/or tweezer bar will form, telling
us that the momentum may be slowing at this point. A doji bar is a type of
Japanese candlestick in which the close is at or near the open of the bar;
it is considered a neutral bar. A tweezer top or bottom is also a Japanese
candlestick pattern; it forms when two bars have the same high or low.
(See Figure 5.5.)
Once it has been determined that the XA leg is complete, then the next
step is to watch the formation of the AB leg. This leg is the first reaction up
or down from the initial impulse wave from X. The key items to watch in
this formation are:
Ĺ The Fibonacci retracement ratio to which the market corrects.
Ĺ The number of bars that form the leg.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

The Gartley “222” Pattern

13:4

Char Count=

61

Figure 5.5 S&P 5-minute chart showing examples of a tweezer top and tweezer
bottom pattern. The tweezer top pattern and the lower tweezer bottom pattern also
show a doji bar or a neutral close marked with an arrow.

Ĺ The similarities in slope and thrust. (See Chapter 4, section titled
“Slope and Time Frames.”)
For example, if the AB leg takes a considerable amount of time (more
than 8 to 10 bars) to form, then we would assume that the market is heading
for a larger correction, potentially to .618, .786, or further.
As the price begins to turn down or up from B, it is important to note
that the pattern would be invalid if the BC leg exceeded X. (Refer to Figure
5.3.) It is possible for the completion point of this leg at C to be an exact
double bottom or top of the X point, and that is still a valid pattern. But if
the price at C exceeds X, the pattern is then invalid; it would potentially
be forming a Butterfly Extension pattern. (See Chapter 6 for more on the
Butterfly pattern.)

PSYCHOLOGY OF THE GARTLEY
“222” PATTERN
In Chapter 4 we described the crowd psychology of the AB=CD pattern.
The same elements apply to the Gartley “222” pattern. It is formed by fear

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

62

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

and greed levels of the market participants. When the Gartley pattern forms
at a major top, the initial move from the top finds support at the A point.
(We use a sell pattern as an example here to describe the crowd psychology; refer to Figure 5.4.) Markets rarely go straight up or down without
any correction. This point in the pattern is formed when enough market
participants view this area as a buying opportunity and the price can rally
from there. This is also true from the C point of the pattern. Since there
are always buyers and sellers in a market, as the price forms the B and D
points, sellers step in, seeing these as areas either to exit the market or to
initiate short positions. The D point of the pattern is the moment of truth
to determine if the buyers or the sellers will be the winners. A price decline
will reward the sellers, and price above the X point will deem the pattern a
failure.
If the pattern is successful, the price can accelerate to the downside
if it exceeds the A point. At this point many previous support areas are
being broken and all traders or market participants who bought above the
A point are now at a loss on the positions. It is true to human nature that
a few are quick to get out with minimum losses while many others are
waiting for the price to come back up to their entry price—which may or
may not occur. As the price continues to decline, more market participants
who are experiencing larger losses are forced to liquidate at undesirable
price levels. There is usually some type of selling climax that signals the
bottom, and support is found as new buyers step in.

TRADING THE GARTLEY “222” PATTERN
As mentioned earlier, the Gartley pattern can be found and traded in any
time frame. This particular pattern eliminates the need to pick tops and
bottoms, as it is a retest of the recent high or low. By definition, it is buying
a higher low or selling a lower high, which is ideal for trading with the
trend. The trend is defined by higher highs and higher lows in an uptrend
and lower highs and lower lows in a downtrend.
The following three trade examples using the Gartley “222” pattern
illustrate entry, exit, and stop placements. Refer to Chapter 13, “Building a Trading Plan,” to help you develop a personal trading plan for this
pattern.
We use two contracts in the futures or commodities trade examples
and 200 shares of stock to illustrate scaling out in two parts. We also
present a couple of examples under the heading “Alternate Trade Management” to provide an assortment of options for managing these pattern
setups.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

The Gartley “222” Pattern

Char Count=

63

Trade Setup #1: Gartley “222” Buy Pattern
Market: Soybeans
Contracts: 2
The entry point in this trade is at the .786 completion at point D. See
Figure 5.6 for several repetitions of the .786 in this pattern. Notice the second AB=CD pattern that forms within the CD leg, marked in parentheses;
this gives us an indication of where the pattern may complete.
A limit order just above the .786 at 586.00 would be used on this trade
with an initial stop-loss order of 8 cents or $400 per contract. When trading the Gartley pattern it is ideal to be able to place a stop just below the
1.00 (X) level, but this will sometimes be too large for the amount of dollars risked and a dollar amount will be calculated for the stop-loss order
instead. Always look at the amount of risk and where the stop must be
placed in any trade. If the trader cannot find an acceptable stop level according to the trader’s money management plan, then the trade should be
dropped and another trade with acceptable risk should be found. We can

Figure 5.6 Soybeans daily chart showing a Gartley “222” buy pattern setup that
has three repetitions of the .786 ratio. This may give the trader a clue as to the proﬁt
objective.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

64

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

always reenter a trade that is stopped out if the pattern is still intact. These
are the types of decisions that traders must make continually.
Risk-Free Trade The first exit in this trade at 594.00 will be at a profit
of 8 cents or $400. The reason for this is if we risked 8 cents and we can
take a partial profit at 8 cents, we can then move our stop up to breakeven
and thereby either reduce the risk in the trade or put ourselves in a risk-free
trade.
The second exit in this trade is at the .618 at 622.00. This particular
trade would have netted +8 cents on the first contract and +36 cents on
the second contract for a total of +44 cents per contract, which equals
$2,200.
As the price moves in the trader’s favor and in the anticipated direction, the trader can trail the stop to lock in profits. There is no exact way
to do this, and there is no 100 percent method that will work all of the
time. If the trader is stopped out on a trailing stop prematurely before the
price reaches the final profit objective, the trader can reenter the trade on
a retracement type pattern (refer to Chapter 8 for more information on retracement entries). A trailing stop may be used by implementing a specific
dollar amount or a percentage of price, or by using Fibonacci retracement
levels. Place the stop above or below key levels or other visual support or
resistance chart levels.
In Figure 5.7 you can see that once the price makes the .382 retracement from the AD swing of the Gartley buy pattern, a new retracement
projection can then be done from the most recent swing low price to the
high or the swing price at the .382 retracement of the AD leg, and a trailing
stop can be placed below the .786 of that retracement. The assumption is
that if the price goes below the .786 on that retracement the pattern may
be failing. In this case this would have been the third stop placement for
this trade:
1. Initial stop at 578.00.
