
"I stopped trying to argue with customers about prepayments and finally
started talking price. At what price were they attractive? There had to
be some price where the customers would buy. A hundred basis points
over treasuries [meaning one percentage point yield greater than U.S.
treasury bonds]? Two hundred basis points? I mean, these things were
three hundred and fifty basis points off the [U.S. treasury yield] curve!"
All American homeowners had a feel for the value of the right to repay
their mortgage at any time. They knew if they borrowed money when
interest rates were high that they could pay it back once rates fell and
reborrow at the lower rates. They liked having that option. Presumably
they would be willing to pay for the option. But no one even on Wall
Street could put a price on the homeowners' option (and people still
can't, though they're getting closer). Being a trader, Ranieri figured, and
argued, that since no one was buying mortgages and everyone was selling
them, they must be cheap. More exactly, he claimed that the rate of
interest paid by a mortgage bond over and above the government, or
risk-free, rate more than compensated the mortgage bondholder for the
option he was granting to the horneowner.
Ranieri cast himself in an odd role for a Wall Street salesman. He
personified mortgage bonds. When people didn't buy them, he appeared
wounded. It was as if Ranieri himself were being sold short. He told The
United States Banker in 1985: "Those of us in housing felt the market
was charging us more of a premium for the prepayment risks
than the reall value." Think about the way that sentence is put. Who are
"those of us, in housing"? Ranieri himself wasn't charged a premium. It
was the hoimeowner who was charged. Lewie Ranieri, formerly of the
Salomon Brrothers rnailroom and utility bond trading desk, had become
the champ io)n of the American horneowner. It was a far more appealing
persona tham that of the slick, profiteering Wall Street trader. "Lewie
had this spie;l about building homes for America," says Bob Dall. "When
we'd come out of those meetings, I'd say, 'C'mon, you don't think anyone
beliteves that crap, do you?' " But that was what made Ranieri so
convincimg. He believed that crap.
Ranieri -was perhaps the first populist in the history of Wall Street. The
great Lcouisiana politician Huey P. Long campaigned on the slogan "A
chicken in every pot!" Lewie Ranieri moved bonds off his trading books
with the slogan "A mortgage on every home!" It helped that Ranieri

looked the part of the common man. "It was a great act," admits his
protege IKronthal. To work Ranieri wore black Johnny Unitas-style
ankle-high tbootV arid six-inch-wide neckties. Every Friday he arrived on
the trading floor in a tan polyester jacket and black chinos. He owned
exactly four-suits, all polyester.
As he grrew wealthy, earning between two and five million in each of the
golde:n years between 1982 and 1986, he continued to own four suits.
Jeffeny Kronthal recalls, "We used to kid him that he stood inline at The
Male: Shop in Brooklyn to get his suits. They used to sell you a suit, with
altrip to Florida, a bottle of champagne, and food stamps, all for ninetymine bucks." With his money Ranieri bought five powerboats. "Them I
had more boats than suits," he says. Other than that he lived modesstly,
without flashy cars or new homes. The clothes made the man, anid
everyone noticed the clothes. The suits said, "I haven't forgotten that I
came from the back office, and don't you fucking forget it either." They
also said, "I'm Lewie, not some schmuck rich investment bankeir. There's
no artifice here. You can trust me, and I'll take care of you.'"
Under ttue weight of Ranieri and his traders, investor mistrust eroded.
And slowly investors began to buy mortgages. "Andy Carter of Genes-son
[money managers] in Boston was the first to buy the gospel according to
Ranie;ri," says Ranieri. More important, Ranieri was the guru of the
thrift incdustry. Dozens of the largest thrifts in America wouldn't
budge without first seeking Ranieri's advice. They trusted him: He
looked like them, dressed like them, and sounded like them. As a result,
thrift managers who could have bought Mike Milken's junk bonds when
they sold their loans stayed heavily concentrated in mortgage bonds.
Between 1977 and 1986 the holdings of mortgage bonds by American
savings and loans grew from $12.6 billion to $150 billion.
But that number dramatically understates the importance of the thrifts
to the fortunes of Ranieri & Co. Ranieri's sales force persuaded the
thrift managers to trade their bonds actively. A good salesman could
transform a shy, nervous thrift president into a maniacal gambler.
Formerly sleepy thrifts became some of the biggest swingers in the bond
markets. Despite their dwindling numbers, the thrifts as a group nearly
doubled in assets size, from $650 billion to $1.2 trillion between 1981
and 1986. Salomon trader Mark Freed recalls a visit he paid on a large
California thrift manager who had been overexposed to Wall Street

influence. Freed actually tried to convince the thrift manager to calm
down, to take fewer outright gambles on the market, to reduce the size
of his positions, and instead hedge his bets in the bond market. "You
know what he told me," says Freed, "he said hedging was for sissies."
Various Salomon mortgage traders estimate that between 50 and 90
percent of their profits derived from simply taking the other side of
thrifts' trades. Why, you might wonder, did thrift presidents tolerate
Salomon's huge profit margins? Well, for a start, they didn't know any
better. Salomon's margins were invisible. And since there was no
competition on Wall Street, there was no one to inform them that they
were making Salomon Brothers rich. What was happening—and is still
happening—is that the guy who sponsored the float in the town parade,
the 3-6-3 Club member and golfing man, had become America's biggest
bond trader. He was also America's worst bond trader. He was the
market's fool.
Despite their frenetic growth, savings and loans, as Bob Dall had
predicted, could not absorb the volume of home mortgages created in
the early 1980s. Being a mortgage trader at Salomon more often meant
being a mortgage buyer than a mortgage seller. "Steve Baurn [the whole
loan trader] was running a two-billion-dollar thrift," says one of his
former colleagues. Like a thrift, Baum found himself sitting on loans for
long periods. (Unlike a thrift, he prospered.) This completed the curious
reversal in roles that occurred in the early 1980s, when thrifts became
traders and traders thrifts. (What was happening is that Wall
Street was making the entire savings and loan industry redundant. One
day someone brave will ask: "Why don't we just do away with S and Ls
entirely?") Michael Mortara nicknamed Baum "I Buy Baum" since he
seemed never to sell anything. That, it turned out, was a stroke of luck.
The bond market was on the verge of a record rally. As Henry Kaufman
recalled in Institutional Investor:
We reached about 21.5 percent on the prime rate and we reached 17.5
percent on the bill rate in the early 1980's. The peak of long term
interest rates was reached in October 1981, when long governments hit
about 15.25 percent. I only sensed that in the third quarter of 1982 that
the economy was not about to get back on its feet very quickly, and so,
finally, in August '82 I became bullish. And, of course, that day when I
turned bullish, the stock market had the biggest gain in history; on that

day the bonds rallied dramatically.
We were going into an executive committee meeting for the firm at the
Waldorf. I had written the night before a two-pager, indicating that I
thought yields would go down quite sharply and my rationale for it. And
I'd given it to my driver to deliver to rny secretary, so she could type it
up and put it into our machine, on our screens, to be shown to our traders
and salespeople at the same time—oh, around 8:45 or 9:00 in the
morning, before the markets opened. 1 then went to the Waldorf where
we had eight people from the executive committee. I got a call from my
secretary asking me to explain something that I had written because she
was typing it up—I had written in longhand—and I think it was John
Gutfreund wht> said, "What are you on the telephone for?" And I said,
"Oh, I just dictated a memo." Somebody said, "What about?" and I said,
"Well, I've just changed my view on the [bond] market." And they said,
"You've changed your view on the market?" Well, by that time it was
going on the screen, and then the markets went wild.
Ranieri & Co. had been forced by the glut into owning billions of dollars
of mortgage bonds. Because of conditions of supply and demand in their
market, they had no choice but to bet on the bond market going up. They
watched with glee, therefore, the biggest bond market rally in the
history of Wall Street. They had Kaufman to thank at first. When Henry
said it was going up, it went up. But then the Federal Reserve allowed
interest rates to fall. Policy in Washington, as anticipated by Kaufman,
had taken a second fortunate turn for Ranieri and his band of traders.
"We're talking off to the races, bond futures up sixteen points in a
week, unreal," recalls Wolf Nadoolman. The mortgage department was
the envy of the firm.
The hundreds of millions of dollars of trading profits realized by the
handful of mortgage traders derived in large part from a combination of
the market going up and the blessed ignorance of America's savings and
loans. Yet there were other, more intriguing ways Ranieri made money.
Ranieri's traders found that their counterparts at other firms could be
easily duped. Salomon's was the only mortgage trading desk without
direct phone lines to other Wall Street investment banks, preferring
instead to work through intermediaries, called interbroker dealers. "We
dominated the street," says Andy Stone. "You'd buy bonds at twelve,
even when they were trading at ten, to control the flow. The [Salomon

Brothers] research department would then produce a piece saying the
bonds you had just bought at twelve were really worth twenty. Or we'd
buy six billion more of the things at twelve. The rest of the Street would
see them trading up on the screens and figure, 'Hey, retail buying,
better buy, too,' and take us out of our position. "Translation: Salomon
could dictate the rules of the mortgage bond trading game as it went
along.
As time passed, Ranieri grew less involved with the day-to-day decisions
made on the trading desk. "Lewie was a brilliant big-picture guy," says
Andy Stone. "He'd say that mortgage bonds were going to do better than
treasury bonds over the next two weeks, and he was right ninety-five
percent of the time. And if he wasn't, he could always call up nineteen
thrifts and persuade them to buy our position in mortgages." Ranieri was
not, however, a brilliant detail guy, and the traders were beginning to
delve into the minutiae of the mortgage market. "The nature of the
trader changed," says longtime mortgage bond salesman Samuel Sachs.
"They wheeled in the rocket scientists, who started to carve up
mortgage securities into itty-bitty pieces. The market became more than
the five things that Lewie could hold in his brain at any one time."
The young traders had M.B.A.'s and Ph.D.'s. The first of the breed was
Kronthal, after whom came Haupt, Roth, Stone, Brittenham, Na-doolman,
Baum, Kendall, and Howie Rubin. One trick the new young traders
exploited was the tendency of borrowers to prepay their loans when they
should not. In a nice example of Wall Street benefiting from confusion in
Washington, Steve Roth and Scott Brittenham made tens of millions of
dollars trading federal project loans—the loans made to the builders of
housing projects, guaranteed by the federal government. By 1981 the
federal government was running a deficit. It embarked on a program of
asset sales. One group of assets it sold were loans that it had made to
the developers of low-cost housing in the 1960s and 1970s.
The loans had been made at below market rates in the first place, as a
form of subsidy. On the open market, because of their low coupons, they
were worth far less than par (one hundred cents on the dollar); a typical
loan was worth about sixty cents on the dollar. So, for example, a thirtyyear hundred-million-dollar loan, paying the lender 4 percent a year in
interest (when he could earn, say, 13 percent in U.S. treasuries), might
be worth sixty million dollars.

On the occasion of the government sale of a loan a tiny announcement
appeared in the Wall Street Journal. It seemed only two people read it:
Roth and Brittenham. Brittenham now says, "We dominated the market
for years. When I came on board in 1981, we were really the only people
buying them." The market was more of a game than most. The trick was
to determine beforehand which of the government project loans was
likely to prepay, for when it did, there was an enormous windfall to the
owner of the loan, the lender. This arose because project loans traded
below a hundred cents on the dollar. When Roth and Brittenham bought
loans at sixty cents on the dollar that prepaid immediately, they realized
a fast forty cents on the dollar profit. To win the money, you had to
know how to identify situations in which the lender would get his money
back prematurely. These, it turned out, were of two sorts.
The first were the financially distressed. Where there was distress,
there was always opportunity. "It was great if you could find a
government housing project that was about to default on its mortgage,"
says Brittenham. It was great because the government guaranteed the
loan and, in the event of a default, paid off the loan in full. The windfall
could be in the millions of dollars.
The other kind of project likely to prepay its mortgage was the cushy
upmarket property. Brittenham recalls, "You'd look for a nice property—
not a slum—something with a nice pool, tennis court, microwave ovens.
When you found it, you'd say to yourself, That's a likely conversion. ' "
To convert, the occupants bought out the owner-developer, who would, in
turn, repay the loan to the government. Once the government had
received its money, it repaid Roth and Brittenham a hundred cents on
the dollar for a piece of paper they had just bought at sixty. The
thought of two young M.B.A.'s from Wall Street roaming the nation's
housing projects in search of swimming pools and bankrupt tenants seems
ridiculous until you have done it and made ten million dollars.
The wonder is that the people in Washington who sold the loans did not
do the same. But they didn't understand the value of the loans. Instead
they trusted the market to pay them the right price. The market,
however, was inefficient.
Even larger windfalls came from exploiting the inefficient behavior of
the American homeowner. In deciding when to pay off his debts, the
homeowner wasn't much craftier than the federal government. All across

the country citizens with 4, 6, and 8 percent home mortgages were
irrationally insisting on paying down their home loans when the prevailing
mortgage rate was 16 percent; even in the age of leverage there were
still many people who simply didn't like the idea of being in hock. This
created a situation identical to the federal project loan bonanza. The
home loans underpinned mortgage bonds. The bonds were priced below
their face value. The trick was to buy them below face value just before
the homeowners repaid their loans. The mortgage trader who could
predict the behavior of the homeowners made huge profits. Any
prepayments were profits to the owner of the mortgage bond. He had
bought the bond at sixty; now he was being paid off at a hundred.
A young Salomon Brothers trader named Howie Rubin began to calculate
the probability of homeowners' prepaying their mortgages. He
discovered that the probability varied according to where they lived, the
length of time their loans had been outstanding, and the sizes of their
loans. He used historical data collected by Lew Ranieri's research
department. The researchers were meant to be used like scientific
advisers at an arms talk. More often, however, they were treated like
the water boys on the football team. But the best traders knew how to
use the researchers well. The American homeowner became, to Rubin and
the research department, a sort of laboratory rat. The researchers
charted how previously sedentary homeowners jumped and started in
response to the shock of changes in the rate of interest. Once a
researcher was satisfied that one group of homeowners was more likely
than another to behave irrationally, and pay off low-interest-rate
mortgages, he would inform Rubin, who then bought their mortgages. The
homeowners, of course, never knew that their behavior was so closely
monitored by Wall Street.
The money made in the early years was as easy as any money ever made
at Salomon. Still, mortgages were acknowledged to be the most
mathematically complex securities in the marketplace. The complexity
I
arose entirely out of the option the homeowner has to prepay his loan; it
was poetic that the single financial complexity contributed to the
marketplace by the common man was the Gordian knot giving the best
brains on Wall Street a run for their money. Ranieri's instinctr that had
led him to build an enormous research department had been right:

Mortgages were about math.
The money was made, therefore, with ever more refined tools of
analysis. But the traders did not become correspondingly more refined in
their behavior. For each step forward in market technology they took a
step backward in human evolution. As their number grew from six to
twenty-five, they became louder, ruder, fatter, and less concerned with
their relations with the rest of the firm. Their culture was based on
food, and as strange as that sounds, it was stranger still to those who
watched mortgage traders eat. "You don't diet on Christmas Day, and
you didn't diet in the mortgage department. Every day was a holiday. We
made money no matter what we looked like," says a former trader. They
began with a round of onion cheeseburgers fetched by a trainee from
the Trinity Deli at 8:00 A.M. "I mean you didn't really want to eat them,"
recalls trader Gary Kilberg, who joined the trading desk in 1985. "You
were hung over. You were sipping coffee. But you'd get wind of that
smell. Everyone else was eating them. So you grabbed one of the
suckers."
The traders performed astonishing feats of gluttony never before seen
at Salomon. Mortara made enormous cartons of malted milk balls
disappear in two gulps. D'Antona sent trainees to buy twenty dollars'
worth of candy for him every afternoon. Haupt, Jesselson, and Arnold
swallowed small pizzas whole. Each Friday was "Food Frenzy" day, during
which all trading ceased, and eating commenced. "We'd order
fourhundred dollars of Mexican food," says a former trader. "Youcan't
buy four hundred dollars of Mexican food. But we'd try—guacamole in
five-gallon drums, for a start. A customer would call in and ask us to bid
or offer bonds, and you'd have to say, 'I'm sorry, but we're in the
middle of the feeding frenzy. I'll have to call you back.' "
And the fatter they became, the more they seemed to loathe skinny
people. "No hypocrisy here! We are proud to look precisely as we are!"
They joked how the thin government traders who ran triathlons on
weekends still couldn't make any money during the week, which was not
entirely accurate. But it was true that no one made as much money
as mortgage bond traders. The market for mortgage trading had turned.
At the end of each month, remembers Andy Stone, "we'd have
department dinners. We'd say we made twice as much as corporates and
governments combined. We're the best. Fuck 'em; and when Mike

Mortara wasn't made a partner at the end of 1983 and all the other
heads of trading desks did, it really united us. We said, 'We don't work
for Salomon Brothers, we work for the mortgage department.' "
Ranieri preserved the culture in spite of its growing numbers with group
functions. If it wasn't dinner at the end of each month, it was the trip to
Atlantic City, from which government and corporate traders were
strictly excluded. The mortgage traders hopped into helicopters, spent
the night gambling, and flew back to Salomon Brothers in time to trade
the next morning. That's the sort of thing you were meant to do—if you
were a trader with iron balls.
Some goofs had genealogies. The suitcase goof had started in 1982, with
one trader getting hold of another trader's weekend bag and replacing
the clothes with pink lace panties. There were at least four goofs and
regoofs of this sort between 1982 and 1985. The goof finally stopped
spawning more goofs when John D'Antona arrived late one Friday
morning with suitcase in hand. He'd planned a weekend trip to Puerto
Rico. He began to lord his good fortune over the other traders: "Hey,
guys, sorry you can't come along, ha-ha-ha." Et cetera.
Finally it was too much for Peter Marro and Greg Erardi (often imagined
by telephone callers to be two people: Greg or Artie). When D'Antona's
attention drifted, the two traders slipped away with his suitcase. They
removed the clothes and inserted about ten pounds of wet paper towels
instead. D'Antona didn't discover the switcheroo until he emerged from
a hotel shower in Puerto Rico that evening. Dripping wet, he made his
first call to his prime suspect: Marro. Marro confessed. This, said
D'Antona, was not a funny joke. He called Marro seven more times over
the weekend to remind him just how unfunny it was. He plotted revenge.
Marro awoke to one of D'Antona's calls, early Sunday morning, that
apparently began: "I don't know how, I don't know when, I don't know
where, but one day . . ."
Revenge came shortly thereafter, but not upon Marro. As usual, the
blame shifted to the trainee who worked for the culprit. The trainee who
worked for Marro was Gary Kilberg, a member of my training class.
Kilberg had lugged his own suitcase to work one day. That evening he
would take the Eastern shuttle to Washington to meet with, among
others, two U.S. senators. Suspecting he was D'Antona's target, he hid
his suitcase in a closet in Henry Kaufman's office. Just as he was about

to leave for the airport, his phone rang. It was Marro. Marro was sitting
about eight feet away, but when two traders wished to speak privately,
even at close proximity, they used the phones.
Marro warned Kilberg. "Don't tell anyone 1 warned you," he said, "but you
better check your suitcase." So, making sure no one followed him, Kilberg
checked his suitcase. All was in order.
Kilberg caught his flight. His trip was uneventful. Yet when he walked
onto the trading floor two days later, all the traders were laughing,
D'Antona the most visibly. "What's so funny?" asked Kilberg.
"Did you have a good trip, Killer?" said D'Antona.
"Yeah," said Kilberg.
"What do you mean, 'yeah'?" asked D'Antona.
Then it occurred to about six people at once what had happened.
D'Antona had, on the day of Kilberg's trip, found a suitcase full of
clothes somewhere in the vicinity of the Salomon trading floor. The
suitcase had had a large gold K stuck on it. K stood for Kilberg, right?
Wrong.
It hadn't been Kilberg's suitcase. "Ther whose suits and shirts are
these?" asked a trader, pulling some very expensive-looking threads from
under a desk. "You could see everyone thinking," recalls Kilberg. "And
they weren't thinking small fry. They were thinking big fry. They were
thinking Kaufman [Henry] or Kimmel [Lee] or, since they had panicked
and were not being rational, Coates [Craig, the head of government bond
trading]. All at once they said, 'Oh, shit! What do we do?' "
Well, when you thought about it, that wasn't a bad question. Whoever
didn't have the suits had the soggy toilet paper. Whoever had the toilet
paper to wear over the weekend must be steamed. Since the goof had
been internal to the mortgage department all along, and there were no
K's in the mortgage department unaccounted for, who, of emotional
importance, would be the wiser if the suits simply disappeared? No one.
So one of the traders bundled the suits in a green Glad bag, like a dead
body, and dumped them into the construction wreckage across the street
from Salomon—in front of the New York Health and Racquet Club.
The traders agreed, like Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn, never to tell a soul
what had happened. "To this day," says Kilberg, "they don't know whose
suits those were."
The department, in short, looked far more like a fraternity than it did a
