
Trading Rules

When the market opens low and closes high, it moves from weakness to
strength. AID then rises and shows that market professionals are more
bullish than amateurs. This means that the market is likely to move higher
the following day. When A/D falls, it shows that market professionals are
more bearish than amateurs. When the market moves from strength to weakness, it is likely to reach a lower low the following day.
The best trading signals are given by divergences between A D and
prices.
1. If prices rally to a new high but AID reaches a lower peak, it gives a
signal to sell short. This bearish divergence shows that market professionals are selling into the rally (Figure 33-2).

177

33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS

62,250

..

Apple Computer
fill

lb,J

t,f~lb,,t~lh'
11*1
tblt futll,if~~llfltfl

" b~ll~bv,t~
lb~t~,,,,

't'l~l~ll~~l,l~~,,t
~ ~ ~ ~ I I I ~ ~ I )

Accurnulation/Distribution

52,750

.. 43,258

.. 33,750

.

24,250
18462
10355
18248
10140
10033

Figure 33-2.

Accurnulation/Distribution

Accurnulation/Distribution gives it 56ng&Q&c

diverges
at
the
~
c
t
o
b%o<l
t
f
&
.
~
~
s
h
d
i
v
e
r
g
e
G
e
s
a
b
u
y
tc
tom. ~ouFmonthslater and $30 higher, a bearish divergence gives a sell
signal. Take profits on long positions and go short.

2. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low but AD
stops at a higher low than during its previous decline. It shows that
market professionals are using the decline for buying, and a rally is
coming.

More on Accumulation/Distribution

When you go long or short, following a divergence between A/D and price,
remember that even market professionals can go wrong. Use stops and protect yourself by following the Hound of the Baskemilles rule (see Section
23).
Volume Accumulator, designed by Marc Chaikin, is an indicator very
similar to AD. Volume Accumulator uses a mean price for the day instead of
the opening price. It is especially useful for those analysts who do not have

178

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

access to opening prices. Its trading signals and rules are similar to

Accumulation/Distribution.
There are important parallels between A D a n d Japanese Candlestick
charts. Both focus on the differences between opening and closing prices.
AD goes further than candlesticks by taking volume into account.

34. OPEN INTEREST
Open interest is the number of contracts held by buyers or owed by short
sellers in a given market on a given day. It shows the number of existing
contracts. Open interest equals either a total long or a total short position.
Stock market shares are traded for as long as a company stays in business
as a separate unit. Futures and options traders, on the other hand, deal in contracts for a future delivery that expire at a set time.
A futures or options buyer who wants to accept delivery and a seller who
wants to deliver have to wait until the first notice day. This waiting period
ensures that the numbers of contracts that are long and short are always equal.
In any case, very few futures and options traders plan to deliver or to accept
delivery. Most traders close out their positions before the first notice day.
Open interest rises or falls depending on whether new traders enter the
market or old traders exit it. Open interest rises only when a new buyer and a
new seller enter the market. Their trade creates a new contract. For example,
if open interest in April COMEX gold is 8500 contracts, then 8500 contracts
are held by bulls and 8500 contracts are owed by short sellers at the close of
that day. If open interest rises to 8600, it means that the net of 100 new contracts have been bought and sold short.
Open interest falls when a trader who is long trades with someone who is
short. When both of them close out their positions, open interest falls by one
contract because one contract disappears. If a new bull buys from an old bull
who is getting out of his long position, open interest remains unchanged:
Open interest also does not change when a new bear sells to an old bear who
needs to buy because he is closing out his short position.
Buyer

Seller

Open Interest

New buyer

New seller

New buyer
Former seller buys to cover
Former seller buys to cover

Former buyer sells
New seller
Former buyer sells

Increases
Unchanged
Unchanged
Decreases

34. OPEN INTEREST

179

Most futures and options exchanges release open interest data one day
later than prices. Some exchanges provide phone numbers to call for preliminary figures on open interest.
Technicians usually plot open interest as a line below price bars (Figure
34-1). Some chart services also plot average open interest for the past several
years. Open interest gives important messages when it deviates from its seasonal norm. Open interest varies from season to season in many markets
because of massive hedging by commercial interests at different stages in
production cycles.
Open interest in currency futures tends to drop four times a year, at the
time of a contract rollover. If open interest does not drop during a rollover, it
shows a strong commitment among traders to the existing trend, which is
likely to accelerate.

Crowd Psychology

It takes one bull and one bear to create a futures or options contract. A bull
buys a contract if he is convinced that prices are going higher. A bear sells
short a contract if he is convinced that prices are going lower. When the two
trade, open interest rises by one contract. A single trade between one bull
and one bear is unlikely to move the markets. But when thousands of traders
make their trades, they propel or reverse market trends.
Open interest reflects the intensity of conflict between bulls and bears. It
reflects the willingness of longs to maintain long positions and the willingness of shorts to maintain short positions. When bulls and bears do not
expect the market to move in their favor, they close out their positions and
open interest shrinks.
There are two people on opposite sides of every trade. One of them gets
hurt when prices change. If prices rally, bears get hurt. If prices fall, bulls get
hurt. As long as the losers hope, they hang on, and open interest does not
change.
A rise in open interest shows that a crowd of confident bulls is facing
down a crowd of equally confident bears. It points to a growing disagreement between the two camps. One group is sure to lose, but as long as potential losers keep pouring in, the trend will continue. These ideas have been
clearly put forth in L. Dee Belveal's classic book, Charting Commodity
Market Price Behavior.
Bulls and bears keep adding to their positions as long as they strongly dis-

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

180

.

PI#\
r]~it'YI/~,II,P/

Cocoa

12

I , l ,

P"'tl,t ,,,,,I I

G+'hfl~llflM,lb+p'.$d,+

p' . 1),

l"l,h,+,/~t'*~

13

.

11

.

10

9

E

7
1
58347

Open Interest

55072
51797

Hau

Jun

Figure 34-1.

Jul

Iluu

Seu

at

Ndu

rn
45247

Open Interest

Open interest (01)reflects the number of all short or long positions in
any futures or options market. Open interest depends on the intensity of
conflict between bulls and bears.
Rising 01 shows that the conflict between bulls and bears is becoming
more intense and confirms the existing trend. Rising 01 during uptrends
shows it is safe to add to long positions (A and D). Flat 01 shows that
fewer losers are entering the market. This means that a mature trend is
nearing its end and it is time to take profits or tighten stops (B and El.
Falling 01 shows that losers are leaving the market and winners are cashing in-that a trend is nearing its end. A fire cannot continue when fuel is
withdrawn, and a sharp drop in 01 during a trend signals that a reversal
is near (C and F).
At the right edge of the chart, cocoa prices have stabilized after falling
in October and open interest is flat. It shows that the decline in cocoa
has shaken out weak bulls and the uptrend is ready to resume. It is time
to go long, with a protective stop below the recent lows.

agree about the future course of prices. It takes conviction and disagreement
to maintain a trend. Rising open interest shows that the supply of losers is
growing and the current trend is likely to persist. If open interest increases
during an uptrend, it shows that longs are buying while bears are shorting

34. OPEN INTEREST

181

because they believe that the market is too high. They are likely to run for
cover when the uptrend puts a squeeze on them - and their buying will propel prices higher.
If open interest rises during a downtrend, it shows that shorts are aggressively selling while bottom-pickers are buying. Those bargain hunters are
likely to bail out when falling prices hurt them, and their selling will push
prices even lower. An increase in open interest gives a green light to the
existing trend.
When a bull is convinced that prices are going higher and decides to buy,
but a bear is afraid to sell short, that bull can buy only from another bull who
bought earlier and now wants to get out. Their trade creates no new contract,
and open interest stays unchanged. When open interest stays flat during a
rally, it shows that the supply of losers has stopped growing.
When a bear is convinced that prices are going lower, he wants to sell
short. If a bull is afraid to buy from him, that bear can only sell to another
bear who shorted earlier and now wants to cover and leave. Their trade creates no new contract, and open interest does not change. When open interest
stays flat during a decline, it shows that the supply of bottom-pickers is not
growing. Whenever open interest flattens out, it flashes a yellow light- a
warning that the trend is aging and the best gains are probably behind.
Falling open interest shows that losers are bailing out while winners are
taking profits. When their disagreement decreases, the trend is ripe for a
reversal. Open interest falls when losers abandon hope and get out of the
market without being replaced by new losers. When a bull decides to get out
of his long position and a bear decides to cover his short position, the two
may trade with one another. When they do, a contract disappears, and open
interest shrinks by one contract. Falling open interest shows that winners are
cashing in and losers are giving up hope. It flashes a red light - it signals the
end of a trend.

Trading Rules
A 10 percent change in open interest deserves serious attention, while a 25
percent change often gives major trading messages. The meaning of rising,
falling, or flat open interest depends on whether prices are rallying, falling,
or flat at the time of change in open interest.
1. When open interest rises during a rally, it confirms the uptrend and
gives a signal that it is safe to add to long positions. It shows that more

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

short sellers are coming into the market. When they bail out, their
short covering is likely to push the rally higher.

2. When open interest rises while prices fall, it shows that bottom-pickers are active in the market. It is safe to sell short because these bargain hunters are likely to push prices lower when they throw in the
towel.
3. When open interest rises while prices are in a trading range, it is a
bearish sign. Commercial hedgers are more likely to sell short than
speculators. A sharp increase in open interest while prices are flat
shows that savvy hedgers are probably shorting the market.

4. When open interest falls sharply while prices are in a trading range, it
identifies short covering by major commercial interests and gives a
buy signal. When commercials start covering shorts, they show that
they expect the market to rise.

5. When open interest falls during a rally, it shows that both winners and
losers are getting "cold feet." Longs are taking their profits, and shorts
are covering. Markets discount the future, and a trend that is accepted
by the majority is ready to reverse. If open interest falls during a rally,
sell and get ready to sell short.
6. When open interest falls during a decline, it shows that shorts are covering and buyers are taking their losses and bailing out. If open interest
falls during a slide, cover shorts and get ready to buy.

7. When open interest goes flat during a rally, it warns that the uptrend is
getting old and the best gains have already been made. This gives you
a signal to tighten stops on long positions and avoid new buying.
When open interest goes flat during a decline, it warns you that the
downtrend is mature and it is best to tighten stops on short positions.
Flat open interest in a trading range does not contribute any new information.

More on Open Interest

The higher the open interest, the more active the market, and the less slippage you risk while getting in and out of positions. Short-term traders should
focus on the markets with the highest open interest. In the futures markets, it
pays to trade the delivery months with the highest open interest.

35. HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX

183

Tracking Commitments of T r a d e r s reports can help you find out
whether new buying or selling is primarily done by small or large speculators or by hedgers (see Chapter 7).
Very few technical indicators use open interest. The Herrick Payoff
Index is the best-known indicator that utilizes it.

35. HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX
The Herrick Payoff Index (HPI) is an indicator developed by John Herrick, a
technical market analyst from California. He taught it privately, but the indicator became more popular after it was included in CompuTrac software in
the early 1980s.
The Herrick Payoff Index helps detect accumulation and distribution.
Most indicators measure only prices, some measure volume, but HPI tracks
open interest as well as prices and volume. HPI confirms valid trends and
helps catch their reversals.
How to Construct HPI

The Herrick Payoff Index may be calculated using several types of daily
data. You may use a single contract with its own price, volume, and open
interest. It is more practical to combine volume and open interest from all
contracts and apply them to the prices of the most active delivery month.
HPI uses daily high and low prices, volume, and open interest. It requires
data for at least three weeks before it begins producing meaningful numbers.
Its complex formula makes using a computer almost a necessity (see worksheet, Figure 35-1).
HPI = Ky + (K - Ky)
where Ky = yesterday's HPI.
K = [(M -My) C V] [I * {(I 2)/G)]
and
M = mean price - i.e., (High t Low)/2.
My = yesterday's mean price.
C = the value of a 1-cent move (or use the same constant for
all contracts).
V = volume.

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

184

Copper

Figure 35-1.

Herrick Payoff Index Worksheet

HPI measures changes in prices, volume, and open interest. It is based on
mean rather than closing prices-the average consensus of value for the
day. The complexity of HPI makes using a computer almost a necessity.

I = absolute value of today's minus yesterday's open interest.
G = today's or yesterday's open interest, whichever is less.
The "+" or "-"sign in the right brackets is determined as follows:
If M > My, the sign is "+"; if M < My, the sign is "-".
Traders can apply HPI only to daily data and not to weekly or intraday
data. There is no such thing as weekly open interest. Weekly volume can be
obtained by adding up daily volume for five days, but open interest cannot
be added up.

Crowd Psychology

The Herrick Payoff Index measures mean prices rather than closing prices.
Daily mean prices represent the average consensus of value for the day.
Volume represents the degree of financial commitment in a given market.
When volume increases, the absolute value of HPI for that day increases.

35. HERRICK PAYOFF I N D E X

Daily changes in open interest represent the flow of funds into and out of
the market. Rising open interest is bullish in an uptrend and bearish in a
downtrend. Falling open interest is bearish in an uptrend and bullish in a
downtrend. Flat open interest is essentially neutral.

Trading Rules

The Herrick Payoff Index gives several types of trading signals, listed here
in the order of importance. Divergences between HPI and prices identify
some of the best trading opportunities (Figure 35-2). When HPI breaks its
trendline, it gives an early warning that a price trendline is likely to be broken. When HPI crosses its centerline, it confirms new price trends.
1. When prices fall to a new low but HPI makes a higher bottom than
during the previous decline, it creates a bullish divergence and gives a
buy signal. When HPI turns up from its second bottom, buy and place
a protective stop below the latest price low.
2. A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high but HPI
makes a lower top. The signal to sell short is flashed when HPI turns
down from its second top. Place a protective stop above the latest high
price.
Important divergences develop over the course of several weeks. A divergence that takes two months to develop is more powerful than the one in
which two weeks passed between the tops or bottoms. Pay attention to the
differences in the height of the adjacent HPI tops or bottoms. If the first top
or bottom is far away from the centerline and the second top or bottom is
near that line, that divergence is likely to lead to a greater move.
Bullish and bearish divergences of HPI often have long lead times. Once
you have identified a potential turning point using an HPI divergence, lean
on short-term oscillators for more precise timing. If a divergence between
HPI and price aborts, and you get stopped out, watch closely -you may get
an even better trading opportunity if a regular divergence turns into a triple
bullish or triple bearish divergence. Triple bullish divergences consist of
three lower bottoms in prices and three higher bottoms in HPI. Triple bearish
divergences consist of three higher tops in prices and three lower tops in
HPI. They occur at some of the major turning points in the markets.
3. HPI lends itself well to classical charting methods, especially trendlines. When trendlines of prices and HPI point in the same direction,

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

186

128
122
115
189
183
89,2
51,7
14,l
Herrick Payoff Index

Figure 35-2.

-23,4
-61,i

Herrick Payoff lndex

HPI tracks the flow of funds into or out of the market by measuring
changes in prices, volume, and open interest. HPI gives its best signals
when its patterns diverge from price patterns. HPI identified market tops
in August and September by tracing lower peaks while prices rose to
new highs. HPI called market bottoms in October and November when
it stopped declining and bottomed out at more shallow levels while copper slid to new lows.
The bullish divergence in November was followed by a breaking of a
downtrendline of HPI and a rally above HPl's centerline. This combination gave an especially strong signal to buy copper. The best signals
develop slowly and give traders plenty of time to get aboard a new
trend.

they confirm trends. HPI often breaks its trendline before prices break
theirs. When HPI breaks below its uptrend, it gives a sell signal. When
it breaks above a downtrend, it gives a buy signal. Then it pays to
either take profits or to tighten stops.
4. The position of HPI above or below its centerline shows whether bulls

or bears dominate the market. When HPI is above its centerline, it
shows that bulls are in control-it is better to be long. When HPI is
below its centerline, it is better to be short. Bulls may buy or add to

36. TIME

187

their long positions when HPI rises above its centerline. When HPI
declines below its centerline, it confirms downtrends.

36. TlME
Most people conduct their lives as if they intend to live forever-with no
review of the past, no real planning for the future, and minimal learning from
past mistakes. Freud showed that the unconscious mind does not have a
notion of time. Our deep-seated wishes remain largely unchanged throughout life.
When people join crowds, their behavior becomes even more primitive
and impulsive than when they are alone. Crowds pay no attention to time
even though they are affected by its passage. Individuals are ruled by the calendar and the clock, but crowds have no notion of time. Crowds act out their
emotions as if they had all the time in the world.
Most traders focus only on changes in prices and pay little attention to
time. This is just another sign of being caught up in mass mentality.
The awareness of time is a sign of civilization. A thinking person is aware
of time, while someone who is acting impulsively is not. A market analyst
who pays attention to time is aware of a dimension hidden from the market
crowd.

Cycles
Long-tenn price cycles are a fact of economic life. For example, the U.S.
stock market tends to run in four-year cycles. They exist because the ruling
party inflates the economy going into the presidential election once every
four years. The party that wins the election deflates the economy when voters cannot take revenge at the polls. Flooding the economy with liquidity
lifts the stock market, and draining liquidity pushes it down. This is why the
2 years before a presidential election tend to be bullish, and the first 12 to 18
months following an election tend to be bearish.
Major cycles in agricultural commodities are due to fundamental production factors, coupled with the mass psychology of producers. For example,
when livestock prices rise, farmers breed more animals. When those animals
reach the market, prices fall and producers cut back. When the supply is
absorbed, scarcity pushes prices up, breeders go to work again, and the

188

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

bullbear cycle repeats. This cycle is shorter in hogs than in cattle because
pigs breed faster than cows.
Long-term cycles can help traders identify market tides. Instead, most
traders get themselves in trouble by trying to use short-term cycles for precision timing and predicting minor turning points.
Price peaks and valleys on the charts often seem to follow in an orderly
manner. Traders reach for a pencil and a ruler, measure distances between
neighboring peaks, and project them into the future to forecast the next top.
Then they measure distances between recent bottoms and extend them into
the future to forecast the next low.
Cycles put bread and butter on the tables of several experts who sell services forecasting highs and lows. Few of them realize that what appears like
a cycle on the charts is often a figment of the imagination. If you analyze
price data using a mathematically rigorous program such as John Ehlers'
MESA (Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis), you will see that approximately 80 percent of what appears like cycles is simply market noise. A
human mind needs to find order in chaos- and an illusion of order is better
than no order for most people.
If you look at any river from the air, it appears to have cycles, swinging
right and left. Every river meanders in its valley because water flows faster in
its middle than near the shores, creating turbulences that force the river to turn.
Looking for market cycles with a ruler and a pencil is like searching for
water with a divining rod. Profits from an occasional success are erased by
many losses due to unsound methods. If you are serious about trading with
cycles, you need a mathematical method for finding them, such as MESA or
Fourier analysis.
Fourier analysis searches for cycles in very large data samples, but MESA
takes a different tack. It searches for evidence of orderly cyclical movement
in a relatively short data window (Figure 36-1). Unlike other packages,
which give nonstop trading signals, MESA tells traders that no valid cycles
are present about 80 percent of the time. It aims to recognize cycles as they
emerge from market noise and tells you when a cycle begins to fade.
