TABLE 4.7

Stradd le versus Strangle

Initial commitment
Hypothetical returns (based on .80
delta of an in-the -money option)

Straddle

Strangle

$7,625
$ 16 ,600

$3 ,500
$10,620

87

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

-~~-~-~~

CL-067: Crude OU NY (Pk) Cod/Uq (Dollyballll

Crude Oil Inventory Report February 21st, 2008
Inventories increased 4.2 million barrels

FIGURE 4.10 Initial Market Reaction to Crude Oil Inventories
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.
CL-067: Crude 011 NY (Pit) CadJ Liq (Daily bars)

,Crude Oil Inventory Report February 21st, 2008
Inventories increased 4.2 million barrels

I

I

.....
~

I

90.00

-

T""""·""'l·;~
·1 ~';;";;;:,,,m-~M01:;;;
116108~~~"'O:-;;1I3m'/O"'8--"'
02l:;;;'4!!l
""8:r-~......,.""2I29IO=8~-""3/:;;;1"'''''8:r-'''''''--::'3/l
=
'/08~--...J 10.00

c
' ..c

Crude Oil Prices Break Resistance Line

1?IGURE 4.11 Crude Oil Almost Reaches $ 11 O/ barrel
Source : TradeNavigato r.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

88
~

BASIC STRATEG IES

CL-067: Crude'oifNY {Pitl Cadj (Iii (OailYbal'll) .

~rude Oil Inventory Report February 21st, 2008
Inventories increased 4.2 million barrels

FIGURE 4.12 Crude Oil Strangle
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

and why a straddle or strangle can be beneficial in catching some of this
unexpected movement.
The movement from $97lbarrel to $108lbarrel is a significant opportunity to generate $11,680 in profits, if you were holding the futures contract
directly. A strangle on the same contract would have you buying a put at
the support line, approximately $85Ibarrel, and at the resistance line, approximately $98lbarrel (see Figure 4.12).
In this instance the volatility of the at-the-money options make the
prospect of a straddle very unattractive. The strangle is a lot more cost effective for the potential profits that can develop from an unexpected spike.
Supply and demand are precariously balanced and those traders who can
be nimble enough to ride the crude oil markets effortlessly up and down
will gain the most from its aggressive volatility (see Tables 4.8 and 4.9).
TABLE 4.8 Straddle versus Strangle

Straddle
Strangle

Call Strike
Price/Premium

Put Strike
Price/Prem iu m

Initial
Commitment

97 . 50/4 .39 ($4,390)
98/4 .09 ($4 ,090)

97.50/5.20 ($5,200)
85/1.22 ($1,220)

9.59 ($9,590)
5.31 ($5,310)

89

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

TABLE 4.9

Straddle versus Strangle

Initial Commitment
Hypothetical Returns (based on .80
delta of an in-the-money option)

Straddle

Strangle

$9,590
$9,344

$5,310
$8,576

SAl\'IPLE STRADDLE AND STRANGLE
WRITE-UP SHEETS
You can photocopy the following tables or you can make a spreadsheet
similar to these two to trade your own events.
Straddle versus Strangle
Initial
Call Strike
Put Strike
Price/Premium Price/Premium Commitment
Straddle
Strangle

Straddle versus Strangle
Straddle

Strangle

Initial commitment
Hypothetical returns
(based on .80 delta of an
in-the-moneyoption)

CONCLUSION
This chapter covers a lot of critical information that is used again in later
chapters. Understanding how to select options is a critical skill that you
cannot neglect. It will prove the difference between effectively managing
your risk and exposing yourself to unnecessary risk if you are not careful. Using straddles and strangles is an easy way to ease yourself into the
world of risk management and to learn techniques to protect yourself from
being stuck on a market position. Nevertheless, you must still make wise
decisions on how you enter the market, and understand what you hope to
accomplish once you have done so.

(~ II

\ P 'I' I,; II :>

Precision
Trading at
Its Finest

T

he American Heritage Dictionary lists one definition of the word pre-

cision as "of or characterized by accurate action." In the preceding

chapter we looked at straddles and strangles as ways of catching the
market's direction, regardless of which direction it is headed. While these
strategies are capable of allowing a trader the ability to beat the market
at its own game, they don't provide active traders with the most precise
way to interact with the markets. That can actually be accomplished by
understanding how to use an option contract as a hedge for your trading
position.

WHAT IS HEDGE TRADING?
In futures and forex trading there are only two participants, speculators
and hedgers. The speculators are out to make money from the simple
change in price, whereas the hedgers are out to protect themselves from
price changes. Both groups trade on the same exchange, but the key distinction between the two groups is that the hedgers actually own or will
own the physical goods. Therefore, they trade the market with the willingness to lose money on the exchange in order to make it up with their actual
position. That is hedge trading at its simplest.
The average retail speculator fails to grasp the potential significance
that hedge trading can have for them. It is no secret that no one is 100 percent right about the market's direction, but little is done by the speculators
to prepare for this eventuality. Stop loss orders, whether mental or actual,
91

92

BASIC STRATEGIES

are used to stop losses, but no time is spent on how to make money when
a trade turns sour. That's where hedging for speculators comes in.
A speculator can look at the market and make a conscious decision
to always have a profitable position on if he is willing to concede a small
loss on another position-just like the real hedgers do. This type of hedge
trading doesn't require a lot of additional effort; it simply requires the willingness to take advantage of the daisy-chain effect of trading.
If you are an active trader, this may also mean that you will need to
have a willingness to change your entire approach to trading. You may have
to reevaluate it and become a specialist in exactly how you look at the
market and what buying, selling, and protecting yourself from loss actually
mean to you.

PRECISION TRADING GROUND RULES
When making the transition from a pure speculator to trading the market like a speculator, a set of ground rules must be put in place. The first
ground rule is the decision to choose a trend. No matter what time frame
you buy and sell in, there is an overall trend that the market is moving in.
In fact, as of this writing gold, oil, and the euro had all been on a bullish
trend for over four years. During that time there have been pullbacks in the
market-counter-trends. Once the market reached certain plateaus the
trend would resume. Therefore a conscious decision must be made to
actively trade either the trend or the counter-trend.
The best choice is to actively trade the counter-trends; then an option
can be purchased as a hedge on the trend. With this trading combination,
you operate just like a true hedger. There are two ways to look at this trade.
The first way is that you are protecting your counter-trend trades by using
an option as a hedge. The second way you can look at it, which is more
in tune with why the markets were developed, is that your option trade is
following the trend, generating income gradually, and you are protecting
that asset, almost like a true hedger's cash position, every time you are
actively trading the counter-trend. No matter how you look at it, you are
getting the best of both worlds, trend and counter-trend, yet as an active
trader you are reducing your commission by almost 50 percent.
The average active trader is constantly buying and selling in and out
of the market, attempting to catch a few ticks from a stock index, or
a few pips from currencies, or a few cents from stocks- all of them attempting to outperform the market. By using an option as a hedge to follow the trend, there is no need to flip-flop between being either long or
short. You are successfully placed in both positions simultaneously. Using

Precision Trading at Its Finest

93

options as a hedge is completely separate and distinct from two other option strategies-option-spot or option-futures strategies. In the next chapter we look at the option as a replacement to the stop loss order, and later
we look at how to combine a cash or futures position and an option together to create a synthetic option.

Benefits
The options hedge strategy has many great benefits for the active trader;
commissions can be reduced, strict trade management strategies can be
followed, and trading systems can be properly tested for their viability.
Being able to reduce commissions can justify the risk management
strategy alone. Active traders are constantly in and out of the market. If
they are actively trading the S&P 500 or some other stock index, racking
up several hundred to several thousand trades per month is not unheard-of.
There is constant buying and selling pressure, with the ultimate goal
of making a fixed daily amount; $500 to $1,000 per day is the typical
target.
Reality smashes into any ideal goals that active traders have once they
see how much they lose on the losing trades and the amount they rack
up in fees and commissions. Regardless of how much or how little they
pay in commissions, they can easily find themselves generating twice as
much cash activity, in losses and commissions, as they take home as profits. Using an option to follow the trend requires only one commission, and
the only loss involved is the erosion of premium. This saves active traders
50 percent of the commissions that they would have usually paid, along
with cutting in half their potential for losses in their active trading.
Not all active traders attempt to buy and sell back-to-back. There are
some traders who focus on momentum trading only, so on any given day
they are only long a market or short a market. While they may not get a
reduction in commissions, they will benefit from having the option playing
cleanup if the momentum of the day is not in sync with the overall trend of
the market.
Another key benefit is the ability to refine entry and exit signals. When
the entry is limited to a specific type of situation, in this case countertrends, trading entry signals can be honed. Whether these signals work
or not will quickly become apparent without the trader needing to be
wholly committed. This also allows for easier journaling of specific trading
strategies.
If all of these benefits aren't enough, futures traders also have the ability to reduce their margins. Whenever they combine options to diminish
their risk, regardless of how they do it, margins are reduced at the commission merchant level.

94

BASIC STRATEGIES

Pitfalls
Picking the right option is the largest pitfall when implementing this option hedge strategy. Years ago a British television game show, The Weakest Link, was imported to the United States. Losing contestants were told,
"You are the weakest link!" Every time the option as a hedge strategy is proposed, those words ring in my head. The strategy is sound in both theory
and practice, but the strike price of the option is essential to its success.
That may mean that the average active trader may not be able to afford to
use this strategy if the option is expensive or if the option exceeds the price
of the underlying asset by too much.
For those active traders who focus on the Emini markets, their commissions and day trading margins can be exceptionally reasonable. As long
as a trader is willing to not hold a position overnight, the margin for the
Emini S&P can be as low as $250 per contract. The standard Emini S&P
contract margin typically runs over $4,000, depending on volatility, when a
contract is carried overnight. The day trading margin and overnight margin
are tremendously different. This difference allows traders with as little as
$2,000 in their accounts to trade the Emini S&P. This has to be taken into
account when suggesting to active traders to use options as a hedge for
their trading.
There are only two types of options that can be purchased to hedge
a position, an in-the-money option and an at-the-money option. Either of
these options can follow the trend effectively while the active trader executes counter-trend trades. The primary drawback is expense.
On Friday, July 11, 2008, the September Emini S&P 500 closed at
1239.75. In Table 5.1 we look at two strike prices for the front month, July,
Emini S&P 500, 1235 and 1240.
Every one-point move is the equivalent of $50. This means the calls and
puts range in price from $750 to $1,025. For an active trader who is enjoying
a high amount of leverage in his day trading position, one option is the
equivalent of three to four contracts. This can be a significant commitment
of capital in a small account.

TABLE 5.1

Option Example 1

Type

Strike

Cost

Amount

20 . 50

$1,025
$900
$750

ESNB

Call

E5NB

Call

1235
1240

E5NB

Put

1235

1B.00
1B.50

ESNB

Put

1240

15.00

$925

95

Precision Trading at Its Finest
TABLE 5.2

ESNB
ESQB

Option Example 2

Type

Month

Strike

Cost

Amount

Call
Call

July
August

1240
1240

1 B.OO
40 .75

$1,025
$2,037.50

A second problem staring option hedge traders in the face is attempting
to figure out exactly which month to purchase options in. In Table 5.2 the
underlying futures front month is September, but the first option contract
that can be purchased is in July, the next is in August, the one after that is
in September.
Although the strike prices are all the same, as each month gets further
and further out the built-in time value of the option plays a greater role. In
fact, the call almost doubles in value from July to August and increases by
more than $500 from August to September.
The same thing occurs when we look at puts in Table 5.3. The price
difference between the July put and the August put is such that the latter option is almost triple in value. The price difference between the puts
and calls is also pronounced. Volatility is erring on the side of caution by
having the puts be slightly more expensive than the calls. This is clearly a
reinforcement of a bearish view on the S&P market.
As a trader, a balancing act must be maintained among the strike price,
the premium, and the expiration month. It is no secret that options expire
earlier than their underlying asset counterparts. This can occur as much as
a month before the underlying futures contract. Therefore, it is important
to determine whether you are content with having an option as a hedge for
protection in just the front month or your hedge position is meant to be
set in place in a further-out month and forgotten about. The option will be
more expensive, but you will be able to use it as a hedge for a lengthier
period of time.
Finally, no matter whether the trader purchases an option for the front
month or for a further-out month, he must balance the expense of the

TABLE 5.3

ESNB
ESQB
ESU8

Option Example 3

Type

Month

Strike

Cost

Amount

Put
Put
Put

July
August
September

1240
1240
1240

15.00
42.25
53.25

$750
$2,112.50
$2,662.50

96

BASIC STRATEGIES

option against what his day trading margins are and what the ultimate goal
is in protecting himself.

Can you, the trader, use an out-of-the-mone y option as a hedge? If you do, the
difficulty of this option as a hedge strategy becomes compounded . Not only
must you pick the right strike price and month, but you mu st also ant ici pate
where the market will head, as opposed to simp ly following t he t rend.

IDENTIFYING MARI{ET TRENDS '
How successfully this technique can be implemented is 100 percent dependent on how well you can determine the trend and the counter-trend. If
you are able to exploit this relationship, then all of the other dominoes fall
in place. In Winning the Trading Game there is a detailed explanation on
how to use technical analysis to determine the long-term trend of both the
futures market and the forex market. To put it concisely, the 50-day moving
average (MA) is a key way to be able to see whether the market is a bullish
or bearish market. Once that is determined, then the work of purchasing
an option that follows the long-term trend is more than halfway done.
That's when your micro technical analysis tools kick in. They help to
determine entries for the counter-trend and when to exit the market once it
begins to shift back and follow the trend. That is where your stops or stop
limits come in. While there is no love lost between my style of trading and
stops, this is one time when I wholeheartedly advocate the use of stops as
part of a risk management strategy.
The function of the option as a hedge is to operate as a profit catchall.
This technique is versatile for futures, spot forex, and stocks. The objective is to actively trade as you normally would, with the intent of focusing
primarily on the counter-trend while your option accumulates value on the
trend. Stops must therefore be used liberally to exit the counter-trend positions. There is no need to erode any of the profits that your option accumulates through losses in the counter-trend. More than enough of the
premium is being eroded because of decreases in time value and intrinsic
value.
This is the simplest way to exploit the insurance nature of futures and
options. By working with this strategy, the everyday trader can become enlightened about the true nature of the markets and how capable they are at
limiting risk when used in conjunction with one another. The level of impact that that has, coupled with the right timing, trend, and counter-trend,

Precision Trading at Its Finest

97

is both the first step and the last step of comprehending what it means to
trade like a pro.
In the following examples, the trend and counter-trend are identified
for the Emini S&P 500. Multiple active trader time frames are viewed along
with their potential optimal returns.

Active Trader Time Frames
There is a dance between the trend and the counter-trend that cannot always be seen. By separating the market's two different directions from one
another, active traders can become more effective no matter what their
preferred market time frame is. In Figure 5.1 the Emini's trend is identified.
Figure 5.1 is a snapshot of the Emini S&P 500 from April 2008 to July
2008. The gray bars represent a bearish market that sits below the 50-day
MA. At the beginning of June 2008 the S&P 500 crosses into the gray bars
at around 1375 and ends up hitting a low of 1225 by July 11, 2008. Even if
the gray bars weren't visible, there would be little dispute about the market
being on a downward slide.
Swing or position traders would have most likely attempted to simply short the market once it crossed the 50-day MA. For active traders the

FIGURE 5.1 Emini S&P 500 Trend
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

98

BASIC STRATEGIES

actions would be slightly different. As seen in Figure 5.1, once the market crossed the 50-day MA a put option would have been purchased as a
hedge. This way the active trader could pick up any profits from the market's counter-trend moves, while simultaneously catching the moves in the
overall trend in the option.
The option that was used as a hedge would accumulate a gain from
1375 to 1225, for a total of 150 points. This would allow the option hedge
to accumulate almost $7,500. This would be an enhancement to any active
trader's overall profits. Of course this is an ideal scenario, catching the
market right when it crosses into a downward trend. As long as the market
stays in the gray area, purchasing a put option is the prudent course of
action.
There are numerous time frames that active traders watch in order
to gain insight into the market's direction. There is a constant search
for the optimum time frame, and no two traders are alike. Some of the
most common short-term time frames are the 5-minute, 15-minute, 60minute, and 4-hour charts. Once traders have established that the market's
trend is down, they can identify counter-trend opportunities in each time
frame.

5·Minute In Figure 5.2 we see the 5-minute Emini S&P chart. This is one
of the shortest time frames in which an active trader can pick and choose
signals.
e ....7: E-IIIiiisrJ>soocodjUq (.m.".....'

5 Minute Chart

FIGURE 5.2 5-Minute Emini S&P 500 Counter-Trend
Source: TradeNavigator .com © 2007. All rights reserved.

99

Precision Trading at Its Finest

On July 13, 2008, from 6:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M., there were at least five different opportunities to go long in the Emini S&P 500 based on the 5-minute
charts. While there also were opportunities to go short, the put option
hedge is in place and there is no need to chase these short opportunities.
15-Minute From July 11, 2008, to July 13, 2008, we can see multiple opportunities in the 15-minute Emini S&P chart. This is another tight time
frame. In Figure 5.3 the long-term downward trend is starting to show itself. Yet there are at least four different opportunities to go long in the
counter-trend.

60-Minute In Figure 5.4 we see three opportunities to go long in the
60-minute chart. From July 8, 2008, to July 13, 2008, three aggressive opportunities to go long appear.

Beginning on June 29, 2008, we see in Figure 5.5 four different
opportunities to go long.
It quickly becomes apparent that there are profits to be had in just
about any time frame. As long as a trader keeps a level head about his
objectives, then trading the counter-trend, with stops in place, becomes an
effective strategy. As long as active traders are willing to not have their
4-0001'

I~

lIWM1~::;5 . 123!:75H5.25'

i

1 ~:
jmt,OCi

.' meJI(I

FIGURE 5.3 1 5-Minute Emini S&P 500 Trend
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. Al l rights reserved.

100

BASIC STRATEGIES

T._ . . .

~~
~~~~e:.Nf!:!L$II.P~Cou!!tetl(t!t1!!

<Zi

FIGURE 5.4 60-Minute Em ini S&P 500 Trend
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved

FIGURE 5.5 4-Hour Emini S&P 500 Trend
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved

Precision Trading at Its Finest

101

faces too close to the canvas, they can benefit from taking advantage of the
long-tenn counter-trend.

CONCLUSION
On the Internet and at various trading expos, the Emini S&P is touted as the
best market to actively trade. Many traders therefore tum to the Emini S&P
to generate daily cash flow. While there is an abundance of liquidity and
momentum on any given day in the S&P, the hedge strategy is not limited
to the Emini S&P traders. Any market where traders are actively searching
for daily or short-tenn profits (stocks, forex, oil, DAX, Nikkei, etc.) is fair
game.
As long as all three components of this strategy are used together-the
ability to identify and act on the trend, the ability to identify and act on the
counter-trend, and the willingness to use a stop to exit any counter-trend
as soon as it loses momentum-then the option as a hedge strategy can be
effective.
