
Most volatile news reports
That traders should follow closely

Volatility and profits in forex are measured in pips. The bigger the volatility
the more pips and money a trader can make from a certain trade. Keep this
chart by your side and make sure to mark these reports in your calendar!

• NFP - Non Farm Payroll. Unemployment indicator, showing if U.S. employment is
growing or not.
• FOMC - decision on the U.S. interest rates.
• Trade Balance - deficit or surplus.
• CPI - Consumer Price Index. Inflation indicator.
• Retail Sales - An estimate of the total sales of goods by all retail establishments in the
U.S. for month prior to the release of the report.

Section 02 | Key drivers of currency movements

Economic indicators

What you need to know about them Part 1
What are Economic Indicators?

Economic indicators are snippets of financial and economic data published regularly by governmental
agencies and the private sector. These statistics help market observers monitor the economy's pulse - so
it's no surprise that they're followed by almost everyone in the financial markets.
With so many people poised to react to the same information, economic indicators have tremendous
potential to generate volume and move prices. It might seem like you need an advanced economics
degree to parse all this data accurately - but in fact traders need only keep a few simple guidelines in mind
when making trading decisions based on this data.

Mark Your Economic Calendars

Watching the economic calendar not only helps you consider trades around these events, it helps explain
otherwise unanticipated price actions during those periods. Consider this scenario: it's Monday morning
and the USD has been falling for 3 weeks, with many traders short USD positions as a result. On Friday,
however, U.S. employment data is scheduled to be released. If that report looks promising, traders may
start unwinding their short positions before Friday, leading to a short-term rally in USD through the week.
Know exactly when each economic indicator will be released. You can find these calendars at the New
York Federal Reserve Bank's site.

What does This Data Mean for the Economy?

You need not understand every nuance of each data release, but you should try to grasp key, large-scale
relationships between reports and what they measure in the economy. For example, you should know
which indicators measure the economy's growth (gross domestic product, or GDP) versus those that
measure inflation (PPI, CPI) or employment strength (non-farm payrolls).

Not All Economic Indicators can Move Markets

The market may pay attention to different indicators under different conditions. That focus can change
over time and from one currency to another. For example, if prices (inflation) are not a crucial issue for a
given country, but its economic growth is problematic, traders may pay less attention to inflation data
and focus on employment data or GDP reports.

Section 02 | Key drivers of currency movements

Economic indicators

What you need to know about them Part 2

Watch for the Unexpected

Often the data itself may not be as important as whether or not it falls within market expectations. If a
given report differs widely and unexpectedly from what economists and market pundits were
anticipating, market volatility and potential trading opportunities may result.
At the same time, be careful of pulling the trigger too quickly when an indicator falls outside expectations.
Each new economic indicator release contains revisions to previously released data. Read more about
this in the next section “Consensus Vs Actual numbers”.

Don't Get Caught Up in Details

While your macroeconomics professor may appreciate all the nuances of an economic report, traders
need to filter data to focus on the numbers that can inform their trading decisions.
For example, many new traders watch the headlines of the employment report, for example, assuming
that new jobs are key to economic growth. That may be true generally, but in trading terms non-farm
payroll is the figure traders watch most closely and therefore has the biggest impact on markets.
Similarly, PPI measures changes in producer prices generally - but traders tend to watch PPI excluding
food and energy as a market driver. Food and energy data tend to be much too volatile and
subject to revisions to provide an accurate reading on producer price changes.

There are Two Sides to Every Trade

Just remember that no trader's knowledge can be complete all the time. You might have a great handle
on economic data published in Europe - but there are times when data published in the U.S. or Australia
might have a surprising impact on your currency market. Doing your homework before trading any
currency can help you make better decisions.

Section 02 | Key drivers of currency movements

Economic indicators
Concensus Vs Actual numbers

Buy the rumors, sell on the news
This is a common phrase used in the forex market because often times it seems that when a news report
is released, the movement doesn’t match what the report would lead you to believe.
For example, let’s say that the U.S. unemployment rate is expected to increase. Imagine that last month
the unemployment rate was at 8.8% and the consensus for this upcoming report is 9.0%.
With a consensus at 9.0%, it means that all the big market players are anticipating a weaker U.S.
economy, and as a result, a weaker dollar.
So with this anticipation, big market players aren’t going to wait until the report is actually released to
start acting on taking a position. They will go ahead and start selling off their dollars for other currencies
before the actual number is released.
Now let’s say that the actual unemployment rate is released and as expected, it reports 9.0%.
As a retail trader, you see this and think “Okay, this is bad news for the U.S. It’s time to short the dollar!”
However, when you go to your trading platform to start selling the dollar, you see that the markets
aren’t exactly moving in the direction you thought it would. It’s actually moving up! What the heck!
Whyyyyyy??
This is because the big players have already adjusted their positions way before the news report even
came out and may now be taking profits after the run up to the news event.
Now let’s revisit this example, but this time, imagine that the actual report released an unemployment
rate of 8.0%. The market players thought the unemployment rate would rise to 9.0% because of the
consensus, but instead the report showed that the rate actually decreased, showing strength for the
dollar.
What you would see on your charts would be a huge dollar rally across the board because the big
market players didn’t expect this to happen. Now that the report is released and it says something
totally different from what they had anticipated, they are all trying to adjust their positions as fast as
possible.
This would also happen if the actual report released an unemployment rate of 10.0%. The only
difference would be that instead of the dollar rallying, it would drop like a rock!
Since the market consensus was 9.0% but the actual report showed a bigger 10.0% unemployment rate,
the big players would sell off more of their dollars because the U.S. looks a lot weaker now than when
the forecasts were first released.
It’s important to keep track of the market consensus and the actual numbers, you can better gauge
which news reports will actually cause the market to move and in what direction.
Reference: babybips

Section 02 | Key drivers of currency movements

How Geo-politics affect currency rates

Wars

Natural
disasters

About elections and
continuity

A surprise, strong showing for Sanders
"would have upset markets" by reducing the
likelihood of Clinton becoming the next
president, Lim Say Boon, chief investment
officer at DBS Bank Ltd. in Singapore, wrote
in a report. The Super Tuesday results are
being seen as "an outcome for continuity
over the disruption threatened by Trump
and Sanders," he said. You must remember
that investors hate uncertainty!

Dollar gains as new
Presidents get elected

Dollar gains as Reagan cuts taxes & Fed
raises interest rates. Similar effects have
occured with Clinton and Obama. For Trump
the upward trend was also there due to his
promise to lower taxes and increase
government spending on infrastrucure.

Political
unrest

Elections

Armed conflicts lead to
depreciation

An impending war tends to negatively affect
major currencies. Instability in the world
market prods investors to pull out of their
financial positions, leading to currency
depreciation.

Section 02 | Key drivers of currency movements

Market psychology

The golden rule of economic indicators
The currency rates often start moving even before the actual data
comes out due to forecasts and market sentiment!
Sentiment analysis is a kind of FX analysis that concentrates on indicating and consequently measuring
the overall psychological and emotional state of all participants of the foreign exchange market. This
kind of Forex analysis strives to quantify what percentage of FX market participants are bullish or
bearish, in other words being optimistic or pessimistic.
As already mentioned in the previous section“Concensus Vs Actual numbers” - Markets start moving
from expectations and forecasts that are also available in the economic calendars. If the forecast
promised a positive growth and the actual data comes out even better than forecasted, it amplifies the
rise of the currency even more.

Actual > Forecast = Good for currency

If the actual data comes out worse than expected, it creates a strong downward pressure on the
currency. Here is the rule to remember with financial reports:

$
¤

SECTION 03
FOREX TIMING

Section 03 | Forex timing

The importance of timing

Top 3 events when maximum volatility happens:

Why timing is important
The Foreign Exchange market operates 24
hours a day, making it nearly impossible
for a single trader to track every market
movement and respond immediately at
all times.
Timing is everything in currency trading. In
order to devise an effective and
time-efficient investment strategy, it is
important to understand how much
liquidity there is around the clock to
maximize the number of trading
opportunities during a trader's own
market hours.
Besides liquidity, a currency pair's trading
range is also heavily dependent on
geographical location and macroeconomic
factors.
Knowing what time of day a currency pair
has the highest or narrowest trading
volatility will undoubtedly help traders
improve their investment utility due to
better capital allocation.
High volatility offers lucrative profit
potentials to short-term traders. Lower
volatility (under 80 pips per day) is better
for risk-averse traders, because there are
less iregular market movements caused by
aggressive intraday speculation.

1. Overlap between two
sessions

Generally, whenever there is an overlap in
the market e.g Japan/London and
London/Newyork Session, there is always an
amount of volatility that accompanies such
period. For instance, every morning during
London Open session. Euro pairs are active
and if you have a good strategy, you could
get 20-30 pips.

2. News Release

Fundamentals drive the market. During
News Release, volatility is experienced and
some pairs could move over 100 pips
depending on the type of news. For example
Non-Farm Payroll is the most volatile news
release and dollar based currency pairs
could move hundreds of pips in seconds.
However, trading news is risky if you are not
knowledgeable about it.

3. Central Bank
Govenor's Speech

Speeches from these guys could make pairs
go hundred's of pips and even change
market sentiment with effects lasting into
months. However, its risky to trade these
speeches except you are subscribed to some
feed/signal service and get the news before
others.

Section 03 | Forex timing

What Are the Best Times to Trade Forex
We strongly advice you to avoid all resources that
tell you Forex market is a fairy-tale place where
you can trade 24/7! The timing in forex trading is
crucial!
The Forex market is open 24 hours a day, but it is
not active all this time! In Forex trading money is
made when the market is active (when traders are
bidding on the prices) so it is crucial for you to
learn about the most productive hours of the day
and of the week for trading the forex!
There are three major trading sessions of the Forex
market: London, US and Tokyo session. The
busiest times are when the sessions overlap as

traders can then purchase currencies from
different continents. The Forex market of London
is usually the most active as it involves many
countries of the European Union. The US market
comes next, so the time when the London session
intersects with the US session usually provides the
biggest returns. Expert traders consider 10 AM to
be the best time as this is the period when the
London market is preparing to close the trades
and traders are getting ready to move to US
market. This creates big swings in currency prices
thus opening great opportunities for profit.

The best time of the day to trade forex
Download Forex Hero app to see
the hours in your time zone!

$
€

0
:0
21

0
:0

0
:0
19

20

:0
18

0

:0
17

0

:0
16

0

:0
15

0

:0
14

0

:0
13

0

:0
12

0

:0
11

0

:0
10

0

:0
09

0

:0
08

0

:0
07

0

:0
06

0

:0
05

0

:0
04

0

:0
03

0

:0
02

0

:0
01

0

:0
24

0

:0
23

0

:0
22

0

EST time

London
New York
Sidney
Tokio

The best time of the week to trade forex
According to research, the biggest movement in the four major currency pairs (EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
USD/JPY, USD/CHF) is observed on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. Fridays are busy as well, but only until
12:00 PM and during the second half of the day the movements can be very unpredictable.

Best time
MON

TUE

WED

THU

FRI

SAT

SUN

Section 03 | Forex timing

When NOT to trade forex
Save your money and keep your nerves by not trading at the wrong time.
While it is crucial to understand when is the best time to analyze the charts
and make the bids, it is equally important to know when NOT to open
positions.
An inactive (often called “thin”) market offers smaller movements of rates, thus smaller potential profits.
A thin market also comes with higher commissions (spreads) for each trade due to the decreased
liquidity. In simple words: if you want to sell a currency, it is harder to find potential buyers, so the
broker or bank must increase the commission as it takes a risk of not finding a buyer so quickly.
A good example of chaotic trading is shortly before, during and shortly after important news events. In
these times of uncertainty, the currency rates can swing wildly and unpredictably, thus messing up
trading by creating execution lags, triggering stop-loss orders, etc.
So here are some examples of when you should at least be careful when trading:

1

Friday afternoon &
weekends

6

Primetime TV
events

2

Trading session
closing time

7

Asian sessions

3

Important news
events

8

When angry or
frustrated

4

Bank holidays

9

Overnight

5

End of December

If you want to know the WHY behind these
points - download the forex hero app here.

Section 03 | Forex timing

When & why do spreads tighten
Why do spreads widen/tighten?
In a well-functioning financial market, where prices are dictated by various market participants (and not
by a single entity/market maker), instruments do not have fixed bid/ask spreads. Usually, the higher the
liquidity, the lower the volatility, and therefore the tighter the spread (Spread is like a commission that
you pay for the trade).
So highly liquid currency majors such as EUR/USD and USD/JPY have tighter spreads than exotic pairs
such as USD/RUB or USD/ZAR.
However, even major pairs can experience wider than normal spreads during volatile periods, such as
interest rates announcements, GDP reports, unemployment figures, to name a few examples. There
will also be wider spreads during off market hours, when there is only a fraction of the participants in
the market, so the liquidity is lower. This can be seen when the markets open for the Asian
session, at 21:00 GMT Sunday, for example.
This widening occurs typically around news announcements or off-market hours. Most forex
brokers allow you to trade all weekend, but spreads will be significantly wider during weekends
when liquidity is almost non-existent.
Dealing desk or market making brokers are going to widen their spreads coming into economic
announcements to offset the risk they take on by filling orders. Unfortunately, banks do the same thing,
so an average forex broker could be better, but only marginally.

What happens before or during important
announcements.
The volatility jumps before important anouncements and the drastic movements can hit the
stop-losses, resulting in a lost trade and investment.
wild swings
based on
rumours etc.
you go
long on
eur/usd

stop-loss level

Fed announcement

Section 03 | Forex timing

How to trade during the news events
A pro trader about hitting stop loss when spreads widen
This is not so much of a problem for me as I don't use stops for exits, just emergency measure that
generally never gets hit. So I generally close the position or wait out the increased spread (unless it is
really pumping).
If you do use stops for exits, just be aware of your stop size as you will have to widen it just before
news announcement if you don't want to get taken out at the exact place you had predicted would
serve as S/R (hence your stop placement just below this level).
This should not be a problem if you are trading the higher time frames as your stop will probably be
quite large and so increasing it by 5 or 10 pips probably won't be too significant risk increase (better yet factor in the widened spread when you calculate your position size as you know that if the trade works
out you will be holding for a few days or more, in which time there will be anouncements) . If you can't
be at your computer when the news anuncement hits, I would suggest leaving your stop wider
for the periods that you can't manage the trade (unless there are no announcements over that
period).
If you are trading lower time frames however, your stops will inevitably be smaller and the increase in
stop size may substantially increase your risk. In this case, you may have to decide to close the
position before the anouncment or close enough of the position so that the increased stop will
equal the same loss as the originally intended loss. But make no mistake - you will have to widen
your stop. The spread will get you. Even if the announcement is in your favour, price generally
whips up and down at least a few pips before taking direction. If your stop is anywhere near price
just prior to news, chances are you will be taken out not matter what the result. Just be aware of the
anouncement times and factor this in when deciding wether or not to take a trade.

Real-life example of a killed stop-loss order due to the volatilty of a news event

$
¤

SECTION 04
TIME FRAMES

Section 04 | Time frames

Multiple time frame analysis
The market can be analysed in several time frames: 10 minutes, hours, days, weeks. It may often
seem that these indicators are contradictory. However, they aren’t, you just need to combine
their readings. Analyses of longer time periods show tendencies, ignoring accidental changes,
whereas daily, hourly ir minute graphs help in choosing the moment to open and close
positions.
Example

Multiple time frame analysis
time
X

Let us look at a daily graph. What
do most traders do when they
see such a curve? They assume
that it’s the beginning of a
downward trend and bid on the
drop of the currency exchange
rate. And they’re wrong!

1600

1550

3

10

17

24

1500

November

time
X
1900

Now let’s look at the same
currency over a longer period of
time.

1600

We see that the daily shift was
inconsequential to the long-term
tendency as it is upward and not
the other way around.

1300

Aug

Sep

Okt

Nov

Conclusion

For successful and precise market analysis, you must use at least 2-3 time frames!

Dec

Section 04 | Time frames

Time frame choice of pros
The shortest time frame that traders should start looking
at when their trading day starts are daily charts, even if
you are trading on a 5-minute time frame!
The most common form of multiple time frame analysis is to use daily charts to identify the overall trend
and then use the hourly charts to determine specific entry levels.

1 DAY

1HOUR

Is it possible to analyze and trade forex using a single
time frame?
It’s possible, but it requires a very good amount of skill and practice.
As a matter of principle, all good traders I know use 2–3 time frames (3 being the best) spaced enough so
that each timeframe above encompasses 4–8 bars from the lower time frame. In example: Month =>
Week => Day, Day => 6h => 1h or Day => 4h => 1h / 30m and so on.
Those who can perform an analysis on one time frame are those who have got a lot of “screen time” and
became trained at understanding the long term price motions by looking at a lower time frame chart.
It’s plenty possible but personally it took me 2 years to learn that. Even then, I prefer to switch to the
other time frames to be really sure about what to do.

$
¤

SECTION 05
FUNDAMENTAL
& TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Section 05 | Fundamental & technical analysis

Fundamental & Tecnhical analysis

What is Fundamental Analysis

Fundamental analysis studies the core underlying elements that influence the economy of a particular
entity, like a stock or currency. It attempts to predict price action and trends by analyzing economic
indicators, government policy, societal and other factors within a business cycle framework.
If you think of the markets as a big clock, fundamentals are the gears and springs that move the hands
around the face. Anyone can tell you what time it is now, but the fundamentalist knows about the inner
workings that move the clock's hands towards times (or prices) in the future.

What is Technical Analysis

Unlike fundamental analysis, technical analysis focuses on the study of price movements. Technical
analysts use historical currency data to forecast the direction of future prices. The underlying belief
behind technical analysis is that all current market information is already reflected in the price of that
currency; therefore, studying price action is all that is required to make informed trading decisions. In a
nutshell, technical analysis assumes that history will repeat itself.
