All traders who win consistently over the long mn have an edge. However, that edge may vary
significantly from trade to trade. It can be mathematically demonstrated that in any wager game with varying
probabilities, winnings are maximized by adjusting the bet size in accordance with the perceived chance for a
successful outcome. Optimal blackjack betting strategy provides a perfect illustration of this concept (see Hull
chapter).
If the trader has some idea as to which trades have a greater edge- say, for example, based on a higher
confidence level (assuming that is a reliable indicator)-then it makes sense to be more aggressive in these
situations. As Druckenmiller expresses it, "The way to build [superior] long-term returns is through
preservation of capital and home runs.... When you have tremendous conviction on a trade, you have to go
for the jugular. It takes courage to be a pig." For a number of Market Wizards, keen judgment as to when to
really step on the accelerator and the courage to do so have been instrumental to their achieving exceptional
(as opposed to merely good) returns.
Some of the traders interviewed mentioned that they varied their trading size in accordance with how they
were doing. For example, McKay indicated that it was not uncommon for him to vary his position size by as
much as a factor of one hundred to one. He finds this approach helps him reduce risk during losing periods
while enhancing profits during the winning periods.
22. SCALING IN AND OUT OF TRADES
You don't have to get in or out of a position all at once. Scaling in and out of positions provides the
flexibility of fine-tuning trades and broadens the set of alternative choices. Most traders sacrifice this
flexibility without a second thought because of the innate human desire to be completely right. (By definition,
a scaling approach means that some portions of a trade will be entered or exited at worse prices than other
portions.) As one example of the potential benefits of scaling, Lip-schutz noted that it has enabled him to
stay with long-term winners much longer than he has seen most traders stay with their positions.
23. BEING RIGHT IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN BEING A GENIUS
I think one reason why so many people try to pick tops and bottoms is that they want to prove to the
world how smart they are. Think about winning rather than being a hero. Forget trying to judge trading
success by how close you can come to picking major tops and bottoms, but rather by how well you can pick
individual trades with merit based on favorable risk/return situations and a good percentage of winners. Go
for consistency on a trade-to-trade basis, not perfect trades.
24. DON'T WORRY ABOUT LOOKING STUPID
Last week you told everyone at the office, "My analysis has just given me a great buy signal in the S&P.
The market is going to a new high." Now as you examine the market action since then, something appears to
be wrong. Instead of rallying, the market is breaking down. Your gut tells you that the market is vulnerable.
Whether you realize it or not, your announced prognostications are going to color your objectivity. Why?
Because you don't want to look stupid after telling the world that the market was going to a new high.
Consequently, you are likely to view the market's action in the most favorable light possible. "The market
isn't breaking down, it's just a pullback to knock out the weak longs." As a result of this type of
rationalization, you end up holding a losing position far too long. There is an easy solution to this problem:
Don't talk about your position.
What if your job requires talking about your market opinions (as mine does)? Here the rule is: Whenever
you start worrying about contradicting your previous opinion, view that concern as reinforcement to reverse
your market stance. As a personal example, m early 1991 I came to the conclusion that the dollar had
formed a major bottom. I specifically remember one talk in which an audience member asked me about my

177

178
outlook for currencies. I responded by boldly
predicting that the dollar would head higher for years.
Several months later, when the dollar surrendered the entire gain it had realized following the news of the
August 1991 Soviet coup before the coup's failure was confirmed, I sensed that something was wrong. I
recalled my many predictions over the preceding months in which I had stated that the dollar would go up for
years. The discomfort and embarrassment I felt about these previous forecasts told me it was time to change
my opinion.
In my earlier years in the business, I invariably tried to rationalize my original market opinion in such
situations. I was burned enough times that I eventually learned a lesson. In the above example, the abandonment of my original projection was fortunate, because the dollar collapsed in the ensuing months.
25. SOMETIMES ACTION IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN PRUDENCE
Waiting for a price correction to enter the market may sound prudent, but it is often the wrong thing to
do. When your analysis, methodology, or gut tells you to get into a trade at the market instead of waiting for
a correction-do so. Caution against the influence of knowing that you could have gotten in at a better price in
recent sessions, particularly in those situations when the market witnesses a sudden, large move (often due
to an important surprise news item). If you don't feel the market is going to correct, that consideration is
irrelevant. These types of trades often work because they are so hard to do. As a perfect example, recall the
willingness of the trader in Lipschutz's group to aggressively sell the dollar into a collapsing market following
the G-7 meeting. Another example of this principle is Driehaus's willingness to buy a stock heavily after it is
already up very sharply on a bullish earnings report if he feels the new information implies the stock will go
still higher.
26. CATCHING PART OF THE MOVE IS JUST FINE
Just because you missed the first major portion of a new trend, don't let that keep you from trading with
that trend (as long as you can define a reasonable stop-loss point). Recall McKay's observation that the
easiest part of a trend is the middle portion, which implies always missing part of the trend prior to entry.
27. MAXIMIZE GAINS, NOT THE NUMBER OF WINS
Eckhardt explains that human nature does not operate to maximize gain but rather the chance of a gain.
The problem with this is that it implies a lack of focus on the magnitudes of gains (and losses)-a flaw that
leads to nonoptimal performance results. Eckhardt bluntly concludes: "The success rate of trades is the least
important performance statistic and may even be inversely related to performance." Yass echoes a similar
theme: "The basic concept that applies to both poker and option trading is that the primary object is not
winning the most hands, but rather maximizing your gains."
28. LEARN TO BE DISLOYAL
Loyalty may be a virtue in family, friends, and pets, but it is a fatal flaw for a trader. Never have loyalty to
a position. The novice trader will have lots of loyalty to his original position. He will ignore signs that he is on
the wrong side of the market, riding his trade into a large loss while hoping for the best. The more
experienced trader, having learned the importance of money management, will exit quickly once it is
apparent he has made a bad trade. However, the truly skilled trader will be able to do a ISO-degree turn,
reversing his position at a loss if market behavior points to such a course of action. Recall Dmckenmiller's illtimed reversal from short to long on the very day before the October 19, 1987 crash. His ability to quickly
recognize his error and, more important, to unhesitatingly act on that realization by reversing back to short
at a large loss helped transform a potentially disastrous month into a net profitable one.
29. PULL OUT PARTIAL PROFITS
Pull a portion of winnings out of the market to prevent trading discipline from deteriorating into
complacency. It is far too easy to rationalize overtrading and procrastination in liquidating losing trades by
saying, "It's only profits." Profits withdrawn from an account are much more likely to be viewed as real
money.
30. HOPE IS A FOUR-LETTER WORD
Hope is a dirty word for a trader, not only in regards to procrastinating in a losing position, hoping the
market will come back, but also in terms of hoping for a reaction that will allow for a better entry in a missed
trade. If such trades are good, the hoped-for reaction will not materialize until it is too late. Often the only
way to enter such trades is to do so as soon as a reasonable stop-loss point can be identified.
31. DON'T DO THE COMFORTABLE THING
Eckhardt offers the rather provocative proposition that the human tendency to select comfortable choices
will lead most people to experience worse than random results. In effect, he is saying that natural human
traits lead to such poor trading decisions that most people would be better off flipping coins or throwing
darts. Some of the examples Eckhardt cites of the comfortable choices people tend to make that run counter
to sound trading principles include: gambling with losses, locking in sure winners, selling on strength and
buying on weakness, and designing (or buying) trading systems that have been overfitted to past price
behavior. The implied message to the trader is: Do what is right, not what feels comfortable.

178

179
32. YOU CAN'T WIN IF YOU HAVE TO WIN
There is an old Wall Street adage: "Scared money never wins." The reason is quite simple: If you are
risking money you can't afford to lose, all the emotional pitfalls of trading will be magnified. Druckenmiller's
"betting the ranch" on one trade, in a last-ditch effort to save his firm, is a perfect example of the above
aphorism. Even though he came within one week of picking the absolute bottom in the T-bill market, he still
lost all his money. The need to win fosters trading errors (e.g., excessive leverage and a lack of planning in
the example just cited). The market seldom tolerates the carelessness associated with trades bom of
desperation.
33. THINK TWICE WHEN THE MARKET LETS YOU OFF THE HOOK EASILY
Don't be too eager to get out of a position you have been worried at>out if the market allows you to exit
at a much better price than anticipated. If you had been worried about an adverse overnight (or over-theweekend) price move because of a news event or a technical price failure on the previous close, it is likely
that many other traders shared this concern. The fact that the market does not follow through much on these
fears strongly suggests that there must be some very powerful underlying forces in favor of the direction of
the original position. This concept, which was first proposed by Marty Schwartz in Market Wizards, was
illustrated in this volume by the manner in which Lipschutz exited the one trade he admitted had scared him.
In that instance, he held an enormous short dollar position in the midst of a strongly rallying market and had
to wait for the Tokyo opening to find sufficient liquidity to exit his position. When the dollar opened weaker
than expected in Tokyo, he didn't just dump his position m relief; rather, his trader's instincts told him to
delay liquidation-a decision that resulted in a far better exit price.
34. A MIND IS A TERRIBLE THING TO CLOSE
Open-mindedness seems to be a common trait among those who excel at trading. For example, Blake's
entry into trading was actually an attempt to demonstrate to a friend that prices were random. When he
realized he was wrong, he became a trader. Driehaus says that the mind is like a parachute; it's good only
when it's open.
35. THE MARKETS ARE AN EXPENSIVE PLACE TOLOOKFOR EXCITEMENT
Excitement has a lot to do with the image of trading but nothing to do with success in trading (except in
an inverse sense). In Market Wizards, Larry Hite described his conversation with a friend who couldn't understand his absolute adherence to a computerized trading system. His friend asked, "Larry, how can you trade
the way you do. Isn't it boring?" Larry replied, "I don't trade for excitement; I trade to win." This passage
came to mind when Faulkner described the trader who blew out because he found it too boring to be trading
in the way that produced profits.
36. THE CALM STATE OF A TRADER
If there is an emotional state associated with successful trading, it is the antithesis of excitement. Based
on his observations, Faulkner stated that exceptional traders are able to remain calm and detached
regardless of what the markets are doing. He describes Peter Steidlmayer's response to a position that is
going against him as being typified by the thought, "Hmmm, look at that." Basso also talks directly about the
benefits of a detached perspective in trading: "If instead of saying, 'I'm going to do this trade,' you say, 'I'm
going to watch myself do this trade,' alt of a sudden you find that the process is a lot easier."
37. IDENTIFY AND ELIMINATE STRESS
Stress in trading is a sign that something is wrong. If you feel stress, think about the cause, and then act
to eliminate the problem. For example, let's say you determine that the greatest source of stress is indecision
in getting out of a losing position. One way to solve this problem is simply to enter a protective stop order
every time you put on a position.
I will give you a personal example. One of the elements of my job is providing trading recommendations
to brokers in my company. This task is very similar to trading, and, having done both, I believe it's actually
more difficult than trading. At one point, after years of net profitable recommendations, I hit a bad streak. I
just couldn't do anything right. When I was right about the direction of the market, my buy recommendation
was just a bit too low (or my sell price too high). When I got in and the direction was right, I got stopped
out-frequently within a few ticks of the extreme of the reaction.
I responded by developing a range of computerized trading programs and technical indicators, thereby
widely diversifying the trading advice I provided to the firm. I still made my day-to-day subjective calls on
the market, but everything was no longer riding on the accuracy of these recommendations. By widely
diversifying the trading-related advice and information, and transferring much of this load to mechanical
approaches, I was able to greatly diminish a source of persona] siress-and improve the quality of the
research product in the process.
38. PAY ATTENTION TO INTUITION
As I see it, intuition is simply experience that resides in the subconscious mind. The objectivity of the
market analysis done by the conscious mind can be compromised by all sorts of extraneous considerations
(e.g., one's current market position, a resistance to change a previous forecast). The subconscious, however,
is not inhibited by such constraints. Unfortunately, we can't readily tap into our subconscious thoughts.

179

180
However, when they come through as intuition, the
trader needs to pay attention. As the anonymous
trader in Zen and the Art of Trading expressed it, "The trick is to differentiate between what you want to
happen and what you know will happen."
39. LIFE'S MISSION AND LOVE OF THE ENDEAVOR
In talking to the traders interviewed in this book, I had the definite sense that many of them felt that
trading was what they were meant to do-in essence, their mission in life. Recall Charles Faulkner's quote of
John Grinder's description of mission: "What do you love so much that you would pay to do it?" Throughout
my interviews, I was struck by the exuberance and love the Market Wizards had for trading. Many used
gamelike analogies to describe trading. This type of love for the endeavor may indeed be an essential
element for success.
40. THE ELEMENTS OF ACHIEVEMENT
Faulkner's list of the six key steps to achievement based on Gary Faris's study of successfully rehabilitated
athletes appears to apply equally well to the goal of achieving trading success. These strategies include the
following:
1. using both 'Toward" and "Away From" motivation;
2. having a goal of full capability plus, with anything less being unacceptable;
3. breaking down potentially overwhelming goals into chunks, with satisfaction garnered from the
completion of each individual step;
4. keeping full concentration on the present moment-that is, the single task at hand rather than the longterm goal;
5. being personally involved in achieving goals (as opposed to depending on others); and
6. making self-to-self comparisons to measure progress.
41. PRICES ARE NONRANDOM = THE MARKETS CAN BE BEAT
In reference to academicians who believe market prices are random, Trout says, 'That's probably why
they're professors and why I'm making money doing what I'm doing." The debate over whether prices are
random is not yet over. However, my experience with the interviews conducted for this book and its
predecessor leaves me with little doubt that the random walk theory is wrong. It is not the magnitude of the
winnings registered by the Market Wizards but the consistency of these winnings in some cases that underpin
my belief. As a particularly compelling example, consider Blake's 25:1 ratio of winning to losing months and
his average annual return of 45 percent compared with a worst drawdown of only 5 percent. It is hard to
imagine that results this lopsided could occur purely by chance-perhaps in a universe filled with traders, but
not in their more finite numbers. Certainly, winning at the markets is not easy-and, m fact, it is getting more
difficult as professionals account for a constantly growing proportion of the activity- but it can be done!
42. KEEP TRADING IN PERSPECTIVE
There is more to life than trading.

180

181
A Personal Reflection
I am frequently asked whether writing this volume and the first Market Wizards helped me become a
better trader. The answer is yes, but not in the way people expect when they ask the question. No trader
revealed to me any great market secrets or master plan unlocking the grand design of the markets. (If this is
what you seek, don't despair, the answer is readily available-just check the ads in any financial periodical.)
For me, the single most important lesson provided by the interviews is that it is absolutely necessary to adopt
a trading approach precisely suited to one's own personality. Over the years, I have come to clearly realize
mat what I really like about this business is trying to solve this master puzzle: How do you win in the
markets? You have all these pieces, and you can put them together in a limitless number of ways, bounded
only by your creativity. Moreover, to keep the game interesting, there are lots of pitfalls to lead you astray,
and some of the rules keep changing in subtle ways. There is even a group of very intelligent people telling
you that the game can't be won at all. The really fascinating thing is that, as complex as this puzzle is, there
are a multitude of totally different solutions, and there are always better solutions. Trying to solve this
wonderful puzzle is what I enjoy.
On the other hand, I have also come to realize that I do not like the trading aspect at all. I do not enjoy
the emotionality of making intraday trading decisions. When I am losing, I am upset, and when I am on a hot
streak, I am anxious because I know I can't keep it up. In short, it is not my style. In contrast, there are
people who thrive on and excel at the actual trading. One person who in my mind epitomizes this type of
approach is Paul Tudor Jones, whom I interviewed in Market Wizards. When you watch Paul trade, you can
see he's really charged by the activity. He bubbles over with energy, taking in information from a hundred
different directions and making instantaneo-us trading decisions. He seems to love it, as if it were some
challenging sport. And loving it is probably why he is so good at it.
For many years, I participated in both descretionary trading and system trading. It is, perhaps, no
coincidence that in the course of working on this book, I came to the conclusion that it "was system trading
that suited my personality. Once I increased my efforts and commitment to system trading, my progress
accelerated and I felt that the approach fit like a glove.
It took me over a decade to figure out my natural direction. I'd suggest that you take the time to seriously
ponder whether the path you are on is the one you want to be on. Perhaps your journey will then be
shortened.

181

182
Appendix: Options - Understanding the

Basics

There are two basic types of options: calls and puts.
The purchase of a call option provides the buyer with the right-but not the obligation-to purchase the
underlying item at a specified price, called the strike price or exercise price, at any time up to and including
the expiration date. A put option provides the buyer with the right-but not the obligation-to sell the
underlying item at the strike price at any time prior to expiration. (Note, therefore, that buying a put is a
bearish trade, whereas selling a put is a bullish trade.) The price of an option is called a premium. As an
example of an option, an IBM April 130 call gives the purchaser the right to buy 100 shares of IBM at $130
per share at any time during the life of the option. The buyer of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated
price rise by locking in a specified purchase price. The call buyer's maximum possible loss will be equal to the
dollar amount of the premium paid for the option. This maximum loss would occur on an option held until
expiration if the strike price were above the prevailing market price. For example, if IBM were trading at $125
when the 130 option expired, the option would expire worthless. If at expiration the price of the underlying
market was above the strike price, the option would have some value and would hence be exercised.
However, if the difference between the market price and the strike price were less than the premium paid for
the option, the net result of the trade would still be a loss. In order for a call buyer to realize a net profit, the
difference between the market price and the strike price would have to exceed the premium paid when the
call was purchased (after adjusting for commission cost). The higher the market price, the greater the
resulting profit.
The buyer of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated price decline by locking in a sales price. Like the call
buyer, his maximum possible loss is limited to the dollar amount of the premium paid for (he option. In the
case of a put held until expiration, the trade would show a net profit if the strike price exceeded the market
price by an amount greater than the premium of the put at purchase (after adjusting for commission cost).
Whereas the buyer of a call or put has limited risk and unlimited potential gain, the reverse is true for the
seller. The option seller (often called the writer) receives the dollar value of the premium in return for
undertaking the obligation to assume an opposite position at the strike price if an option is exercised. For
example, if a call is exercised, the seller must assume a short position in the underlying market at the strike
price (because, by exercising the call, the buyer assumes a long position at that price).
The seller of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated sideways to modestly declining market. In such a
situation, the premium earned by selling a call provides the most attractive trading opportunity. However, if
the trader expected a large price decline, he would usually be better off going short the underlying market or
buying a put-trades with open-ended profit potential. In a similar fashion, the seller of a put seeks to profit
from an anticipated sideways to modestly rising market.
Some novices have trouble understanding why a trader would not always prefer the buy side of the option
(call or put, depending on market opinion), since such a trade has unlimited potential and limited risk. Such
confusion reflects the failure to take probability into account. Although the optipn seller's theoretical risk is
unlimited, the price levels that have the greatest probability of occurrence (i.e., prices in the vicinity of the
market price when the option trade occurs) would result in a net gain to the option seller. Roughly speaking,
the option buyer accepts a large probability of a small loss in return for a small probability of a large gain,
whereas the option seller accepts a small probability of a large loss in exchange for a large probability of a
small gain. In an efficient market, neither the consistent option buyer nor the consistent option seller should
have any significant advantage over the long mn.
The option premium consists of two components: intrinsic value plus time value. The intrinsic value of a
call option is the amount by which the current market price is above the strike price. (The intrinsic value of a
put option is the amount by which the current market price is below the strike price.) In effect, the intrinsic
value is that part of the premium that could be realized if the option were exercised at the current market
price. The intrinsic value serves as a floor price for an option. Why? Because if the premium were less than
the intrinsic value, a trader could buy and exercise the option and immediately offset the resulting market
position, thereby realizing a net gain (assuming that the trader covers at least transaction costs).
Options that have intrinsic value (i.e., calls with strike prices below the market price and puts with strike
prices above the market price) are said to be in the money. Options that have no intrinsic value are called
out-of-the-money options. Options with a strike price closest to the market price are called at-the-money
options.
An out-of-the-money option, which by definition has an intrinsic value equal to zero, will still have some
value because of the possibility that the market price will move beyond the strike price prior to the expiration
date. An in-the-money option will have a value greater than the intrinsic value because a position in the
option will be preferred to a position in the underlying market. Why? Because both the option and the market
position will gain equally in the event of a favorable price movement, but the option's maximum loss is
limited. The portion of the premium that exceeds the intrinsic value is called the time value.
The three most important factors that influence an option's time value are the following:
1. Relationship between the strike price and market price-Deeply out-of-the-money options will have little
