else’s money for free, just the kind of idea that appealed to him.
GEICO seemed to Warren a no-lose proposition.
That Monday, less than forty-eight hours after he arrived back in New York, Warren dumped stocks worth
three-quarters of his growing portfolio and used the cash to buy 350 shares of GEICO. It was an
extraordinary move for the normally cautious young man.
That was especially true because, at its current price, GEICO was an investment that Ben Graham would not
have approved of, even though Graham-Newman had only recently become its largest shareholder. Graham’s
idea was to buy stocks trading for less than the value of their assets, and he did not believe in concentrating
in just a few stocks. But Warren was amazed by what he had learned from Lorimer Davidson. GEICO was
growing so fast that he felt confident of being able to predict what it would be worth in a few years. On that
basis, it was cheap. He wrote a report about it for his father’s stockbrokerage firm, saying that GEICO was
trading at $42 per share, a multiple of about eight times its recent earnings per share. Other insurance
companies, he noted, were selling at much higher multiples of their earnings. Yet GEICO was a small
company in a large field, whereas its competitors were companies “whose growth possibilities have largely
been exhausted.” Warren then made a conservative projection of the company’s value in five years. He
thought the stock would be worth between $80 and $90 per share.27
A less Graham-like analysis could hardly be imagined. Graham’s 1920s bubble and Depression experiences
had made him suspicious of earnings projections, so suspicious that while he paid lip service to this method of
valuation in his teaching, he never used it himself in valuing stocks to buy for his firm. But Warren was
betting three-quarters of his patiently accumulated money on the numbers he had calculated.
In April, he wrote to Geyer & Co. and Blythe and Company, the most prominent brokerage firms specializing
in insurance stocks, asking for their research. Next he visited these experts to talk to them about GEICO.
After he heard their views, he explained his own theory.
They told Warren he was nuts.
GEICO, they said, could not succeed over the larger, more established companies that used agents. It was a
tiny company, with a market share of less than one percent. Huge insurance companies with thousands of
agents dominated the industry, and so it would ever be. Yet here was GEICO, growing like a dandelion in
June and printing money like the U.S. Mint.
Warren didn’t understand why they couldn’t see what was right before their eyes.

17
Mount Everest
New York City • Spring 1951

As his second semester began at Columbia, Warren hummed with excitement. His father had just been
reelected to Congress for a fourth time—by the largest majority yet—and he was finally going to meet his
hero.
In his memoir, Ben Graham describes himself as a loner who never had an intimate friend after high school:
“I was cut out to be everybody’s friend but no one’s bosom pal or crony.”1 “Nobody cracked his shell. Men
all admired him, they all liked him, and they all wanted to be his friend more than he wanted them to be.

You came away feeling terrific about him, but you never got to be his pal.” Buffett would later call this
Graham’s “protective coating.” Even his partner David Dodd never became an intimate. Graham had great
difficulty in understanding and empathizing with others. People found him almost painful to talk to—so
cerebral, so erudite, so clever. He was not relaxing to be around; people had to keep their wits about them all
the time in his company. While he was always kind, he quickly tired of conversing with his fellow human
beings; the “real friends and intimates” of his life were his favorite authors—Gibbon, Virgil, Milton,
Lessing—and their subjects, which, he said, “had far more significance for me and left a greater impression
on my memory than the living people around me.”
Born Benjamin Grossbaum,2 Graham passed his first twenty-five years in a period when the country
experienced four financial panics and three depressions.3 His family’s fortune dwindled after his father’s
death when Ben was nine; his worldly, ambitious mother lost most of her own small stake in the stock-market
panic of 1907, and she wound up having to pawn her jewelry. One of Graham’s earliest memories was
standing at a bank teller window, trying to cash his mother’s check as the teller audibly asked a colleague
whether Mrs. Grossbaum was good for five dollars. During this time, Graham recalled, the family was saved
through the charity of relatives “from misery, though not from humiliation.”4
Nonetheless, Ben excelled throughout his education in the New York City public schools, where he read
Victor Hugo in French, Goethe in German, Homer in Greek, and Virgil in Latin. Upon graduation, he wanted
to attend Columbia University but needed financial aid. When the scholarship examiner visited the
Grossbaums, he turned Ben down. Ben’s mother was convinced that he did so because the family still clung
to a few Louis XVI chairs and some other fine pieces of furniture, despite its reduced circumstances. Ben,
however, was sure the examiner had detected a “secret deformity” in his soul: “For years I had been
struggling against something the French call mauvaises habitudes [bad habits, a euphemism for
masturbation], and which a combination of innate puritanism on my part and the hair-raising health tracts
prevalent in those days had raised to a moral and physical issue of enormous proportions.”5
Graham and his bad habits wound up at tuition-free City College, bereft and broke, convinced that a degree
from this school would not advance him in the snobbish, cultivated world to which he aspired. The last straw
came when two borrowed books were stolen from his locker and he had to pay to replace them. He had no
pocket money at all. He dropped out, got a job assembling doorbells, and recited the Aeneid and the Rubáiyát
to himself as he worked. Eventually, he reapplied to Columbia and this time was given the scholarship that
had earlier been denied him—through a clerical error, it turned out. At Columbia, he became an academic
star, even while working at a variety of menial jobs to help pay his expenses. Checking waybills, he would
mentally compose sonnets for distraction. On graduation, he turned down a scholarship to law school as well
as offers from three different departments—to teach philosophy, mathematics, and English—in order to
follow his dean’s advice and go into the advertising business.6
Graham’s sense of humor always tended toward irony. His first effort at writing a jingle for the nonflammable
cleaning fluid Carbona was rejected as too frightening to customers when he produced this limerick:
There was a young girl from Winona
Who never had heard of Carbona
She started to clean
With a can of benzene
And now her poor parents bemoan her.
After this episode, Columbia’s Dean Keppel recommended Graham for a job at the brokerage house
Newburger, Henderson & Loeb. Graham said of Wall Street, “I knew it only by hearsay and in novels as a
place of drama and excitement. I felt the urge to participate in its mysterious rituals and momentous events.”
He started in 1914 on the bottom rung of the Wall Street ladder, earning $12 a week as a runner. Then he
worked as an assistant board boy, scurrying to and fro in a customer’s room, changing stock prices on a
chalkboard. Graham parlayed these jobs into a career through a classic Wall Street maneuver: He did
research on the side, until one day a floor broker gave a report he had written—negatively appraising the

bonds of the Missouri Pacific Railroad—to a partner at Bache & Company, which hired him as a
statistician.7 Later, he returned to Newburger, Henderson & Loeb as a partner, where he remained until
1923. Then, a group of financial backers, including members of the Rosenwald family (early partners in
Sears), lured him away by providing him with starting capital of $250,000, which enabled him to go out on his
own.
Graham closed this business in 1925 when he and his backers disagreed over his compensation, and
established the “Benjamin Graham Joint Account” on January 1, 1926, with $450,000 from clients and his
own money. Shortly afterward, Jerome Newman, the brother of one of his clients, offered to make an
investment in the firm and join Graham as a partner at no salary until he learned the business and added
value. Graham, however, insisted on paying him, modestly at first, and Newman brought to the partnership a
broad general knowledge of business as well as management skills.
In 1932, Graham wrote a series of articles in Forbes, “Is American Business Worth More Dead Than Alive?”
in which he chastised company managements for sitting on troves of cash and investments, and investors for
overlooking this value, which was not reflected in the prices of stocks. Graham knew how to dislodge the
value, but his problem was capital. Through its stock-market losses, the firm’s account was down from $2.5
million to $375,000.*13 Graham felt responsible for recouping his partners’ losses, but that meant he would
have to more than triple their money. It would take some doing even to keep the Joint Account alive. Jerry
Newman’s father-in-law saved it by putting in $50,000. And by December 1935, Graham did triple the
money, and earned the losses back.
For tax reasons, in 1936 Graham and Newman reorganized the Joint Account into two businesses—GrahamNewman Corporation, and Newman & Graham.8 Graham-Newman charged a fixed fee and had issued shares
to the public which now traded on an exchange. Newman & Graham was a “hedge fund,” or private
partnership with a limited number of sophisticated partners, that paid Graham and Newman based on their
performance as managers.
The two men remained partners for thirty years, although in his memoir, Graham cited Jerry Newman’s “lack
of amiability,” his demanding, impatient, and fault-finding personality, and his inclination to be “too tough”
in negotiation. Newman, said Graham, was “far from popular, even among his friends, of whom he had
many,” and “had numerous quarrels with close associates,” which he always made up in the end. He and
Graham got along because of Graham’s protective coating; other people’s behavior never seemed to disturb
Graham’s equanimity.
The one exception to this was Graham’s penchant for taking on established business figures in a fight.
Through diligent research digging through a report published by the Interstate Commerce Commission, he
had discovered that Northern Pipeline, an oil transmission company whose stock sold for $65, owned railroad
bonds worth $95 per share in addition to its pipeline assets. However, the Rockefeller Foundation, which
controlled the stock, was doing nothing to release the value of the railroad bonds to shareholders. The stock
traded at a depressed price that did not reflect the value of the bonds, so Graham began quietly accumulating
shares until his firm became the largest owner after the Rockefeller Foundation. Then he pushed for the
bonds to be distributed to the shareholders. Northern Pipeline’s management, who had come from Standard
Oil when it was broken up in 1911, gave him a runaround. It said the company needed to keep the bonds in
order to be able to pay for replacing the aging pipeline someday. But Graham knew better. Finally, the
managers simply said: Running a pipeline is a very complex and specialized business, about which you know
very little but which we have done for a lifetime. If you don’t agree with our policies, why don’t you just sell
your shares?
But Graham viewed his role as serving all the company’s investors, not just himself, and instead of selling, he
went down to the shareholders’ meeting in remote Oil City, Pennsylvania, where he was the only person who
attended other than company employees. He made a motion about the railroad bonds, but the management
refused to recognize him because he had brought no one along to second the motion. In its dealings with him,
the management also made what he felt were some anti-Semitic innuendos, which hardly inclined him to give
up the fight. Over the next year, he bought additional shares, teamed up with other investors, and prepared to

mount a legal battle with management—a proxy fight. By the time of the next shareholders’ meeting, he had
assembled enough votes to get two additional directors elected to the board, which tilted the balance in favor
of distributing the bonds. The company submitted and ended up handing out the equivalent of $110 per share
in cash and stock to its shareholders.
The battle became a famous incident on Wall Street, and Graham went on to build the Graham-Newman
Corporation into one of the best-known, although far from the largest, investment firms in the business.
He did it even while inflicting a handicap on his own performance. His teaching style used examples taken
directly from Graham-Newman’s office. Every time he mentioned a stock in the classroom, the students ran
out and bought it, pushing up the price and making it more expensive for Graham-Newman to buy. This
drove Jerry Newman crazy. Why make the firm’s job harder by letting other people in on what they were
doing? To make money on Wall Street meant keeping your ideas to yourself. But, as Buffett said, “Ben
didn’t really care how much money he had. He wanted to have enough, and he went through that period in
’29 to ’33 that was very rough. But if he had as much money as he felt he needed, anything else was totally
immaterial to him.”
Over the twenty-year life of Graham-Newman Corporation, its performance had beaten the stock market’s
performance by an average of 2.5 percent a year—a record exceeded by only a handful of people in the
history of Wall Street. That percent might sound trifling, but compounded for two decades, it meant that an
investor in Graham-Newman wound up with almost sixty-five percent more in his pocket than someone who
earned the market’s average result. Much more important, Graham had achieved this superior performance
while taking considerably less risk than someone who simply invested in the stock market as a whole.
And Graham did it mainly through his skill at analyzing numbers. Before him, assessments of a security’s
value were largely guesswork. Graham developed the first thorough, systematic way of analyzing the value of
a stock. He preferred to work by studying only publicly available information—usually a company’s financial
statements—and rarely attended even public meetings with a company’s management.9 Although his
associate Walter Schloss had been at the Marshall-Wells meeting, it was his own idea to go, not Graham’s.
Ben’s third wife, Estey, drove her husband up to Columbia from the Graham-Newman Corporation’s office
at 55 Wall Street every Thursday afternoon after the market closed to teach his “seminar on common stock
valuation.” This course was the culmination of the Columbia finance curriculum, so highly regarded that men
who were already working in money management signed up for it, sometimes more than once.
Warren, of course, looked up to Graham with worshipful awe. He had read the Northern Pipeline story over
and over when he was ten years old, well before he understood who Benjamin Graham was in the investing
world. Now he hoped to bond with his teacher. But outside the classroom, he and Ben had few hobbies in
common. Graham dabbled in the arts and sciences in a quest for knowledge, writing poetry, failing
spectacularly as a Broadway playwright, and puttering around filling notebooks with ideas for clumsy
inventions. He also devoted himself to ballroom dancing, clumping around for years at the Arthur Murray
studio, where he danced like a wooden soldier and counted the steps out loud. During dinner parties, Graham
often disappeared in the middle of a course to work on mathematical formulas, read Proust (in French), or
listen to the opera in solitude, rather than suffer the dull company of his fellow man.10 “I remember the
things I learn,” he wrote in his memoir, “rather than the things I live.” The one exception where living took
precedence over learning was his assignations.
About the only way a human being competed with the classic authors for Graham’s attention was to be
female and beddable. He was short and physically unimposing, but people had told him that his sensual full
lips and penetrating blue eyes reminded them of the actor Edward G. Robinson.11 There was something
elfish-looking about him, and he was not a handsome man. Nonetheless, Graham seemed to be a Mount
Everest for women who liked a challenge: they met him and wanted to climb on top.
In his three wives, Graham’s taste had ranged wide: from the passionate, strong-willed teacher Hazel Mazur
to Broadway showgirl Carol Wade—eighteen years his junior—to his third wife and former secretary, the

intelligent, lighthearted Estelle “Estey” Messing. Complicating all these marriages was his complete
indifference to monogamy. Graham later wrote a memoir12 in which he begins, “Let me describe my first
extramarital affair in the soberest fashion,” a sobriety he giddily abandons six sentences later as he explains
the recipe for his liaison with the sharp-tongued, “by no means beautiful” Jenny: “one part attraction and
four parts opportunity.” If more attraction was present, he needed less opportunity, making him shameless,
even annoying, in his sexual advances toward women he found attractive. Combining two of his hobbies,
Graham might dash off a seductive little poem to a woman he fancied on the subway. Yet he was so cerebral
that, even for his lovers, it must have been a challenge to hold his attention. The darting from amour to
business in the following passage of the memoir is pure Graham:13
I have a sentimental memory of the last hour we spent together in the cabin of her Ward Line steamer. (Little
did I think then that my firm was later to control that old-established steamship company.)
He drove his wives to distraction with his philandering. But Warren at the time knew nothing about Graham’s
personal life and was focused only on what he could learn from the brilliant teacher. On the first day of
Graham’s seminar in January 1951, Warren walked into a smallish classroom containing a long rectangular
table. In the middle sat Graham, surrounded by eighteen or twenty men. Most of the other students were
older, some of them war veterans. Half were not Columbia students but businessmen who were auditing the
course. Once again, Warren was the youngest—yet also the most knowledgeable. When Graham asked a
question, inevitably he “would be the first one to have his hand up and immediately start talking,” recalls one
of his classmates, Jack Alexander.14 The rest of the class became the audience to a duet.
In 1951, many American businesses were still worth more dead than alive. Graham encouraged his students
to use real-life examples from the stock market to illustrate this, down-and-dirty companies such as Greif
Bros. Cooperage, a barrel maker whose stock Warren owned. Its main business was slowly disappearing but
whose stock was trading at a substantial discount to the cash that could be netted if its properties and
inventory were simply sold off and its debts repaid. Eventually, Graham reasoned, that “intrinsic” value
would surface the way a river-tossed barrel, trapped under winter ice, pops to the surface in a spring thaw.
You had only to interpret the balance sheet, decoding the numbers that proved there was a barrel of money
trapped under the ice.
Graham said that a company is no different than a person, who might think that her net worth was $7,000,
comprising her house, worth $50,000, less her mortgage of $45,000, plus her other savings of $2,000. Just
like people, companies have assets that they own, such as the products they make and sell, and debts—or
liabilities—that they owe. If you sold all the assets to pay off the debts, what would be left was the
company’s equity, or net worth. If someone could buy the stock at a price that valued the company cheaper
than its net worth, Graham said, eventually—a tricky word, “eventually”—the stock’s price would rise to
reflect this intrinsic value.15
It sounded simple, but the art of security analysis lay in the details—playing detective, probing for what
assets were really worth, excavating hidden assets and liabilities, considering what the company could
earn—or not earn—and stripping apart the fine print to lay bare the rights of shareholders. Graham’s students
learned that stocks were not abstract pieces of paper, and their value could be analyzed by figuring what the
whole pie of a business was worth, then dividing it into slices.
Complicating matters, however, was that issue of “eventually.” Stocks often traded at odds with their
intrinsic value for long periods of time. An analyst could figure everything right and still appear wrong in the
eyes of the market for the investing equivalent of a lifetime. That was why, as well as being a detective, you
had to build in what Graham and Dodd called a MARGIN OF SAFETY—that is, plenty of room for error.
Graham’s method struck people who studied it in one of two ways. Some grasped it immediately as a
fascinating, all-consuming treasure hunt and others recoiled from it as a dreary homework assignment.
Warren’s reaction was that of a man emerging from the cave in which he had been living all his life, blinking
in the sunlight as he perceived reality for the first time.16 His former concept of a “stock” was derived from
the patterns formed by the prices at which pieces of paper traded. Now he saw that those pieces of paper

were simply symbols of an underlying truth. He instantly grasped that the patterns formed by trading these
pieces of paper did not signify a “stock” any more than those childhood piles of bottle caps had signified the
effervescent, sweet-sour-spicy taste of soda pop that made people crave it. His old notions dissolved in an
instant, conquered by Graham’s ideas and illuminated by the way he taught.
Graham used all kinds of nifty, effective tricks in his class. He would ask paired questions, one at a time. His
students thought they knew the answer to the first, but when the second came along, it made them realize
that maybe they didn’t. He would put up descriptions of two companies, one in terrible shape, practically
bankrupt, another in fine form. After asking the class to analyze them, he would reveal that they were the
same company at different times. Everyone was surprised. These were memorable lessons on thinking
independently, typical of how his mind worked.
Along with his Company A and Company B teaching method, Graham used to talk about Class 1 and Class 2
truths. Class 1 truths were absolutes. Class 2 truths became truths by conviction. If enough people thought a
company’s stock was worth X, it became worth X until enough people thought otherwise. Yet that did not
affect the stock’s intrinsic value—which was a Class 1 truth. Thus, Graham’s investing method was not
simply about buying stocks cheap. As much as anything it was rooted in an understanding of psychology,
enabling its followers to keep their emotions from influencing their decision-making.
From Graham’s class, Warren took away three main principles that required nothing more than the stern
discipline of mental independence:
• A stock is the right to own a little piece of a business. A stock is worth a certain fraction of what you would
be willing to pay for the whole business.
• Use a margin of safety. Investing is built on estimates and uncertainty. A wide margin of safety ensures that
the effects of good decisions are not wiped out by errors. The way to advance, above all, is by not retreating.
• Mr. Market is your servant, not your master. Graham postulated a moody character called Mr. Market,
who offers to buy and sell stocks every day, often at prices that don’t make sense. Mr. Market’s moods
should not influence your view of price. However, from time to time he does offer the chance to buy low and
sell high.
Of these points, the margin of safety was most important. A stock might be the right to own a piece of a
business, and the intrinsic value of the stock was something you could estimate, but with a margin of safety,
you could sleep at night. Graham built in his margin of safety in various ways. As well as buying things for
considerably less than he thought they were worth, he never forgot the danger of using debt. And although
the 1950s had become one of the most prosperous eras in American history, his early experiences had scarred
him and given him the habit of assuming the worst. He looked at business through the lens of his 1932 Forbes
articles—as worth more dead than alive—thinking of a stock’s value mostly in terms of what the company
would be worth if dead—that is, shut down and liquidated. Implicitly, Graham was always looking over his
shoulder at the 1930s, when so many businesses went into bankruptcy. He kept his firm small in part because
he was so risk-averse. And he rarely bought more than a tiny position in any company’s stock, no matter how
sound the business.17 This meant the firm owned a large array of stocks that required much tending. While
plenty of stocks did sell at prices below the businesses’ liquidation value, which made Warren an enthusiastic
follower of Graham, he disagreed with his teacher about the need to buy so many stocks. He had cast his lot
with one stock: “Ben would always tell me GEICO was too high. By his standards, it wasn’t the right kind of
stock to buy. Still, by the end of 1951, I had three-quarters of my net worth or close to it invested in
GEICO.” And yet Warren “worshipped” his teacher, even though he had strayed so far from one of
Graham’s ideas.
As the spring semester wore on, Warren’s classmates gradually accepted the routine of the classroom duet.
Warren “was a very focused person. He could focus like a spotlight, twenty-four hours a day almost, seven
days a week almost. I don’t know when he slept,” says Jack Alexander.18 He could quote Graham’s
examples and come up with examples of his own. He haunted the Columbia library, reading old newspapers
for hours on end.
