
Tests 1 through 3: Long-Emiy-at-Open
Model Tested on Entry at Open, on Limit,
and on Stop. Table 12-4 indicates that, in-sample, the model was strongly profitable
for the NYFE (but not the S&P X0), the British Pound, the Deutschemark, the
Japanese Yen, Palladium, most of the Wheats, Kansas Wheat, Cocoa, and Lumber,
and Light Crude (if entry at open is omitted). Out-of-sample, the NYFE had no
trades, the British Pound and the Deutschemark continued to be strongly profitable
across all three order types, and many of the other markets in which strong in-sample
profitability was observed had no trades. Out-of-sample, some markets that had not
traded in-sample traded profitably (especially Unleaded Gasoline, Silver, and
Coffee), which indicates that the model continued to perform well, not merely in a
different time period, but on a different set of markets.

Testi 4 through 6: Short-Entry-at-Open

Model Tested on Entry at Open, on Limit,

and on Stop. In-sample, the T-Bills, the Deutschema& the Swiss Franc, the
Canadian Dollar, Pork Bellies, Oats, Kansas Wheat, Orange Juice, and Lumber all
showed strong profits. The British Pound and Deutschemark held up out-of-sample.
The Swiss Franc was profitable out-of-sample, hut only with the limit order. It lost
when entry was at open or on stop. The other markets either did not trade out-of-sample or had losses. Out-of-sample, the NYFE traded strongly profitably across all three
order types, but did not trade profitably in-sample.
Figure 12-1 depicts portfolio equity growth for long trades taken with entry
at open. As is evident, there was a steady, stair-like growth in equity, the stair-like

Breakdown of Performance By Market and Test

Portfolio Equity Growth for Long Model with Entry at the Open

quality resulting from the small number of trades taken. The occasional, strongly
profitable trade caused a sudden step up in equity. The least-squares line fitted to
the equity curve reveals consistent growth in both samples, but slightly greater in
the early years.
The equity growth for the long model with entry on limit, which helps to
control transaction costs, is shown in Figure 12-2. Again, the stair-like growth
in equity is apparent. However, the equity growth was more even; i.e., there was
no slowing down of growth in recent year-in fact, the fitted line is almost
straight. Out-of-sample performance was almost identical to in-sample performance.
Figure 12-3 shows portfolio equity growth for the best evolved short-enttyat-open model, evaluated with entry actually at the open. Again, the stair-like
appearance is present. However, except for a strong spurt of growth between
August 1989 and June 1993, the curve is essentially flat. Overall, the equity was
seen rising, except for the flat regions.

F I G U R E

12-2

Portfolio Equity Growth for Long Model with Entry on a Limit

The Rules for the Solutions Tested
Rules for Long Entry.

The chromosome that represented the best solution for
long entries at the open contained three genes. Each gene was composed of four
numbers and corresponded to a specific rule.
The numbers for Gene 1 were 4, 850,65, and 653, which specified an openinterest decline rule (case 4), a look-back of 34, and a threshold of 0.042, respectively. The last number (653) was not used or translated because the rule did not
require three blanks to be filled in, only two. If this information is taken and translated into plain language, the rule says that the open interest must decline at least
4.2% over the past 34 bars for the rule to evaluate as TRUE. In other words, the
open interest 34 bars ago (relative to the current bar) minus the open interest 1 bar
ago, divided by the open interest 34 bars ago, was greater than 0.042.
The numbers for Gene 2 were 1, 256, 530, and 709. The fust number (1)
specified a simple price comparison mle (case I). When the additional numbers
were translated to the correct lookbacks and thresholds, it is apparent that this rule
fires (evaluates as TRUE) when the close 3 days ago is greater than the close 14
days ago plus 3.46 times the average true range.

Porlfolio

Equity Growth for Shot-l

Model with Entry at the Open

The numbers for Gene 3 were 5, 940, 47, and 610. Rule template 5 (case 5),
which is the open-interest incline rule, was specified by the first number. Fully
instantiating this rule reveals that the rule evaluates as TRUE if the market’s open
interest has risen at least 5.6% in the past 44 days.
If the conditions for all three rules, specified by Genes 1 through 3, were met
on a given bar, a buy signal was generated.
It is interesting that two rules involved open interest, a variable not usually considered in many popular approaches to trading. It is also noteworthy that the two
open-interest rules, when put together, seem almost contradictory: The current open
interest had to be greater than the open interest 44 bars ago, but less than the open
interest 34 bars ago. The model appears to be somewhat trend-following in that a
recent closing price had to be greater than an older closing price before an entry was
taken. However, time was left for a small pull-back; i.e., the increase in price only had
to be observed 3 bars ago, not in the current bar. The set of rules is not one that would
be easy to discover in a normal manner, without the aid of a genetic algorithm.
Rules for Shorf Enfry.

A similar analysis can be done for the shorts as for the
longs. The numbers corresponding to the chromosome that represented the best

solution for short entries at the open were 5, 890, 391, and 532 (Gene 1); 5,705,
760, and 956 (Gene 2); and 10, 163,999, and 196 (Gene 3). When the string of
three genes was translated, it was revealed that two rules deal with open interest
and one with the MACD oscillator. The first open-interest role states that the
open interest 1 bar ago must be at least 38% greater than the open interest 38
bars ago. The second open-interest rule states that the open interest 1 bar ago
must be at least 75% greater than the open interest 25 bars ago. The third rule
states that the slope of the MACD-with a shorter moving average length of 2
and a longer moving average length of 50-must be down, suggesting a current
downward trend. If the conditions for all three rules, specified by the three
genes, were met on a given bar, a sell signal was generated. Again, these rules
would not have been easily discovered when developing a trading model in a
more traditional manner.

CONCLUSION
As was the case in our earlier study, the use of a GA to select and instantiate rule
templates continued to work well as a means of developing a trading system, or,
at least, an entry model. Results were still impressive, despite such problems as
inadequate numbers of trades in many of the solutions generated. The approach is
certainly one that can serve as the basis for further development efforts. In this
exercise, only a small base of rule templates, involving such fairly simple elements
as price comparisons, moving averages, and indicators, were used. Undoubtedly,
much better results could be obtained by using a more sophisticated and complete
set of role templates as grist for the genetic mill.

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
. Long positions tend to perform better than short positions for the markets
in our standard portfolio and with the models that were tested. Therefore,
it is probably more worthwhile to place development efforts on a system
that emphasizes the long rather than short side.
. Genetic algorithms appear to be an effective means of discovering small
inefficiencies that are buried in a mountain of efficient market behaviors.
n When used correctly, and in such a manner as discussed above, overoptimization (curve-fitting) does not seem to be a serious problem, despite
the optimization power of genetic algorithms. Restrictions on the number
and complexity of the rules in any solution seems to be the key element
in controlling the curve-fitting demon.
. Evolution, as used herein, has the great benefit of producing explicit rules
that can be translated into plain language and understood. Unlike neural

network systems, the trading rules produced by GAS are not hidden in an
inscrutable black box.
. Using genetics in the manner described above has the benefit of producing a large number of distinct, yet profitable, solutions. It would be easy
evolve and then put together a portfolio of systems.

P A R T

T H R E E

.~

THE STUDY OF EXITS
Introduction

I n Part II, the focus was on the timing of trade entries. The extent to which various
methodologies are useful in the process of deciding when, where, and how to enter
a trade was examined. Tests were conducted on everything from cycles to sunspot
activity, from simple rule-based approaches to advanced genetic algorithms and
neural networks. In order that a reasonably fair comparison of entry methods could
be made, the exit strategy was intentionally kept simple and constant across all
tests. A fixed money management stop, a profit target limit, and an exit at market
after a given number of bars, or days, in the trade were used. In Part III, attention
will be shifted to the problem of how to get out of a trade once in, i.e., to exit strategies, an issue that has often been neglected in the trading literature.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE EXIT
In many ways, a good exit is more critical and difficult to achieve than a good entry.
The big difference is that while waiting for a good opportunity to enter a trade, there
is no market risk. If one opportunity to enter is missed, another will always come
along-and a good, active trading model should provide many such opportunities.
When a trade is entered, however, exposure to market risk occurs simultaneously.
Failing to exit at an appropriate moment can cost dearly and even lead to the dreaded margin call! We actually know someone who made a quick, small fortune trading, only to lose it all (and then some) because the exit strategy failed to include a
good money management stop! To get out of a trade that has gone bad, it is not a
good idea to simply wait for the next entry opportunity to come along. Similarly,
erring on the side of safety and exiting at the drop of a hat can also drain a trading

282

account, albeit less dramatically through slow attrition. The problem with frequent
and hasty exits is that many small losses will occur due to the sacrifice of many
potentially profitable trades, and trades that are profitable will be cut short before
reaching their full profit potential. A good exit strategy must, above all, strictly control losses, but it must not sacrifice too many potentially profitable trades in the
process; i.e., it should allow profitable trades to fully mature.
How important is the exit strategy? If risk can be tightly controlled by quickly bailing from losing trades, and done in such a way that most winning trades am
not killed or cut short, it is possible to turn a losing system into a profitable one!
It has been said that if losses are cut short, profits will come. A solid exit strategy
can, make a profitable system even more lucrative, while reducing equity volatility and drawdown. Most importantly, during those inevitable bad periods, a good
exit strategy that incorporates solid money management and capital preservation
techniques can increase the probability that the trader will still be around for the
next potentially profitable trade.
GOALS OF A GOOD EXIT STRATEGY
There am two goals that a good exit strategy attempts to achieve. The first and
most important goal is to strictly control losses. The exit strategy must dictate how
and when to get out of a trade that has gone wrong so that a significant erosion of
trading capital can be prevented. This goal is often referred to as money management and is frequently implemented using stop-loss orders (money management
stops). The second goal of a good exit strategy is to ride a profitable trade to full
maturity. The exit strategy should determine not only when to get out with a loss,
but also when and where to get out with a profit. It is generally not desirable to
exit a trade prematurely, taking only a small profit out of the market. If a trade is
going favorably, it should be ridden as long as possible and for as much profit as
reasonably possible. This is especially important if the system does not allow multiple reentries into persistent trends. “The trend is your friend,” and if a strong
trend to can be ridden to maturity, the substantial profits that will result can more
than compensate for many small losses. The protit-taking exit is often implemented with trailing stops. profit targets, and time- or volatility-triggered market
orders. A complete exit strategy makes coordinated use of a variety of exit types
to achieve the goals of effective money management and profit taking.
KINDS OF EXITS EMPLOYED IN AN EXIT
STRATEGY
There are a wide variety of exit types to choose from when developing an exit
strategy. In the standard exit strategy, only three kinds of exits were used in a simple, constant manner. A fixed money management exit was implemented using a
stop order: If the market moved against the trade more than a specified amount.

the position would be stopped out with a limited loss. A p&It rarget exit was
implemented using a limit order: As soon as the market moved a specified amount
in favor of the trade, the limit would be hit and an exit would occur with a known
profit. The time-based exir was such that, regardless of whether the trade was profitable, if it lasted more than a specified number of bars or days, it was closed out
with an at-the-market order.
There are a number of other exit types not used in tbe standard exit strategy:
trailing exits, critical threshold exits, volatility exits, and signal exits. A trailing
exit, usually implemented with a stop order and, therefore, often called a trailing “top, may be employed when the market is moving in favor of the trade. This
stop is moved up, or down, along with the market to lock in some of the paper
profits in the event that the market changes direction. If the market turns against
the trade, the trailing stop is hit and the trade is closed out with a proportion of
the profit intact. A critical threshold exit terminates the trade when the market
approaches or crosses a theoretical barrier (e.g., a trendline, a support or resistance level, a Fibonacci retracement, or a Gann line), beyond which a change in
the interpretation of current market action is required. Critical threshold exits
may be implemented using stop or limit orders depending on whether the trade
is long or short and whether current prices are above or below the barrier level.
If market volatility or risk suddenly increases (e.g., as in the case of a “blow-off
top), it may be wise to close out a position on a volatility exit. Finally, a signal
exit is simply based on an expected reversal of market direction: If a long position is closed out because a system now gives a signal to go short, or because an
indicator suggests a turning point is imminent, a signal exit has been taken.
Many exits based on pattern recognition are signal exits.

Money Management Exits
Every exit strategy must include a money management exit. A money management
exit is generally implemented using a stop order. Therefore, it is often referred to
as a money management stop. Such a stop closes out a trade at a specified amount
of adverse excursion (movement against the trade), or at a specified price below
(if long) or above (if short) the price at which the trade was entered. A money management stop generally stays in place for the duration of the trade. Its purpose is
to control the maximum risk considered tolerable. Of course, the potential risk
may be greater than what was expected. The market could go limit up (or down)
or have a large overnight gap. Trading without a money management stop is like
flying in a rickety old plane without a parachute,
The issue is not whether a money management stop should be used. Rather,
it is determining the optimal placement of the stop. There are many ways to decide
where to place money management stops, The simplest placement occurs by
assessing the maximum amount of money that can be risked on a given trade. For

example, if a trade on the S&P 500 is entered and the trader is not be willing to
risk more than $1,500, a money management stop that uses a $1,500 stop-loss
order would be specified. If the market moves against the trade more than $1,500
(three S&P points), the stop gets hit and the position is closed out. Another way to
set the money management stop is on the basis of volatility. In volatile markets and
periods, it may be a good idea to give trades more room to breathe, i.e., to avoid
having the stop so close to the market that potentially profitable trades get stopped
out with losses.
A good way to set a money management stop is on the basis, of a price barrier, such as a trendline or support/resistance level. In such cases, the stop also
serves as a critical threshold exit. For example, if there are a number of trend and
support lines around 936.00 on the S&P 500, and a long position at 937.00 has just
been entered, it might be worth considering the placement of a stop a little below
936.00, e.g., at 935.50. Setting a protective stop at 935 is logical since a break
through support suggests that the trend has changed and that it is no longer smart
to be long the S&P 500. In this example, only $750 is at risk, substantially less
than the $1,500 risked when using the money management stop that was based on
a dollar amount. A tighter stop can often be set using a barrier or critical price
model than would be the case using a simple dollar-amount model.
As hinted above, setting a money management stop involves a compromise. It
is good to have a very tight stop, since losing trades then involve only tiny, relatively
painless losses. However, as the stop is righrened (i.e., moved closer to the entry or
current price), the likelihood of it getting triggered increases, even if the market eventually moves in favor of the trade. For example, if a $50 stop loss is set, almost all
trades on the S&P 500, regardless of entry method, will be stopped out with small
losses. As a stop gets tighter, the percentage of winning trades will decrease. The stop
eventually ends up sacrificing most of what would have been profitable trades. On the
other hand, if the stop is too loose, although the winning trades are retained, the
adverse excursion on those winners, and the losses on the losing trades, will quickly
become intolerable. The secret is to find a stop that effectively controls losses with
out sacrificing too many of the trades that provide profits.
Trailing

Exits

A rrailing exit is usually implemented with a so-called trailing stop. The purpose
behind this kind of exit is to lock in some of the profits, or to provide protection
with a stop that is tighter than the original money management stop, once the market begins to move in the trade’s favor. If a long position in the S&P 500 is taken
and a paper profit ensues, would it not be desirable to preserve some of that profit in case the market reverses? This is when a trailing stop comes in useful. If a
$1,500 money management stop is in place and the market moves more than
$1,500 against the trade, the position is closed with a $1,500 loss. However, if the

market moves $1,000 in the trade’s favor, it might be wise to move the old money
management stop closer to the market’s current price, perhaps to $500 above the
current market price. Now, if the market reverses and the stop gets hit, the trade
will be closed out with a $500 profit, rather than a $1,500 loss! As the market
moves further in favor of the trade, the trailing stop can be moved up (or down, if
in a short position), which is why it is called a trailing stop, i.e., it is racheted up
(or down), trailing the market-locking in more of the increasing paper profit.
Once it is in place, a good trailing stop can serve both as an adaptive money
management exit and as a profit-taking exit, all in one! As an overall exit strategy,
it is not bad by any means. Trailing stops and money management stops work hand
in hand. Good traders often use both, starting with a money management stop, and
then moving that stop along with the market once profits develop, converting it to
a trailing stop. Do not be concerned about driving the broker crazy by frequently
moving stops around to make them trail the market. If trading is frequent enough
to keep commissions coming in, the broker should not care very much about a few
adjustments to stop orders. In fact, a smart broker will be pleased, realizing that
his or her client is much more likely to survive as an active, commission-producing trader, if money management and trailing stop exits are used effectively.
How is the placement of a trailing stop determined? Many of the same principles discussed with regard to money management exits and stops also apply to
trailing exits and stops. The stop can be set to trail, by a fixed dollar amount, the
highest (or lowest, if short) market price achieved during the trade. The stop can
be based on a volatility-scaled deviation. A moving threshold or barrier, such as a
trend or Gann line, can be used if there is one present in a region close enough to
the current market action. Fixed barriers, like support/resistance levels, can also be
used: The stop would be jumped from barrier to harrier as the market moves in the
trade’s favor, always keeping the stop comfortably trailing the market action.
Profit Target Exits

A projit target exit is usually implemented with a limit order placed to close out a
position when the market has moved a specified amount in favor of the trade. A
limit order that implements a profit target exit can either be fixed, like a money
management stop, or be moved around as a trade progresses, as with a trailing
stop. A fixed profit target can be based on either volatility or a simple dollar
amount. For example, if a profit target of $500 is set on a long trade on the S&P
500, a sell-at-limit order has been placed: If the market moves $500 in the trade’s
favor, the position is immediately closed. In this way, a quick profit may be had.
There are advantages and disadvantages to using a profit target exit. One
advantage is that, with profit target exits, a high percentage of winning trades can
be achieved while slippage is eliminated, or even made to work in the trader’s
favor. The main drawback of a profit target exit is that it can cause the trader to
