
the twenty-one years that I have been doing this, our overall exposure here has averaged about 40
percent.
You mean 40 percent net long?
Yes. In contrast, I would doubt that the most conservative of typical mutual funds has had an
average exposure of less than 80 percent during the last twenty years.
On average, you have been about 40 percent net long. What range does that encompass?
I remember being 15 or 20 percent net short at one point, and, at another time, being over 100
percent net long.
So you have the flexibility of being net short as well as net long?
Yes. One of the things I would emphasize about our approach is its flexibility to shift market
exposure so as to make it an exceptionally meaningful—sometimes perhaps too meaningful—tool
in our investment management arsenal.
How do you determine your outlook for the general market direction, since that is obviously a
very critical element of your approach?
It is really beyond definition, except to say that there are a host of variables, with some sometimes
more important than others, and they change all the time. Having done it as long as I have gives me
the opportunity to be 51 percent right rather than 50 percent right.
Does that imply that your main profitability comes from stock selection as opposed to net
exposure adjustments for anticipated changes in the broad market direction?
No, I was being a bit facetious. It is more than a 1 percent edge, but it is not a big advantage like
being right 80 percent of the time, or anything approaching that.
Relatively speaking, how important is the bias of the right market direction versus stock
selection as a contributing factor to your overall superior performance?
As I look back on the past twenty-one years, there is no set pattern of successful activity. In some
years, we did particularly well on the strength of a few well-chosen stocks. In other years, we did
exceptionally well because we were on the right side of the market. For example, in 1973-1974,
when the market went down enormously, we were up substantially, largely because we were net
short. There were other periods when the bulk of our money was made in bonds. I think there is a
message in the fact that there is no real pattern: Anyone who thinks he can formulate success in this
racket is deluding himself, because it changes too quickly. As soon as a formula is right for any
length of time, its own success carries the weight of its inevitable failure.
What made you sufficiently confident of lower stock prices to go net short in 1973-1974?
The anticipation of a recession.
Based on what?
I felt that the higher inflation rates of that period would lead to higher interest rates, which, in turn,
would slow down the economy.
Were you negative on the stock market in the period preceding the major 1982 bottom as
well?
Not as strongly. But in 1981 and 1982,1 made an enormous amount of money by having a
leveraged position in treasury notes. Although one couldn't predict the end of the rise of interest
rates timing-wise, it was clear that unless interest rates came down, other areas had to be relatively
unattractive. When you could get 14 percent in long-term treasury securities, in order to be
competitive, stocks had to sell so much lower than they were selling at that it wasn't even worth
focusing on which stocks to buy—although you might focus on the short side. What was unique in
that period was the inevitability of a turn in interest rates in order for anything else to be
worthwhile; it was simply a matter of timing that turn. In contrast to most other periods, this period
had a clear unidirectional message: U.S. Treasury fixed income securities were by far the
quintessential value of the time.
Anyone with any sense of contrarian mentality had to look at interest rates in the early 1980s as
presenting a potentially great opportunity. You knew the Fed would have to ease as soon as
101

business started to run into trouble. In addition, we had already seen an important topping in the
rate of inflation.
So, some of the pieces of the puzzle were already in place?
Yes, and that is as much as you can hope for, because when they are all in place, it is too late.
You mention a contrarian mentality, but that type of thinking could have justified trying to
pick a top at much lower rates.
Absolutely. People think that being a contrarian implies victory. After all, what is a contrarian but
someone that goes against the crowd. It is almost a cliche that the crowd is always wrong—so the
guy who stands against the crowd must always be right. Well, life doesn't work that way. There
were plenty of contrarians who bought bonds when interest rates went to 8 percent for the first
time, and 9 percent, and 10 percent. There was a great deal of money lost by people buying bonds
at what were then all-time high yields.
There is a very important difference between being a theoretical contrarian and dealing with it in
practical terms. In order to win as a contrarian, you need the right timing and you have to put on a
position in the appropriate size. If you do it too small, it's not meaningful; if you do it too big, you
can get wiped out if your timing is slightly off. The process requires courage, commitment, and an
understanding of your own psychology.
I assume that you probably had the market run against you for quite a while in that trade.
Right, it did. It was a very painful period, because as far as most of my investors were concerned, I
was an equity investor. What did I know about bonds? Who was I to contradict Henry Kaufman
who was telling the world that interest rates were going to the moon? Not only was I doing
something that was different than in the past, which always raises the antennas of investors—
particularly those with an institutional mentality—but I was doing it in an enormous size.
Were you leveraged more than 100 percent on your position?
Yes, at one point I had three to four times the firm's capital in five-year maturities. In stocks, you
have a policeman who tells you how much you can speculate: it is called margin requirements. But
in treasuries, you can finance as much as 98 percent of your purchases, depending on maturity, so
there is no real constraint.
How long was the period between when you started buying treasuries and the market bottom
[interest rate peak]?
I started buying in the spring of!981,andl think treasuries bottomed on September 30,1981.
How much did rates move against you in that first half year?
I don't recall, but rates went up enough to be painful, especially given the size of my position.
Up until this time, you had primarily been a stock trader. Here on your first major foray in
treasuries, you started out by incurring substantial losses. Didn't you have periods of selfdoubt?
All the time. The summer of 1981 was the worst experience of my business life. A number of
thoughtful, intelligent investors were really very unhappy with what I was doing—and I wasn't so
sure myself.
Did you ever come close to saying, "Maybe I am wrong," and liquidating, or at least
decreasing, your position?
No, never.
One of your basic principles seems to be that as long as you believe you are fundamentally
right, you will stay with a position. Have there been any exceptions—that is, markets in which
you didn't change your fundamental view, but the loss just got too big?
There have been some situations when I was short and simply didn't have enough courage to hang
in with the full-boat of the position. That was particularly true in 1972, at the height of the "NiftyFifty" phenomenon. With the exception of October 1987, that was probably the worst period in my
investment life. At the time, there was a theory that as long as a company continued to sustain
substantially above-average secular growth, it didn't matter how much you paid for it. Many growth
102

stocks traded at multiples that were just crazy. We went short Polaroid when it was selling at sixty
times earnings, which we thought was absurd; it then went to seventy times earnings. The market
seemed to lose track of reality, and we found ourselves asking, "What is the difference between
forty times earnings and eighty times earnings?" By putting a different number on the secular
growth rate estimate, you could justify almost any multiple That is how people were thinking in
those days.
So you backed off during that period?
At times we did, because we were losing a lot of money.
Did that prove to be the right move, because stocks eventually went to much higher multiples,
or would you have been better off if you had held on?
In hindsight, in almost all cases, I would have been better off sticking it out.
You mentioned that October 1987 was one of the worst market experiences in your career.
Obviously, you had lots of company. But I find it surprising, you being such a contrarian. I
wouldn't have expected you to be heavily long in a year with such bullish euphoria. What
happened?
Actually, in the spring of 1987,1 wrote a letter to my investors stating the reasons why I was
cautious and substantially reducing my exposure in the market. Having done that, I kept thinking
about why the market was trading at a level that was too high by historic standards I came to the
conclusion that the quintessential issue was a unique combination of phenomena occurring in the
American equity markets—a substantial continuous reduction in the amount of equities
outstanding, coinciding with a more liberal attitude toward debt. As long as banks were comfortable lending money, the junk bond market was good, and corporate managers saw repurchasing
their shares as the right thing to do, I felt there would be an unusual upward bias to equity prices.
That to me was the single most important reason in the seeming overvaluation of stocks that existed
through most of 1987.
Therefore, the important question was: What was going to change this situation? The answer was a
recession. And whenever that recession would come, its impact would be horrendous because the
government didn't have the flexibility to fight it since they had deviatsd from a countercyclical
fiscal policy during the expansion phase. But during the fall of 1987, not only was the economy not
weakening, it was strengthening—so much so that the Fed tightened.
What I didn't anticipate was that less-than-dramatic events could have as large an impact on the
market as they did. What was the real importance of the Fed tightening? Ordinarily, that might have
created a 100- or 200-point decline in the stock market, but not a 500-point decline. In the light of
history, what was the significance of Treasury Secretary Baker's criticism of Germany? It was
merely a disagreement as to the proper valuation of currencies—hardly a unique event. In
retrospect, what happened to the real world after October 19? Almost nothing. So, in some sense,
you have to conclude that this problem was internal to the market; it wasn't that the market was
forecasting an imminent financial debacle or great recession.
How then do you explain the extreme nature of the October 19 price break?
The problem that led to the October 19 collapse was the combination of relatively modest real
world changes and an inability of the markets' mechanism to deal with the institutional changes that
occurred mostly during the 1980s. The elements of stability—the individual investor and the
specialist system—had been greatly reduced in importance.
Do you believe portfolio insurance exacerbated the decline? [Portfolio insurance is the
systematic sale of stock index futures to reduce the risk exposure in a stock portfolio as prices
decline. See Appendix 1 for more detail.]
That was one of the new elements. On one hand, you had a reduction in the elements of stability.
On the other hand, you had the creations of the 1980s—portfolio insurance, program trading, and
global asset allocation—which tended to exert a unidirectional impact. By that, I mean that
participants in these strategies tend to be buyers and sellers at the same time. The stock market was
not prepared to handle it.
103

Where were you, position wise, coming in on October 19?
I came in very much long exposed—80 to 90 percent—and I increased my exposure during the day.
Why? Were you still bullish?
My increasing exposure was strictly a contrarian trade in the sense that when the markets have an
enormous move, most of the time, it is right to take the view that there is a lot of emotionalism and
extremism in that move. If you can maintain a bit of distance from the emotionalism, you tend to do
well. So my buying that day is what I would have done on any 300-, 400-, or 500-point down day.
Did you stay with your long position?
No, I reduced it throughout the next two months. The magnitude of the decline and the
extraordinary change in confidence that it engendered affected me as well. I thought it was better to
sit back and rethink the situation with a lot of cash rather than try to hang in.
Did you think that your basic premise for being long was no longer valid?
I thought that I had underestimated the impact of the forces that had diminished market stability.
What was your percentage loss during October 1987?
I was down over 20 percent for the month.
As you look back on the October 1987 experience, are there mistakes that you believe you
learned from?
There is a very good investor I speak to frequently who said, "All I bring to the party is twentyeight years of mistakes." I really believe he is right. When you make a mistake, there is some
subconscious phenomenon that makes it less likely for you to make that same mistake again. One
of the advantages of trading the way I do—being a long-term investor, short-term trader, individual
stock selector, market timer, sector analyst—is that I have made so many decisions and mistakes
that it has made me wise beyond my years as an investor.
The typical mutual fund adheres to a buy-and-hold approach. Do you think that concept is
basically a flawed strategy?
Yes, although flawed isn't quite the word I would use. I would say it is too limiting a strategy. The
objective of participating in the long-term growth of American equities, willing to suffer through
those periods when equities decline, is fine, but it leaves so much on the table in terms of potential
professional management. It is an incomplete strategy.
Yet, the vast majority of all funds fall into that category.
I guess so, but less than before. More and more people are paying attention to market timing, not
that they are necessarily qualified to do it terribly well, but because they have come to recognize
what a buy-and-hold approach means. When I was a kid, it was common advice to buy a stock, put
it in a vault, and forget about it. You don't hear that sort of concept anymore. We have lost
confidence in the long term.
Do you think the mutual fund industry is going to change?
The mutual fund industry is certainly sensitive enough to the whims of the investing public to find
products that will meet contemporary needs.
How do you handle a losing period?
As is true for so many other questions in this business, there is no pat answer or formula. There is
nothing that can be articulated precisely enough to lead others in a certain direction.
In other words, one losing period may be sufficiently different from another so that, even for
yourself, there may be no general wisdom that applies.
Correct.
How did you get started as a fund trader?
When I first got into this business in the late 1960s, I only had an analytical background. I was an
agricultural equipment and cyclical goods analyst at Loeb Rhoades. My business was started with
two other fellows who were also analysts. As our business grew, trading became more important. I
became the trader for the firm, having had very little trading background.
104

If you had very little experience, why did you become the trader?
I probably wasn't as good an analyst as the other two.
Even in those early years, you did very well as a trader. How do you think you managed that
without benefit of experience?
My father has been a gambler all his life. Although I can't remotely justify it, I feel there is an
element of gambling in this business. Maybe I got that talent from my father.
You have traded the stock market for over twenty years. Have you noticed any significant
changes during that time?
The amount of intellectual power on the trading desks twenty years ago was minimal compared to
today. The institutional traders were typically kids from Brooklyn, who could hardly speak the
language, made a minimum amount of money, and had very little discretion. So when I first started
trading, it was like taking candy from a baby.
I remember once a trader needed to sell 700,000 shares of Penn Central. At the time, the stock was
already in Chapter 11. The last trade was at 7, and the seller didn't bother to check the board. I
bought 700,000 shares at 6'/8. The seller was relieved to sell that amount of stock at less than a
dollar under the last trade. Meanwhile, I turned around and sold the 700,000 shares at 61.1 could
have sold three times that amount at that price. I made a half million dollars on that trade, and it
took me all of twelve seconds.
How long did that environment last?
Until the consolidated tape in 1975. Now there is a lot more competition; the people on the trading
desks are much brighter. Another change is that retail buyers and sellers have diminished greatly in
importance. The market has become institutionalized. Individuals buy stock through mutual funds.
Brokerage firms don't sell customers stocks so much as they sell those horrible mutual funds and
other awful things they call "financial products."
Perhaps the most important change is that the world has become much more short term oriented.
All sorts of people who used to be investors are now traders. The institutions now define
themselves as enterprises whose goal is to achieve the highest rate of return, when they used to
define themselves as long-term investors. People's confidence in their ability to predict secular
trends has greatly diminished. In 1967, it would be typical to see a report by a brokerage firm
estimating McDonalds' per share earnings up to the year 2000. Those people thought they could
estimate long-term earnings because companies were growing in a stable and predictable way.
They believed in America and steady growth. Today, stocks don't lend themselves to the same type
of secular analysis.
The implication of secular growth trend analysis not having worked in the 1970s and 1980s relates
to the question of trading. In the 1950s and 1960s, the heroes were the long-term investors; today,
the heroes are the wise guys. There are people like Goldsmith, who lauds the virtues of capitalism.
He talks about "what I did for Goodyear." What did he do for Goodyear? He was in there for seven
months, made eight zillion dollars for himself, and left the management after taking greenmail. He
talks about what he did for Goodyear, because he is uncomfortable and has to somehow associate
himself with the capitalist process. He and these other people have to bitch and moan about
management, but they don't know their ass from their elbow about running companies. With the
breakdown of certain laws, people are allowed to do things they weren't allowed to do before.
What laws are you referring to?
The Justice Department's reinterpretation of takeover laws; the definition of what is and is not
monopolistic.
What would be the most important advice you could give to the layman?
One of the allures of this business is that sometimes the greatest ignoramus can do very well. That
is unfortunate because it creates the impression that you don't necessarily need any professionalism
to do well, and that is a great trap. So the major advice I would give anybody is: Recognize that this
is a very competitive business, and that when you decide to buy or sell a stock, you are competing
with people who have devoted a good portion of their lives to this same endeavor. In many instances, these professionals are on the opposite side of your trades and, on balance, they are going
105

to beat you.
Is the implicit message that, most of the time, the novice trader would be better off having his
money professionally managed?
The term professionally managed implies a credit I am not sure I would give the average
professional in this business. My point is that you should have a good reason to assume that you are
going to achieve a significantly superior return for investing in stocks. If you can get 9 percent or
10 percent by investing in T-bonds and 7 percent or 8 percent by investing in T-bills, what should
you get in stocks to offset the incremental risk? Probably something much higher. You have to
decide what that number should be, and whether you have a realistic chance of achieving it.
Don't underestimate the difficulty of the game.
Right, and forget the shibboleth that stocks are going to give you a higher rate of return because
they are more risky. That is not true. They are more risky; therefore, you have to be convinced that
you are going to get a higher rate of return in order to play the game. Don't assume that by
investing in some mutual fund, you are going to get a higher rate of return.
Isn't that true, though? Historically, hasn't the stock market significantly beat interest rate
returns?
True, but there is a lot of statistical mumbo jumbo involved. Average return calculations depend
heavily on the starting date. If you start in 1968 or 1972, for example, the numbers look a lot less
appealing.
What are the elements of good trading?
Good trading is a peculiar balance between the conviction to follow your ideas and the flexibility to
recognize when you have made a mistake. You need to believe in something, but at the same time,
you are going to be wrong a considerable number of times. The balance between confidence and
humility is best learned through extensive experience and mistakes. There should be a respect for
the person on the other side of the trade. Always ask yourself: Why does he want to sell? What
does he know that I don't? Finally, you have to be intellectually honest with yourself and others. In
my judgment, all great traders are seekers of truth.
Steinhardt's variant perception is basically a contrarian approach. But you can't be a successful
contrarian by just using sentiment survey numbers or other measures of bullish consensus. The
markets don't pay off that easily. Although sentiment is always very bullish at tops and very bearish
at bottoms, unfortunately, extreme bullish and bearish readings are also characteristic of extended
trends. The trick is not being a contrarian, but being a contrarian at the right time. Such judgments
cannot be made on the basis of simple formulae. The successful contrarian needs to be able to filter
out the true opportunities. Steinhardt's filters are a combination of a keen sense of fundamentals
and market timing.
Flexibility is another essential key to Steinhardt's extremely favorable return/risk performance
characteristics. This flexibility is demonstrated by the equal ease at which he goes short or long, as
well as his willingness to trade markets other than stocks when warranted by his perception of the
fundamentals. "The more things you bring to the table—shorting, hedging, participation in bond
markets, futures market trading, and so on—the better off you are," he says.
One trait I have noticed among a number of the great traders is their willingness and ability to take
on a particularly large position when they perceive a major trading opportunity. The nerve and skill
required to step on the accelerator at the right time is certainly one of the elements that separates
good traders from exceptional traders. Steinhardt's heavy position in treasury notes during 1981 and
1982 is a perfect example of this characteristic.
