
Dell’s stock wasn’t such a hot performer—and that’s not a coincidence.

69


70

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXPLAINED

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Statement of Cash Flows

In millions
Fiscal year ending January 31,2003 February 1, 2002 February 2, 2001

Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $2,122 $1,246 $2,177

Adjustments to reconcile net income to
net cash provided by operating activities

Depreciation and amortization 211 239 240
Tax benefits of employee stock plans 260 487 929
Special charges _ 742 105
(Gains)/losses on investments (67) 7 (307)
Other, primarily effects of exchange (410) 178 135

rate changes on monetary
assets and liabilities denominated
in foreign currencies

Changes in

Operating warking capital $1,210 $ 826 $ 642
Noncurrent assets and liabilities 212 62 2714
Net cash provided by aperating activities $3,538 $3,797 $4,195

Figure 5.16 Dell's partial cash flow statement. Source: Dell SEC filings.

Changes in Working Capital
Remember when Mike let some folks buy hot dogs on credit and owed
money to the grocer for those extra buns? Both of those actions affected
working capital, and they'd be accounted for here. If a company is owed
more money by customers this year than it was last year, accounts receivable
increase and cash flow decreases; if it owes more money to suppliers, accounts
payable increase and so does cash flow. Finally, if a firm pumps more money
into inventory that doesn’t sell, cash flow decreases. Remember, inventory
ties up capital.

In Dell’s case, we need to go back to the balance sheet to see where the

$1.2 billion entry for the line item came from (see Figure 5.17).


THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Balance Sheet

For the following years ended October 31

In millions, except per share amounts 2003 2002
Current assets

Cash and cash equivalents $4,232 $3,641
Short-term Investments 406 22
Accounts receivable—net 2,586 2,269
Inventaries 306 278
Other 1,394 1,416

Figure 5.17 Dell’s current assets. Source: Dell SEC filings.

As you can see, accounts receivable increased from $2.269 billion to
$2.586 billion, which ate up $317 million (2.586 minus $2.269) because Dell’s
customers owed it more money at the end of fiscal 2003 than they did at the
end of fiscal 2002. In addition, inventory increased a bit from $278 million to
$306 million, which also used up cash because Dell increased the amount of
capital it had tied up in inventory.

Meanwhile, accounts payable increased from $5.075 billion to $5.989 bil-
lion, which means that Dell owed $914 million more to its suppliers at the
end of 2003 than it did at the end of 2002—and that meant more cash in

Dell's pocket (see Figure 5.18).

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Balance Sheet

Liabilities and stockholder’s equity 2003 2002
Current liabilities

Accaunts payable $5,989 $5,075
Accrued and other 2,944 2,444

Figure 5.18 Dell's current liabilities. Source: Dell SEC filings.

7


G2

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXPLAINED

So, we have $914 million in cash generated by an increase in accounts
payable, minus the $317 million increase in accounts receivable, minus the
$28 million change in inventory, which gives us $569 million in cash flow.
Add in the $500 million increase in “accrued and other’—mainly warranties
and employee bonuses that Dell may have to pay out in the future—as well
as some other odds and ends detailed on the bowels of the financial filings,
and you wind up with the $1.220 billion in “changes in operating working
capital” that you see on Dell’s cash flow statement.

You don’t need to go through all of this every time you look at a statement
of cash flows because everything gets neatly netted out for you in the “net cash
provided by operating activities” line. But because the “changes in working
capital” entry is often the biggest cause of differences between net income and
operating cash flow, this is an area that you'll want to pay attention to—hence
our detailed analysis.

One-Time Charges

Remember these? Dell didn’t have any, but H-P did (see Figure 5.19). Because
most of these charges were noncash charges—that is, H-P didn’t write a check
made out to someone named Restructuring—they need to be added back
when figuring cash flow (similar to depreciation, which is also noncash).

Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
This is your holy grail for figuring out whether a company is generating cash.
Also known as operating cash flow, it’s the result of adding or subtracting the

Hewlett-Packard Company and Subsidiaries: Partial Statement af Cash Flows

For the following years ended October 31

In millions 2002 2001 2000
Restructuring charges $1,780 $384 $102
Acquisition-related charges, including in-process research 1,494 60 —

and development

Figure 5.19 Hewlett-Packarc’s partial cash flow statement. Source: Hewlett-Packard SEC filings.


THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS

previous items from net income. It doesn’t replace net income, but if you
don’t look at it in addition to net income, youre not getting the full picture
because the two can often tell very different stories.

Now we arrive at the second portion of the statement of cash flows, the
“cash flow from investing activities” section. These are activities that involve
acquiring or disposing of PP&E, corporate acquisitions, and any sales or pur-

chases of investments.

Capital Expenditures

This figure represents money spent on items that last a long time, such as
PP&E—basically, anything needed to keep the business running and grow-
ing at its current rate. Operating cash flow minus capital expenditures equals
free cash flow, or the amount of cash the company generates after investing in
its business. We can see in Figure 5.20 that Dell spent $305 million on capex.

Investment Proceeds

Companies often take some of their excess cash and invest it in bonds or
stocks in an effort to get a better return than they could in a basic savings ac-
count. This number tells us how much money the company has made (or
lost) on such investments. As you can see in Figure 5.20, Dell invested $8.7

billion of its cash in securities of one sort or another (purchases) and received

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Statement of Cash Flows

In millions:

Fiscal year ending January 31,2003 February 1, 2002 February 2, 2001

Cash flows from investing activities

Investments:

Purchases 98,726) $5,382) $(2,606)
Maturities and sales 7,880 3,425 2,331
Capital expenditures (305) (303) (482)
Net cash used in investing activities $1,381) 42,260) $ (757)

Figure 5.20 Dell's partial cash flow statement. Source: Dell SEC filings.

73


4

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXPLAINED

$7.7 billion from previous investments that either reached maturity or were
sold (maturities and sales).

The final portion of the statement of cash flows is the “cash flow from fi-
nancing activities” section. Financing activities include any transactions with
the company’s owners or creditors. Items that typically show up in this sec-

tion are briefly described next.

Dividends Paid
Unlike many line items, this one is just what it sounds like. You can see that

H-P paid a total of $801 million in dividends in 2002 (see Figure 5.21).

Issuance/Purchase of Common Stock

This is an important number to look at because it indicates how a company is
financing its activities. Rapidly growing companies often issue large amounts
of new stock, which can dilute the value of existing shares but which also give
the company cash for expansion. Slower growing companies that generate a
lot of free cash flow tend to buy back significant amounts of their own stock,
though companies that issue many stock options to their employees also buy
back stock to minimize dilution.

You can see this kind of buyback activity in Figure 5.22 of Dell’s financial
statements printed to the right. Under “purchase of common stock,” note that
Dell spent $2.3 billion repurchasing its own stock, and on the income state-
ment, you can see that the number of diluted shares outstanding fell about
3 percent, from 2.726 billion to 2.644 billion. Although share repurchases are
generally a shareholder-friendly use of €XCess cash—after all, the fewer shares

Hewlett-Packard Company and Subsidiaries: Partial Statement of Cash Flaws

For the following years ended October 31
In millions 2002 2001 2000

Dividends $(801) $621) $(638)

Figure 5.21 Hewlett-Packarc's partial cash flow statement. Source: Hewlett-Packard SEC filings.


THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 75

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Statement of Cash Flows

In millions
Fiscal year ending January 31,2003 February 1, 2002 February 2, 2001

Cash flows from financing activities

Purchase of camman stack $(2,290) $3,000) $(2,700)
Issuance of common stock under 265 298 395
employee plans and other

Net cash used in financing activities $(2,025) $2,702) $(2,305)

Figure 5.22 Dell's partial cash flow statement. Source: Dell SEC filings.

you have to view share buybacks with caution when they come from firms
such as Dell that grant large numbers of stock options. Firms that grant their
employees a ton of options and then spend corporate cash on repurchases are
essentially selling shares to their employees at low prices and buying it back on
the open market at much higher prices, which is not the best use of capital.

Issuance/Repayments of Debt

This number tells you whether the company has borrowed money or repaid
money it previously borrowed. In Figure 5.23, you can see that H-P received
$2.5 billion from bondholders in exchange for some long-term debt and paid
off $2.4 billion in short-term debt. You can see these two entries on the lines

Hewlett-Packard Company and Subsidiaries: Partial Statement af Cash Flows

For the following years ended October 31
In millions 2002 2001 2000

Cash flows from financing activities

(Decrease) increase in nates payable and 2,402) $303 $(1,297)
short-term borrowings

Issuance of long-term debt 2.520 904 1,936
Payment of long-term debt (472) (290) (474)

Figure 5.23 Hewlett-Packarc’s partial cash flow statement. Source: Hewlett-Packard SEC filings.


76

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXPLAINED

labeled “issuance of long-term debt” and “(decrease) in notes payable and

short-term borrowings.”

Conclusion

Painful though it may have been, you've just gained something very valuable:
You now know enough about financial statements to meaningfully analyze a
company. Although you can (and should) spend much more time learning
the nooks and crannies of financial reporting, understanding how a company
generates cash is now within your grasp, and that’s what really matters. The
details aren't nearly as important as the basic concepts that we've just walked
through. Now that you've made it through most of this chapter, you're al-
ready ahead of the pack.

‘To wrap things up, let’s follow a dollar through Dell to see what happens
to it. A customer—tet’s call him Steven, just for kicks—buys a computer for
$1,000 from Dell. Dell turns around and uses $821 to pay manufacturing em-
ployees and parts suppliers (cost of goods sold). How do I know this? Look at
Dell’s income statement (Figure 5.24): The firm spent $29,055/435,404, or 82.1
percent, of every dollar in sales paying for the cost of manufacturing the com-
puter, and 82.1 percent of $1,000 is $821. So. Dell has $179 of the $1,000 it re-
ceived for the computer left over after paying for the cost of making the
computer.

Now, look at the rest of the income statement (Figure 5.25) to see what
happens to the remaining $179. About $86 is spent on television ads and cor-
porate overhead (selling, general, and administrative), $13 goes to research and

development, and another $25.50 goes to Uncle Sam. After adding back a little

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Income Statement

2003
Net revenue $35,404
Cast of revenue 29,055
Gross margin 6,349

Figure 5.24 Dell's revenue breakdown. Source: Dell SEC filings.


CONCLUSION 77

Dell Computer Corporation: Partial Income Statement

2003
Operating expenses
Selling, general, and administrative $3,050
Research, development, and engineering 455
Special charges _
Total aperating expenses $3,505,
Operating incame 2,844
Investment and other income (loss}—net 183
Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of change in 3,027
accounting principle
Provision for incame taxes 905
Income before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle 2,122
Cumulative effect af change in accounting principle—net _
Net incame $2,122

Figure 5.25 Dell's partial income statement. Source: Dell SEC filings.

bit of investment income generated by Dell’s huge cash balance, we're left with
about $60 in net profit from the $1,000 computer sale. That $60 can be rein-
vested in the business, used to buy back stock, or simply kept in a bank ac-
count until a good opportunity comes along. You can calculate every single
one of these numbers yourself right from Dell's income statement— just divide
the line item by total sales, and multiply the resulting percentage by $1,000.

What do we now know about Dell’s business? For one thing, we know
that the profit margins are pretty low—with only about $60 in net profits of
every $1,000 in sales, we can see that most of Dell’s revenue goes right back
out the door to the folks who build the computers, supply the parts, and run
the company.

We also know that Dell doesn’t spend much on R&D or marketing,
which makes sense because the company is striving to be the low-cost pro-

ducer in a commodity market. If Dell were a pharmaceutical company and


78

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXPLAINED

spent only 15 percent of revenue on research, we'd get mighty worried. But
R&D isn’t all that important to Dell, so we're not too concerned about it.

There's much more you can learn about a company than this, and that’s
exactly what we do in the next chapter—we take what we've learned about fi-
nancial statements and use it to generate analytical insights into how a busi-
ness is functioning.

But don’t overlook the power of this simple test: If you can’t understand
how a dollar flows from a company’s customers back through to shareholders,
something's amiss. Either the company’s business model is too confusing or

you need to do more digging before committing any of your money.

Investor's Checklist: Financial Statements Explained

> The balance sheet tells you how much a company owns, how much it
owes, and the difference between the two, which represents the value of the
money that shareholders have invested in the firm. Shareholders’ equity in
a firm is the value of the firm’s assets minus its liabilities.

> Because the balance sheet must balance at all times, any change in assets
or liabilities will cause a corresponding change in equity. Ifa firm gener-
ates huge profits that drive an increase in assets, equity will also increase.

> Keep an eye on the trend in accounts receivable compared with sales. If
the firm is booking a large amount of revenue that hasn't yet been paid
for, this can be a sign of trouble.

>» When youre evaluating a company’s liabilities, remember that debt is a
fixed cost. A big chunk of long-term debt can be risky for a company be-
cause the interest has to be paid no matter how business is doing.

> Be wary of companies that report “nonrecurring” charges, particularly if
they make a habit of it. All kinds of expenses can be buried in “one-time”
charges.

> The statement of cash flows is the true touchstone for corporate value cre-
ation because it shows how much cash a company is generating from year
to year—and cash is what counts. Look at the cash flow statement first.

>» When you're analyzing a company, make sure you can understand how a
dollar flows through the business. If you can’t do this, you probably don’t

understand the company well enough to buy the stock,


Analyzing a Company—
The Basics

Now THAT WE have the basic tools of financial statement analysis in hand,
we can start tearing into companies. Because this can be a daunting task, I

suggest that you break down the process into five areas:

1. Growth: How fast has the company grown, what are the sources of its
growth, and how sustainable is that growth likely to be?

2. Profitability: What kind of a return does the company generate on the
capital it invests?

3. Financial health: How solid is the firm’s financial footing?

4. Risks/bear case: What are the risks to your investment case? There are ex-
cellent reasons of to invest in even the best-looking firms. Make sure you
look at the full story and investigate the negatives as well as the positives.

5. Management: Who's running the show? Are they running the company
for the benefit of shareholders or themselves? This is such a critical topic

that I've devoted an entire chapter (Chapter 7) to it.


80

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

One word of caution: In this chapter and the next, we'll be concerned
only with evaluating the quality of the company. However, this is only half
the story because even the best companies are poor investments if pur-
chased at too high a price. We'll cover how to evaluate stocks in Chapters 9
and 10, where I'll show you how to estimate the right price to pay for a

company’s shares.

Growth

The allure of strong growth has probably led more investors into temptation
than anything else. High growth rates are heady stuff—a company that man-
ages to increase its earnings at 15 percent for five years will double its profits,
and who wouldn't want to do that? Unfortunately, a slew of academic re-
search shows that strong earnings growth is not very persistent over a series of
years; in other words, a track record of high earnings growth does not neces-
sarily lead to high earnings growth in the future.

Why is this? Because the total economic pie is growing only so fast—after
all, the long-run aggregate growth of corporate earnings has historically been
slightly slower than the growth of the economy—strong and rapidly growing
profits attract intense competition. Companies that are growing fast and pil-
ing up profits soon find other companies trying to get a piece of the action
for themselves.

You can’t just look at a series of past growth rates and assume that they'll
predict the future—if investing were that easy, money managers would be
paid much less, and this book would be much shorter. It’s critical to investi-
gate the sources of a company’s growth rate and assess the quality of the
growth. High-quality growth that comes from selling more goods and enter-
ing new markets is more sustainable than low-quality growth that’s generated

by cost-cutting or accounting tricks.

The Four Sources

In the long run, sales growth drives earnings growth. Although profit growth
can outpace sales growth for a while if a company is able to do an excellent
job cutting costs or fiddling with the financial statements, this kind of situa-
tion simply isn’t sustainable over the long haul—there’s a limit to how much

costs can be cut, and there are only so many financial tricks that companies


GROWTH

can use to boost the bottom line. In general, sales growth stems from one of

fo ur areas:

Selling more goods or services
Raising prices

Selling new goods or services

oo Bo

Buying another company

The easiest way to grow is to do whatever you're doing better than your
competitors, sell more products than they do, and steal market share from
them. Mobile-phone giant Nokia, for example, increased its share of the
global mobile phone market from around 15 percent in the mid-1990s to
around 35 percent today by simply doing a better job selling phones.

Raising prices can also be a great way for companies to boost their top
lines, although it takes a strong brand or a captive market to be able to do it
successfully for very long. Anheuser-Busch, for example, has historically been
able to raise prices by 1 percent to 3 percent per year because it has a strong
portfolio of popular brands such as Budweiser, Bud Lite, and Michelob.

Cable companies have also used pricing power to increase their top lines,
though it’s due more to monopoly power than strong brands. Throughout
the 1990s, most markets had only one cable provider for any given consumer,
so cable firms were able to push through annual price increases of 6 percent
to 7 percent.

If there's not much more market share to be taken or your customers are
very price-sensitive, you can do what Wal-Mart did and expand your market
by selling products that you hadn't sold before. In the mid-1980s, founder and
then-CEO Sam Walton saw that the firm’s growth was likely to hit a wall at
some point in the ensuing decade, so he began investigating new markets.
After a trip to Europe, where European retailers had begun to build hypermar-
kets that sold everything from clothes to toys to ketchup under one roof, Wal-
ton figured that groceries could be Wal-Mart’s next big market. Fifteen years
later, Wal-Mart is the largest seller of groceries in the United States, and super-
centers that include food sales account for an ever-larger percentage of its sales.

Remember, the goal of this type of analysis is simply to know why a com-

pany is growing. In Anheuser-Busch’s case, youd want to know how much

81


82

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

growth is coming from price increases (more expensive beer), how much is
coming from volume increases (more beer drinkers), and how much is com-
ing from market share growth (more Budweiser drinkers). Once you're able
to segment a firm’s growth rate into its components, you'll have a much bet-
ter handle on where that growth is likely to come from in the future—and
when it may tap out.

The fourth source of sales growth—acquisitions—deserves special atten-
tion. Acquisitive firms are often darlings of Wall Street because they're major
consumers of investment banking services. They're often looking to either
raise capital for a new acquisition or find a new target, which means they
constantly have folks in suits lining up at their door trying to pitch them on
deals. It shouldn't come as any surprise, then, that the analysts that follow
acquisition-hungry firms usually have nice things to say.
