
CHAPTER 13

AUTOMATED TRADING

237

example, when dealing with a volatile market, where it has no way of
assigning emotional weight to events.
Many trading platforms actually include neural network theories and
technology that will teach your particular system about the network and
use its predictions and capacity to generate direct buy or sell orders based
on those outputs. You can build your own neural network, but as in any of
the different ways of applying a trading system, you first will have to
thoroughly learn the process so that you can know exactly what you are
doing and what you can expect. Know your system, its scope, and its
basic tenets so that you can more likely attain the success you are looking
for in your trading. Learn as much as you can. Automation can be a powerful impulse to the future growth of the FOREX market because it simplifies many processes and brings about many more positive outcomes
than negative issues.
The use of an automated FOREX trading system allows traders to open
positions in real time at any moment and from any place in the world. Especially in highly volatile markets, the delays are practically nonexistent, and
thus most of the usual losses in manually operated systems that stem from
delays in buying or selling in a fast-moving environment are avoided. In the
same way, traders will be able to operate simultaneously in a wide range of
currency markets at the same time because the automated system has no
time limitations and can be set to work the whole 24 hours of the day.
Neural networks and artificial intelligence are the best method for
economic modeling. Those robots adapt and are able to evolve and change
based on market conditions and to train themselves based on a particular
algorithm with a coded set of rules that will allow them to make the correct decisions. They will detect the most important input factors out of
hundreds of factors that are used in the first phase of the network training
setup. The selected factors then are employed to fine-tune forecasts on the
training and test sets in order to maximize accuracy and profit. The results
have proven that neural networks can be implemented very successfully to
forecast the movements in the financial market.

This page intentionally left blank

P

6
A

R

T

BUILDING YOUR
PORTFOLIO

This page intentionally left blank

C

14

H

A

P

T

E

R

SECRETS TO FOREX
DIVERSIFICATION
The ideal investment scenario is to have several alternatives so as not to put
“all your eggs in one basket” and thus minimize the risks by broadening
your portfolio’s scope. The most common alternatives are marketable securities, which are very liquid assets that can be converted into cash quickly
at a fair price. Their maturities usually represent less than one year, and the
rate at which they can be bought or sold has little effect on their prices.
Some examples of marketable securities include commercial paper,
banker’s acceptances, Treasury bills, and other money-market instruments.
Among them, and beyond trading FOREX currency pairs, you can
invest in options, futures, exchange-traded funds, and contracts for difference, commodities, indices, and securities.

FOREX OPTIONS
An option is a contract through which the buyer, by means of paying a premium, acquires the right, though not the obligation, to buy or sell a particular asset at a given price—the execution price—on a certain date or before
a future date, which is the expiration time. Options are negotiated in over
the counter (OTC) and in organized markets. These are the financial products that offer the best possibilities of coverage and speculation, and they
offer a high level of liquidity and low transaction costs.
241

242

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

For example, in the usual way, an investor who anticipates a rise in the
price of wheat could buy the wheat directly and store it, waiting to sell it
later to gain a profit if the price rises. Another way of benefiting from
the price rise without having to mess with storage would be to buy a call
option on the same amount of wheat for a three-month period. If three
months later the price has risen, it will be good for both the first investor
who bought directly and the one who bought the option. The difference
is that the first investor would have to pay in full for the wheat bought;
meanwhile, the option only requires the investor to pay a premium that
represents a very small percentage of the actual price. If the first investor
bought $500 worth of wheat, and the price increased to revalue his or her
investment to $700, he or she will have made a profit of $200, which
represents 40 percent of his or her initial investment. Conversely, the
second investor used a small capital represented by the premium, which
could be of $10, and realized a gain on the option of $200 (the difference
between the previous price and the risen price), so the return on his or her
investment would be of $190, that is, 1900 percent!
An important feature of options is that they are negotiable instruments
in the market, and it is not necessary to materialize the transaction physically; you can buy an option for $10 and then sell it on the market for $200
with a profit of $190 while never having had the intention of really buying
the asset.
Options are divided into calls and puts. A call is the right to buy a particular asset; you can buy a call (buy the rights) or sell a call (sell the
rights). The buyer of a call has the right, but not the obligation, to buy the
asset (underlying asset) at a certain price (execution price) on a certain
date or prior to that date, which is the expiration time, in exchange for a
premium that the investor pays to the seller of the call. A put is the right to
sell an asset. You can buy or sell a put (the right to buy or sell). The buyer
of a put has the right, but not the obligation, to buy the asset (the real asset)
at a certain price (execution price) on a certain date or prior to that date,
which is the expiration time, in exchange for a premium that the investor
pays to the seller of the put. The right to buy or sell is acquired by the
holder of the option. The person who sells the option is called the writer.
Underlying assets are the assets on which the option is negotiated. The
premium is the cost of the option, that is, the price that gives the right to buy
(call) or sell (put) the underlying asset of an option. In the preceding example, the premium would be represented by the $10.
When the holder executes the right to buy or sell, it is said that he or she
executes the contract. The execution price, or strike price, is the price at

CHAPTER 14

SECRETS TO FOREX DIVERSIFICATION

243

which the right is granted to buy or sell (call or put) an option. The expiry
date is the date on which the option contract expires.
There are three basic types of options: the American option, which can
be executed at any moment until its expiry date; the European option,
which can only be executed at the moment of its expiration; and the Asian
option, whose price on the expiry date does not depend on the price of the
underlying asset at that moment but on the average of its consecutive prices
during a determined time period.
Options are commonly perceived as being a high-risk investment; however, this is not always true because certain positions in options bear much
less risk than physical acquisition of the underlying asset. You could say
that the maximum risk of option holders is the premium that has to be paid.
The maximum risk of the writers or sellers is usually unlimited, and their
maximum benefit is the option premium.

RISKS AND BENEFITS OF BUYING A CALL OR A PUT
A call option will be placed when the price of a particular underlying asset
is perceived as rising. A put option will be acquired when the price of this
asset is in decline. In both cases, the risk to the investor is limited to the full
amount of the premium that has to be paid to perform the transaction,
which represents only a small fraction of the cost of the underlying asset.
However, if the prices don’t evolve in the projected direction, the risk of
loss is of all the premium paid.
Potential benefits are unlimited. In the case of a call, since the contract
gives the holder the right to buy at a fixed price, this right will acquire a
greater value as the price of the underlying asset increases. At the expiry
date, the investor will get the amount determined by the difference between
the execution price and the final price that has risen minus the premium
paid. In the case of a put, the benefit will be equal to the fall in price minus
the premium paid.

RISKS AND BENEFITS OF SELLING A CALL OR A PUT
When the price of the underlying asset is perceived as falling, selling a call
is the strategy to use. Puts are sold when the price is perceived to be on the
rise. The greatest benefit that can be obtained from selling both a call or a
put is the amount of the premium that the seller receives for his or her
option.
The greatest risk that can be incurred by selling a put is that the price
falls instead of rising; the greatest loss is the amount to the execution price
of the underlying asset minus the premium received. In the case of a call,

244

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the potential risk is unlimited because the price could rise indefinitely. This
is why selling calls or puts is extremely risky if the investor does not have
the underlying asset in his or her possession.

LEVERAGE
One of the most attractive characteristics of futures and options, and at the
same time the most dangerous, is that they can be used as leverage effect.
The leverage effect is the relationship between the invested capital and the
result obtained from a given investment. The higher the leverage, the less
capital is needed to obtain a particular result.
For example, say that an investor buys one call on company ABC shares
with expiry in January 2009, paying a premium of $15 with an execution
price of $100 (expressed as “1 ABC January 100 call”). At the moment, the
shares of company ABC are quoted at $108. If on the expiry date the shares
are quoted at $120, the investor will execute his or her buying option and
will sell the shares on the market for $120. In this way, with an investment
of $15 (the premium paid), the investor has obtained a profit of $20; the
return he or she has gotten on the transaction is 133.33 percent. You can see
that the return on options is much higher.
However, the leverage works both ways. If on the expiry date the shares
of company ABC are quoted at $80, the investor would not execute his or
her buying option because although he or she still has the right to buy
shares at $100, he or she can buy them cheaper, at $80, in the market. In
this case, the investor would lose 100 percent of the investment, that is, the
$15 premium.
The leverage effect has to be treated with respect, and only experienced
investors should speculate with options and futures because it is very easy
to lose the whole investment and more.
To calculate the value of the premium of an option, the market usually employs the formula of Black and Scholes. Here is a simple example
on how it is calculated: You have a share quoted at $100, and you could
buy it in a year at $100. How much does this right cost? To answer this
question, let us suppose that at the end of the year, the price of the share
can only take one of two values: It either rises to $120 or it falls to $80.
Now, you want to build a portfolio by buying 50 shares and selling 100
calls. How much would that cost? You would have to pay 50 shares ⫻
$100 ⫽ $5000; however, you will not need to pay all that money because
for the options sold, you will receive $100 ⫻ the price of each option,
which is still unknown. What you know is that if at the end of the year the
shares rise in price, your option will be valued at $100 and if they fall in

CHAPTER 14

SECRETS TO FOREX DIVERSIFICATION

245

price, the option will have a value of 0. Thus the final value of your portfolio will be $4000 if the share price rises (50 shares ⫻ $120 per share ⫺
100 calls ⫻ $20 per call) or $4000 if the share falls (50 shares ⫻ $80 ⫺
100 calls ⫻ $0 per call). You can see that the value of your portfolio does
not depend on the price of the share at that moment. That is, your portfolio is not at risk and thus offers a return similar to one-year Treasury
bonds (the expiry date of the option).
If this nonrisk return is 5 percent, this implies that to get $4000 in a
year, you will have to invest today 4000/1.05 ⫽ $3809.52; this is your
portfolio’s initial value. Since the 50 shares you have bought cost $5000,
the amount you should have received on the 100 options you have sold
would be 5000 ⫺ 3809.52 ⫽ $1190.48. For this reason, the price of each
option at the moment of initiation should be $11.90. If the price of the
option were lower or higher than $11.90, you could earn money by buying
options and selling shares, or vice versa, which would bring the price to its
theoretical value.
The Black and Scholes model uses an infinite number of subperiods
and repeats the preceding procedure an infinite number of times to calculate the price of the option. In the example, the theoretical value of the
option applying this formula is of $11.90, very near to the value calculated
for a single period.
Some of the strategies used with options allow a more aggressive
approach to the market:
Bull spread. Buying a call or a put with a particular execution price
and selling another call or put with a higher execution price,
where both options must have the same expiry date and a rise in
the price of the underlying asset is expected.
Bear spread. Buying a call or a put with a given execution price
and selling another call or put with a lower execution price
(as in the bull spread, both options have the same expiry date).
In this case, a decrease in the price of the underlying asset is
expected.
Straddle buy. Buying a call and a put with the same execution price
and expiry date. The expectation is for great volatility to the
bullish as well as to the bearish side.
Strangle buy. Buying a call and a put with different execution prices
and the same date of expiry. As with the straddle, the strangle
expects great volatility in the financial markets, even higher than
in the preceding case.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

246

Butterfly. The buying and selling of options with three different
execution prices: (1) buying a call or a put with a low execution
price, (2) buying a call or a put with a high execution price, and
(3) selling two calls or two puts with execution prices at about
midway between the two preceding ones. The expectation is
oriented to a stable market.

SPOT FOREX OPTIONS
Single-payment options trading (SPOT) options are a slightly different
kind of FOREX option: The trader forecasts what is to happen in the
FOREX market. If the trader is right in his or her predictions, the possible
profit can be unlimited, and if the SPOT is unsuccessful, the trader loses
only the premium.
SPOT FOREX options are more flexible to set and execute, but the premiums are higher than in traditional options. A basic example of how a
SPOT option works would be that the trader states his or her prediction on
the market: “EUR/USD will break through 1.4000 in 15 days.” The investor
gets a quote for the cost or premium associated with this option and will
receive a payout if, effectively, the prediction happens. The option is automatically converted to cash when the trade is successful. If your prediction
is incorrect, you lose only the premium.
There are three basic variants of SPOT options: double one-touch,
one-touch, and double no-touch. A double one-touch option has two barrier levels; either one has to be breached before the expiration date for
a profitable result. If none of them is crossed at expiration, the option loses
its value. This type of option is usually employed on news releases because
it is a nondirectional breakout prediction. If any of the barrier levels is broken, the payout will be made.
A one-touch option has a single barrier level. This makes the option a little less expensive than the double one-touch option. The same behavior
applies; the level has to be surpassed before expiration for the option to be of
value and yield a profit. This is a directional approach when you have good
probabilities of forecasting that the market is going in a particular direction.
A double no-touch option is exactly the opposite of a double one-touch
option. Here, you also have two barrier levels, but in this case neither one
can be crossed before expiration. Otherwise, the option payout is not made.
This option is usually employed when the trader forecasts that prices will
remain in a range and that there will not be much volatility in the market.

CHAPTER 14

SECRETS TO FOREX DIVERSIFICATION

247

Options are an excellent way to protect your existing positions by
means of a hedge in order to limit the risk. Some traders even use them to
replace stop losses.

FOREX FUTURES
A future is a standardized contract to buy or sell a specific asset at a fixed
future date and at a price previously agreed on. There are two parties in
a futures contract: the buyer and the seller. The buyer of the future has the
obligation to buy on a determined date; meanwhile, the seller has the obligation to sell on that same date.
Futures contracts are negotiated in organized markets and thus are
standardized instruments; for example, a futures contract on steel can
involve 5 tons of the metal, or each contract can be set for 1 million dollars.
For this reason, futures are only negotiated in multiples of contracts; that is,
if you want to buy 50 tons of steel, you would have to buy 10 steel futures.
These standards offer liquidity by increasing the number of potential buyers
and sellers.
One tick is the minimum fluctuation allowed in the price of a futures
contract. Since every futures contract has a fixed size, the minimum fluctuation will have a monetary value, which is the tick multiplied by the size
of the contract; this is known as the tick value.
All kinds of people use futures; some of them, for example, farmers,
use them to reduce risks; others look for a high rentability while assuming
greater risks to achieve it. In the futures markets, the risk is transferred
from the most conservative to the most aggressive traders.
Risk reduction is achieved by taking a termed position in the opposite
direction of the real-time market’s actual direction, trying to protect the
investment against contrarian moves of the market. This is known as coverage. Arbitrage is achieved by buying or selling in two different markets
(actual market price/futures), benefiting from the imperfections in each
one of them. Speculators try to maximize their profits in the shortest time
possible, thus assuming a very high risk in their investments.
In general terms, the prices of futures move in the same direction as
the market of physical assets. The transaction in futures implies that both
parties agree to buy and sell financial instruments or physical commodities that will be delivered in the future at a specific price. When you buy
a futures contract, you agree to buy something that the seller has not yet
produced. Physical goods are usually not exchanged nor delivered, unlike

248

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the transactions made between producers and consumers, but their prices
allow traders to hedge their risks or speculate. The futures market is very
risky and complex but also offers great liquidity.
Profits and losses are calculated on a daily basis. If the price of the
commodity or financial instrument rises, the seller’s account will be debited on the difference between the actual price and the value agreed on at
the moment of establishment of the contract; the buyer’s account will be
credited with the equivalent amount. The buyer has profited because the
price he or she is obligated to pay on the future is now less than the market
price. These adjustments are made every day as the market moves and
futures positions are settled. Thus gains and losses are deducted or credited
to each party’s account every day.
The futures market is a very important source of information about
sentiment in the market and other indicators. It is extremely active and is
the center of the global marketplace because transactions occur in the physical exchange of commodities and not only as pure financial speculation.
Prices can be determined through estimation of tomorrow’s levels of supply
and demand based on today’s transactions. Many factors intervene in the
definition of prices, and a constant flow of information renders the overall
operativity very transparent. On the other hand, risks are reduced because
the prices of the futures were set previously, which allows planning for the
quantities to be bought or sold. The result of a reduced risk is a higher stability in prices at the retail level because sellers will be less likely to push
prices too far to make up for their losses.

FOREX EXCHANGE-TRADED FUNDS (ETFs)
ETFs allow small investors to perform transactions in the stock markets
worldwide, for example, in countries such as China, India, Mexico, or
Brazil, and profit from their strong economic potential, thanks to the
present market globalization. These are funds that can be bought or sold on
the market exactly as if they were stock shares. Their cost is much smaller
than investing directly in the stock markets and without all the administrative obstacles that could arise if a trader were to transact directly on site.
The offer of ETFs is presently limited, and few entities commercialize
them. They can be transacted through any financial intermediary such as
online brokerage firms or other entities that offer investment services. This
kind of instrument is very similar to an index and is the most attractive
option to invest in foreign markets that are difficult access.

CHAPTER 14

SECRETS TO FOREX DIVERSIFICATION

249

As with stocks, the prices of ETFs are constantly changing throughout
the day based on supply and demand. The investor will be able to sell whenever he or she wants during the working hours of the specific market where
the particular ETF is being quoted by giving the sell order to his or her
financial intermediary.
The price paid to acquire a participation in an ETF depends on each
broker. There are also other associated costs; for example, all those funds
apply a management fee that ranges between 0.15 and 0.5 percent. This fee
is lower than commissions taken by traditional funds, which hover around
1.2 percent. Since this product is quoted on the stock markets, there is also
