
conjunction, putrefaction, congelation, cibation, sublimation, fermentation, exaltation,
multiplication, and projection! to which he might have added botheration, the most
important process of all. He was very rich, and allowed it to be believed that he could
make gold out of iron. Fuller, in his "Worthies of England," says that an English
gentleman of good credit reported that, in his travels abroad, he saw a record in the island
of Malta, which declared that Ripley gave yearly to the knights of that island, and of
Rhodes, the enormous sum of one hundred thousand pounds sterling, to enable them to
carry on the war against the Turks. In his old age, he became an anchorite near Boston,
and wrote twenty-five volumes upon the subject of alchymy, the most important of which
is the "Duodecim Portarum," already mentioned. Before he died, he seems to have
acknowledged that he had misspent his life in this vain study, and requested that all men,
when they met with any of his books, would burn them, or afford them no credit, as they
had been written merely from his opinion, and not from proof; and that subsequent trial
had made manifest to him that they were false and vain. [Fuller's "Worthies of England."]

BASIL VALENTINE.
Germany also produced many famous alchymists in the fifteenth century, the chief of
whom are Basil Valentine, Bernard of Treves, and the Abbot Trithemius. Basil Valentine
was born at Mayence, and was made prior of St. Peter's, at Erfurt, about the year 1414. It
was known, during his life, that he diligently sought the philosopher's stone, and that he
had written some works upon the process of transmutation. They were thought, for many
years, to be lost; but were, after his death, discovered enclosed in the stone work of one
of the pillars in the Abbey. They were twenty-one in number, and are fully set forth in the
third volume of Lenglet's "History of the Hermetic Philosophy." The alchymists asserted,
that Heaven itself conspired to bring to light these extraordinary works; and that the pillar
in which they were enclosed was miraculously shattered by a thunderbolt; and that, as
soon as the manuscripts were liberated, the pillar closed up again of its own accord!
BERNARD of TREVES.
The life of this philosopher is a remarkable instance of talent and perseverance
misapplied. In the search of his chimera nothing could daunt him. Repeated
disappointment never diminished his hopes; and, from the age of fourteen to that of
eighty-five, he was incessantly employed among the drugs and furnaces of his laboratory,
wasting his life with the view of prolonging it, and reducing himself to beggary in the
hopes of growing rich.
He was born at either Treves or Padua, in the year 1406. His father is said by some to
have been a physician in the latter city; and by others, to have been Count of the Marches
of Treves, and one of the most wealthy nobles of his country. At all events, whether
noble or physician, he was a rich man, and left his son a magnificent estate. At the age of
fourteen he first became enamoured of the science of alchymy, and read the Arabian
authors in their own language. He himself has left a most interesting record of his labours
and wanderings, from which the following particulars are chiefly extracted: -- The first

book which fell into his hands, was that of the Arabian philosopher, Rhazes, from the
reading of which he imagined that he had discovered the means of augmenting gold a
hundred fold. For four years he worked in his laboratory, with the book of Rhazes
continually before him. At the end of that time, he found that he had spent no less than
eight hundred crowns upon his experiment, and had got nothing but fire and smoke for
his pains. He now began to lose confidence in Rhazes, and turned to the works of Geber.
He studied him assiduously for two years; and, being young, rich, and credulous, was
beset by all the chymists of the town, who kindly assisted him in spending his money. He
did not lose his faith in Geber, or patience with his hungry assistants, until he had lost
two thousand crowns - a very considerable sum in those days.
Among all the crowd of pretended men of science who surrounded him, there was but
one as enthusiastic and as disinterested as himself. With this man, who was a monk of the
order of St. Francis, he contracted an intimate friendship, and spent nearly all his time.
Some obscure treatises of Rupecissa and Sacrobosco having fallen into their hands, they
were persuaded, from reading them, that highly rectified spirits of wine was the universal
alkahest, or dissolvent, which would aid them greatly in the process of transmutation.
They rectified the alcohol thirty times, till they made it so strong as to burst the vessels
which contained it. After they had worked three years, and spent three hundred crowns in
the liquor, they discovered that they were on the wrong track. They next tried alum and
copperas; but the great secret still escaped them. They afterwards imagined that there was
a marvellous virtue in all excrement, especially the human, and actually employed more
than two years in experimentalizing upon it, with mercury, salt, and molten lead! Again
the adepts flocked around him from far and near, to aid him with their counsels. He
received them all hospitably, and divided his wealth among them so generously and
unhesitatingly, that they gave him the name of the "good Trevisan," by which he is still
often mentioned in works that treat on alchymy. For twelve years he led this life, making
experiments every day upon some new substance, and praying to God night and morning
that he might discover the secret of transmutation.
In this interval he lost his friend the monk, and was joined by a magistrate of the city of
Treves, as ardent as himself in the search. His new acquaintance imagined that the ocean
was the mother of gold, and that sea-salt would change lead or iron into the precious
metals. Bernard resolved to try; and, transporting his laboratory to a house on the coast of
the Baltic, he worked upon salt for more than a year, melting it, sublimating it,
crystalizing it, and occasionally drinking it, for the sake of other experiments. Still the
strange enthusiast was not wholly discouraged, and his failure in one trial only made him
the more anxious to attempt another.
He was now approaching the age of fifty, and had as yet seen nothing of the world. He,
therefore, determined to travel through Germany, Italy, France, and Spain. Wherever he
stopped he made inquiries whether there were any alchymists in the neighbourhood. He
invariably sought them out; and, if they were poor, relieved, and, if affluent, encouraged
them. At Citeaux he became acquainted with one Geoffrey Leuvier, a monk of that place,
who persuaded him that the essence of egg-shells was a valuable ingredient. He tried,
therefore, what could be done; and was only prevented from wasting a year or two on the

experiment by the opinions of an attorney, at Berghem, in Flanders, who said that the
great secret resided in vinegar and copperas. He was not convinced of the absurdity of
this idea until he had nearly poisoned himself. He resided in France for about five years,
when, hearing accidentally that one Master Henry, confessor to the Emperor Frederic III,
had discovered the philosopher's stone, he set out for Germany to pay him a visit. He had,
as usual, surrounded himself with a set of hungry dependants, several of whom
determined to accompany him. He had not heart to refuse them, and he arrived at Vienna
with five of them. Bernard sent a polite invitation to the confessor, and gave him a
sumptuous entertainment, at which were present nearly all the alchymists of Vienna.
Master Henry frankly confessed that he had not discovered the philosopher's stone, but
that he had all his life been employed in searching for it, and would so continue, till he
found it; -- or died. This was a man after Bernard's own heart, and they vowed with each
other an eternal friendship. It was resolved, at supper, that each alchymist present should
contribute a certain sum towards raising forty-two marks of gold, which, in five days, it
was confidently asserted by Master Henry, would increase, in his furnace, five fold.
Bernard, being the richest man, contributed the lion's share, ten marks of gold, Master
Henry five, and the others one or two a piece, except the dependants of Bernard, who
were obliged to borrow their quota from their patron. The grand experiment was duly
made; the golden marks were put into a crucible, with a quantity of salt, copperas,
aquafortis, egg-shells, mercury, lead, and dung. The alchymists watched this precious
mess with intense interest, expecting that it would agglomerate into one lump of pure
gold. At the end of three weeks they gave up the trial, upon some excuse that the crucible
was not strong enough, or that some necessary ingredient was wanting. Whether any thief
had put his hands into the crucible is not known, but it is certain that the gold found
therein at the close of the experiment was worth only sixteen marks, instead of the fortytwo, which were put there at the beginning.
Bernard, though he made no gold at Vienna, made away with a very considerable
quantity. He felt the loss so acutely, that he vowed to think no more of the philosopher's
stone. This wise resolution he kept for two months; but he was miserable. He was in the
condition of the gambler, who cannot resist the fascination of the game while he has a
coin remaining, but plays on with the hope of retrieving former losses, till hope forsakes
him, and he can live no longer. He returned once more to his beloved crucibles, and
resolved to prosecute his journey in search of a philosopher who had discovered the
secret, and would communicate it to so zealous and persevering an adept as himself.
From Vienna he travelled to Rome, and from Rome to Madrid. Taking ship at Gibraltar,
he proceeded to Messina; from Messina to Cyprus; from Cyprus to Greece; from Greece
to Constantinople; and thence into Egypt, Palestine, and Persia. These wanderings
occupied him about eight years. From Persia he made his way back to Messina, and from
thence into France. He afterwards passed over into England, still in search of his great
chimera; and this occupied four years more of his life. He was now growing both old and
poor; for he was sixty-two years of age, and had been obliged to sell a great portion of his
patrimony to provide for his expenses. His journey to Persia had cost upwards of thirteen
thousand crowns, about one-half of which had been fairly melted in his all-devouring
furnaces: the other half was lavished upon the sycophants that he made it his business to
search out in every town he stopped at.

On his return to Treves he found, to his sorrow, that, if not an actual beggar, he was not
much better. His relatives looked upon him as a madman, and refused even to see him.
Too proud to ask for favours from any one, and still confident that, some day or other, he
would be the possessor of unbounded wealth, he made up his mind to retire to the island
of Rhodes, where he might, in the mean time, hide his poverty from the eyes of all the
world. Here he might have lived unknown and happy; but, as ill luck would have it, he
fell in with a monk as mad as himself upon the subject of transmutation. They were,
however, both so poor that they could not afford to buy the proper materials to work with.
They kept up each other's spirits by learned discourses on the Hermetic Philosophy, and
in the reading of all the great authors who had written upon the subject. Thus did they
nurse their folly, as the good wife of Tam O'Shanter did her wrath, "to keep it warm."
After Bernard had resided about a year in Rhodes, a merchant, who knew his family,
advanced him the sum of eight thousand florins, upon the security of the last-remaining
acres of his formerly large estate. Once more provided with funds, he recommenced his
labours with all the zeal and enthusiasm of a young man. For three years he hardly
stepped out of his laboratory: he ate there, and slept there, and did not even give himself
time to wash his hands and clean his beard, so intense was his application. It is
melancholy to think that such wonderful perseverance should have been wasted in so
vain a pursuit, and that energies so unconquerable should have had no worthier field to
strive in. Even when he had fumed away his last coin, and had nothing left in prospective
to keep his old age from starvation, hope never forsook him. He still dreamed of ultimate
success, and sat down a greyheaded man of eighty, to read over all the authors on the
hermetic mysteries, from Geber to his own day, lest he should have misunderstood some
process, which it was not yet too late to recommence. The alchymists say, that he
succeeded at last, and discovered the secret of transmutation in his eighty-second year.
They add, that he lived three years afterwards to enjoy his wealth. He lived, it is true, to
this great age, and made a valuable discovery - more valuable than gold or gems. He
learned, as he himself informs us, just before he had attained his eighty-third year, that
the great secret of philosophy was contentment with our lot. Happy would it have been
for him if he had discovered it sooner, and before he became decrepit, a beggar, and an
exile!
He died at Rhodes, in the year 1490, and all the alchymists of Europe sang elegies over
him, and sounded his praise as the "good Trevisan." He wrote several treatises upon his
chimera, the chief of which are, the "Book of Chemistry," the "Verbum dimissum," and
an essay "De Natura Ovi."

TRITHEMIUS.
The name of this eminent man has become famous in the annals of alchymy, although he
did but little to gain so questionable an honour. He was born in the year 1462, at the
village of Trittheim, in the electorate of Treves. His father was John Heidenberg, a vinegrower, in easy circumstances, who, dying when his son was but seven years old, left him
to the care of his mother. The latter married again very shortly afterwards, and neglected

the poor boy, the offspring of her first marriage. At the age of fifteen he did not even
know his letters, and was, besides, half starved, and otherwise ill-treated by his stepfather; but the love of knowledge germinated in the breast of the unfortunate youth, and
he learned to read at the house of a neighbour. His father-in-law set him to work in the
vineyards, and thus occupied all his days; but the nights were his own. He often stole out
unheeded, when all the household were fast asleep, poring over his studies in the fields,
by the light of the moon; and thus taught himself Latin and the rudiments of Greek. He
was subjected to so much ill-usage at home, in consequence of this love of study, that he
determined to leave it. Demanding the patrimony which his father had left him, he
proceeded to Treves; and, assuming the name of Trithemius, from that of his native
village of Trittheim, lived there for some months, under the tuition of eminent masters,
by whom he was prepared for the university. At the age of twenty, he took it into his head
that he should like to see his mother once more; and he set out on foot from the distant
university for that purpose. On his arrival near Spannheim, late in the evening of a
gloomy winter's day, it came on to snow so thickly, that he could not proceed onwards to
the town. He, therefore, took refuge for the night in a neighbouring monastery; but the
storm continued several days, the roads became impassable, and the hospitable monks
would not hear of his departure. He was so pleased with them and their manner of life,
that he suddenly resolved to fix his abode among them, and renounce the world. They
were no less pleased with him, and gladly received him as a brother. In the course of two
years, although still so young, he was unanimously elected their Abbot. The financial
affairs of the establishment had been greatly neglected, the walls of the building were
falling into ruin, and everything was in disorder. Trithemius, by his good management
and regularity, introduced a reform in every branch of expenditure. The monastery was
repaired, and a yearly surplus, instead of a deficiency, rewarded him for his pains. He did
not like to see the monks idle, or occupied solely between prayers for their business, and
chess for their relaxation. He, therefore, set them to work to copy the writings of eminent
authors. They laboured so assiduously, that, in the course of a few years, their library,
which had contained only about forty volumes, was enriched with several hundred
valuable manuscripts, comprising many of the classical Latin authors, besides the works
of the early fathers, and the principal historians and philosophers of more modern date.
He retained the dignity of Abbot of Spannheim for twenty-one years, when the monks,
tired of the severe discipline he maintained, revolted against him, and chose another
abbot in his place. He was afterwards made Abbot of St. James, in Wurtzburg, where he
died in 1516.
During his learned leisure at Spannheim, he wrote several works upon the occult
sciences, the chief of which are an essay on geomancy, or divination by means of lines
and circles on the ground; another upon sorcery; a third upon alchymy; and a fourth upon
the government of the world by its presiding angels, which was translated into English,
and published by the famous William Lilly in 1647.
It has been alleged by the believers in the possibility of transmutation, that the prosperity
of the abbey of Spannheim, while under his superintendence, was owing more to the
philosopher's stone than to wise economy. Trithemius, in common with many other
learned men, has been accused of magic; and a marvellous story is told of his having

raised from the grave the form of Mary of Burgundy, at the intercession of her widowed
husband, the Emperor Maximilian. His work on steganographia, or cabalistic writing,
was denounced to the Count Palatine, Frederic II, as magical and devilish; and it was by
him taken from the shelves of his library and thrown into the fire. Trithemius is said to be
the first writer who makes mention of the wonderful story of the devil and Dr. Faustus,
the truth of which he firmly believed. He also recounts the freaks of a spirit, named
Hudekin, by whom he was at times tormented. [Biographie Universelle]
THE MARECHAL DE RAYS.
One of the greatest encouragers of alchymy in the fifteenth century was Gilles de Laval,
Lord of Rays and a Marshal of France. His name and deeds are little known; but in the
annals of crime and folly, they might claim the highest and worst pro-eminence. Fiction
has never invented anything wilder or more horrible than his career; and were not the
details but too well authenticated by legal and other documents which admit no doubt, the
lover of romance might easily imagine they were drawn to please him from the stores of
the prolific brain, and not from the page of history.
He was born about the year 1420, of one of the noblest families of Brittany. His father
dying when Gilles had attained his twentieth year, he came into uncontrolled possession,
at that early age, of a fortune which the monarchs of France might have envied him. He
was a near kinsman of the Montmorencys, the Roncys, and the Craons; possessed fifteen
princely domains, and had an annual revenue of about three hundred thousand livres.
Besides this, he was handsome, learned, and brave. He distinguished himself greatly in
the wars of Charles VII, and was rewarded by that monarch with the dignity of a marshal
of France. But he was extravagant and magnificent in his style of living, and accustomed
from his earliest years to the gratification of every wish and passion; and this, at last, led
him from vice to vice, and from crime to crime, till a blacker name than his is not to be
found in any record of human iniquity.
In his castle of Champtoce, he lived with all the splendour of an Eastern Caliph. He kept
up a troop of two hundred horsemen to accompany him wherever he went; and his
excursions for the purposes of hawking and hunting were the wonder of all the country
around, so magnificent were the caparisons of his steeds and the dresses of his retainers.
Day and night, his castle was open all the year round to comers of every degree. He made
it a rule to regale even the poorest beggar with wine and hippocrass. Every day an ox was
roasted whole in his spacious kitchens, besides sheep, pigs, and poultry sufficient to feed
five hundred persons. He was equally magnificent in his devotions. His private chapel at
Champtoce was the most beautiful in France, and far surpassed any of those in the richlyendowed cathedrals of Notre Dame in Paris, of Amiens, of Beauvais, or of Rouen. It was
hung with cloth of gold and rich velvet. All the chandeliers were of pure gold, curiously
inlaid with silver. The great crucifix over the altar was of solid silver, and the chalices
and incense-burners were of pure gold. He had, besides, a fine organ, which he caused to
be carried from one castle to another, on the shoulders of six men, whenever he changed
his residence. He kept up a choir of twenty-five young children of both sexes, who were
instructed in singing by the first musicians of the day. The master of his chapel he called

a bishop, who had under him his deans, archdeacons, and vicars, each receiving great
salaries; the bishop four hundred crowns a year, and the rest in proportion.
He also maintained a whole troop of players, including ten dancing-girls and as many
ballad-singers, besides morris-dancers, jugglers, and mountebanks of every description.
The theatre on which they performed was fitted up without any regard to expense; and
they played mysteries, or danced the morris-dance, every evening, for the amusement of
himself and household, and such strangers as were sharing his prodigal hospitality.
At the age of twenty-three, he married Catherine, the wealthy heiress of the house of
Touars, for whom he refurnished his castle at an expense of a hundred thousand crowns.
His marriage was the signal for new extravagance, and he launched out more madly than
ever he had done before; sending for fine singers or celebrated dancers from foreign
countries to amuse him and his spouse, and instituting tilts and tournaments in his great
court-yard almost every week for all the knights and nobles of the province of Brittany.
The Duke of Brittany's court was not half so splendid as that of the Marechal de Rays.
His utter disregard of wealth was so well known that he was made to pay three times its
value for everything he purchased. His castle was filled with needy parasites and
panderers to his pleasures, amongst whom he lavished rewards with an unsparing hand.
But the ordinary round of sensual gratification ceased at last to afford him delight: he was
observed to be more abstemious in the pleasures of the table, and to neglect the beauteous
dancing-girls who used formerly to occupy so much of his attention. He was sometimes
gloomy and reserved; and there was an unnatural wildness in his eye which gave
indications of incipient madness. Still, his discourse was as reasonable as ever; his
urbanity to the guests that flocked from far and near to Champtoce suffered no
diminution; and learned priests, when they conversed with him, thought to themselves
that few of the nobles of France were so well-informed as Gilles de Laval. But dark
rumours spread gradually over the country; murder, and, if possible, still more atrocious
deeds were hinted at; and it was remarked that many young children, of both sexes,
suddenly disappeared, and were never afterwards heard of. One or two had been traced to
the castle of Champtoce, and had never been seen to leave it; but no one dared to accuse
openly so powerful a man as the Marechal de Rays. Whenever the subject of the lost
children was mentioned in his presence, he manifested the greatest astonishment at the
mystery which involved their fate, and indignation against those who might be guilty of
kidnapping them. Still the world was not wholly deceived; his name became as
formidable to young children as that of the devouring ogre in fairy tales; and they were
taught to go miles round, rather than pass under the turrets of Champtoce.
In the course of a very few years, the reckless extravagance of the Marshal drained him
of all his funds, and he was obliged to put up some of his estates for sale. The Duke of
Brittany entered into a treaty with him for the valuable seignory of Ingrande; but the heirs
of Gilles implored the interference of Charles VII. to stay the sale. Charles immediately
issued an edict, which was confirmed by the Provincial Parliament of Brittany, forbidding
him to alienate his paternal estates. Gilles had no alternative but to submit. He had
nothing to support his extravagance but his allowance as a Marshal of France, which did
not cover the one-tenth of his expenses. A man of his habits and character could not
