
book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

Page 167

Testing

167

I knew where this was going. But I did not interrupt him. He continued: “I’ve already told you this. But it’s like I see some of myself in you.
That you have this temptation now to go over the top. To do more of the
same. That you can do no wrong. You can get into so much trouble so
quickly like that.”
I nodded. He was telling me what I needed to hear. Last night I’d been
tempted to plan another full trade. But I hadn’t. I’d stopped when I realized
that I lacked the confidence to plan another trade. Rather than do that, I
simply started the next idea—with a number at which the Euro was likely
to stop (at least in my opinion). Maybe I was too close to the loss of my entire trading account, but I simply didn’t feel like I wanted to go out and conquer the world. I still felt like I wanted to do my work at Wakeman. That I
wanted to earn back the trust of my wife. That I wanted to make Harvey
proud that I could get my emotions under control. And then, most of all, I
wanted to discipline myself so that I could gain the chance to trade again.
And trade profitably this time.
I needed to go. I had so much work upstairs and I wasn’t getting paid to
sit and shoot the bull with a bunch of wild traders. Already, other traders
had begun to surround us and were asking me questions. They mostly just
wanted to know if I was planning to buy Euros at 1.1850. It only took a few
moments to explain that I was simply offering what might be a good profit
target on the original trade, if I hadn’t already picked a different target. In
fact, I sort of wondered why they couldn’t come up with their own profit
targets. Didn’t they know more about trading than I did?

RISKING ERNEST WELLINGTON’S MONEY AGAIN
Work raced by. Friday shot past and the only reason I stopped downstairs
was to say good day to Roddy and Winnipeg George, who weren’t there
anyway. The entire trading floor was empty. I checked the price of the
EUR/USD and it was hovering at 1.2100, hardly having moved at all during
the entire day. Having opened the charts, I figured I might as well take a
look to see if I could justify any type of trade at the 1.1850 level. It didn’t
mean much just to say that price would probably stop down at that price. If
it was going to stop down there, why not buy it for even just a few pips?
I opened up the 4-hour chart again to see the places where 1.1850 had
been hit, and then I opened a 15-minute chart to get the finer details of
what happened exactly at those times.
The most recent example was November 18, 2003: at 10:15 on that
day, the pair rocketed through the 1.1850 mark, never stopping for a
breath of air. Perhaps an interest decision had been made that day and it

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

Page 168

168

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

overwhelmed the market. In any case, price flew upward 127 pips beyond
the level, and didn’t fall back below it for six days. When it fell back
through, it fell hard, but I had to believe that I would have exited the trade
by then. Taking a loss of 127 pips seemed too great. On a sheet of paper in
front of me, I wrote:
November 18, 2003: Loss/127
Then I moved back in time to the next example, from November 16.
Price rose upward and came within 5 pips of the mark (to 1.1845) and fell
backward 122 pips, almost immediately, which I confirmed with a shorter
term chart. It never reached higher than 1.1845 before taking this huge reversal. Did this qualify? I said yes, since I wasn’t going to bicker with 5
pips. From now on, I might go ahead and be willing to sell within 5 pips of
the line. This seemed perfectly reasonable. Now I added another trade on
the piece of paper in front of me: November 16, 2003: Profit/122.
Next I looked back to October 24. Price rose up to a high of 1.1856, and
then fell backward immediately. It didn’t even stay in the 1.1850 area for
more than two 15-minute candles. Then it fell all the way down to 1.1720, or
130 pips, within two days. Another good trade. I wrote: October 24, 2003:
Profit/130.
On October 23, price reached as high as 1.1843 but not any higher. Although it would have created an excellent trade, I stayed with my rule of a
5-pip-buffer zone. Staying with the rule meant that I couldn’t take this superprofitable trade. But I realized that if I started changing the rules now, I
wouldn’t have a very good set of results (see Figure 17.1).
On October 10, price reached 1.1845, never went higher, and dropped
all the way down to 1.1547 in just seven days, before making its next climb
all the way back up to 1.1843 on October 23. This was nearly 300 pips of
gain and hardly any risk. I wrote: October 10, 2003: Profit/297.
The next example was October 9, which netted at least 150 pips. I had
taken a short trade at 1.1845 to 1.1850. It only went as high as 1.1857. Obviously, this level was important. Maybe as important as the 1.2200 mark.
I then found six more occasions on which the pair had hit that level and
reversed. Three times it stretched over the 1.1900 mark before it fell back
lower. Once it went as high as 1.1931, not quite 100 pips. Two trades only took
30 pips of profit, if I adhered to the rule of finding the lowest point the pair
reached before starting back up to hit the 1.1850 region. All I wanted to know
at this point was the maximum number of pips available on each trade.
The total number of trades I found—11:1 loss and 10 profitable trades.
If I kept my stop loss at 100 pips, then my average loss would be 100. My
average profit across all trades was 171. I realized that this time I had only
looked at selling the EUR/USD, never buying it at the 1.1850 level.

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

Page 169

169

Testing

FIGURE 17.1

Harry’s 5-pip-buffer zone rule.

I pulled out a Post-it note and wrote:
Short EUR/USD 1.1850 (if rises from underneath)
Stop: 1.1950
Profit: 1.1700
That seemed completely reasonable. But how far did the pair have to
fall below the 1.1850 mark, and then rise back up, to create the trade?
Maybe I should consider a buy trade at that level. I’d have to talk to Roddy
or George, or Craig, if he was interested, to find out if I could reverse the
system.
In the meantime, I knew that it would be unsafe to simply plan a buy
trade. No Post-it note for this one. I’d have to wait. If I missed it, who cared
anyway? I was trading on paper and I was doing this to build up some experience and confidence, without putting money on the line.
Well, not my money at least. Perhaps some of Ernest Wellington’s.
This work had taken me over three hours and it seemed like only 15
minutes had passed. This analysis work appealed to me as much or more
than trading. I experienced the wonder of discovering new stuff, and none
of the pain or emotion of having to commit to a trade or live through it. All
my trading up to this point had been impulse driven. But now analysis and
study were driving the trade planning.
And I had only scratched the surface. I had a zillion questions:

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

170

Page 170

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Could I apply this to any currency pair?
Could I apply this to shorter time frames, if not for trading, then at least
to prove the concept of horizontal support and resistance trading?
What about interest rates? George Sisler had wanted me to study up on
interest rates. What’s more, I’d already seen how an interest rate decision could send the market into a frenzy. How did rates fit into all of
this?
I called my wife and told her that I wasn’t coming home. I was on a roll.

A WILD WEEKEND
By Saturday morning, I had hit the mother lode of information. At 7:00 A.M.,
I went home and had breakfast with my family, kissed them all, and returned to Ernest Wellington. My wife was completely supportive, and although she didn’t understand what I was talking about, she was happy that
I was putting extra time in to figure it all out. We both had a feeling that I
was finally taking a rational, methodical approach to trading, so much so
that it began to seem more like investing. We liked that.
During the next two days, not only did I research the so-called cross
currency pairs, but I had found information on the Internet about interest
rates—a lot of information. I was now convinced that George Sisler had
given me a huge gift in directing my focus to studying interest rates. I had
some ideas about how I could combine what I had learned about horizontal support and resistance with interest rates, but I would have to talk to
him first.
Late Sunday afternoon, Roddy and George were the first ones into the
office. They came in on Sunday because they worked the Asian hours, and
it was already Monday in Asia. They were in good moods and immediately
approached me: “Banes, are you makin’ bloody trades for the entire office
here again?” That was Roddy.
“No, Roddy. Just on your account. You are short a hundred million Polish Zlotys.”
He laughed. “Good one!” He slapped me on the back. “Want to start off
the week with some paychecks?”
George cut in: “Harry, don’t listen to him. We had a bit of a wild
weekend.”
Who knew what trouble they’d been in. What bars they’d been to, how
much they’d drank, what parties they’d gone to. It couldn’t hurt to ask.
“What kind of a wild weekend?”

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

Page 171

Testing

171

“Testing!” Roddy exclaimed.
Testing? Drug testing? Testing for sexually transmitted diseases?
George nodded. They were nearly giddy with excitement. “We’ve been
backtesting a new short-term strategy and we had a breakthrough. We
haven’t slept for 48 hours.”
I nodded. “Neither have I.”
“Banes!” Roddy yelled. He actually picked me up and bear-hugged me
and screamed: “You’ve been testing, you bugger! Haven’t you!”
I couldn’t help but laugh. He was twice my size and had 50 times the
energy of a normal human. I admitted to them that I’d been testing and had
some breakthroughs of my own, but I needed to talk to people who knew
more than I did to confirm what I’d found.
“You can talk to us,” George offered, and then pulled two chairs up
next to me. Roddy was too excited to sit down and couldn’t wait to hear
what I’d found.
I decided to share with them my testing of the horizontal support and
resistance. They ate it up.

THE LESSON IN BACKTESTING
RODDY: So how many pairs did you look at?
ME: Only five. The EUR/USD first, then the GBP/USD, the GBP/JPY, the
EUR/JPY, the USD/CAD, and the EUR/CAD.
WINNIPEG GEORGE: What time frames? Mostly long-term?
ME: Right. All long term. But I did drill down to the shorter time frames to
verify stops and profit targets.
WINNIPEG GEORGE: This is really similar to what Roddy and I’ve been
looking at. We call it “short-term trading from the longer term charts.”
ME: That’s a good name. I kind of feel the same way. I’m just jumping on
for some pips on a reversal. Most of the trades aren’t open for more than
a couple of days. I liked planning them from the four-hour and the daily
charts the most, but I have a feeling that this would work on the onehour charts, too.
RODDY: You’ve got a good feelin’, Banes! It shorely does work on the onehour! That’s me favorite chart!
ME: Why is the one-hour your favorite?
WINNIPEG GEORGE: It’s his favorite because he doesn’t have the attention
span to look at anything longer term than that.
RODDY: Not true! I can look at the fifteen-minute chart all day long!
WINNIPEG GEORGE: That’s shorter term.

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

172

2:38 PM

Page 172

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

RODDY: Oh. Right you are!
ME: I did a lot of work to analyze this stuff. I looked at twenty trades on
each of the pairs, and kept notes on all of them.
WINNIPEG GEORGE: Your notes are all over the place. You wrote all of this
down by hand?
ME: Yep. I guess there is an easier or better way, but I started rolling along
and couldn’t stop myself.
WINNIPEG GEORGE: You need to start keeping this information in spreadsheets.
ME: I don’t know how to use spreadsheets.
WINNIPEG GEORGE: Well, you can worry about that later, but let me show
you an example of why it’s so important. I’m opening one of our testing
spreadsheets right here. We just type in the entry price, the closing
price, and the spreadsheet tallies up the wins and losses. It gives us a
final pip count for wins and losses. It tells us how big the average winner is, the average loser. It tells us our win percentage—which is how
often we can expect to have a winning trade, based on the information
we’ve already provided.
ME: And you do this for all of your testing?
RODDY: Don’t leave home without it! We never test without it. We spreadsheet everything. We have spreadsheets on top of bloody spreadsheets.
I can hardly keep track of all of ’em. Banes, did you say that you’ve only
tested twenty trades so far?
ME: Yes! Twenty per currency pair. So I actually finished testing one hundred, in total.
RODDY: One hundred’s not enough, boy! You gotta do better than that!
ME: How much better?
WINNIPEG GEORGE: Well, we spent the entire weekend testing. We got
through about a thousand trades.
ME: [silence]
RODDY: Yeah, Harry. Did you do a thousand trades? I think not!
ME: How did you get that many done?
WINNIPEG GEORGE: We sat on the couch with our laptops—one of us with
charts and the other one with spreadsheets. We had food brought in, and
we watched basketball, baseball, and cartoons, and only took breaks to
go to the bathroom. We didn’t shower, answer the phone, or interact with
humankind in any way. It was complete focus.
ME: And you tested the same system, over and over again?
WINNIPEG GEORGE: We actually did five hundred trades each on two variations of the same system. The main system we tested was a combination of the CCI [Commodity Channel Index] oscillator with long-term
support and resistance. The second variation, that we tested simultane-

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

Testing

2:38 PM

Page 173

173

ously, was to look at Fibonacci retracements for exits, instead of using
set profit targets.
ME: How did you do that?
GEORGE: It would take too long to describe here, but let’s just say that we
found a few fib retracement levels that we really liked. Using the fib
exits, we increased our average profit by 20 percent.
ME: Are you ready to start trading it?
RODDY: I am! I’m divin’ in this afternoon.
GEORGE: That’s a bit of an ongoing discussion. I’d like to actually watch it
for a week without opening any trades. We’ve been putting the pieces of
this together for a long, long time. We have been testing every weekend
for about seven months now. We’ve changed strategies and rules a million times but now we think we’ve found something that we can live
with for the long term.
ME: And what are you trading in the meantime? I mean, you still have to
make trades.
GEORGE: Oh, we do a lot of price making for clients. Remember, that’s actually our first job, to quote prices for clients. You already know how
that works, I’m sure.
ME: Yes. A manufacturer or a hedge fund might call the bank and say
that they want to buy some British Pounds. And you’ve got to give them
a price.
GEORGE: Right. That’s what we do all day. We generate profit for the bank
by the difference between pricing. Sometimes we offset the trade by
selling or buying on the spot market. Sometimes we keep the trade if we
think it will be profitable for us.
ME: So how does this new system fit in?
RODDY: Don’t say a word, Winnie!
ME: Winnie?
RODDY: That’s the name I’ve got for George. Winnie! He’s from Winnie-peg,
Canada. So that’s his nickname.
ME: I think I’ve got a lot of work ahead of me. One hundred trades isn’t
going to be enough.
GEORGE: But don’t feel like you can’t start paper trading, like you’ve
been doing. You make a lot of sense with the levels you’ve chosen for
trades so far. The 1.1850 level is something that we’re looking at, too.
ME: For a buy or a sell?
GEORGE: For a buy. The pair has stayed above that level for some
time now, and we think the tables are turned. What used to be resistance is now support. We’re going to happily buy Euros at that price.
All we can. What are you going to do next? Which pair are you going
to test?

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

174

2:38 PM

Page 174

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

ME: All of them. But first I need to talk to George Sisler again.
GEORGE: Sisler? The hedge fund guy? You’re going to talk to him?
ME: Yes. If I can. I met him last week and he wanted me to do some research into interest rates—which I’ve done. But now I have more questions than answers.
GEORGE: Mind if I come with you?
ME: I don’t mind at all. I’m not sure he’ll actually meet with me. But I am
going to try.

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

2:39 PM

Page 175

CHAPTER 18

Homework

doubted that George Sisler would talk to me without Harvey. Anyone
running a zillion-dollar hedge fund wasn’t going to just waste his time
on someone like me. Perhaps Harvey had told George that I had taken
harebrained trades and lost my account, in which case a meeting with
George would even be less likely.
So I was surprised when George took my call the next day. I called him
as soon as I arrived at Wakeman at 7:00 A.M., and he picked up the phone.
“George Sisler.”
I had anticipated a secretary or a receptionist. I paused to collect my
thoughts, and in that small amount of time, George hung up the phone. Obviously, he was very busy. I called and this time he answered again:
“George Sisler. Who is this?”
“It’s Harry Banes. The guy that—”
“Harry! Did you do your interest rate homework?”
“I did. I did a lot of work. But I have some questions before I can
continue.”
“I’ll see you at lunch,” he told me, and then he hung up.
I worked my brains out that morning so that I could spare a couple of
hours for lunch. It had been a personal goal of mine to not leave for lunch
at all in the next few weeks, so that I could pay back time lost at the firm.
But a meeting with George Sisler took precedence over that for now. At
lunchtime, I hopped in a cab and hoped that I wasn’t making a mistake by
showing up without Harvey.

I

175

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

176

2:39 PM

Page 176

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

It didn’t seem to matter. George saw me right away. The office wasn’t
any different from the last time I’d seen it. Just as dumpy as before. This
time I had a new appreciation for it. I started to wonder what George’s
house looked like. Did he live in his car, or under a bridge?
I would soon find out. But first he had questions for me. Lots of
questions.
“What did you find?” he asked.
“You specifically asked me to find out if I could figure out a way to take
the carry trade on a retail platform,” I answered. “That was my focus. I
stayed up all night on Friday and did a ton of research on it.”
“And? You found that it’s impossible.” This was a statement of fact,
meant to encourage me to move on to the next point. So he was not so
mildly shocked when I announced: “Oh, it’s very possible. Just not in the
exact same way that you do it.”
His eyes brightened. “Really? Now I want to hear more.”
I pulled out my notebook and flipped open to the tab I’d marked “Interest Rates—Retail Carry Trade.” Then I began: “You talked about borrowing
cheap money and then investing in high-interest currencies. I sat down for
at least two hours and learned why that works. It makes perfect sense to
me. A high-rated borrower has, in effect, a huge pool of capital to draw
from. I realized that a wise investor should always look to borrow at the
lowest rates and invest for the highest rates possible, combined with a reasonable expectation of return. I hadn’t ever considered that, not because it
doesn’t make sense, but rather because it’s just not something I would have
thought about.”
George smiled. “And now that you thought about it, what did you
learn?”
“I learned that carry traders don’t just invest in currencies. They also
invest in U.S. stocks, bonds from around the world, real estate, they even
purchase entire companies with the borrowed money. There is a whole lot
of borrowed Yen out there. But I will get to that point later. I am sure I am
not telling you anything that you don’t already know.”
He nodded. “Probably true. But I have thirty minutes and I want to
hear it all again.”
I looked down over my notes. There was no possible way for me to get
through everything in half an hour. But I plodded onward: “Once I had an
understanding of why it worked, and believe me, it took me a while to figure it out, I realized that I could try to apply the same principles in my currency trading. I called my currency dealer and asked about interest rates. It
turns out that retail currency platforms charge and pay out interest in the
same way that a bank would charge or pay interest. Only retail platforms
call it a swap rate, and the interest is calculated at the end of every currency trading day—in other words, at five P.M. eastern time.”

book_c18.qxd

12/20/06

Homework

2:39 PM

Page 177

177

“How much are they charging or paying out?”
“Well, for my research here, I used the British Pound versus the Japanese Yen, the GBP/JPY. Because interest rates in Japan are at zero, and
rates in the United Kingdom are at 4 percent—and, I might add, expected
to keep rising—when I buy one standard lot of the GBP/JPY cross pair in
my trading account, which is $100,000 worth of currency, I get paid about
$20 every day in interest.”
“What kind of leverage do they give you?”
“That’s my next point. I have 4001 leverage with my dealer, which I
know sounds ridiculous. It’s a ton of leverage. But the leverage is almost irrelevant,” I told him, “and this is where it gets exciting. I hope I haven’t
gone totally wrong with this research, because I think I stumbled onto
something really amazing.
“Let’s say that I open an account with Universal Currency Brokers. I
put $100,000 in the account. I don’t have that much money, but let’s just say
I do. I put up only $10,000 of that money for margin. And because of leverage, they let me buy $4,000,000 worth of GBP/JPY, or forty standard lots.
Every day that I hold that currency, I get paid $20 for every standard lot, or
$800. Just for holding onto the currency pair in a buy position. This sounds
too good to be true, but I called around that night to at least 20 currency
dealers. I found that almost all of them are paying interest in those
amounts. Almost all of them. I hope I’m okay so far.”
George nodded. He looked at his watch. I could tell that I had captured
his interest. He said: “I ordered in some sandwiches but I’m losing my appetite while you talk to me about money.”
“Me, too. I can eat later.”
“Good. So far, this is fine research you’ve done. This is slightly different than the way it works for us, but it’s perfect so far.”
“I’m happy to hear that. If the research was faulty up to this point, I’d
have nothing left to say. But here’s what comes next: I thought, it sounds
too easy to just buy the GBP/JPY each day and try to earn $800. Why? Because the currency pair might fall, instead of rise. You know, if some news
comes out, or if there is a terrorist act, the currency pair is going to bounce
around. And for each standard lot traded, a pip is worth about nine dollars.
Say it drops 100 pips, and I’ve traded 40 standard. If the pair falls 100 pips
in one day, I would lose 100 times nine dollars times forty—that’s 100 pips,
times nine dollars per standard lot, times forty standard lots traded. That’s
a lot of money. Way more than I would be earning from the interest.”
“It’s just not worth the risk then,” he added.
“Right. It would be ridiculous. But, if I could find good levels at which
to buy the currency pair, and hold on, then I would be in good shape. Really
good shape. Not only could I earn interest, but I would be earning pip
gains, too. This would be far better than taking the same type of trade with
