
that determine the outcome of the game. Once you decide you are going to participate, you can't change
your mind—you're in for the duration. That's not true of trading. In trading, prices are in constant
motion, nothing begins until you decide it should, it lasts as long as you want, and it doesn't end until
you want it to be over. Regardless of what you may have planned or wanted to do, any number of
psychological factors can come into play, causing you to become distracted, change your mind, become
scared or overconfident: in other words, causing you to behave in ways that are erratic and unintended.
Because gambling games have a formal ending, they force the participant to be an active loser. If you're
on a losing streak, you can't keep on losing without making a conscious decision to do so. The end of
each game causes the beginning of a new game, and you have to actively subject more of your assets to
further risk by reaching into your wallet or pushing some chips to the center of the table.
Trading has no formal ending. The market will not take you out of a trade. Unless you have the
appropriate mental structure to end a trade in a manner that is always in your best interest, you can
become a passive loser. This means that, once you're in a losing trade, you don't have to do anything to
keep on losing. You don't even have to watch. You can just ignore the situation, and the market will
take everything you own—and more.
One of the many contradictions of trading is that it offers a gift and a curse at the same time. The gift is
that, perhaps for the first time in our lives, we're in complete control of everything we do. The curse is
that there are no external rules or boundaries to guide or structure our behavior. The unlimited
characteristics of the trading environment require that we act with some degree of restraint and selfcontrol, at least if we want to create some measure of consistent success. The structure we need to
guide our behavior has to originate in your mind, as a conscious act of free will. This is where the many
problems begin.
PROBLEM: The willingness to Create Rules
I have not yet encountered a person interested in trading who didn't resist the notion of creating a set of
rules. The resistance isn't always overt. Quite the contrary, it's usually very subtle. We agree on the one
hand that rules make sense, but we really have no intention of doing whatever is being suggested. This
resistance can be intense, and it has a logical source.
Most of the structure in our minds was given to us as a result of our social upbringing and based on
choices made by other people. In other words, it was instilled in our minds, but did not originate in our
minds. This is a very important distinction. In the process of instilling structure, many of our natural
impulses to move, express, and learn about the nature of our existence through our own direct
experience were denied. Many of these denied impulses were never reconciled and still exist inside of
us as frustration, anger, disappointment, guilt, or even hatred. The accumulation of these negative
feelings acts as a force inside our mental environment causing us to resist anything that denies us the
freedom to do and be whatever we want, when we want.

In other words, the very reason we are attracted to trading in the first place—the unlimited freedom of
creative expression—is the same reason we feel a natural resistance to creating the kinds of rules and
boundaries that can appropriately guide our behavior. It's as if we have found a Utopia in which there is
complete freedom, and then someone taps us on the shoulder and says, "Hey, you have to create rules,
and not only that, you also have to have the discipline to abide by them."
The need for rules may make perfect sense, but it can be difficult to generate the motivation to create
these rules when we've been trying to break free of them most of our lives. It usually takes a great deal
of pain and suffering to break down the source of our resistance to establishing and abiding by a trading
regime that is organized, consistent, and reflects prudent money-management guidelines. Now, I'm not
implying that you have to reconcile all of your past frustrations and disappointments to become a
successful trader, because that's not the case. And you certainly don't have to suffer.
I've worked with many traders who have achieved their objectives of consistency and haven't done
anything to reconcile their backlog of denied impulses. However, I am implying that you can't take for
granted how much effort and focus you may have to put into building the kind of mental structure that
compensates for the negative effect denied impulses can have on your ability to establish the skills that
will assure your success as a trader.
PROBLEM: Failure to Take Responsibility
Trading can be characterized as a pure, unencumbered personal choice with an immediate outcome.
Remember, nothing happens until we decide to start; it lasts as long as we want; and it doesn't end until
we decide to stop. All of these beginnings, middles, and endings are the result of our interpretation of
the information available and how we choose to act on our interpretation. Now, we may want the
freedom to make choices, but that doesn't mean we are ready and willing to accept the responsibility
for the outcomes. Traders who are not ready to accept responsibility for the outcomes of their
interpretations and actions will find themselves in a dilemma: How does one participate in an activity
that allows complete freedom of choice, and at the same time avoid taking responsibility if the outcome
of one's choices are unexpected and not to one's liking?
The hard reality of trading is that, if you want to create consistency, you have to start from the premise
that no matter what the outcome, you are completely responsible. This is a level of responsibility few
people have aspired to before they decide to become traders. The way to avoid responsibility is to adopt
a trading style that is, to all intents and purposes, random. I define random trading as poorly-planned
trades or trades that are not planned at all. It is an unorganized approach that takes into consideration an
unlimited set of market variables, which do not allow you to find out what works on a consistent basis
and what does not.
Randomness is unstructured freedom without responsibility.
When we trade without well-defined plans and with an unlimited set of variables, it's very easy to take

credit for the trades that turn out to our liking (because there was "some" method present). At the same
time, it's veiy easy to avoid taking responsibility for the trades that didn't turn out the way we wanted
(because there's always some variable we didn't know about and therefore couldn't take into
consideration beforehand). If the markets behavior were truly random, then it would be difficult if not
impossible to create consistency. If it's impossible to be consistent, then we really don't have to take
responsibility. The problem with this logic is that our direct experience of the markets tells us
something different. The same behavior patterns present themselves over and over again. Even though
the outcome of each individual pattern is random, the outcome of a series of patterns is consistent
(statistically reliable). This is a paradox, but one that is easily resolved with a disciplined, organized,
and consistent approach.
I've worked with countless traders who would spend hours doing market analysis and planning trades
for the next day Then, instead of putting on the trades they planned, they did something else. The trades
they did put on were usually ideas from friends or tips from brokers. I probably don't have to tell you
that the trades they originally planned, but didn't act on, were usually the big winners of the day.
This is a classic example of how we become susceptible to unstructured, random trading—because we
want to avoid responsibility. When we act on our own ideas, we put our creative abilities on the line
and we get instant feedback on how well our ideas worked. It's very difficult to rationalize away any
unsatisfactory results. On the other hand, when we enter an unplanned, random trade, it's much easier
to shift the responsibility by blaming the friend or the broker for their bad ideas.
There's something else about the nature of trading that makes it easy to escape the responsibility that
comes with creating structure in favor of trading randomly: It is the fact that any trade has the potential
to be a winner, even a big winner. That big winning trade can come your way whether you are a great
analyst or a lousy one; whether you do or don't take responsibility. It takes effort to create the kind of
disciplined approach that is necessary to become a consistent winner. But, as you can see, it's very easy
to avoid this kind of mental work in favor of trading with an undisciplined, random approach.
PROBLEM: Addiction to Random Rewards
Several studies have been done on the psychological effects of random rewards on monkeys. For
example, if you teach a monkey to do a task and consistently reward it every time the task is done, the
monkey quickly learns to associate a specific outcome with the efforts. If you stop rewarding it for
doing the task, within a very short period of time the monkey will simply stop doing the task. It won't
waste its energy doing something that it has now learned it won't be rewarded for. However, the
monkey's response to being cut off from the reward is very different if you start out on a purely random
schedule, instead of a consistent one. When you stop offering the reward, there's no way the monkey
can know that it will never be rewarded again for doing that task. Every time it was rewarded in the
past, the reward came as a surprise. As a result, from the monkey's perspective, there's no reason to quit

doing the task. The monkey keeps on doing the task, even without being rewarded for doing it. Some
will continue indefinitely.
I'm not sure why we're susceptible to becoming addicted to random rewards. If I had to guess, I would
say that it probably has something to do with the euphoria-inducing chemicals that are released in our
brains when we experience an unexpected, pleasant surprise. If a reward is random, we never know for
sure if and when we might receive it, so expending energy and resources in the hope of experiencing
that wonderful feeling of surprise again isn't difficult. In fact, for many people it can be very addicting.
On the other hand, when we expect a particular outcome and it doesn't come about, we're disappointed
and feel bad. If we do it again and get the same disappointing outcome, it isn't likely that we will keep
doing something we know will cause us emotional pain.
The problem with any addiction is that it leaves us in a state of "choicelessness." To whatever degree
the addiction dominates our state of mind, to that same degree our focus and efforts will be geared
toward fulfilling the object of that addiction. Other possibilities that exist in any given moment to fulfill
other needs (like the need to trust ourselves and not to subject too many of our assets to risk) are either
ignored or dismissed. We feel powerless to act in any other way than to satisfy the addiction. An
addiction to random rewards is particularly troublesome for traders, because it is another source of
resistance to creating the kind of mental structure that produces consistency.
PROBLEM: External versus Internal Control
Our upbringing has programmed us to function in a social environment, which means we've acquired
certain thinking strategies for fulfilling our needs, wants and desires that are geared toward social
interaction. Not only have we learned to depend on each other to fulfill the needs, wants and desires we
cannot fulfill completely on our own, but in the process we've acquired many socially-based controlling
and manipulating techniques for assuring that other people behave in a manner that is consistent with
what we want.
The markets may seem like a social endeavor because there are so many people involved, but they're
not. If, in today's modern society, we have learned to depend on each other to fulfill basic needs, then
the market environment (even though it exists in the midst of modern society) can be characterized as a
psychological wilderness, where it's truly every man or woman for himself or herself. Not only can we
not depend on the market to do anything for us, but it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to
manipulate or control anything that the market does. Now, if we've become effective at fulfilling our
needs, wants and desires by learning how to control and manipulate our environment, but suddenly find
ourselves, as traders, in an environment that does not know, care, or respond to anything that is
important to us, where does that leave us? You're right if you said up the proverbial creek without a
paddle.
One of the principal reasons so many successful people have failed miserably at trading is that their

success is partly attributable to their superior ability to manipulate and control the social environment,
to respond to what they want. To some degree, all of us have learned or developed techniques to make
the external environment conform to our mental (interior) environment. The problem is that none of
these techniques work with the market. The market doesn't respond to control and manipulation (unless
you're a very large trader). However, we can control our perception and interpretation of market
information, as well as our own behavior. Instead of controlling our surroundings so they conform to
our idea of the way things should be, we can learn to control ourselves. Then we can perceive
information from the most objective perspective possible, and structure our mental environment so that
we always behave in a manner that is in our own best interest.

CHAPTER 3
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
Although the words "taking responsibility" sound simple, the concept is neither easy to grasp nor easy
to put into practice in your trading. We have all heard the words and been confronted with the need to
take responsibility so many times in our lives that it is easy to take for granted that we know exactly
what the phrase means.
Taking responsibility in your trading and learning the appropriate principles of success are inextricably
connected. You have to understand, with every fiber of your being, the ways in which you are and are
not responsible for your success as a trader. Only then can you take on the characteristics that will
allow you to join the select group of traders who are consistently successful in the markets.
At the end of Chapter 1, I introduced the idea of stepping into a future projection of yourself. In other
words, the consistently successful trader that you want to become doesn't exist yet. You must create a
new version of yourself, just as a sculptor creates a likeness of a model.
SHAPING YOUR MENTAL ENVIRONMENT
The tools you will use to create this new version of yourself are your willingness and desire to learn,
fueled by your passion to be successful. If the willingness and desire to learn are your primary tools,
then what is your medium? An artist creating a sculpture can choose to work in a number of
mediums—clay, marble, or metal, for example— but if you want to create a new version of your
personality that expresses itself as a consistently successful trader, you have only your beliefs and
attitudes. The medium for your artistic endeavor will be your mental environment, where with your
desire to learn, you can restructure and install the beliefs and attitudes that are necessary to achieve
your ultimate goal.
I am assuming your ultimate goal is consistency. If you're like most traders, you don't realize the fullest
potential of the opportunities available to you. To realize more and more of that potential, to make it
more and more of a reality in your life, your primary goal has to be to learn how to think like a
consistently successful trader. Remember, the best traders think in a number of unique ways. They have
acquired a mental structure that allows them to trade without fear and, at the same time, keeps them
from becoming reckless and committing fear-based errors. This mind-set has a number of components,
but the bottom line is that successful traders have virtually eliminated the effects of fear and
recklessness from their trading.
These two fundamental characteristics allow them to achieve consistent results.
When you acquire this mind-set, you, too, will be able to trade without fear. You will no longer be

susceptible to the multitude of fear-based errors that come from rationalizing, subconsciously distorting
information, hesitating, jumping the gun, or hoping. Once the fear is gone, there just won't be a reason
to make these errors and, as a result, they will virtually disappear from your trading.
However, eliminating fear is only half the equation. The other half is the need to develop restraint.
Excellent traders have learned that it is essential to have internal discipline or a mental mechanism to
counteract the negative effects of euphoria or the overconfidence that comes from a string of winning
trades. For a trader, winning is extremely dangerous if you haven't learned how to monitor and control
yourself.
If we start from the premise that to create consistency traders must focus their efforts on developing a
trader's mind-set, then it is easy to see why so many traders don't succeed. Instead of learning to think
like traders, they think about how they can make more money by learning about the markets. It's almost
impossible not to fall into this trap. There are a number of psychological factors that make it very easy
to assume that it's what you don't know about the markets that causes your losses and lack of consistent
results.
However, that's just not the case. The consistency you seek is in your mind, not in the markets. It's
attitudes and beliefs about being wrong, losing money, and the tendency to become reckless, when
you're feeling good, that cause most losses—not technique or market knowledge.
For example, if you could choose one of the following two traders to manage your money, which one
would you pick? The first trader uses a simple, possibly even mediocre trading technique, but possesses
a mind-set that is not susceptible to subconsciously distorting market information, hesitating,
rationalizing, hoping, or jumping the gun. The second trader is a phenomenal analyst, but is still
operating out of the typical fears that make him susceptible to all of the psychological maladies that the
other trader is free of. The right choice should be obvious. The first trader is going to achieve far better
results with your money.
Attitude produces better overall results than analysis or technique. Of course, the ideal situation is to
have both, but you really don't need both, because if you have the right attitude—the right mind-set—
then everything else about trading will be relatively easy, even simple, and certainly a lot more fun. I
know for some of you this may be difficult to believe, or even distressing especially if you've been
struggling for years to learn everything you can about the market.
Interestingly, most traders are closer to the way they need to think when they first begin trading than at
any other time in their careers. Many people begin trading with a very unrealistic concept of the
inherent dangers involved. This is particularly true if their first trade is a winner. Then they go into the
second trade with little or no fear. If that trade is a winner, they go into the next trade with even less
concern for what would otherwise be the unacceptable possibility of a loss. Each subsequent win
convinces them that there is nothing to fear and that trading is the easiest possible way to make money.
This lack of fear translates into a carefree state of mind, similar to the state of mind many great athletes
describe as a "zone." If you've ever had the occasion to experience the zone in some sport, then you

know it is a state of mind in which there is absolutely no fear and you act and react instinctively. You
don't weigh alternatives or consider consequences or second-guess yourself. You are in the moment
and "just doing it." Whatever you do turns out to be exactly what needed to be done.
Most athletes never reach this level of play, because they never get past the fear of making a mistake.
Athletes who reach the point where there is absolutely no fear of the consequences of screwing up will
usually, and quite spontaneously, enter into "the zone." By the way, a psychological zone is not a
condition you can will yourself into, the way you can will yourself into a feat of endurance. It is a state
of mind you find yourself in that is inherently creative, and usually if you start thinking about your
actions at a rational or conscious level, you pop right out of it.
Even though you cannot force or will yourself into a zone, you can set up the kind of mental conditions
that are most conducive to experiencing "the zone," by developing a positive winning attitude. I define
a positive winning attitude as expecting a positive result from your efforts, with an acceptance that
whatever results you get are a perfect reflection of your level of development and what you need to
learn to do better. That's what the great athletes have: a winning attitude that allows them to easily
move beyond their mistakes and keep eoine.
Others get bogged down in negative self-criticism, regret, and selfpity. Not many people ever develop a
positive winning attitude. The curious anomaly of trading is that, if you start with a winning trade, you
will automatically experience the kind of carefree mind-set that is a by-product of a winning attitude,
without having developed the attitude itself. I know this may sound a bit confusing, but it has some
profound implications.
If a few winning trades can cause you to enter into the kind of carefree state of mind that is an essential
component to your success, but is not founded on the appropriate attitudes, then -what you have is a
prescription for extreme misunderstanding about the nature of trading that inevitably results in both
emotional and financial disaster. Putting on a few (or more) winning trades does not mean you have
become a trader, but that's the way it feels, because it taps us into a state of mind that only the most
accomplished people experience on a consistent basis. The fact is, you don't need the slightest bit of
skill to put on a winning trade, and if it's possible to put on one winning trade without the slightest bit
of skill, it is certainly possible to put on another and another. I know of several people who started their
trading careers with fairly substantial strings of winning trades.
When you're feeling confident and unencumbered by fears and worries, it isn't difficult to put on a
string of winning trades because it's easy to get into a flow, a kind of natural rhythm, where what you
need to do seems obvious or self-evident. It's almost as if the market screams at you when to buy and
when to sell, and you need very little in the way of analytical sophistication. And, of course, because
you have no fear, you can execute your trades with no internal argument or conflict.
The point I am making is that winning in any endeavor is mostly a function of attitude. Many people
are certainly aware of this, but at the same time, most people don't understand the significant part
attitude plays in their results. In most sports or other competitive activities, participants must develop
