
60/396

community in Reykjavík. And they had no
idea what they were doing.”
He examined Kaupthing’s annual reports
and discovered some amazing facts: this giant international bank had only one board
member who was not Icelandic, for instance.
Its directors all had four-year contracts, and
the bank had lent them £19 million to buy
shares in Kaupthing, along with options to
sell those shares back to the bank at a guaranteed profit. Virtually the entire bank’s
stated profits were caused by its marking up
assets it had bought at inflated prices. “The
actual amount of profits that were coming
from what I’d call banking was less than 10
percent,” said Shearer.
In a sane world the British regulators
would have stopped the new Icelandic financiers from devouring the ancient British
merchant bank. Instead, the regulators ignored a letter Shearer wrote to them. A year
later, in January 2005, he received a phone

61/396

call from the British takeover panel. “They
wanted to know,” says Shearer, “why our
share price had risen so rapidly over the past
couple of days. So I laughed and said, ‘I think
you’ll find the reason is that Mr. Einarsson,
the chairman of Kaupthing, said two days
ago, like an idiot, that he was going to make
a bid for Singer & Friedlander.’” In August
2005, Singer & Friedlander became Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander, and Shearer quit,
he says, out of fear of what might happen to
his reputation if he stayed. Sure enough, in
October 2008, Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander went bust.
In spite of all this, when Tony Shearer was
pressed by the House of Commons to characterize the Icelanders as mere street hustlers,
he refused. “They were all highly educated
people,” he said in a tone of amazement.
another way in which Iceland
echoed the American model: all sorts of
people, none of them Icelandic, tried to tell
HERE IS YET

62/396

them they had a problem. In early 2006, for
instance, an analyst named Lars Christensen
and three of his colleagues at Denmark’s
biggest bank, Danske Bank, wrote a report
that said Iceland’s financial system was
growing at a mad pace and was on a collision
course with disaster. “We actually wrote the
report because we were worried our clients
were getting too interested in Iceland,” he
tells me. “Iceland was the most extreme of
everything.” Christensen then flew to Iceland
and gave a speech to reinforce his point, only
to be greeted with anger. “The Icelandic
banks took it personally,” he says. “We were
being threatened with lawsuits. I was told,
‘You’re Danish, and you are angry with Iceland because Iceland is doing so well.’ Basically it all had to do with what happened in
1944,” when Iceland declared its independence from Denmark. “The reaction wasn’t,
‘These guys might be right.’ It was, ‘No! It’s a

63/396

conspiracy. They have bad motives.’” The
Danish were just jealous!
The Danske Bank report alerted hedge
funds in London to an opportunity: shorting
Iceland. They investigated and found this incredible web of cronyism: bankers buying
stuff from one another at inflated prices,
borrowing tens of billions of dollars and relending it to the members of their little
Icelandic tribe, who then used it to buy up a
messy pile of foreign assets. “Like any new
kid on the block,” says Theo Phanos, of Trafalgar Asset Managers, in London, “they
were picked off by various people who sold
them the lowest-quality assets—second-tier
airlines, sub-scale retailers. They were in all
the worst LBOs.”
But from the prime minister on down, Iceland’s leaders attacked the messenger. “The
attacks . . . give off an unpleasant odor of unscrupulous dealers who have decided to
make a last stab at breaking down the

64/396

Icelandic financial system,” said Central
Bank chairman Oddsson in March 2009. The
chairman of Kaupthing publicly fingered
four hedge funds that he said were deliberately seeking to undermine Iceland’s financial miracle. “I don’t know where the
Icelanders get this notion,” says Paul Ruddock, of Lansdowne Partners, one of those
fingered. “We only once traded in an
Icelandic stock and it was a very short-term
trade. We started to take legal action against
the chairman of Kaupthing after he made
public accusations against us that had no
truth, and then he withdrew them.”
One of the hidden causes of the current
global financial crisis is that the people who
saw it coming had more to gain from it by
taking short positions than they did by trying
to publicize the problem. Plus, most of the
people who could credibly charge Iceland—or, for that matter, Lehman Brothers—with financial crimes could be

65/396

dismissed as crass profiteers, talking their
own book. Back in April 2006, however, an
emeritus professor of economics at the
University of Chicago named Bob Aliber took
an interest in Iceland. Aliber found himself
at the London Business School, listening to a
talk on Iceland, about which he knew nothing. He recognized the signs instantly. Digging into the data, he found in Iceland the
outlines of what was so clearly a historic act
of financial madness that it belonged in a
textbook. “The Perfect Bubble,” Aliber calls
Iceland’s financial rise, and he has the textbook in the works: an updated version of
Charles Kindleberger’s 1978 classic, Manias,
Panics, and Crashes. Aliber is editing the
new edition. In it, Iceland, he decided back
in 2006, would now have its own little box,
along with the South Sea Bubble and tulip
mania—even though Iceland had yet to
crash. For him the actual crash was a mere
formality.

66/396

Word spread in Icelandic economic circles
that this distinguished professor at Chicago
had taken a special interest in Iceland. In
May 2008, Aliber was invited by the
University of Iceland’s economics department to give a speech. To an audience of students, bankers, and journalists, he explained
that Iceland, far from having an innate talent
for high finance, had all the markings of a giant bubble, but he spoke the technical language of academic economists. (“Monetary
Turbulence and the Icelandic Economy,” he
called his speech.) In the following Q&A session someone asked him to predict the future, and he lapsed into plain English. As an
audience member recalls, Aliber said, “I give
you nine months. Your banks are dead. Your
bankers are either stupid or greedy. And I’ll
bet they are on planes trying to sell their assets right now.”
The Icelandic bankers in the audience
sought to prevent newspapers from

67/396

reporting the speech. Several academics suggested that Aliber deliver his alarming analysis to Iceland’s Central Bank. Somehow
that never happened. “The Central Bank said
they were too busy to see him,” says one of
the professors who tried to arrange the meeting, “because they were preparing the Report
on Financial Stability.” For his part Aliber
left Iceland thinking that he’d caused such a
stir he might not be allowed back into the
country. “I got the feeling,” he told me, “that
the only reason they brought me in was that
they needed an outsider to say these
things—that an insider wouldn’t say these
things, because he’d be afraid of getting into
trouble.” And yet he remains extremely fond
of his hosts. “They are a very curious
people,” he says, laughing. “I guess that’s the
point, isn’t it?”
Icelanders—or at any rate Icelandic
men—had their own explanations for why,
when they leapt into global finance, they

68/396

broke world records: the natural superiority
of Icelanders. Because they were small and
isolated, it had taken 1,100 years for
them—and the world—to understand and exploit their natural gifts, but now that the
world was flat and money flowed freely, unfair disadvantages had vanished. Iceland’s
president, Ólafur Ragnar Grimsson, gave
speeches abroad in which he explained why
Icelanders were banking prodigies. “Our heritage and training, our culture and home
market, have provided a valuable advantage,” he said, then went on to list nine of
these advantages, ending with how unthreatening to others Icelanders are. (“Some
people even see us as fascinating eccentrics
who can do no harm.”) There were many,
many expressions of this same sentiment,
most of them in Icelandic. “There were research projects at the university to explain
why the Icelandic business model was superior,” says Gylfi Zoega, chairman of the

69/396

economics department. “It was all about our
informal channels of communication and
ability to make quick decisions and so forth.”
“We were always told that the Icelandic
businessmen were so clever,” says university
finance professor and former banker Vilhjálmur Bjarnason. “They were very quick.
And when they bought something they did it
very quickly. Why was that? That is usually
because the seller is very satisfied with the
price.”
You didn’t need to be Icelandic to join the
cult of the Icelandic banker. German banks
put $21 billion into Icelandic banks. The
Netherlands gave them $305 million, and
Sweden kicked in $400 million. UK investors, lured by the eye-popping 14 percent
annual returns, forked over $30 billion—$28
billion from companies and individuals and
the rest from pension funds, hospitals, universities, and other public institutions. Oxford University alone lost $50 million.

70/396

Maybe because there are so few Icelanders
in the world, we know next to nothing about
them. We assume they are more or less
Scandinavian—a gentle people who just want
everyone to have the same amount of
everything. They are not. They have a feral
streak in them, like a horse that’s just pretending to be broken.
in Reykjavík, I receive,
more or less out of the blue, two phone calls.
The first is from a producer of a leading
current-events TV show. All of Iceland
watches her show, she says, then asks if I’d
come on and be interviewed.
“About what?” I ask.
“We’d like you to explain our financial
crisis,” she says.
“I’ve only been here three days!” I say.
It doesn’t matter, she says, as no one in
Iceland understands what’s happened.
They’d enjoy hearing someone try to explain
it, even if that person didn’t have any idea
AFTER THREE DAYS

71/396

what he was talking about—which goes to
show, I suppose, that not everything in Iceland is different from other places. As I demur, another call comes, from the prime
minister’s office.
Iceland’s then prime minister, Geir
Haarde, was also the head of the Independence Party, which governed the country from
1991 to 2009. It ruled in loose coalition with
the Social Democrats and the Progressive
Party. (Iceland’s fourth major party is the
Left-Green Movement.) That a nation of
300,000 people, all of whom are related by
blood, needs four major political parties suggests either a talent for disagreement or an
unwillingness to listen to one another. In any
case, of the four parties, the Independents
express the greatest faith in free markets.
The Independence Party is the party of the
fishermen. It is also, as an old schoolmate of
the prime minister’s puts it to me, “all men,
men, men. Not a woman in it.”

72/396

Walking into the PM’s minute headquarters, I expect to be stopped and searched, or
at least asked for photo identification. Instead I find a single policeman sitting behind
a reception desk, feet up on the table, reading a newspaper. He glances up, bored. “I’m
here to see the prime minister,” I say for the
first time in my life. He’s unimpressed.
Anyone here can see the prime minister. Half
a dozen people will tell me that one of the
reasons Icelanders thought they would be
taken seriously as global financiers is that all
Icelanders feel important. One reason they
all feel important is that they all can go see
the prime minister anytime they like.
What the prime minister might say to the
Icelanders about their collapse is an open
question. There’s a charming lack of financial experience in Icelandic financial-policymaking circles. The minister for business affairs is a philosopher. The finance minister is
a veterinarian. The Central Bank governor is

73/396

a poet. Haarde, though, is a trained economist—just not a very good one. The economics
department at the University of Iceland has
him pegged as a B-minus student. As a
group, the Independence Party’s leaders
have a reputation for not knowing much
about finance and for refusing to avail themselves of experts who do. An Icelandic professor at the London School of Economics
named Jon Danielsson, who specializes in
financial panics, has had his offer to help
spurned; so have several well-known financial economists at the University of Iceland.
Even the advice of really smart Central
Bankers from seriously big countries went
ignored. It’s not hard to see why the
Independence Party and its prime minister
fail to appeal to Icelandic women: they are
the guy driving his family around in search
of some familiar landmark and refusing, over
his wife’s complaints, to stop and ask
directions.

74/396

“Why are you interested in Iceland?” he
asks, as he strides into the room with the
force and authority of the leader of a much
larger nation. And it’s a good question.
As it turns out, he’s not actually stupid, but
political leaders seldom are, no matter how
much the people who elected them insist that
it must be so. He does indeed say things that
could not possibly be true, but they are only
the sorts of fibs that prime ministers are
hired to tell. He claims that the krona is once
again an essentially stable currency, for instance, when the truth is it doesn’t trade in
international markets. The krona is simply
assigned an arbitrary value by the government for select purposes. Icelanders abroad
have already figured out not to use their Visa
cards, for fear of being charged the real exchange rate, whatever that might be.
The prime minister would like me to believe that he saw Iceland’s financial crisis
taking shape but could do little about it.

75/396

(“We could not say publicly our fears about
the banks, because you create the very thing
you are seeking to avoid: a panic.”) By implication it was not politicians like him but
financiers who were to blame. On some level
the people agree: the guy who ran the
Baugur investment group had snowballs
chucked at him as he dashed from the 101
Hotel to his limo; the guy who ran Kaupthing
Bank turned up at the National Theatre and,
as he took his seat, was booed. But, for the
most part, the big shots have fled Iceland for
London, or are lying low, leaving the poor
prime minister to shoulder the blame and
face the angry demonstrators, led by
folksinging activist Hördur Torfason, who
assemble every weekend outside Parliament.
Haarde has his story, and he’s sticking to
it: foreigners entrusted their capital to Iceland, and Iceland put it to good use, but
then, on September 15, 2008, Lehman
Brothers failed and foreigners panicked and

76/396

demanded their capital back. Iceland was
ruined not by its own recklessness but by a
global tsunami. The problem with this story
is that it fails to explain why the tsunami
struck Iceland, as opposed to, say, Tonga.
But I didn’t come to Iceland to argue. I
came to understand. “There’s something I
really want to ask you,” I say.
“Yes?”
“Is it true that you’ve been telling people
that it’s time to stop banking and go
fishing?”
A great line, I thought. Succinct, true, and
to the point. But I’d heard about it thirdhand, from a New York hedge fund manager.
The prime minister fixes me with a self-consciously stern gaze. “That’s a gross exaggeration,” he says.
“I thought it made sense,” I say uneasily.
“I never said that!”
Obviously, I’ve hit some kind of nerve, but
which kind I cannot tell. Is he worried that to

77/396

have said such a thing would make him seem
a fool? Or does he still think that fishing, as a
profession, is somehow less dignified than
banking?
AT LENGTH, I return to the hotel to find, for the

first time in four nights, no empty champagne bottles outside my neighbors’ door.
The Icelandic couple whom I had envisioned
as being on one last blowout have packed
and gone home. For four nights I have endured their orc shrieks from the other side of
the hotel wall; now all is silent. It’s possible
to curl up in bed with “The Economic Theory
of a Common-Property Resource: The Fishery.” One way or another, the wealth in Iceland comes from the fish, and if you want to
understand what Icelanders did with their
money you had better understand how they
came into it in the first place.
The brilliant paper was written back in
1954 by H. Scott Gordon, an Indiana
University economist. It describes the plight

78/396

of the fisherman—and seeks to explain “why
fishermen are not wealthy, despite the fact
that fishery resources of the sea are the
richest and most indestructible available to
man.” The problem is that, because the fish
are everybody’s property, they are nobody’s
property. Anyone can catch as many fish as
he likes, so people fish right up to the point
where fishing becomes unprofitable—for
everybody. “There is in the spirit of every
fisherman the hope of the ‘lucky catch,’”
wrote Gordon. “As those who know fishermen well have often testified, they are gamblers and incurably optimistic.”
Fishermen, in other words, are a lot like
American investment bankers. Their overconfidence leads them to impoverish not just
themselves but also their fishing grounds.
Simply limiting the number of fish caught
won’t solve the problem; it will just heighten
the competition for the fish and drive down
profits. The goal isn’t to get fishermen to

79/396

overspend on more nets or bigger boats. The
goal is to catch the maximum number of fish
with minimum effort. To attain it, you need
government intervention.
This insight is what led Iceland to go from
being one of the poorest countries in Europe
circa 1900 to being one of the richest circa
2000. Iceland’s big change began in the early
1970s, after a couple of years when the fish
catch was terrible. The best fishermen returned for a second year in a row without
their usual haul of cod and haddock, so the
Icelandic government took radical action:
they privatized the fish. Each fisherman was
assigned a quota, based roughly on his historical catches. If you were a big-time
Icelandic fisherman you got this piece of paper that entitled you to, say, 1 percent of the
total catch allowed to be pulled from Iceland’s waters that season. Before each season
the scientists at the Marine Research Institute would determine the total number of

80/396

cod or haddock that could be caught without
damaging the long-term health of the fish
population; from year to year, the numbers
of fish you could catch changed. But your
percentage of the annual haul was fixed, and
this piece of paper entitled you to it in
perpetuity.
Even better, if you didn’t want to fish you
could sell your quota to someone who did.
The quotas thus drifted into the hands of the
people to whom they were of the greatest
value, the best fishermen, who could extract
the fish from the sea with maximum efficiency. You could also take your quota to the
bank and borrow against it, and the bank
had no trouble assigning a dollar value to
your share of the cod pulled, without competition, from the richest cod-fishing
grounds on earth. The fish had not only been
privatized, they had been securitized.
IT WAS HORRIBLY unfair: a public resource—all

the fish in the Icelandic sea—was simply

81/396

turned over to a handful of lucky Icelanders.
Overnight, Iceland had its first billionaires,
and they were all fishermen. But as social
policy it was ingenious: in a single stroke the
fish became a source of real, sustainable
wealth rather than shaky sustenance. Fewer
people were spending less effort catching
more or less precisely the right number of
fish to maximize the long-term value of Iceland’s fishing grounds. The new wealth
transformed Iceland—and turned it from the
backwater it had been for 1,100 years to the
place that spawned Björk. If Iceland has become famous for its musicians it’s because
Icelanders now have time to play music, and
much else. Iceland’s youth are paid to study
abroad, for instance, and encouraged to cultivate themselves in all sorts of interesting
ways. Since its fishing policy transformed
Iceland, the place has become, in effect, a
machine for turning cod into PhDs.

82/396

But this, of course, creates a new problem:
people with PhDs don’t want to fish for a living. They need something else to do.
And that something is probably not working in the industry that exploits Iceland’s
other main natural resource: energy. The waterfalls and boiling lava generate vast
amounts of cheap power, but, unlike oil, it
cannot be profitably exported. Iceland’s
power is trapped in Iceland, and if there is
something poetic about the idea of trapped
power, there is also something prosaic in
how the Icelanders have come to terms with
the problem. They asked themselves: What
can we do that other people will pay money
for that requires huge amounts of power?
The answer was: smelt aluminum.
Notice that no one asked, What might
Icelanders want to do? Or even: What might
Icelanders be especially suited to do? No one
thought that Icelanders might have some
natural gift for smelting aluminum, and, if

83/396

anything, the opposite proved true. Alcoa,
the biggest aluminum company in the country, encountered two problems peculiar to
Iceland when, in 2004, it set about erecting
its giant smelting plant. The first was the socalled hidden people—or, to put it more
plainly, elves—in whom some large number
of Icelanders, steeped long and thoroughly in
their rich folkloric culture, sincerely believe.
Before Alcoa could build its smelter it had to
defer to a government expert to scour the enclosed plant site and certify that no elves
were on or under it. It was a delicate corporate situation, an Alcoa spokesman told me,
because they had to pay hard cash to declare
the site elf-free, but, as he put it, “we couldn’t
as a company be in a position of acknowledging the existence of hidden people.” The
other, more serious problem was the
Icelandic male: he took more safety risks
than aluminum workers in other nations did.
“In manufacturing,” says the Alcoa

84/396

spokesman, “you want people who follow the
rules and fall in line. You don’t want them to
be heroes. You don’t want them to try to fix
something it’s not their job to fix, because
they might blow up the place.” The Icelandic
male had a propensity to try to fix something
it wasn’t his job to fix.
Back away from the Icelandic economy and
you can’t help but notice something really
strange about it: the people have cultivated
themselves to the point where they are unsuited for the work available to them. All
these exquisitely schooled, sophisticated
people, each and every one of whom feels
special, are presented with two mainly horrible ways to earn a living: trawler fishing
and aluminum smelting. There are, of
course, a few jobs in Iceland that any refined,
educated person might like to do. Certifying
the nonexistence of elves, for instance. (“This
will take at least six months—it can be very
tricky.”) But not nearly so many as the place
