
8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 165

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 165 •

“ ‘Yes sir. It got out of hand a little at first, and then I wanted to
see if I could do it, that’s all.’
“ ‘Well, Mr. Livermore, what would it take for you to undo it,
before the other traders really find out what’s happened here and
start to drive up the price?’ the president asked.
“ ‘Nothing sir, just you asking me here today, that will do it.’
“ ‘How, how will you do it?’ the secretary asked.
“ ‘I’ll sell it just like I bought it, in an orderly way, and I will sell
only for what I basically paid for it. I’m not interested in anything
that will hurt the country.’
“We shook hands and I lived up to my promise. But I always
have to smile when I think of this story. Nobody except the secretary of agriculture and the president and myself ever knew about
what had happened.
“And now you too, son.”
It was in the 1920s that Livermore acquired his gun collection.
Firearms had always fascinated him. He built a shooting range at
Evermore after the house had been finished. The shooting range
was down on the beach level. He excavated a long corridor,
beginning at the ledge where the beach ended and the rolling
lawns began. About 6 feet high, it ran 100 feet and divided into a
Y. The sides were supported with timbers, and at the end of the
shooting alley was a wall of heavy wood, then sand, then a 1-inchthick steel sheet to stop the bullets.
He had a large collection of handguns, shotguns, and rifles, and
he spent lots of time with Dorothy and the boys, teaching them
about firearms. Paul, an expert marksman, could fieldstrip a .45
automatic and reassemble it in minutes when he was 11 years old.
Jesse Jr. and Mousie were also crack shots.
Livermore kept his handguns locked up in the library, along
with his extensive collection of high-powered rifles and shotguns.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 166

• 166 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore often hunted in the woods surrounding his home in
Lake Placid. He also had a large collection of classic Purdy shotguns, made for him in England, for bird shooting.
Livermore also built a skeet range that fired clay pigeons off into
Long Island Sound. He often shot skeet for $5 a bird, sometimes
shooting from the hip, blasting the clay pigeons into smithereens.
Dorothy was also a great shot, especially with a rifle. She could
give anyone a run for their money on the shooting range. She had
no fear of guns.
One day the boys went into the library and the downstairs gunroom and counted the guns: There were 405 guns of one kind or
another in the house. Livermore told his boys the shooting range
helped him relax.
Livermore had constant stress to deal with in the markets.
Livermore had direct wires from his offices to more than 50 brokerage firms. In 1923, he ran a pool that he later regretted—
Mammoth Oil, which was involved in the Teapot Dome scandal.
Two close associates, E. L. Doheny and Harry F. Sinclair, came to
Livermore in October 1922. They wanted to distribute 151,000
shares of stock to the public at $40 a share. They wanted Livermore to engineer the distribution and at the same time try to run
an orderly market in the stock.
Mammoth was a Sinclair Oil subsidiary that had received profitable oil leases from the U.S. Navy—through, as it was later disclosed, the direct help of Albert Fall, the secretary of the interior.
The Mammoth issue was immediately oversubscribed once the
public heard that Livermore was running the stock. The first day,
sales opened with 8,000 shares at $43 a share; the day ended with
total sales of 40,000 shares, with a closing price of $40.75. The sale
of stock went well, and the 151,000 shares were sold to the public
within three days.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 167

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 167 •

But on February 16, 1924, the Teapot Dome scandal broke. The
scandal rocked the market. The price of Mammoth Oil fell like a
stone. Livermore was in Palm Beach at the Breakers when the
news hit. He had been there since December 28, 1923. Traveling
with him was his private telegraph operator.
He had traveled to Palm Beach in his own private railway car.
The car was opulent, with three bedrooms, a galley, and a large living and dining area. The boys each had their own nannies, who
traveled in the train’s regular sleeper cars, as did the chef and the
butler. Livermore always kept the car at the ready in the New York
train yards. When he was in Palm Beach, the railway car was kept
in the Miami train yards. He also used it when he traveled to his
home in Lake Placid, or when he went to Chicago to visit the
grain pits during heavy speculation.
The Teapot Dome scandal involved two cabinet members: Secretary Fall of the Interior Department and Secretary Denby of the
Navy. It was an elaborate scam. Naval oil properties had been
transferred to the Interior Department; naval coal lands in Alaska
were to be transferred in the same way. After a suitable passage of
time, the Interior Department, headed by Secretary Fall, would
then lease them under very favorable conditions to private enterprises, including Mammoth Oil.
President Coolidge’s entire administration was placed in jeopardy. Correspondence and other documentation clearly proved the
fraud charges. Mammoth plunged on the news, and then the
entire market followed.
Livermore had already sold out his Mammoth Oil and was a
bear at the time of the scandal. He had shorted a number of other
stocks. But he was named as a fringe player in the scandal and was
placed under federal court subpoena.
On February 16, 1924, the New York Times eagerly covered the
story:

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 168

• 168 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Every day that passes brings out some new sensational development in regard to the oil hearing; this has undermined the
confidence of a lot of people in the stock market. If this
investigation fever of Senators and Congressmen keeps up
and branches out into investigation of other matters, it is
going to disturb confidence in a great deal more. I think it is
very foolish trying to be an optimist on the stock market at
the present time.
The Times went on the next day to report:
The speculatively inclined accepted the message of Jesse Livermore’s as gospel yesterday and at once turned into bears.
The decline was under full-speed at noon and every class of
shares was affected.
The scandal had erupted. Livermore remained in Palm Beach
and eluded the subpoena for a while, but was eventually called
before a congressional committee. He gave his testimony and was
not bothered again. It was not as easy for Doheney and Sinclair,
who were both indicted for bribery. Sinclair was ultimately sentenced to nine months in prison, while Doheny was acquitted of
all charges. Fall was convicted of bribery. He was the first U.S. cabinet member ever to go to jail.
Livermore’s final comment to the press on the matter was:
In the future, men of higher caliber should be sent to Washington. This country is a business nation, and it should have
at the head of its various governmental branches the most
successful businessmen in the country.
Livermore was later accused of trying to manipulate the press in
order to affect the steep downward decline of the market during

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 169

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 169 •

the scandal. His response was published in the March 8, 1924, edition of the New York Times:
Mr. Jesse Livermore has offered a reward of $25,000 for proof
that he had sent or contemplated any of the messages referred
to in the various rumors about him trying to affect the market.
More rumors started flying, and Livermore sent a wire to the
press from the Breakers in Palm Beach:
I emphatically deny the rumor which was so industriously
spread throughout the country that I was to issue a statement
of some kind this afternoon. I have sent no messages or wires
nor have I made any private statement to anyone; therefore
the rumor that was started yesterday, was started by some
unscrupulous person or persons. Three weeks ago, on February 14, I received requests from two brokers and one prominent capitalist asking me my personal opinion on the
immediate future of the stock market. I sent them a short and
concise statement of my views and stated at that time it was a
confidential message meant only for them personally.
Someone, without my permission, gave the message out,
and it was sent broadcast over a number of private wires, and
later carried by the newspapers. Having had the confidence
of a personal and private message betrayed, there will be no
more personal messages sent or given by me to anyone.
Livermore was becoming an expert in handling the press and using
it to his benefit. His mysterious and secretive ways on Wall Street
only increased allure, mystery, and fascination, fueling the fires of
public curiosity and selling more newspapers.
The last issue he ran was the initial public offering of the

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 170

• 170 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

De Forest Radio Company. The issue, 75,000 shares, was offered on
November 8, 1924, at $21 a share. The offering was tremendously
oversubscribed and later was listed on the New York Curb Market.
In 1924, Wall Street was on fire with the introduction of commercial radio, and the De Forest issue was timed perfectly to coincide with the overheated demand for any high-technology radio
stock.
The issue later went bankrupt.
In the meantime, Livermore was enjoying himself at his beloved
Palm Beach. His yacht was moored there, and he was ready for
some big game fishing.
In January 1925, he took his boat and six guests down to the
Florida Keys. In the Keys, Livermore hooked into a big shark. He
fought the fish, strapped in the fighting chair, for 55 minutes. The
rod suddenly went wild as he released his grip and fainted in the
chair. The captain and crew carried him to his stateroom.
He was confined to his stateroom for three days, recovering. But
it did not upset the fishing. The total catch was reported as 256
fish, along with a giant stingray, which was harpooned in the Gulf
Stream. The stingray towed the boat for five miles before it was
brought alongside. It weighed 590 pounds and had a spread of 22
feet. It measured 30 feet from the head to the end of the stinger.
But life wasn’t all fun. There was always a threat in the air for
those who were famous for their enormous wealth. On March 15,
1925, Mrs. Louis Goldstein, wife of an assistant district attorney
for Kings County, was sitting on the porch of the Breakers Hotel
dozing. It was raining heavily. She was awakened by the raised
voices of two men in a heated discussion.
“What would a million dollars be to him?” one of the men
asked. “Why, he makes that much in a single speculation on the
stock market.”

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 171

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 171 •

“We could take the older boy, Jesse Junior, for instance. He’s a
high-spirited youngster and runs around all the time by himself. It
would be the easiest thing in the world to grab ahold of him.”
Mrs. Goldstein, now fully awake, got up from her seat. She
knew Livermore, and she knew these men were referring to him
and his son. She walked over to the two men on the porch so she
could have a good look at their faces. The two men looked up at
her and then looked away, pulling up their collars and pulling
down their hats. They rose from their chairs and hurriedly walked
off the porch into the pouring rain.
Mrs. Goldstein immediately reported the conversation to Livermore and he, at once, sent a wire to New York to have a detective
sent to Palm Beach to stay with the boys for the rest of the season.
But the detective never got to Palm Beach.
On March 18, Dache and the boys were returning from a car
trip to the Everglades in the Rolls. Dache was driving, and the
boys were sitting up front with him. He saw the smoke first as they
approached the Breakers. Huge dark clouds of smoke were
enveloping the far end of the hotel. Dache parked the car and
walked to the expansive front lawn to watch the fire with the boys.
Dorothy was in the crowd and ran to the boys. “Oh, thank God
you were out in the car with Harry.”
“But our end of the hotel isn’t even burning yet,” Jesse Jr. said.
“It will,” Dache said.
Just then Livermore arrived. He had been down on the yacht
with the crew getting ready for a cruise to the Florida Keys.
“What happened?” he asked.
“This place was a firetrap at best, J.L., old dried-out wood baking in the tropics. An accident waiting to happen.”
“J.L., I hope our luggage will be all right. I had it packed for the
cruise.”

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 172

• 172 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“We can always buy more luggage, Mousie,” he said.
“But our initials are on all the pieces, and they all match so
nice.” They each had 12 pieces of Luis Vuitton hand-crafted
monogrammed luggage. “I asked the bell captain to try!” Dorothy
continued.
“Try what?” Livermore asked.
“To go back and try to save them,” Dorothy answered.
“J.L., look at that.” Dache pointed to the corner where they
had their suite of rooms. “Look up at those windows, I can’t
believe it.”
Luggage was showering out through the fourth-floor window.
When it landed on the lawn, it was picked up by a crew of bellhops who carried it away from the fire toward the beach.
“Mousie, I think that’s our luggage. I’m dumbfounded,” Livermore said. “Mousie, you stay with the boys while Harry and I go
see if we can help.” The two men ran toward that corner of the
building. They got there as the bellhops were stacking up the last
of the 24 pieces on the beach.
Dache got there first and inspected the luggage. “This is incredible, this luggage falls four stories, bounces on the grass, gets
kicked and piled up in the sand, and there isn’t a mark on it.”
Livermore examined the luggage. “You’re right, Harry. It’s
amazing that Mousie would ask them to go back into the fire, and
that they would actually do it, and it’s amazing that the luggage
survived.”
“Without a scratch or a dent. You ought to buy this Louis Vuitton stock.”
Livermore smiled. “I think I might buy it, Harry, but there’s
one problem.”
“What’s that, J.L.?”
“The stuff never wears out. Or breaks. No repeat sales!”

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 173

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 173 •

They laughed and gave Dorothy the high sign that everything
was fine.
The Breakers was rebuilt in record time, just one year. Schultz
and Weaver, the same firm that had designed the Waldorf Astoria
in New York and the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, designed
the new and improved Breakers Hotel. By 1927, many people
considered this new Breakers to be the finest resort in the United
States. The Livermores agreed, and rented a suite of rooms well in
advance of the new hotel’s opening.
It was an active spring for Livermore. On April 9, 1925, he was
injured at his mansion in King’s Point. He was inspecting a newly
constructed wing of the mansion when he walked into a dimly lit
staircase and fell 20 feet. He was placed in his limousine and sped
to his house at 8 West Seventy-sixth Street in Manhattan.
Physicians were summoned to the house, where they diagnosed
him as having a broken right arm and some broken ribs. This diagnosis was confirmed by X ray, and he was confined to his home.
Livermore did not trade in stocks again until August 25, 1925.
He conducted business from his Lake Placid home. Rumors circulated that he was long 50,000 shares of U.S. Steel and held an
important position in White Motors. Livermore refused to confirm these rumors.
On October 27, 1927, Livermore bought a new apartment in
New York at 825 Fifth Avenue, between Sixty-third and Sixtyfourth Streets. This would become his New York residence.
Dorothy was thrilled with the new apartment, and along with her
mother, as always, she spent great time, effort, and money in decorating their new home.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 174

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 175

*

chapter nine

*

Boston Billy

I find all this money is a considerable burden.
John Paul Getty Jr.

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 176

• 176 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

ON SUNDAY, MAY 29, 1927, ARTHUR BARRY; JAMES F.

Monaghan, known as “Boston Billy”; Eddie Kane, former chauffeur for Livermore; and Anna Blake, an attractive young woman
with bobbed blonde hair who was Barry’s girlfriend, sat around a
midnight campfire at Evermore, the Livermore estate. The full details of the dramatic events that followed during the next several
hours were subsequently covered by both the New York Times and
the Daily News from May 31, 1927, until December 27, 1929.
The men were settled on their haunches in a patch of open land
under a big oak tree. Blake sat on the grass. They could see the shimmering, moonlit water in front of them and the long pier where the
Chris-Craft was tied up. The Livermore yacht sat anchored in deep
water, about 100 yards off the pier. To their left, they could see the
massive house through the forest. They were waiting for the lights to
go out. They knew there was a dinner party going on. They even
knew who the guests were: millionaire silk merchant Harry
Aronhson and his wife, close friends of the Livermores, who had
come from New York on the yacht for the weekend. Kane, Livermore’s former chauffeur, had informed Monaghan about the small
dinner party and the layout of the Livermore mansion.
Barry and Monaghan were dressed in dark gray business suits,
shirts, ties, and fedora hats. They were clean-shaven and about 25
years old. Livermore was later to comment that they looked more
like Wall Street clerks than burglars. Barry was muscular and
brawny; Monaghan was of average size and weight, about 5 foot 10
and 160 pounds, but he was the fiercer of the two.
They sat around the campfire roasting hot dogs. They had even
brought a little picnic bag with buns and drinks in it. They chatted
calmly as they waited for the clock to reach 3:30 A.M.
“So, the safe may have up to a million in jewelry?” Barry asked.
“Yeah, that’s right. This guy Livermore is crazy about his wife
and has given her millions in jewels,” Kane said. “They’re all from

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 177

BOSTON BILLY

• 177 •

Harry Winston and Van Cleef and Arpels, first quality, easy to take
outta the settings.”
“Easy to fence,” Monaghan said, biting into his hot dog, sipping
from a bottle of beer.
Kane continued, “Word is that Livermore has such a fear of
going broke, because he’s been broke before, that he gave his old
lady the jewelry so’s if he busted out again he could take the jewel
stash back and hock it for at least a cool million. The jewels are his
stake to start over. Rumor is that he has actually done it, hocked
’em, on occasion with that big-shot jeweler Harry Winston who
made ’em in the first place.”
“High-class hock shop. Buy the jewels for your wife, then hock
’em back to the jeweler. Pretty nifty, these rich folks, but they’re
just like everybody else when they get in trouble. They take back
their gifts and hock ’em,” Blake said.
“You know from experience, huh, Anna?” Monaghan said.
“Shut your face, Billy,” Barry said. “How do you know all this,
Eddie?”
“Hey, the house slaves get to know everything about their masters. Don’t you know that?”
“Yeah, I heard of that,” Monaghan said. “This ain’t my first
job.”
The gang had stolen an expensive canary-yellow Chrysler roadster from the garage of Walter Roesler, one of Livermore’s neighbors. Roesler himself had borrowed the car for the day from his
friend George Owens. It was a high-profile, well-known car in
Great Neck. They had hidden it off the road near the entrance to
the Livermore estate.
They watched over their campfire as all the lights went out in
the mansion. Hours later, at 3:45 in the dark morning, they
watched the embers of their campfire sizzle and die as they poured
the last of the beer on it. Barry and Monaghan stood, straightened

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 178

• 178 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

