
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

Short-Sale Constraints

11

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

12

because no one else was able to short the stock and depress its price when
your model shorted it. But this return is completely unrealistic.This renders
short-sale constraints dangerous to backtesting. It is not easy, though, to find
a historically accurate list of hard-to-borrow stocks for your backtest, as this
list depends on which broker you use. As a general rule, small-cap stocks are
affected much more by short-sale constraint than are large-cap stocks, and
so the returns of their short positions are much more suspect. Bear in mind
also that sometimes ETFs are as hard to borrow as stocks. I have found, for
example, that I could not even borrow SPY to short in the months after the
Lehman Brothers’ collapse!
An additional short-sale constraint is the so-called “uptick rule” imposed
by the SEC. The original uptick rule was in effect from 1938 to 2007, where
the short sale had to be executed at a price higher than the last traded price,
or at the last traded price if that price was higher than the price of the trade
prior to the last. (For Nasdaq stocks, the short sale price must be higher
than the last bid rather than the last trade.) The Alternative Uptick Rule that
took effect in 2010 also requires a short sale to have a trade price higher than
the national best bid, but only when a circuit breaker has been triggered. A
circuit breaker for a stock is triggered when that stock traded at 10 percent
lower than its previous close. The circuit breaker is in effect for the following day after the initial trigger as well. This effectively prevents any short
market orders from being filled. So, again, a really accurate backtest that
involves short sales must take into account whether these constraints were
in effect when the historical trade was supposed to occur. Otherwise, the
backtest performance will be inflated.

Futures Continuous Contracts
Futures contracts have expiry dates, so a trading strategy on, say, crude oil
futures, is really a trading strategy on many different contracts. Usually,
the strategy applies to front-month contracts. Which contract is the “front
month” depends on exactly when you plan to “roll over” to the next month;
that is, when you plan to sell the current front contract and buy the contract
with the next nearest expiration date (assuming you are long a contract to
begin with). Some people may decide to roll over 10 days before the current
front contract expires; others may decide to roll over when there is an “open
interest crossover”; that is, when the open interest of the next contract exceeds that of the current front contract. No matter how you decide your
rollover date, it is quite an extra bother to have to incorporate that in your

13
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

trading strategy, as this buying and selling is independent of the strategy and
should result in minimal additional return or profit and loss (P&L). (P&L, or
return, is certainly affected by the so-called “roll return,” but as we discuss
extensively in Chapter 5, roll return is in effect every day on every contract
and is not a consequence of rolling over.) Fortunately, most futures historical data vendors also recognize this, and they usually make available what is
known as “continuous contract” data.
We won’t discuss here how you can go about creating a continuous contract yourself because you can read about that on many futures historical
data vendors’ websites. But there is a nuance to this process that you need
to be aware of. The first step in creating a continuous contract is to concatenate the prices of the front-month contract together, given a certain set of
rollover dates. But this results in a price series that may have significant price
gaps going from the last date before rollover to the rollover date, and it will
create a false return or P&L on the rollover date in your backtest.
To see this, let’s say the closing price of the front contract on date T is
p(T ), and the closing price of this same contract on date T + 1 is p(T + 1).
Also, let’s say the closing price of the next nearby contract (also called the
“back” contract) on date T + 1 is q(T + 1). Suppose T + 1 is the rollover date,
so if we are long the front contract, we should sell this contract at the close
at p(T + 1), and then buy the next contract at q(T + 1). What’s the P&L (in
points, not dollars) and return of this strategy on T + 1? The P&L is just
p(T + 1) − p(T ), and the return is ( p(T + 1) − p(T ))/p(T ). But the unadjusted continuous price series will show a price of p(T ) at T, and q(T + 1) at
T + 1. If you calculate P&L and return the usual way, you would have calculated the erroneous values of q(T + 1) − p(T ) and (q(T + 1) − p(T ))/p(T ),
respectively. To prevent this error, the data vendor can typically back-adjust
the data series to eliminate the price gap, so that the P&L on T + 1 is p(T + 1)
− p(T ). This can be done by adding the number (q(T + 1) − p(T + 1)) to
every price p(t) on every date t on or before T, so that the price change and
P&L from T to T + 1 is correctly calculated as q(T + 1) − ( p(T ) + q(T + 1)
− p(T + 1)) = p(T + 1) − p(T ). (Of course, to take care of every rollover,
you would have to apply this back adjustment multiple times, as you go back
further in the data series.)
Is our problem solved? Not quite. Check out what the return is at T + 1
given this adjusted price series: ( p(T + 1) − p(T ))/( p(T ) + q(T + 1) − p(T +
1)), not ( p(T + 1) − p(T))/p(T ). If you back-adjust to make the P&L calculation correct, you will leave the return calculation incorrect. Conversely,
you can back-adjust the price series to make the return calculation correct

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

14

(by multiplying every price p(t) on every date t on or before T by the number q(T + 1)/p(T + 1)), but then the P&L calculation will be incorrect.You
really can’t have both. As long as you want the convenience of using a continuous contract series, you have to choose one performance measurement
only, P&L or return. (If you bother to backtest your strategy on the various
individual contracts, taking care of the rollover buying and selling yourself,
then both P&L and return can be correctly calculated simultaneously.)
An additional difficulty occurs when we choose the price back-adjustment
instead of the return back-adjustment method: the prices may turn negative
in the distant past. This may create problems for your trading strategy, and
it will certainly create problems in calculating returns. A common method
to deal with this is to add a constant to all the prices so that none will be
negative.
This subtlety in picking the right back-adjustment method is more important when we have a strategy that involves trading spreads between
different contracts. If your strategy generates trading signals based on the
price difference between two contracts, then you must choose the price
back-adjustment method; otherwise, the price difference may be wrong and
generate a wrong trading signal. When a strategy involves calendar spreads
(spreads on contracts with the same underlying but different expiration
dates), this back adjustment is even more important. This is because the
calendar spread is a small number compared to the price of one leg of the
spread, so any error due to rollover will be a significant percentage of the
spread and very likely to trigger a wrong signal both in backtest and in live
trading. However, if your strategy generates trading signals based on the
ratio of prices between two contracts, then you must choose the return
back-adjustment method.
As you can see, when choosing a data vendor for historical futures prices,
you must understand exactly how they have dealt with the back-adjustment
issue, as it certainly impacts your backtest. For example, csidata.com uses
only price back adjustment, but with an optional additive constant to prevent prices from going negative, while tickdata.com allows you the option
of choosing price versus return back-adjustment, but there is no option for
adding a constant to prevent negative prices.

Futures Close versus Settlement Prices
The daily closing price of a futures contract provided by a data vendor
is usually the settlement price, not the last traded price of the contract

15
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

during that day. Note that a futures contract will have a settlement price
each day (determined by the exchange), even if the contract has not traded
at all that day. And if the contract has traded, the settlement price is in
general different from the last traded price. Most historical data vendors
provide the settlement price as the daily closing price. But some, such as
vendors that provide tick-by-tick data, may provide actual transaction price
only, and therefore the close price will be the last traded price, if there has
been a transaction on that day. Which price should we use to backtest our
strategies?
In most cases, we should use the settlement price, because if you had
traded live near the close, that would have been closest to the price of your
transaction. The last recorded trade price might have occurred several hours
earlier and bear little relation to your transaction price near the close. This
is especially important if we are constructing a pairs-trading strategy on
futures. If you use the settlement prices to determine the futures spreads,
you are guaranteed to be using two contemporaneous prices. (This is true
as long as the two futures contracts have the same underlying and therefore
have the same closing time. If you are trading intermarket spreads, see the
discussion at the end of this section.) However, if you use the last traded
prices to determine the spread, you may be using prices generated at two
very different times and therefore incorrect. This incorrectness may mean
that your backtest program will be generating erroneous trades due to an
unrealistically large spread, and these trades may be unrealistically profitable in backtest when the spreads return to a correct, smaller value in the
future, maybe when near-simultaneous transactions occur. As usual, an inflated backtest result is dangerous.
If you have an intraday spread strategy or are otherwise using intraday
futures prices for backtesting a spread strategy, you will need either historical data with bid and ask prices of both contracts or the intraday data on
the spread itself when it is native to the exchange. This is necessary because
many futures contracts are not very liquid. So if we use the last price of every bar to form the spread, we may find that the last prices of contract A and
contract B of the same bar may actually refer to transactions that are quite
far apart in time. A spread formed by asynchronous last prices could not in
reality be bought or sold at those prices. Backtests of intraday spread strategies using the last price of each leg of the spread instead of the last price
of the spread itself will again inflate the resulting returns. One vendor that
sells intraday historical calendar spread data (both quote and trade prices) is
cqgdatafactory.com.

There is one general detail in backtesting intermarket spreads that should
not be overlooked. If the contracts are traded on different exchanges, they
are likely to have different closing times. So it would be wrong to form an
intermarket spread using their closing prices. This is true also if we try to
form a spread between a future and an ETF. The obvious remedy of this is
to obtain intraday bid-ask data so that synchronicity is assured. The other
possibility is to trade an ETF that holds a future instead of the future itself.
For example, instead of trading the gold future GC (settlement price set
at 1:30 p.m. ET) against the gold-miners ETF GDX, we can trade the gold
trust GLD against GDX instead. Because both trade on Arca, their closing
prices are set at the same 4:00 p.m. ET.
■ Statistical Signiﬁcance of Backtesting:

Hypothesis Testing

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

16

In any backtest, we face the problem of finite sample size: Whatever statistical measures we compute, such as average returns or maximum drawdowns,
are subject to randomness. In other words, we may just be lucky that our
strategy happened to be profitable in a small data sample. Statisticians have
developed a general methodology called hypothesis testing to address this
issue.
The general framework of hypothesis testing as applied to backtesting
follows these steps:
1. Based on a backtest on some finite sample of data, we compute a certain statistical measure called the test statistic. For concreteness, let’s say
the test statistic is the average daily return of a trading strategy in that
period.
2. We suppose that the true average daily return based on an infinite data
set is actually zero. This supposition is called the null hypothesis.
3. We suppose that the probability distribution of daily returns is
known. This probability distribution has a zero mean, based on the
null hypothesis. We describe later how we determine this probability
distribution.
4. Based on this null hypothesis probability distribution, we compute the
probability p that the average daily returns will be at least as large as
the observed value in the backtest (or, for a general test statistic, as
extreme, allowing for the possibility of a negative test statistic). This
probability p is called the p-value, and if it is very small (let’s say smaller

than 0.01), that means we can “reject the null hypothesis,” and conclude
that the backtested average daily return is statistically significant.

TABLE 1.1 Critical Values for

n × Daily Sharpe Ratio

p-value

Critical values

0.10

1.282

0.05

1.645

0.01

2.326

0.001

3.091

Source: Berntson (2002).

17
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

The step in this procedure that requires most thought is step 3. How do
we determine the probability distribution under the null hypothesis? Perhaps we can suppose that the daily returns follow a standard parametric
probability distribution such as the Gaussian distribution, with a mean of
zero and a standard deviation given by the sample standard deviation of the
daily returns. If we do this, it is clear that if the backtest has a high Sharpe
ratio, it would be very easy for us to reject the null hypothesis. This is because the standard test statistic for a Gaussian distribution is none other than
the average divided by the standard deviation and multiplied by the square
root of the number of data points (Berntson, 2002). The p-values for various
critical values are listed in Table 1.1. For example, if the daily Sharpe ratio
multiplied by the square root of the number days ( n) in the backtest is
greater than or equal to the critical value 2.326, then the p-value is smaller
than or equal to 0.01.
This method of hypothesis testing is consistent with our belief that highSharpe-ratio strategies are more statistically significant.
Another way to estimate the probability distribution of the null hypothesis is to use Monte Carlo methods to generate simulated historical
price data and feed these simulated data into our strategy to determine
the empirical probability distribution of profits. Our belief is that the
profitability of the trading strategy captured some subtle patterns or
correlations of the price series, and not just because of the first few
moments of the price distributions. So if we generate many simulated
price series with the same first moments and the same length as the
actual price data, and run the trading strategy over all these simulated
price series, we can find out in what fraction p of these price series
are the average returns greater than or equal to the backtest return.

Ideally, p will be small, which allows us to reject the null hypothesis.
Otherwise, the average return of the strategy may just be due to the
market returns.
A third way to estimate the probability distribution of the null hypothesis is suggested by Andrew Lo and his collaborators (Lo, Mamaysky, and
Wang, 2000). In this method, instead of generating simulated price data,
we generate sets of simulated trades, with the constraint that the number
of long and short entry trades is the same as in the backtest, and with the
same average holding period for the trades. These trades are distributed
randomly over the actual historical price series. We then measure what
fraction of such sets of trades has average return greater than or equal to
the backtest average return.
In Example 1.1, I compare these three ways of testing the statistical significance of a backtest on a strategy. We should not be surprised that they
give us different answers, since the probability distribution is different in
each case, and each assumed distribution compares our strategy against a
different benchmark of randomness.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

18

Example 1.1: Hypothesis Testing on a Futures
Momentum Strategy
We apply the three versions of hypothesis testing, each with
a different probability distribution for the null hypothesis, on
the backtest results of the TU momentum strategy described in
Chapter 6. That strategy buys (sells) the TU future if it has a positive
(negative) 12-month return, and holds the position for 1 month. We
pick this strategy not only because of its simplicity, but because it has
a fixed holding period. So for version 3 of the hypothesis testing, we
need to randomize only the starting days of the long and short trades,
with no need to randomize the holding periods.
The first hypothesis test is very easy. We assume the probability
distribution of the daily returns is Gaussian, with mean zero as
befitting a null hypothesis, and with the standard deviation given by
the standard deviation of the daily returns given by our backtest. So
if ret is the Tx1 MATLAB© array containing the daily returns of the
strategy, the test statistic is just
mean(ret)/std(ret)*sqrt(length(ret))

Example 1.1 (Continued)

moments={mean(marketRet), std(marketRet), ...
skewness(marketRet), kurtosis(marketRet)};
numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved=0;
for sample=1:10000
marketRet_sim=pearsrnd(moments{:}, length(marketRet), 1);
cl_sim=cumprod(1+marketRet_sim)-1;
longs_sim=cl_sim > backshift(lookback, cl_sim) ;
shorts_sim=cl_sim < backshift(lookback, cl_sim) ;

(Continued )

19
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

which turns out to be 2.93 for our data set. Comparing this test
statistic with the critical values in Table 1.1 tells us that we can reject
the null hypothesis with better than 99 percent probability.
The second hypothesis test involves generating a set of random,
simulated daily returns data for the TU future (not the daily returns
of the strategy) for the same number of days as our backtest. These
random daily returns data will have the same mean, standard
deviation, skewness, and kurtosis as the observed futures returns,
but, of course, they won’t have the same correlations embedded
in them. If we find there is a good probability that the strategy can
generate an as good as or better return on this random returns series
as the observed returns series, it would mean that the momentum
strategy is not really capturing any momentum or serial correlations
in the returns at all and is profitable only because we were lucky that
the observed returns’ probability distribution has a certain mean and
a certain shape. To generate these simulated random returns with the
prescribed moments, we use the pearsrnd function from the MATLAB
Statistics Toolbox. After the simulated returns marketRet_sim are
generated, we then go on to construct a simulated price series cl_sim
using those returns. Finally, we run the strategy on these simulated
prices and calculate the average return of the strategy. We repeat
this 10,000 times and count how many times the strategy produces
an average return greater than or equal to that produced on the
observed data set.
Assuming that marketRet is the Tx1 array containing the
observed daily returns of TU, the program fragment is displayed
below. (The source codes for these tests can be downloaded as
TU_mom_hypothesisTest.m from www.wiley.com/go/algotrading.)

Example 1.1 (Continued)
pos_sim=zeros(length(cl_sim), 1);
for h=0:holddays-1
long_sim_lag=backshift(h, longs_sim);
long_sim_lag(isnan(long_sim_lag))=false;
long_sim_lag=logical(long_sim_lag);
short_sim_lag=backshift(h, shorts_sim);
short_sim_lag(isnan(short_sim_lag))=false;
short_sim_lag=logical(short_sim_lag);
pos_sim(long_sim_lag)=pos_sim(long_sim_lag)+1;
pos_sim(short_sim_lag)=pos_sim(short_sim_lag)-1;
end
ret_sim=backshift(1, pos_sim).*marketRet_sim/holddays;
ret_sim(~isfinite(ret_sim))=0;

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

20

if (mean(ret_sim)>= mean(ret))
numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved=numSampleAvgret
BetterOrEqualObserved+1;
end
end

We found that out of 10,000 random returns sets, 1,166 have
average strategy return greater than or equal to the observed average
return. So the null hypothesis can be rejected with only 88 percent
probability. Clearly, the shape of the returns distribution curve has
something to do with the success of the strategy. (It is less likely that
the success is due to the mean of the distribution since the position
can be long or short at different times.)
The third hypothesis test involves randomizing the long and short
entry dates, while keeping the same number of long trades and short
trades as the ones in the backtest, respectively. We can accomplish
this quite easily by the MATLAB function randperm:
numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved=0;
for sample=1:100000
P=randperm(length(longs));

Example 1.1 (Continued)
longs_sim=longs(P);
shorts_sim=shorts(P);
pos_sim=zeros(length(cl), 1);
for h=0:holddays-1
long_sim_lag=backshift(h, longs_sim);
long_sim_lag(isnan(long_sim_lag))=false;
long_sim_lag=logical(long_sim_lag);
short_sim_lag=backshift(h, shorts_sim);
short_sim_lag(isnan(short_sim_lag))=false;
short_sim_lag=logical(short_sim_lag);
pos(long_sim_lag)=pos(long_sim_lag)+1;
pos(short_sim_lag)=pos(short_sim_lag)-1;
end
ret_sim=backshift(1, pos_sim).*marketRet/holddays;

21
if (mean(ret_sim)>= mean(ret))
numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved=...
numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved+1;
end
end

There is not a single sample out of 100,000 where the average
strategy return is greater than or equal to the observed return.
Clearly, the third test is much weaker for this strategy.

The fact that a null hypothesis is not unique and different null hypotheses can give rise to different estimates of statistical significance is one
reason why many critics believe that hypothesis testing is a flawed methodology (Gill, 1999). The other reason is that we actually want to know
the conditional probability that the null hypothesis is true given that we
