
■ Establish Your Trading Goals

What Really Are Your Goals?
Maybe this is a very obvious question, and the answer is probably simple:You want to
make money. There has to be a trade‐off, however, between simply making money and
the drawdowns one has to endure to get to one’s goals.
No matter how profitable one’s trading is, the volatility of returns must be taken
into account. If the volatility is too great, there will be a period when one cannot
continue to trade. This cessation in trading could be due to an emotional breakdown
or lack of risk trading capital. Consider this example. One trader makes 60 percent
returns; however, he goes through periods in which he experiences 40 percent‐plus
drawdowns. Quantifying these numbers over a 10‐year period with an initial amount
of $50,000 compounds to $5,497,558.14.

GET A SAVVY START

Before you start, you need to determine what your goals are. What do you hope to
achieve with your trading activities? How much time do you have to trade? Another
great question is why do you want to trade? Before you trade a single penny, really
think about what you hope to achieve with trading. Knowing what your goal is will
help you stay motivated when you’re facing an inevitable drawdown, and it’ll help you
all along the way.

15

FIGURE 1.1 DUNN Capital Management: DUNN Combined Fund (DCF)

Source: Chart Courtesy of IASG.Com

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

16

That is the great news; however, at one point in year 10 you lose 40 percent of that
much. Does losing $2,199,023 leave you feeling comfortable? The answer is obvious:
probably not! Do you really think he can stomach that year in and year out? Would
you invest with him? I would personally find it very hard. In the real world there are
trend followers like Bill Dunn of DUNN Capital Management who have had some
wild swings.You mostly hear of the fantastic periods, not the drawdowns. There were
points at which Bill Dunn managed funds in excess of $2 billion. In his program, the
Combined Fund DCF, he is currently managing $22 million.
Bill Dunn has been managing money since the 1970s. He is considered a legend
in the trend following world. Dunn has experienced extreme volatility throughout
the years. When times are good, people throw him money, and when he goes through
drawdowns, his investors panic. As much as DCF has returned 100 percent one year
he has had drawdowns in the 70 percent range. Dunn had five years in a row in which
he sustained losses and the following year he returned 100 percent.
I have heard from many investors that they can withstand a 20 percent drawdown;
however, when it actually occurs, that is a different story. They quickly translate 20
percent into what that is in a dollar basis. The fear of the 20 percent drawdown
increasing to 30 percent or greater sets in very quickly. In my proprietary trading
account I consider how much risk I need to take on in order to generate reasonable
returns. This keeps me in the race.
I believe the lower the volatility in a trading account, the more apt one is to stay in
the game. Going through any drawdown is not fun or easy. However, there are many
investors that are not satisfied with this either. They want the big returns without the
big drawdowns. They seem to want their cake and eat it too, as that phrase goes.
Traders need to be realistic and mature when weighing between these two options.
Reducing the magnitude of a drawdown enhances the probability that the trader will
stay in the game by two accounts. This reduces the risk of ruin and makes it much less
emotionally challenging to go through big swings not just in percentages but also in
real dollar terms.

Some of the biggest mistakes I have seen are when traders are in drawdowns. They
stop to think logically and fear kicks in with irrational behavior. These traders forget
their trading plan and try to trade their way out of this bottomless pit of a drawdown.
They double up, they tighten stops when they shouldn’t, or they will do the exact opposite by widening stops. Basically they are out of control and trading in a rage.You do
not want to get to this point. This is why it is a paramount issue to “try” to keep losses
and drawdowns to a tolerable level. I want to emphasize the word try. We are dealing
with uncertainty, and the only certainty is uncertainty.
We can put stops in the market, but this is no guarantee that we cannot get caught
in a limit move against us. Limit moves are set by the exchanges of a maximum permissible move allowed in a particular market. There are times when, as much as we want
to exit, we cannot. The other reason I stress the word “try” is that there will be overnight gaps and moves, which as much as they can benefit us, are more apt to hurt us.

Stick to Your Plan

A Look on the Bright Side
Going back to being slightly more positive, there is more to the idea than you want
to make money. Do you want to be rich or wealthy? In my neighborhood I have both
types of neighbors. I have wealthy ones and rich ones. What is the difference?
“Being rich” means that you have a lot of money. “Being wealthy” means that you
actually have time to enjoy your money, time to do what you want to do when you
want to do it.
I live five minutes from the beach and see many people early in the morning walking. I walk pretty much every morning, most of the time with my wife.What stuck out
to both of us was that a very famous businessman would walk on the beach whenever it
seemed he would have financial issues as reported in the newspapers. In 2008 we saw
him for the first time. He walked with his head down in deep thought and concern.
Again this year we would see him. What I gleaned from this was that he was rich but

17
GET A SAVVY START

Another hard mistake for traders to overcome is that they do not follow their plan
(if they have one) and exit a trade that is working due to the proverbial fear of
losing money, greed of taking the money, or ego of being right or smart. Initially
they might feel good and then Mr. Murphy shows up and the trade in which they
exited prematurely ends up being a runaway trade. The trader has left a substantial
amount of money on the table. The emotional roller‐coaster starts with a great
deal of disappointment and anxiety. I wish I had stayed in that trade. Why was I
so stupid? The list can go and on. My solution is first, look out the front window.
What has happened is over. All you can do is go forward and learn from it. What
one needs to learn is the necessity of a plan and following it exactly.

he was not wealthy. He owned one company after the other and was leveraged to the
hilt. On the surface of it he seems unable to enjoy his money.
Contrarily, I am wealthy. I can do whatever and whenever I please. I take my trading with me. I have time for my family as well as charity work. I can only attribute this
to trend following over the years. I compounded money over time. It has not been easy
as I have gone through countless drawdowns, but I was patient and disciplined to keep
in the marathon and not give up.
In retrospect I was fortunate that I struggled when I first started trading.This struggle planted the seeds in my psyche that trading is not easy and that I had to work. I
am happy I did not encounter immediate short‐term success that would have deluded
me. I believe if I had had some amazing trades right from the get‐go, I would have underestimated what is truly entailed for trading success. I might not have realized how
quickly the market can take away my hard‐earned profits. I probably would not have
developed the risk profile in which I trade today.
You decide which you prefer!

■ Trading Pitfalls

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

18

With great excitement and probably nervousness you put on your first trade. Do not
expect it to work (make money). It will be much better for you if your first couple
of trades do not work. This will serve as a wakeup call on how hard trading really is. I
would strongly suggest that you start small with money you can afford to lose, as you
will make mistakes. Remember, 90 percent‐plus of traders lose money and quit. I wish
that you will become one of the 10 percenters who are consistently successful over
time. I truly believe my book is unique and gives you all the tools.
On my blog, TrendFollowingMentor.com, there are many free educational pieces
to help you and guide you. Reading my book and my material on my Web page,
TrendFollowingmentor.com, should help you with one of the most important aspects
of trading, patience and discipline.
Traders lack discipline for several emotional reasons. There is the fear element,
greed element, and the ego element. These are all based on human nature. We all
should trade for one paramount issue, to build an ever‐increasing equity curve—
greed. Who would ever want to put on a trade if they stood the distinct possibility
of losing money? That is human nature. We want to be right; this is ego. Who really
likes to lose money? This is where the fear comes into play. We are hard‐wired for
these human emotions. This is why discipline is hard to achieve. When we cut a loss,
several interesting things happen. We are wrong and our ego could be damaged and
our pocketbooks are damaged with a loss. Not too many people like being wrong and
losing money at the same time. What a head trip! It is not human nature! Wouldn’t it
be so much easier just not taking the loss and hoping the trade will come back? Yes, it

19
GET A SAVVY START

would be emotionally easier; however, this is one of the quickest ways to stop trading.
Small losses morph into large losses.
Successful trend followers know that if they do not take small losses, these small
losses can morph into big losses and cause both financial and emotional damage. This
is why successful traders have built the discipline. They have let small losses turn into
these big losses, and they do not want to have it happen again.
Lack of discipline can be evident in various other aspects of trading. Exiting a profitable trade contrary to your rules is due to lack of discipline and fear. Ego comes into
the picture when people want to be considered right or smart on a trade. If they lock
in the profit, all of a sudden they are right. These types of traders are lacking discipline.
Taking their profit prematurely, they face the distinct possibility of missing the big trade
of the year. They need that trade to offset all the numerous losses they will encounter.
Another example of lack of discipline are the traders who violate their trading plan (if
they really have one), and once a trade goes against them, they average down and double
down. They believe they are right and the market is wrong. It is almost funny to say this,
but even professional traders have made this mistake of discipline and have blown up.
Conversely there are the type of traders who, when/if a trade starts to work, immediately add to that position. They want to make a killing. They want to get rich. This
is ego. This enhanced leverage works both ways and is a double‐edged sword. When a
trade works and leverage is used, that is great. However, the more probable instance
is when these trades do not work, leverage is used, and both financial and emotional
pain is generated. I am not a psychologist; however, I have seen these types of instances
in the market.
Discipline is really a hard attribute to build. It is almost like a muscle that needs to
be built.You need to build a discipline muscle as well as a patience muscle. Discipline
is one of the most difficult aspects of trading to overcome. You can have your exact
trading plan and the “best” system, but it is for naught if you either do not take the next
upcoming trade or fail to exit when you are supposed to.
You do not want to fail to pull the trigger on a trade. You do not want to miss a
trade you should have taken.You do not want to let a small loss grow into a nightmare.
If you miss one trade, you might miss an entire year of profits. The lack of discipline
comes at the most critical time for a trader. Discipline is needed when you are in the
thick of it or in a difficult situation. There are those that think simulated trades teach
one discipline. I disagree wholeheartedly. There is a new feeling when you have real
money and real risks on the line. All the supposed planning and preparation can go
out the window. It is trite to tell a trader that he or she needs to control fear and
greed. These are very strong emotions. When one is consistent (over time) the ability
to overcome fear and greed are slightly easier to handle. Consistent means seeing a
familiar situation that you have seen before and acted upon in exactly the same manner. You repeat the same action and are open and accepting of the consequences. You
completely accept that the trade is 50/50, and if the trade does not work, you move

on and take the next trade without any fear. Mechanical trading systems can assist in
discipline, but it is still up to you to take the trade and be responsible for the outcome.
Interpreting charts is somewhat difficult. At times, if you do not have an exact
plan with patterns that are recognizable, you might interpret the charts differently.
Differently means you are not consistent. Consistency builds discipline and controls
the inherent fear, greed, and ego.
The learning never stops. Do you really expect to make millions of dollars after
only investing a few hours of time in your education? You wouldn’t trust a lawyer or
doctor whose only education was from a course or webinar!
If you’re not willing to spend the time learning the techniques of trend following,
not working on yourself as far as discipline and patience are concerned, then trend
following might not be for you.

■ It’s Your Choice

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

20

Trend following is all about making decisions, but before you actually begin trading, there are a few important things you’ll need to consider. The basic decisions you
should make deal with your chosen software platform, your trading time frame, and
what markets you want to trade.
My trend following methodology is very simple and robust, and it will
work on all platforms, time frames, and markets.

Your Charting Software and Computer System
You don’t need the latest computer, and you don’t need the most expensive or so‐called
fastest system. Basically, any computer or laptop that you’ve purchased in the past couple of years is fine. I trade with an ASUS laptop from a year ago. I have everything
backed up on a desktop, an external hard drive, and a cloud.You do not need anything
fancy, just solid, reliable, and durable. Forget about all the speed stuff that is touted.
Choosing the right charting software is a very personal decision. What another
trader chooses may be different from what you choose, and vice versa. That’s why it’s
important for you to carefully evaluate a list of features, considering both advantages
and disadvantages before you make a decision on a data feed and charting package.
You can use Stocks & Commodities magazine’s Reader’s Choice as a starting point
and try out various software platforms. I have been using Metastock, probably since
around the time it came out in the marketplace, and I use Tradingblox, as well. There
are pros and cons to both platforms.
Metastock was probably the first trading platform in the world that
gave you the ability to create, test, and fully automate your own rule‐based trading
Metastock

Tradingblox As I stated, there are reviews in Stocks & Commodities magazine to help
you figure out what works best for you. On a portfolio level, I use Tradingblox. It lets
me test out how my ideas test on a portfolio level. I would suggest walking before
running.Walk forward means testing different periods of time in order to confirm that
you have similar results both in percent profits and percent drawdowns.Try Metastock
and if you are satisfied, purchase it for your trend following strategies. I teach with
Metastock in my mentoring courses due to its robustness and simplicity.
You need to be comfortable with the platform and it is entirely your choice.

Time Frames for Trend Following
The term time frame refers to the length of time you plan to hold your trade. This is
totally a personal decision based on your personality, risk profile, and account size.
Day traders exit all of their positions at the close of the market. Position traders
can hold trades for weeks or even years. You have to decide on your time frame.
Do you want to trade short‐term, long‐term, or somewhere in between? This is
a paramount decision regarding your trading career. Each time frame has its own
prerequisite of both time and emotional energy.

21
GET A SAVVY START

strategies on a daily basis. When you’re ready for your first trade, Metastock can
watch your trading rules and even carry out your trades 100 percent automatically. It is similar to autopilot, but I suggest you still try flying the plane yourself,
at least initially.
Metastock is designed to help you discover some potential market opportunities
and then perform your trades more professionally than you could ever do on your
own. Metastock essentially monitors the markets for you tick by tick, in real time on
the Internet, and seeks out all of the opportunities based on your trading plans.
The instant an opportunity arises based on your custom buy or sell rules, it’s designed to automatically generate your entry and exit orders and send them to the
marketplace within fractions of a second of the market move.
You can automate practically all of the trading strategies you could ever think of,
including multiple orders, entries and exits, profit targets, protective stops, trailing
stops, and more. It allows you to back‐test, program custom indicators, and modify
indicators to your needs. Then, with just a single click of your mouse, it will back‐test
your strategy on up to 20 years of authentic, intraday market data, giving you the
simulated results. Metastock will provide you with information on all of the trades you
would have positioned, your simulated net profit or losses, and much more, before
you even risk one dollar from your real trading funds.
When you first set up Metastock, it may be a little overwhelming because of all
the features and functions. However, for $1,395 (plus data charges) you can utilize
Metastock’s award‐winning features and be off to a good start.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

22

Whatever time frame you chose, it must fit your personality as well as time constraints. Some traders simply do not have the patience to wait for an outcome of a
trade. They are not emotionally built to hold a trade for month or longer. Traders like
this should not even consider longer‐term time frames. Conversely, if you have a full‐
time job, do not delude yourself that you can bop in and out of a position while you
are juggling your real job. Can you imagine if you went to an attorney for a pressing
issue? Suppose he comes in late for the meeting because he was watching his trading
screen of five‐minute S&P 500 bars. In the course of the meeting, he gets an alert on
his BlackBerry to buy the S&P 500 futures and bolts out the door to place the order.
I doubt that the lawyer will be successful nor that you would have confidence in the
lawyer representing you. The lawyer thinks he can make easy money. He is lured into
the money trap and cannon fodder for professional traders. I have heard stories like
this, as ridiculous as they sound.You must trade your time constraints and there is no
free lunch out there.
Day traders swear by their time frame and why it is optimal. Position traders
will swear by their time frame and state their reasons. In both cases these traders are
trading their personality. There is no best time frame. The best time frame is one that
matches your time constraints and personality. There are traders who change time
frames like some change their hairstyles. These traders are seeking the holy grail and
have not accepted the inherent risks while trading. There is no way to avoid losses
other than not trading. If I can put my two cents in, there is the inherent advantage
to trade less to avoid slippage and commissions. This is just my opinion. I have found
that more position traders over time are more successful than day traders. There is less
emotional demand and stress on position trading than day trading.
Trade your personality as far as time frame; determine for yourself what time
frame works the best for you.
You can sit in front of a computer and day trade or you can do as I do with daily
bars. Personally, when I am trading daily bars from start to finish, I am usually finished
in less than one hour. With the methods of trend following I will teach you, it is all
the same. I download my data early in the morning and within less than one hour I
am finished for the day. I know what I need to do exactly. I have exact entries,
exits, and exact amounts of contracts or shares to buy. I am prepared and my orders
are in the markets. It really does not matter what your exact entries are. A mechanical
systematic trader might look for a breakout trade or a retracement trade (as I do). A
fundamental trader might look for a favorable earnings report. Then there are those
who rely on astrology or cycles. Don’t laugh, I am serious, people even seek out astrology. The key is to have some type of realistic entry method that is replicative and
identifiable so that once you see it on another trade you can repeat the action.
Regardless of the entries, they are one of the smallest pieces of the puzzle. Any
trade is 50/50. The more important issues are the risk considerations such as how
much to buy or sell and when to exit with either a profit or a loss.

23
GET A SAVVY START

Aspects of the Exit Exiting a trade is much more important than the entries. One
of the hardest things for traders to do is actually take the appropriate exit as per their
trading plan (if they have one). Trend followers need to ride major trends to make up
for all of the small losses they encounter and maximize their profitability. Day traders,
on the other hand, are happy to make a few ticks on the majority of their profitable
trades. Both of these issues are personal issues that need to be addressed before trading
commences. What I have found is that one of the hardest issues for a beginning trader
is to have the patience to let the trade work. Once the trade starts working or trending
fear or greed kicks in, there is the urge to lock in the short profit as opposed to letting it run. This will have devastating effects on a trader’s account. Most trades do not
work when one trend follows and cutting profits short is the direct route to failure in
trading. One must have these rare big winners to offset the multitudes of trades that do
not work and incur (hopefully) small losses. The reality of trend following is doing the
uncomfortable. Trend following requires work. This work is developing your patience
and discipline to let these trades run their course and not cut them short due to fear or
greed. It is very easy to ring the cash register, and then this leads to another major issue
of disappointment. Can you imagine if you had a trade that was working and out of
fear or greed you took your quick profit only to watch it afterwards hitting multiyear
highs or lows? This is the reality. Trends go to extremes. Do not feel bad. This is human
nature. I once heard a lecture by Leo Melamed from CME who spoke about a silver
trade he was in. Leo Melamed, the chairman of CME, exited a silver trade during the
Hunt brothers’ escapade thinking that it had gone far enough.
The Hunt brothers tried to corner the silver market in the late 1970s. Silver went
from $11 to $50 during the Hunt brothers’ manipulation. Fortunes were made and
lost. Beginning in the early 1970s, the Hunt brothers started accumulating large
amounts of silver. By mid‐1979, the Hunt brothers virtually cornered the total global
silver market. The brothers made a tremendous profit estimated at between $2 billion to $4 billion due to their enormous silver bet. In today’s terms, this amount I
would assume would be in the tens of billions or possibly more. Silver prices ultimately returned from the stratosphere and collapsed to below $11 eventually. The
largest single‐day drop in the price of silver occurred on so‐called Silver Thursday.
The Hunt brothers ended up filing for bankruptcy in September 1988, largely due to
lawsuits incurred as a result of their silver speculation. However, during this period
trend followers who had a plan and the tenacity to follow their plan created fortunes
for themselves and their grandchildren. Trends will go to extremes. You need to have
the patience and fortitude to let them run without interfering.
As much as cutting losses is important to long‐term success while trend following,
the aspect of exits and when to exit may have more of an impact in your long‐term
success as exemplified in the preceding paragraphs.
You have to have the drive, dedication, discipline, patience, and passion to give
yourself the potential for success in trading.
