
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
FINRA (www.finra.org) was formed in 2007 by the merger of the New York
Stock Exchange’s regulatory department and the National Association of
Securities Dealers. It represents and regulates all stock and bond brokerage

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
firms and their employees. More than 4,245 firms are members, with 630,150
employees registered to sell securities. FINRA administers background
checks and licensing exams, regulates securities trading and monitors how
firms comply, and provides information for investors so that they are better
informed about the investing process.
FINRA also requires brokers to know who their customers are and whether
an investment strategy is suitable for them, the so-called know your customer
rule. I discuss suitability later in this chapter, but for now, know that that’s a
FINRA function.
A good first stop for a day trader is FINRA’s BrokerCheck service, which you
can find at www.finra.org/Investors/ToolsCalculators/
BrokerCheck. BrokerCheck allows you to look up brokerage firms and individual brokers to see whether they’re in good standing. If any complaints have
been filed, you can see what they are and decide for yourself how you feel
about them. This great information can help you head off problems with sales
people or brokerage firms early on. BrokerCheck has helped me a time or two
when I’ve been looking into potential business partners.
FINRA’s predecessor, the National Association of Securities Dealers, started as
a self-regulatory organization, but in the late 1960s, it saw that member firms
needed a better way to trade over-the-counter securities (securities that don’t
trade on an organized exchange like the New York Stock Exchange). In 1971, it
formed its own electronic communication network, the National Association of
Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system, or NASDAQ, pronounced as
one word: NAZ-dack. In 2000, the NASD divested NASDAQ, which is now
known only by that name, and returned to its self-regulatory organization
roots. Although the two are now separate, brokerage firms that trade
securities on NASDAQ must be members of FINRA.

The exchanges
Although the New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ got out of the brokerage oversight business when they formed FINRA, they are both involved in
regulation. In particular, these and the smaller exchanges work to ensure that
companies with securities traded on the exchange meet the criteria set for
their listings. These criteria include timely financial reporting with the SEC
and minimum numbers of shares that are actually traded. (Chapter 3 has a
description of the different exchanges and their listing requirements.)
The exchanges also monitor how securities are traded in order to look for
patterns that may point to market manipulation or insider trading. Each
exchange works with the brokerage firms that are allowed to trade on its
exchange to make sure that the brokers know who their customers are and
that the brokers have systems in place to make certain that their customers
play by the rules.

85

86

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
The Federal Reserve System
The Federal Reserve System, known as the Fed to friend and foe alike, is
the central bank of the United States, and one of its roles is to ensure the
integrity of the country’s financial system. Although most Federal Reserve
regulation is aimed at commercial banks, the Fed gets involved in securities
markets in times of crisis to ensure that the markets continue to function. In
the 2008 financial crisis, this involvement included arranging the mergers of
failing brokerage firms as well as buying troubled assets from different banks,
brokerage firms, and insurance companies.

The Securities Investor Protection Corporation
The Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) was founded in 1970
to protect brokerage accounts from losses in the event of the firm’s bankruptcy. If your firm goes under (and several have over the years, including
some that were once household names), you’ll be able to get your cash and
securities back.
The SIPC doesn’t insure against fraud, however. If you’re dealing with a firm
or a salesperson who rips you off, you have to get redress through the courts
and the Securities and Exchange Commission. You want to find a brokerage
firm that is an SIPC member, but your due diligence can’t stop there. For example, you should check your broker through FINRA’s BrokerCheck, discussed in
the earlier section “The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA).”
Likewise, almost all disputes that clients have with brokerage firms go to
arbitration, not the courts, and many people believe that the arbitration
process is biased in favor of the brokers. You have recourse, but you may
not have as much as you would like.

Treasury bond market regulation
Treasury bonds are a slightly different animal than corporate bonds. They
are issued by the U.S. government, so the Treasury Department’s Bureau of
the Public Debt (www.treasurydirect.gov) handles regulation, with the
SEC providing additional oversight. The firms that trade Treasury bonds are
FINRA members, so those rules apply, too.

Derivatives market regulation
The derivatives markets, where options and futures are traded, don’t deal in
stocks and bonds directly. Instead, they link buyers and sellers of contracts
where the value is linked to the value of an underlying security. Derivatives are

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
popular with day traders, because they give these traders a way to get exposure to interest rates and market index performance with less capital than
would be required to buy Treasury bonds or large groups of stocks directly.
Derivatives markets have their own regulatory bodies, but they match the
format and hierarchy of stock and bond market regulation. The organizations
may not be household names, but their functions are familiar.

Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
The CFTC (www.cftc.gov) is a government agency founded in 1974 to
oversee market activities in agricultural and financial commodities. The
government realized that these markets needed some regulation but were
sufficiently different from traditional stock exchanges that the SEC might not
be the best agency to handle it. The CFTC is structured similarly to the SEC,
with five commissioners holding staggered five-year terms, appointed by the
President and confirmed by Congress. One of the commissioners is designated as the chair. This structure is designed to keep the CFTC nonpartisan.
For decades, futures trading was regulated by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture because it involved nothing but agricultural commodities like
grain, pork bellies, and coffee. As traders demanded such new products as
futures on interest rates and currencies, it became clear that a new regulatory
body was needed, and that was the CFTC.
The CFTC has two main functions:
✓ To ensure that the markets are liquid and that both parties on an
options or futures transaction are able to clear (that is, to meet their
contractual obligations)
✓ To provide oversight to the markets by ensuring that the exchanges and
self-regulatory organizations have sufficient regulations in place and that
those regulations are enforced

National Futures Association (NFA)
The NFA (www.nfa.futures.org) regulates 4,200 firms with 55,000 employees who work on the different futures exchanges. It administers background
checks and licensing exams, regulates futures trading and monitors how
firms comply, and provides information for investors so that they’re better
informed about futures trading and how it differs from more traditional
investments.
Firms that handle futures are known as futures commission merchants, or
FCMs, rather than brokers. You can find information on FCMs and their
employees through the NFA’s Background Affiliation Status Information

87

88

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Center, which has the clever acronym BASIC. You can access it at www.
nfa.futures.org/basicnet or through the NFA’s home page. BASIC
allows you to look up futures firms and employees to see whether they are
registered and whether any complaints have been filed against them. If any
complaints have been filed, you can see how the problem was resolved.
(Consider BASIC the futures equivalent of the legendary permanent record
that your elementary school teachers said would follow you for the rest of
your life.)
The Securities and Exchange Commission and the National Association of
Securities Dealers regulate trading in options on stocks, but the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission and the National Futures Association regulate
trading on options on futures. As the lines between derivative products get
blurrier, you may find a lot of overlap between these different organizations,
and many experts in the industry predict that the SEC and CFTC will merge
at some point. Because researching firms and people through several
self-regulatory organizations is possible, you may as well take the time to do it.
Don’t be alarmed if someone is listed one place and not the other, but do be
alarmed if a firm or person isn’t listed anywhere.

The exchanges
Unlike the stock exchanges, the derivatives exchanges haven’t merged their
regulatory functions. Thus the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), the
CME Group, InterncontinentalExchange, and other derivatives exchanges
have their own regulatory groups that ensure that their traders comply with
exchange rules and rules of other organizations, especially the CFTC. They
also develop new types of trading contracts that satisfy market demands
while complying with applicable laws. (Chapter 3 describes the different
exchanges and what they do.)
To look for patterns that may point to market manipulation or insider trading, the exchanges also monitor how derivatives are traded. Each works with
the futures commission merchants that are allowed to trade on its exchange
to ensure that the FCMs know who their customers are and have systems in
place to make sure these customers trade well, if not profitably.
On occasion, the exchanges cooperate with regulators of stock and bond markets, especially if the suspicion of fraud or market manipulation exists. After
all, insider trading in options is just as illegal as insider trading in stocks!

Foreign exchange (forex) regulation
Because it is the largest, most liquid market in the world, many day traders
are taking up trading in foreign exchange, also known as forex. But here’s

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
the tricky thing: These markets are not well regulated. There’s nothing to
stop someone from exchanging U.S. dollars for Canadian dollars; tourists do
it every day, often at a hotel desk or retail shop. There’s no paperwork, no
hassle — and no oversight.
Oversight isn’t necessary for a simple exchange of bucks to loonies, like when
someone at a convenience store buys a tube of Smarties (no, not the dry
tablets wrapped in cellophane but rather a fine chocolate candy not available in the States, so if you cross the border, please pick some up for me!).
Unfortunately, this situation has allowed some firms to misrepresent forex
trading to day traders as regulated when it is not, which has allowed some
day traders to get badly burned. Forewarned is forearmed, as the cliché goes.
Some online forex brokers are located outside of the United States, so they are
allowed to offer customers more leverage. Increasing leverage can increase
return, but it also adds risk. And some jurisdictions have better protections
for investors than others. Check to see where a firm is based and what laws
apply so that you’re protected.

Options and futures on currency
Most currency is traded in the spot: Traders exchange one currency for
another at the current exchange rate. The spot market is not regulated.
But many day traders prefer to pick up exposure to currency using options
and futures, to bet on where exchange rates may go and to hedge the risks
of unexpected changes. Options and futures on currency are regulated as
derivatives, through the CFTC, the NFA, and the relevant futures exchanges.
In some cases, though, FCMs get customer referrals from foreign exchange
firms that are not themselves registered, which can make it unclear whether
customers understand what they are getting into.
If you are participating in an unregulated market like forex, you can protect
yourself by doing your research so that you know what the risks and rewards
are. For that matter, every market has a few unscrupulous individuals, so
you’re always better off if you find your own facts rather than rely on someone
else. The exchanges and self-regulatory organizations all have great websites
with lots of information, and you can see a directory of them in this book’s
appendix.

Banks and oversight
Banks are responsible for most foreign exchange trading, and banks are heavily regulated. Therefore the Federal Reserve Banks and the U.S. Treasury
Department pay attention to forex markets, looking for evidence of manipulation and money laundering (discussed later in the chapter). This oversight
keeps the market from being a total free-for-all, even though anyone is
allowed to trade currency.

89

90

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Bank oversight isn’t enough to protect you from the outlandish claims made
by crooked forex trading firms, but it does ensure that your contracts are
fulfilled.

Working with Brokers’ Rules
No matter who regulates them, brokers and futures commission merchants
have to know who their customers are and what they are up to. That leads
to some basic regulations about suitability, pattern day trading, and money
laundering — and extra paperwork for you. Don’t get too annoyed by all the
paperwork you have to fill out to open an account, because your brokerage
firm has to do even more.

Gauging suitability
Brokerage firms and FCMs have to make sure that customer activities are
appropriate. The firms need to know their customers and be sure that any
recommendations are suitable. When it comes to day trading, firms need to
be sure that customers are dealing with risk capital — money that they can
afford to lose. They also need to be sure that the customers understand the
risks that they are taking. Depending on the firm and what you’re trying to
do, you may have to submit financial statements, sign a stack of disclosures,
and verify that you have received different guides to trading.
Your financial situation is no one’s business but your own — except of course
that the various regulators want to make sure that firm employees aren’t talking customers into taking risks that they shouldn’t be taking. That’s why the
brokerage firm wants to know who you are and what money you’re using for
your trading. Sure, you can lie about it. You can tell the broker you don’t need
the $25,000 you’re putting in your account, even if that’s the money paying
for your kidney dialysis. But if you lose it, you can’t say you didn’t know
about the risks involved.

Money laundering: Al Capone or Watergate?
Although some believe that the term money
laundry dates back to Al Capone’s attempts
to evade taxes by owning laundries —
businesses that had a large amount of small
cash transactions — the Federal Reserve

Board says that the term didn’t come into use
until the Watergate scandal, when Nixon’s
campaign staff had to hide the money used to
pay the people who broke into his opponent’s
psychiatrist’s office.

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader

Making sure the money is legit
Money laundering is the process of creating a provenance for money acquired
from illegal activities. Your average drug dealer, Mafia hit man, or corrupt
politician doesn’t accept credit cards, but he really doesn’t want to keep
lots of cash in his house, either. How can he collect interest on his money if
it’s locked in a safe in his closet? And besides, his friends are an unsavory
sort; he can’t trust them to stay away from his cache. If this criminal fellow
takes all that cash to the bank, those pesky bankers will start asking a lot of
questions, because they know that most people pursuing legitimate business
activities get paid through checks or electronic direct deposit.
Hence, the felon with funds looks for a way to make it appear that the money
is legitimate. All sorts of ways to launder money exist, ranging from making
lots of small cash deposits to engaging in complicated series of financial
trades and money transfers, especially between countries, that become
difficult for investigators to trace. Sometimes these transactions look a lot
like day trading, which is why legitimate brokerage firms opening day-trade
accounts pay attention to who their customers are.
Fighting money laundering took on urgency after the September 11, 2001,
attacks, because it was clear that someone somewhere had given some bad
people a lot of cash to fund the preparation and execution of their deadly
mission. The U.S. and several other nations increased their oversight of financial activities during the aftermath of the strikes on the World Trade Center
and Pentagon. That’s why a key piece of paperwork from your broker will
be the anti-money laundering disclosure. The U.S. Treasury Department’s
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (www.fincen.gov), which investigates money laundering, requires financial institutions to have enforcement
procedures in place to verify that new investments were not made from
ill-gotten funds.
In order for your brokerage firm to verify that it knows who its customers are
and where their money came from, you’ll probably have to provide the
following information when you open a brokerage account:
✓ Your name
✓ Your date of birth
✓ Your street address
✓ Your place of business
✓ Your Social Security number or Taxpayer Identification Number
✓ Your driver’s license and passport
✓ Copies of your financial statements

91

92

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Following special rules for
pattern day traders
Here’s the problem for regulators: Many day traders lose money, and those
losses can be magnified by the use of leverage strategies (trading with borrowed money, meaning that you can lose more money than you have in the
quest for large profits, discussed in great detail in Chapter 9). If the customer
who lost the money can’t pay up, then the broker is on the hook. If too many
customers lose money beyond what the broker can absorb, then the losses
ripple through the financial system, and that’s not good.
FINRA has a long list of rules that its member firms have to meet to stay in
business. One, still known as NASD Rule 2520 despite the merger of the NASD
that created FINRA, deals specifically with day traders. This rule sets the minimum account size and margin requirements for those who fit the definition
of day traders, and I’ll give you a hint: The requirements are stricter than for
other types of accounts to reflect the greater risk, although they give some
flexibility on maintenance margin.
FINRA defines day trading as the buying or selling of the same security on the
same day in a margin account (that is, using borrowed money). Execute four
or more of those day trades within five business days, and you are a pattern
day trader, unless those four or more trades were 6 percent or less of all the
trades you made over those five days.
The National Futures Association does not have a definition of day trading,
because futures trades by their very nature are short term.
Here’s why NASD Rule 2520 matters: If you are a pattern day trader, you can
have a margin of 25 percent in your account, which means you can borrow
75 percent of the cost of the securities that you’re trading. Most customers
are only allowed to borrow 50 percent. The reason for the higher amount?
Pattern day traders almost always close out their positions overnight, so the
firm has less risk of having the loan outstanding. However, you have to have
a margin account if you are a pattern day trader. That is, you have to sign an
agreement saying that you understand the risks of borrowing money, including that you may have to repay more than is in your account and that your
broker can sell securities out from under you to ensure you pay what is owed.
Under Rule 2520, you have to have at least $25,000 in your brokerage account
at the start of the trading day. If you have losses that take your account below
that, you have to come up with more money before your broker allows you to
continue day trading. If you don’t make the deposits necessary to bring your
account up to at least $25,000 and at least 25 percent of the amount of money
you’ve borrowed within five business days, you have to trade on a cash basis
(no borrowing), assuming the firm will even let you trade.

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
Don’t bother trying to plead your case, because the broker has to comply
with the law. Firms pay a price if they let customers slide. In 2010, FINRA
fined brokerage firm Scottrade $200,000 for allowing customers who met the
definition of pattern day traders to trade without maintaining $25,000 in their
accounts. The firm sent customers warnings but allowed them to trade in
violation of the rule — a decision that wasn’t cool with the regulators.
The rules set by FINRA and other self-regulatory organizations are minimum
requirements. Brokerage firms are free to set higher limits for account size and
borrowing, and many do in order to manage their own risks better.

Reporting taxes
On top of the identity paperwork, you have forms to fill out for tax reporting. IRS Form W9 keeps your taxpayer information on record. Then, after the
end of the year, the brokerage firm sends you form 1099B listing how much
money you made in your account, breaking it out between income and capital
gains on stocks, bonds, options, and futures. You use that to ensure that the
taxman gets his cut. Tax issues are covered in Chapter 15, but for now, just
keep in mind that your federal, state, and local taxing authorities are paying
attention to how well your trading does.

Watching Out for Insider Trading
The regulations about suitability and money laundering are very clear. You
get a bunch of forms, you read them, you sign them, you present documentation, and everyone is happy. The rules that keep the markets functioning are
clear and easy to follow.
But another set of rules also keeps markets functioning — namely, that no
one has an unfair information advantage. If you knew ahead of time about big
merger announcements, interest-rate decisions by the Federal Reserve, or a
new sugar substitute that would eliminate demand for corn syrup, you could
make a lot of money in the stock market, trading options on interest-rate
futures or playing in the grain futures market. In doing so, however, you’d
have an unfair advantage. If everyone believed that such unfair advantages
were common, then they would be unwilling to participate in the capital
markets, and that would harm the economy.
Insider trading is not well defined. Insider information includes any nonpublic
information that a reasonable person would consider when deciding whether
to buy or sell a security, and that’s a pretty vague standard — especially
because the whole purpose of research is to combine bits of immaterial
information together to make investment decisions.
