
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

34

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

From this point, there are two different scenarios that they would be watching for.
In one, the market drops and keeps dropping, and they see that the rest of the market
really has no conviction or interest. Depending on their plan for the campaign, this might
or might not affect their decision to continue buying. Perhaps they are very happy to buy
the market even lower, or perhaps it is weaker than they expected and they might have to
slowly unwind their positions. Large players like these do not take significant losses very
often, but they are also not always right. The other possibility is that they stop buying and
the market falls, but other buyers immediately step in and arrest the decline. In this case,
the large players just got an important piece of information: there is underlying buying
interest in the market.
Keep in mind that these types of buyers, and so this type of price action, tend to
be very large and very slow moving. These are usually institutions that may buy many
times the stock’s average daily trading volume, so most of these plays develop on an
almost glacial scale; but, even so, there are critical inflection points that can be defined
in minutes or seconds. These drops below the bottom of the accumulation range are
examples of specific points in time that require attention and focus.
The presence of other buyers just under the level where the institutions were buying
telegraphs real interest. The large player would probably be compelled to immediately
resume their buying plan, working very hard to not spook the market. Again, it is a game
of deception. If enough players sense the buying pressure, the market will explode into
an uptrend, and the large players do not want this until they have accumulated their full
line. This type of activity leaves a distinctive and important pattern on a price chart: it
will be clear that the market has defined a support area and that price has probed below
that support, but that the market spent very little time there because buyers immediately
stepped in and pressed the market higher. This is one pattern that candlestick charts can
highlight well. Candles with long shadows extending below support but with few or no
closes below that support are a sign of accumulation. If we were to look inside the candles on a lower time frame, we would see that most of those excursions below support
lasted less than a quarter of the time frame of each candle (i.e., a daily chart spends at
most a few hours below support, an hourly chart less than 15 minutes, etc.). Figure 2.2
shows an accumulation area in daily October 2010 Platinum futures. The dotted line is
not an exact level, but notice that only candle shadows touch the area—the market is
unable to close near the level. Also, the bar marked A is a classic Wyckoff spring, which
is a bar that tests below a level and immediately finds buyers. In this case, the price
movement off this day led to a multimonth rally.
This is an important lesson about putting chart patterns in context. A simple statistical test of candles with long lower shadows would find that there is no predictive power
to that pattern, but when a market is potentially in accumulation, the presence of these
springs can distinctly tilt the probabilities in favor of the upside. Everything we do as
traders is a matter of shifting probabilities. We deal in probabilities, not certainties, but
the position and context of the higher time frame can often provide warning that a market could be under accumulation, lending more importance to these lower time frame
patterns. Notice also that this is a subtle pattern. Though these are not exciting patterns,
they are important and contribute to a trader’s overall read on the market’s action. It is

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

35

FIGURE 2.2 Accumulation in Daily Platinum Futures with a Classic Spring at A

also worth considering that what I am presenting here is an idealized and simplified perspective on a market in accumulation. In actual practice, these patterns are often much
more complex and obscured by noise.
From a longer-term perspective, crowd psychology is simple and easy to understand
while a market is in accumulation. If the smart money operators are accumulating well
and doing their job right, the public simply does not care about the market. The distinguishing psychological feature of a market in accumulation is that it is off the public’s
radar; no one is thinking about it or talking about it. No journalist writes an article about
a market in sideways consolidation, and no one talks about such markets on television.
They are invisible and boring; only smart, professional traders know to watch for these
formations. At some point, unobserved and unnoticed, the accumulation breaks to the
upside and the stock moves into the next phase of the cycle.

Markup: The Classic Uptrend
The second part of the cycle is the uptrend (markup), and the action of the smart money
is not as clearly defined here. Perhaps the institutions may simply hold their full line until the stock is marked up to prices at which they consider it advantageous to sell, or

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

36

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

perhaps they will actively buy and sell with the fluctuations of the trend. The public psychology in an uptrend is a subject for study in and of itself. Usually, trends begin out of
accumulation and there is little attention from the public. Trends begin in sneaky, unnoticed ways, but, at some point, the price advances far enough that people start to take
notice. The classic first reaction is disbelief, followed by a desire to fade (go against) the
move. If Wheat futures have been locked in a $1.00 range for a couple of years, most
people are apt to regard a price $0.50 above that range as too high and will be inclined
to short, thinking the aberration will correct itself. This price movement will still not
be in focus in the major media, but, when people do talk about it, they will almost universally observe that “fundamentals do not support this move” and there are also many
narrative factors that suggest “the risk is too high to consider buying up here.” At the
beginning of trends, the prevailing mind-set from the public is usually that the trend is
somehow wrong.
As the trend grinds higher, the early, aggressive shorts will be forced to cover, and
their buying pressure will, in turn, push the market higher. (Here is a clear example
where short sellers are actually a source of significant buying pressure; things are never
as simple as they seem, and regulatory pressures to curb short selling are naive and misdirected at best.) The public’s initial disbelief slowly turns into acceptance, and people
start buying every dip in an attempt to position themselves with the trend that is now obvious and fully underway. If the trend continues, there may be news stories in the major
media featuring the trend, but talking heads will still be divided on the subject. Some will
have switched their bearish bias, observing that the market is simply going up, perhaps
“climbing the wall of worry” put up by other commentators who still insist the movement
cannot be justified by the fundamentals. If you are positioned long in such a trend, this
is good—the division of opinion is fuel for the fire. You want dissenting opinions at this
point in the market cycle.
We will spend an entire chapter refining our understanding of the characteristic features of price action in trends, but the basic pattern is a series of with-trend legs interspersed with pullbacks, which are also called retracements. Trend traders usually focus
a lot of attention on the relationship of each trend leg and pullback to previous legs, in
terms of magnitude, length (time), and character (primarily referring to lower time frame
price action). Trading plans in trends usually involve either buying into the pullbacks or
buying breakouts to new highs as the trend continues higher.
Though there have been many attempts, no one has found a reliable way to judge the
large-scale psychology of market participants; however, an understanding of the emotional cycle that drives trend moves is very important. Because market action is, at least
to some degree, the sum of many traders’ and investors’ hopes and fears, many people observe that price action often encourages traders to make mistakes. Markets often present
us with the temptation to do the wrong thing at the wrong time, and we will be lured into
doing so if we do not understand the psychology of the crowd. Understand this so that
you can stand apart from it. The emotional cycle of trends can be summarized as disbelief, acceptance, and, eventually, consensus. When everyone agrees, the trend is usually
close to being over.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

37

In some trends, mania sets in and things get a little crazy. Now, everyone will be
talking about the movement. All the pundits will be in agreement. Even though the market may have appreciated several hundred percent in a year’s time, it is now obvious to
everyone that there is real demand and the situation is only going to get worse. There
will be dire calls of shortages and claims that increased global demand cannot possibly
be met by supply. Common sense goes out the window and people do not recognize the
significance of the most basic fundamental factors, or, more accurately, they do not understand how fundamental factors change. For instance, in the case of an agricultural
commodity, there will be news stories about how the world is running out of the commodity, probably a story here and there about some blight that will destroy the crop
on one continent or another, and what are basically calls for the end of the world. For
some reason, no one will notice that farmers just planted three times the acreage that
was planted in the previous year—the invisible hand is funny like that. Though the manic
uptrend seems like an unstoppable force, something very interesting is about to happen:
this unstoppable force is about to meet the immovable object in the form of massive
supply coming online.
Here is an important lesson for the objective trader: your clue to the fact that psychology has reached the mania stage is when stories begin to show up in the popular,
nonfinancial media. At times like that you have one job and one job only—detach yourself from the mass psychology and begin to exit the market. At the very least, you must
book partial profits and take steps to reduce the risk on your remaining line.

Distribution—The End?
Nothing goes on forever. At some point, higher prices will bring increased supply into
the market, balance is achieved, and prices will stop rising. From a technical perspective,
there are, broadly speaking, two ways this can happen. The manic blow-off end-of-trend
pattern just discussed is unusual, but deserves attention because it presents dramatic opportunities and dangers. More common is that the uptrend just runs out of steam, and the
market goes into another sideways trading range. The large operators who accumulated
positions in the first stage and who held most of their line through the markup now begin
quietly selling their inventory to the public (distribution). In the accumulation phase, it
was important that they hide their buying so as to not cause the market to break into
an uptrend too early. Similarly, they must now sell carefully because too much selling
pressure could crack the market into a downtrend.
To the untrained eye, distribution areas are indistinguishable from accumulation
areas—they are both large, sideways ranges. However, on a more subtle level, we will
see that many of the classic signs of accumulation will not be present. When prices drop
below support, the market will not rebid quite as quickly. In general, prices may spend
more time hugging the bottom of the range; pressure against the top of the range is a
bit more common in accumulation. There may even be false breakouts of the top of the
range, leaving the candles with long shadows above the highs of the range. This pattern is
the opposite of the Wyckoff spring, and is usually called an upthrust. Eventually, prices

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

38

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

will drop below support at the bottom of the range and will fail to bounce. The market
will roll over into the last phase, markdown.
Psychologically, the public is usually still hopeful when a market goes into distribution. They will seize every potential breakout as proof that a new uptrend is just around
the corner, and will usually look for any excuse to keep buying. Keep in mind that this
pattern occurs in markets that have just had substantial advances, so it is easy to say
things like “Look, this thing is up 50 percent year over year, the fundamentals are great,
and the Street obviously loves it.” Every dip is an opportunity to pick up additional shares
or contracts, which are now cheaper, so they are basically on sale. Who could pass up
such a great opportunity? The public, however, is blind to the subtle differences in patterns that hint that another trend leg up might not be in the cards.
Trading real markets is not quite this simple. For one thing, markets in secondphase uptrends will frequently enter fairly extended sideways ranges in the middle of the
trend. Should these be treated as further accumulation areas, in preparation for another
markup, or is the trend over and these are distribution areas? There are subtle clues in
market structure and price action, but it is not always possible to make an accurate judgment in real time. Looking back, or at the middle of a chart, the answer is obvious, but
it will not be so obvious at the hard right edge. Even with the best analysis and trading
plan, we will simply make the wrong decision sometimes, so any good trading plan will
focus on risk management first.

Markdown: The Bear Market
The last stage is markdown, which, in many ways, is the inverse of the markup. Psychologically, if the market has been in a protracted distribution phase, the public will most
likely have lost some interest. Some traders will be optimistic, and will plan to “get back
in” whenever it moves, but, in general, the public focuses on the same things the major
media do: hot markets that are moving. These traders will easily be able to justify buying
new highs above the distribution area, as this is how another trend leg would begin. They
also will be able to justify buying breakdowns below the distribution area, because the
market would be cheaper (on sale?) at those levels. The level of interest will probably be
relatively low because the public usually focuses on markets that move, but the general
tone will likely be very positive. After all, everyone is now in agreement that the market
is going higher, right?
Real downtrends begin out of this environment of optimism or complacency. Eventually, it becomes clear that the declines are a little steeper than expected, and some
longs begin to unwind their positions, adding to the selling pressure. The mood of the
market changes from optimism to disappointment, and aggressive shorts may even begin to show some teeth as they make larger profits on each successive decline. Bounces
fall short of previous highs, and people begin to sell even more aggressively. At some
point, everyone becomes convinced that the company is going out of business or that
commodity is “done” or the currency will never rally, and that the correct play is to short

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

39

it into oblivion. As you might expect by now, such an emotional extreme more often than
not marks the very bottom, and the market stabilizes into accumulation in preparation
for the next uptrend.
Market structure and price action in a downtrend are not a perfect mirror image of
the first stage, but the differences are subtle and difficult to quantify. One of the major
pieces of received wisdom from old-school traders is that markets tend to go down much
faster than they go up. There is some truth to this, as volatility reliably expands on declines in many markets, and there is also a subjective side to the analysis, as there is a
distinctly different feel to rallies in a bear market compared to sell-offs in a bull market.
Both structures are pullbacks in established trends, but there is a special kind of franticness and volatility that seems to be a unique attribute of bear markets. Bear market rallies
tend to be sharp and vicious, whereas pullbacks in bull markets are usually much more
orderly. There is a surprising degree of symmetry—most elements of uptrends and downtrends are mirror images of each other (reflected around the y-axis), but most traders
also find that a very different skill set is required to trade each environment. This may
explain why some traders avoid bear markets whereas others specialize in them.

The Cycle in Action
The structure laid out here was originally conceived around the equity markets and on
time frames ranging from months to years. It applies especially well there, but it also
has relevance to other markets and shorter time frames. Commodity markets tend to
follow a similar cycle, but the cycle in commodities is often driven by the production and
consumption cycle. Commodities, in general, tend to be a little more cyclical and more
prone to seasonal distortions, especially of volatility, than stock indexes are. Currency
markets tend to be a little less cyclical and tend to trend better than most other asset
classes over longer time frames. That said, there certainly are times when this cycle
does apply to the currency markets—for instance, in extreme situations accompanied by
emotional elation or stress.
The concept of fractal markets, as Mandelbrot and Hudson (2006) have written
about, is especially important when considering the Wyckoff cycle. Simply put, this
means that the same patterns appear in very long-term markets as in very short-term
markets. However, much of the academic work supporting this concept does not recognize that patterns may not be tradable on all time frames. It is not always possible
to trade 5-minute charts the same way as weekly charts, even though the patterns may
superficially appear to be similar. In addition, not enough work has been done on the relationship of fractal markets and liquidity. In the shorter time frames, patterns are bounded
by liquidity. For instance, very active stocks might show fractal patterns down to the 15second time frame, while less liquid commodities or stocks might degenerate into noise
anywhere below the daily level.
So, it should be easy to make money trading this cycle, right? Find accumulation on
your chosen time frame. Buy. Wait for distribution. Sell and sell short. Cover shorts when

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

40

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

the market goes back into accumulation. Repeat. Simple, right? Not so fast. Though this
cycle provides a useful road map and large-scale framework, there are many nontrivial
problems in actual application:

r Accumulation does lead to significant advances, but it is difficult to time entries out
of accumulation areas. Buying breakouts results in a string of small (or, depending
on your trade management discipline, not so small) losses that do add up.
r Buying within the accumulation area is not simple, as there are usually no clear risk
points. Setting stops under accumulation areas is usually wrong, because you want
to be buying those flushes, not selling into them.
r Sometimes what looks like accumulation turns out to not be accumulation, the bottom drops, and the market does not look back. Small losses can quickly become big
problems in this environment.
r Trading bull and bear trends (markup and markdown) is also not as simple as might
be expected. There are many tradable patterns in trends, as well as patterns that
suggest the trend is coming to an end, but it takes real skill to identify and to trade
these patterns.
r Markup periods often go into long, sideways ranges that may be either accumulation
or distribution. The pattern is not always accumulation → uptrend → distribution; it
is sometimes accumulation → uptrend → accumulation, or some other variation.
And perhaps most importantly, remember that no trader is correct 100 percent of the
time, and being wrong means being on the wrong side of the market. Risk management
is essential to limit the damage on the times you are wrong.

THE FOUR TRADES
Wyckoff’s market cycle is a highly idealized view of market action, but it does lay the
foundation for a simple categorization of technical trades into four categories. There
are two trend trades: trend continuation and trend termination, and two support and
resistance trades: holding and failing. Though this may seem like an arbitrary classification system, it is not. Every technical trade imaginable falls into one of these categories.
Trades from certain categories are more appropriate at certain points in the market structure, so it is worthwhile to carefully consider your trades in this context.
The first question to consider is: Are all of your trade setups in one category? If
so, this may not be a bad thing—a successful trading methodology must fit the trader’s
personality—but most traders will have the best results when they have at least two
counterbalancing setups. For instance, a trader who focuses on breakout trades should
probably understand the patterns of failed breakouts. A trader who trades pullbacks in
trends should probably also be able to trade the patterns that occur at the ends of trends.
There are two reasons behind this suggestion. First, you should become intimately familiar with the patterns associated with the failure of the patterns you trade. The second
