
A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

93

a fundamentally flawed business concept have made their initial public offerings and have retired to their estates, and they hardly care that the price of
their stocks has dropped so far. Some business magazines that prospered not
so much because readers demanded them, but because companies wanted to
advertise in them as part of their act, have shut down their operations. But
more such ventures are still appearing, if at a lower rate, and the story is by
no means over.
I remember vividly an experience I had in 1998 when I became involved in
an attempt to sell a small firm. The small firm made a presentation to some
investment bankers to help them decide whether they could market the firm
privately to potential corporate buyers. The scene lingers in my memory.
The president of the small firm was describing a sound business model to
these bankers, I thought. The investment bankers seemed a little sleepy. At
one point in his presentation, the president mentioned that the firm sells
its product over the Internet, and so one could say it was an Internet firm.
At this point one of the investment bankers sprang to life. He said that the
market was hungry for Internet firms, and if they could present the small
firm as one of these, his bank could raise serious millions of dollars for the
sale. But, he said, the firm would have to come up with a story of a grand
future trajectory for the firm, a plausible story that might conceivably lead
to hundreds of millions of revenue in a few years, and the management
would have to start living that story, taking business initiatives that signaled
belief in the story. Later, the president of the small firm told me he toyed
with the idea of changing the firm’s name to something ending in .com. But,
on further reflection, he said that the story was not real: “I just couldn’t do
it,” he concluded.
Others could and did do that sort of thing. In fact, there was a trend over
the 1990s toward installing showmen and media-savvy personalities as
heads of corporations, to lure investors and boost stock prices. In his 2002
book Searching for a Corporate Savior, Rakesh Khurana documented a pattern
of hiring expensive celebrities from the outside to run companies with an
eye on the stock market. Those who had a genuine and deep knowledge of
the business, who felt a loyalty to the others who worked there, and who
were willing to take the steps that would ensure long-term success, were
often pushed aside.33

Speculative Bubbles as Naturally Occurring Ponzi Processes
It would appear, by extrapolation from examples like those given earlier, that
speculative feedback loops that are in effect naturally occurring Ponzi schemes
do arise from time to time without the contrivance of a fraudulent manager.
Even if there is no manipulator fabricating false stories and deliberately

94

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

deceiving investors in the aggregate stock market, tales about the market are
everywhere. When prices go up a number of times, investors are rewarded
sequentially by price movements in these markets, just as they are in Ponzi
schemes. There are still many people (indeed, the stock brokerage and mutual
fund industries as a whole) who benefit from telling stories that suggest that
the market will go up further. There is no reason for these stories to be fraudulent; they need only emphasize the positive news and give less emphasis to
the negative. The path of a naturally occurring Ponzi scheme—if we may call
speculative bubbles that—will be more irregular and less dramatic, since there
is no direct manipulation, but the path may sometimes resemble that of a
Ponzi scheme when it is supported by naturally occurring stories. The extension from Ponzi schemes to naturally occurring speculative bubbles appears
so natural that one must conclude, if there is to be debate about speculative
bubbles, that the burden of proof is on skeptics to provide evidence as to why
Ponzi‑like speculative bubbles cannot occur.
Recently, many of the major finance textbooks, which have promoted a
view of financial markets as working rationally and efficiently, have not provided arguments as to why feedback loops supporting speculative bubbles
cannot occur. In fact, at least until recently they may not even mention bubbles
or Ponzi schemes.34 These books convey a sense of orderly progression in
financial markets, of markets that work with mathematical precision. If the
phenomena are not mentioned at all, then students are not given any way to
judge for themselves whether they are in fact influencing the market.

Feedback and Cross Feedback between
the Stock Market and the Housing Market
We noted in previous chapters that in the United States, there has been very
little relation historically between price changes in the stock market and price
changes in the housing market, but that the housing market boom that began
in 1998 appeared several years after the beginning of the sharpest ascent of
the stock market starting in 1995. We also noted that, internationally, home
price booms show some tendency to peak a couple years after stock market
booms. This raises the possibility that there is sometimes cross feedback, that
is, feedback from one market to another, between the stock market and the
housing market. While the housing market grows more speculative as our
society changes, it is also possible that the feedback will intensify in the future.
It does not seem surprising that a home price boom would begin a few
years after a stock market boom. The stock market boom produces perceived
wealth, and the greater wealth ought to encourage people to spend more on
their homes and thus bid up the price of homes. This effect could easily operate with a lag of years, since it takes people years to make decisions to change

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

95

their housing arrangements. But it is challenging to envision a feedback model
that has home prices rising rapidly even after stock prices are sharply falling.
It may seem unlikely that we will ever understand such a phenomenon.
It could be that the home price boom, which began in the United States and
other countries before the peak of the market, started in 1998 in response to
the stock market boom and just fed on itself through its own internal feedback after the stock market fizzled. It could also be that the home price boom
was a sort of long-lagged response to stock market increases that had built
up since 1982, because the decline in the market after 2000 only brought the
market partway back down and left people feeling a lot wealthier even after
the post-2000 stock market drop than they had felt in 1982. Or perhaps the
stock market boom produced some cultural changes that continued on their
own after the corporate earnings drop that is so closely tied to the stock market
drop, an earnings drop that did not directly affect housing.
But we should add to these possibilities another that would help explain
rapidly increasing home prices concurrent with the post-2000 stock market
drops: that the drops in the stock market after 2000 had the perverse effect
of further intensifying the demand for housing by transferring investor
enthusiasm from the stock market to the housing market. This may seem
like a theory contrived to fit the facts, but we have evidence for it. In our
questionnaire surveys of recent homebuyers in 2003 and 2004, Karl Case
and I asked homeowners directly about possible feedback from the stock
market to the housing market. We asked the following question, with the
results indicated:
The experience with the stock market in the past few years
[Please circle one number]
12%
1. Much encouraged me to buy my house
2. Somewhat encouraged me to buy my house
14%
3. Had no effect on my decision to buy my house
72%
4. Somewhat discouraged me from buying my house	  2%
5. Much discouraged me from buying my house	  1%
[n = 1,146]

At the time of these surveys, respondents’ experiences with the stock market in the past few years would of course usually have been very bad, since
the aggregate market had fallen so sharply after 2000. The great majority
of respondents said the stock market had no effect on their decision to
buy a house. This is actually not at all surprising, since most people have
a multitude of personal reasons to buy a house that must figure more
prominently in their minds. But the interesting thing about these answers
is that, of those who replied that the experience did affect their decision to
buy a house, an overwhelming percentage said that it encouraged them. In

96

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

fact (taking account of the rounding error in the percentages given), more
than ten times as many said that the stock market encouraged them than
said it discouraged them.
Right after this question on the questionnaire, we had a follow-up question: “Please explain your thinking here.” The respondents wrote some
substantial answers explaining their answers to the previous question,
and it is in reading so many of these answers that one gets a real sense of
the cross feedback from stock prices to home prices. Here is a sampling of
some of these answers from people who said the stock market encouraged
them to buy a house:
I watched my IRAs & 401Ks decline. I decided I would invest in real estate
instead.
Housing does not lose as much as stocks.
Stock market shares are too volatile in values, making the risk higher. Buying
a house & land retain better investment value because land will not be depleted
over times.
Diminishing returns & huge losses. Looked for alternative use of capital.
Home ownership is the number one investment for personal financial security. Everything else is second.
Housing is inherently safer investment. You can always just live in it.
We lost a high percentage of 401K & Roth IRA funds during 2000/2002. We’ve
never lost money on real estate.
Real estate is safer. At least you own the property. With stocks, if you lose,
you have nothing.

After we read many such answers, some clear patterns seem to emerge.
The drops in the stock market in 2000–2003 had just gotten people increasingly fed up with the stock market and ready to transfer their affections to
another market, one that they increasingly believed was the best investment
for them. It is as simple as that; what they wrote seems plain and easily
understood. There was a sort of cross feedback from the stock market to the
housing market, and that must account for a good part of the housing boom
that we saw.35 This cross feedback also helps account for the international
nature of the housing boom, as the stock market collapse was experienced
in all of the advanced countries that had seen booming markets since the
late 1990s.
This seeming evidence of cross feedback from the stock market to the housing market may seem fragile, since such feedback does not always occur, but
one must remember that we are dealing with social science, not theoretical
physics. We do not fully understand why feedback between markets has the
form it does and why it changes through time, but we have learned something
about it.

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

97

Irrational Exuberance and Feedback Loops:
The Argument So Far
There are many precipitating factors ultimately causing irrational exuberance, as detailed in the previous chapter, and the effects of these causes can
be amplified by a feedback loop, a speculative bubble, as we have seen in this
chapter. As prices continue to rise, the level of exuberance is enhanced by the
price rise itself.
In this chapter, we have only begun to describe the process of feedback. We
have seen that feedback does not merely come about as individuals look at
past price increases and make arithmetical calculations to adjust for individual
levels of confidence and expectations. The changes in thought patterns infect
the entire culture, and they operate not only directly from past price increases
but also from auxiliary cultural changes that the past price increases helped
generate. For a better understanding of how precipitating factors exert their
effects and how they are amplified, we turn, in the next part, to a discussion
of the cultural changes that have accompanied the recent stock market and
other speculative booms.

Part Two

Cultural Factors

Six

The News Media

T

he history of speculative bubbles begins
roughly with the advent of newspapers.1
One can assume that, although the record of these early newspapers is mostly
lost, they, or their pamphlet analogues, reported on the first bubble of any
consequence: the Dutch tulip mania of the 1630s.2
Although the news media—newspapers, magazines, and broadcast media,
along with their new outlets on the Internet—present themselves as detached
observers of market events, they are themselves an integral part of these events.
Significant market events generally occur only if there is similar thinking
among large groups of people, and the news media are essential vehicles for
the spread of ideas.
In this chapter, I consider the complexity of the media’s impact on market
events. As we shall see, news stories rarely have a simple, predictable effect on
the market. Indeed, in some respects, they have less impact than is commonly
believed. However, a careful analysis reveals that the news media do play an
important role both in setting the stage for market moves and in instigating
the moves themselves.

The Role of the Media in Setting the Stage for Market Moves
The news media are in constant competition to capture the public attention
they need to survive. Survival for them requires finding and defining interesting news, focusing attention on news that has word‑of‑mouth potential (so as

101

102

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

to broaden their audience), and, whenever possible, defining an ongoing story
that encourages their audience to remain steady customers.
The competition is by no means haphazard. Those charged with disseminating the news cultivate a creative process, learning from one anothers’
successes and failures, that aims to provide emotional color to news, to invest
news stories with human interest appeal, and to create familiar figures in the
news. Years of experience in a competitive environment has made the media
professions quite skillful at claiming public attention.
The news media are naturally attracted to financial markets, because, at
the very least, the markets provide constant news in the form of daily price
changes. Nothing beats the stock market for sheer frequency of potentially
interesting news items.
The stock market has star quality. The public considers it the Big Casino,
the market for major players, and believes that on any given day it serves as a
barometer of the status of the nation—impressions that the media can foster
and benefit from. Financial news may have great human interest potential
to the extent that it deals with the making or breaking of fortunes. And the
financial media can present their perennial lead, the market’s performance, as
an ongoing story—one that brings in the most loyal repeat customers. The only
other regular generator of news on a comparable scale is sporting events. It is
no accident that financial news and sports news together account for roughly
half of the editorial content of many newspapers today.
Housing has also been a source of endless fascination for the general public,
because we live in houses, we work on them every day, and our sense of our
individual social position is tied to the kind of houses we live in. The fascination
increased for a while with the housing bubble. Newspapers launched whole
sections devoted to homes or real estate, and in the United States, the housing
boom led to the creation of an entire TV channel devoted to housing: HGTV. In
the United Kingdom, the reality TV show Property Ladder, launched in 2001, was
initially a great success, with spinoffs in the Netherlands and the United States.
The show depicted the adventures of property flippers who buy homes, fix them
up, and quickly sell them with hope of an impressive profit. After the housing
crash, the U.K. version relaunched as Property Snakes and Ladders, reflecting the
increased awareness of the potential for both ups and downs in the housing
market, and refocusing on making your own house nice rather than fixing it for
resale.3 The U.S. TV show Flip that House, launched in the time of the housing
bubble, 2005, was shut down in 2008 after the bubble burst.

