
c. While the whole zone 1s potential support (from 11 to 10), the pivotal

support of rising windows ts at the bottom of the window. In this exam-
ple, the bottom of the window ts at 10.

c. The falling window’s zone of resistance 1s the entire window. In this
exhibit, since the market gapped down from 12 to 11, that becomes the
resistance area.

a. Even though for a falling window the entire window ts resistance, the
most important resistance is at the top of the window. In this case, the
top of the falling window ts at 12.

a. The black real body wrapping around the white real body In an uptrend
forms a bearish engulfing pattern.

b. Although a bearish engulfing pattern 1s typically a top reversal signal,
it 1s eritical to place the candles in the context of recent market activity.
In this example, the white candle of the bearish engulfing pattern gapped
higher than the prior session and in doing so formed a bullish rising


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

window. Therefore, we have a bearish engulfing pattern that formed at
the potential support of a bullish rising window. Based on the theory that
a rising window should be support, one would have to wait for a close
under this rising window to confirm the bearish implications of the bear-
ish engulfing pattern. The close under this rising window came on ses-
sion 4. Observe how at session 3 the market did break under the rising
window's support on an intraday basis, not a closing basis. To confirm a
break of the window’s support one would need a close under the bottom
of that rising window. This occurred on session 4.


Taking
Advantage of Market
Opportunities

s the Japanese proverb states, “Make use of your opportunities.” In

this chapter I show some practical applications of how candle charts

will let you take advantage of market opportunities. The examples in
Section 1 of this chapter provide ilustrations of the following real-world
applications.

Using candle charts to preserve capital

How candle charts give early reversal signals

How eandle charts can confirm support or resistance areas

Using a confluence of candle signals to confirm support or resistance
The ease of combining Western technical tools with candle charts
Obtaining a price target

Harnessing the insights of the candles to enter and exit a trade

Using intraday trading signals

The technique of using a longer time frame chart to get support or resis-
tanee and a short time frame to issue the buy or sell signal

Section 2 of this chapter applies the trading precepts given in Chapters One,
Two, and Three. Keep in mind that the techniques shown in the rest of this
chapter can be applied to any market you are trading—futures, equities,
fixed-income—and any time frame—from a 1-minute to a monthly chart. In
addition, option traders can also use candle signals as a timing mechanism.
The exception to this universality of use for candles is that the market has to


112

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

have an open, high, low, and close. Tick charts and daily mutual funds, for ex-
ample, can't have candle charts, since both only have closes.

Chapter Four has two goals: to bring together some of the concepts ad-
dressed in the previous chapters and to touch on some of the more advaneed
trading concepts that are the focus of my other educational materials (as de-
tailed in the conclusion on page 205).


SECTION ONE
Candle Chart Applications

roperly used, candle charts not only help improve profits, but they
also assist in preserving capital. They do so by helping you avoid a po-
tential losing trade or exiting a profitable trade early. Exhibit 4.1
shows an example of the latter. The dashed lines in Exhibit 4.1 show a resis-
tance area near 135, A tall white candle pierces this resistance in early March.
For thase who were already long this index, this was a green light to remain

Boj —~+
m | 13750
Breaks recistancs — >:

Resistance 26 \.

1 +} 13800

Mi ot | |e

12000
feb —

2. iat
Fy pt en 7? 20 26 kt en

fet)

EMMMBIT 4.€ Oil Service Index: Daily (Using Candle Charts to Preserve Capital)
© COG Inc. used by permission.


114 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

long. But observe what unfolded the next session—the doji. This doji line
hinted that the bulls had lost full control of the market (however, it does not
mean that the bears have taken control). With this doji, one should consider
taking profits, moving up protective sell stops, or selling calls. This 1s a clas-
sic example of the power of candle charting techniques: Within one session
we were able to glean the visual clue via the doji that while the market was
maintaining its highs, the doji shouted that the bulls were not in complete
control. So while the market looked healthy from the outside, the internals
(as shown by the doji) were relaying the message that the market was not as
healthy as it seemed. This market was, as the Japanese proverb states, “Like
a leaking boat brightly painted.”

A key concept 1s that the more technical signals that emerge at the same
support or resistance level, the higher the likelihood of a reversal. This con-
vergence concept can be applied with candles and Western techniques. That
is, if a candle signal confirms a Western technical signal, as the Japanese
proverb says, like the right hand helping the left. The charts in Exhibits 4.2

460,00
450.00

440.00
430,00
420.00

Resistance zone Tk.

410.00

400,00
390.00

HL
| - [ " 380.00

‘tem Gravestone dofl

fimeiaivecinniges waa
nes fe | Fa 360.00

{| I 350.00

340,00
)330.00
:320.00

‘319.00

fii saya 2s iva sas lis jafzz—sByfil [3/83/10 Day
] cs | Lt LJ | |

EXIDBET 4.2 Semiconductor Index: Daily (Using Candle Charts to Confirm Resistance)
® Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.



Taking Advantage of Market Opportunities 115

and 4.3 are examples of the ease and power with which one can merge can-
dle and Western charting techniques. Exhibit 4.2 shows how candles can
confirm support and how we can use Western technical tools to get a price
target. Exhibit 4.3 displays how a candle signal helped confirm a base.
Exhibit 4.2 shows how a gravestone doji helped reinforce a resistance
zone near 420, Another technical signal at or near the same price area of the
gravestone doji amplifies the candle signal's significance. As mentioned in
Chapter One, a limitation of candle charts ts that they normally don't provide
price targets. This is why classic Western techniques, such as looking at sup-
port or resistance lines or pivot highs or lows, 1s so important, since you use
these levels as targets. With this in mind, let's turn our attention to the same
chart. Observe how this market was in a box range (discussed in Chapter
One, Section Three) of about 420 to 370. Once the gravestone doji confirmed
the top end of the box range at 420, a trader could consider selling short with
that signal (with a stop over the top end of the box range) with a target to the
bottom end of the box range near 370. This objective was quickly meet.

Fo By REE 0 REG lala A Ul Pi 5 ee | Me - | 7 a

wy A Wah

EMMBIT 4.3 Dow Jones Industrials: Daily (Using Candle Charts to Confirm Support)
© Charts powered by MetaStock Used by permission.


116

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

In Exhibit 4.3 a bullish engulfing pattern that took on extra importance as
a turning signal ts highlighted for two reasons. The first was that the lows of
that bullish engulfing pattern confirmed a potential support level set by the
lows made in late January. The second consideration 1s that, although a clas-
sie bullish engulfing pattern has a white candle wrapping around a prior
black candle, this bullish engulfing pattern had a white candle that engulfed
the three prior small real bodies (one of which was a doji). Though this as-
pect doesn't forecast that the market will move much higher than it would
with a regular bullish engulfing pattern (remember, candles don't give tar-
gets), it does greatly improve the chances of a tum and thus makes a buy
more attractive.

In the exhibits 4.2 and 4.3 I touched upon combining candle charting tools
with Western technical analysis (please note that this book only touched the
tip of the iceberg with this concept. Please see conclusion for more source
material on ways to combine moving averages, volume, Bollinger bands, ete
with candle charts).

Candle signals converge, just as Western technical indicators do. This
means that if you see more than one candlestick signal confirming support or
resistance set by another candle pattern, such as a hammer confirming a sup-
port area set by a bullish engulfing pattern, the likelihood of a turn increases.
Exhibit 4.4 illustrates what I call a confluence of candles. This chart also
shows that candle charting techniques are easily applicable to intraday charts.

Exhibit 4.4 shows a bearish falling window, or resistance zone, from
$39.80 to $40.20. Thus, one could consider selling on a move up to that win-
dow. The stock got to that level at candle line A. But although the stock was
at resistance, would one sell short with a tall white candle? I wouldn't rec-
ommend that, even if the market ts at a resistance level! Notice what un-
folded after candle line A: As shown at area B, the market formed a series of
small real bodies (aka spinning tops). These small real bodies tell us that the
bulls were tired, confirming the market's hesitation at the resistance zone set
by the falling window. This could be a good time to sell short. Of course, if
the market closed over the top of the falling window (1.e., $40.20), one should
reconsider being short. As such we had one candle signal (the falling win-
dow) set the resistance area and another candle signal (the small real bodies)
reinforcing that supply was stepping in at the window's resistance.

Because candle charts often send out reversal signals much sooner than
bar charts, candles will shine at helping you improve market timing, Indeed,
some of our advisory clients use fundamentals to decide which markets to buy
or sell and then use the candles for timing these buy or sell times. Exhibit 4.5
illustrates how a trader might use the candles to enter or exit trades.


ieeea |,
Falling
window
F
;
Hi Tr . MD Ee ty a8 Wein sca | Te | a

EMIOBIT 4.4 = American Express: 60 minute (Confluence of Candles)
© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—_ veel

ue
il
i

i
"hh het: Ri eck
a-—>| 8->} a SL

window

Pat lk

Hammer —

Si ae <r) ae Trl ola) a | Tr Sr a TB

‘4 o000
sa aonn
¢3 8000
«9 7000
*3 e000
3.6000
13.4000
13 3000
13 2000
3.000

IG58
we
Ss
8
Ss

9000
152000
171000
170000
yo #000
ro scud
10.7000
19 so00

Dey

EMOBIT 4S = Converse Technology: Daily (Using Candle Signals to Enter or Exit Trades)

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

117


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Ahammer forms on May 7 (the upper shadow was small enough to make
this a hammer). This, in combination with the series of bullish shadows
shown at A and B, was a strong indication that the market was trying to build
a foundation for a rally. One could buy on that hammer with a stop under the
low of the hammer. In the next session the market formed a rising window,
which was another positive signal. A few days after this rising window the
stock descended, but the bottom of the rising window maintained itself as
support based on the close (remember that it takes a close under the bottom
of arising window for the window’s support to be broken). Since this support
held, we would stay long, In the week of May 13, the market moved north.
The emergence of a bearish engulfing pattern near $13.30 at a resistance level
defined by the highs of April 19 (shown by the dashed line) was a strong In-
dication to take profits from the longs purchased on the hammer session.

In Exhibits 4.64 and 4.6B I show Just one of the many ways a trader can
harness the power of intraday candle charts to get a leg up on the competition.

46.60
M48 OD
44650

46 OO

1 M750
| : p+ Shooting star a7 Oo
A b ' ] {| + 46.50
ae oo
] 1 , | 4‘ | | , | a l | as So
+ | 7 | 46.00
M ! | Maco
| } 5 | Ia4.00
Nv Hh t) | ines te pao
43.00
fico ba a eas he
pall tast of buy here.
patietns support tun 42.00
intraday
aan chart 41 60
4100
— Baz bs ee TAL it ae [2>rI il Dey

EXIOBEE 4.64 —H and R Block: Daily (Using Intraday Candle Signals)



Taking Advantage of Market Opportunities 119

“q70
\ s3.10
Hammer / Support level Lon
daily chart io
#210

137m) 1400 1630 1905 10 BOS 100 1893 FiO
To SS

120 1230 1395 1) 14 1490 15 80 1530 Be 1G $ me

eTiatt yl tte itd 4

EMMMIBIT 4.68 —H andR Block: S Minute (Using Intraday Candle Signals)

In Exhibit 4.64 we see a solid band of support near $43.25 underpinned
by the dual bullish engulfing patterns on the week of June 3. The lows set by
these two bullish engulfing patterns was successfully defended on June 14.
The rally that began on June 14 stalled with a shooting star near $47. As the
price dip from this shooting star approached the aforementioned support
area toward $43.25 on June 26, you might consider buying on the session. To
help improve our timing we can turn to an intraday chart to see if there are
any buy signals as the stock approached $43.25 intraday. We now turn to the
54minute chart of this stock at Exhibit 4.6B.

On this June 26 5minute chart, the horizontal line shows the support
area obtained from the daily chart (Exhibit 4.6a) near $43.25. This level was
confirmed by a hammer. Therefore we can buy on that hammer based on
this 5minute chart because it confirmed a support level derived from the
longer-term daily chart. These two exhibits illustrate the concept of using a
longer time frame (daily) to obtain support or resistance and then a shorter


120

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

time frame's candle signal (a 5-minute chart) to place the trade. This concept
ean be expanded to any two time frames. Thus, for example, you could use
a weekly chart to get a support level and see if there are any bullish candle
signals on a dally chart as the stock gets to this support.


SECTION TWO
Trading Guidelines

could get a feel for how to apply the tools and techniques of Chapters One

to Three. Now we take the next step by listing the ptvotal trading con-
eepts explained in the preceding chapters.

A note of caution: Market conditions affect some of the precepts listed
below. According to one of the guidelines below, northern doji are normally
more significant than southern doji. While this is generally true, if there's a
southem doji confirming a major support area, you can be assured that I
would pay close attention to that southern doji. This brings to the fore the
importance of looking at all candle signals and trading guidelines in the con-
text of the market environment.

I: Section One of this chapter I gave some real-world examples so you

THE GUIDELINES

* As the real body gets smaller, it implies that the prior trend ts losing
steam.

¢ The larger the real body, the greater the force underpinning the move.

* The more technical signals, whether Eastern (candles) or Western, that
eonfirm the same support or resistance level, the greater the chanee for
a bounce from support or decline from resistance.

* Northern doji are normally more significant than southern doji.

* A series of long upper shadows as the market 1s ascending implies that
the bulls do not have full control.

* A series of long lower shadows as the market ts falling hints that the
bears do not have full control.

* Therising and falling windows are, respectively, bullish and bearish con-
tinuation Indicators.

121


122

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Doji in the middle of a box range are not a trading signal, since there is no
trend to reverse.
Candle charts are best used as a tool, not a system.

« Resistance or support js not considered broken unless by a close.
* Ifyou see a reversal signal, consider initiating a new position only if that

signal 1s in the direction of the major trend.

Never place a trade with a candle signal until you have considered the
risk/reward of the potential trade.

Candle signals can denote areas of support and resistance.

Candle indicators do not offer price targets.

You should wait for the session's close to confirm a candle signal.
Ahanging man needs bearish confirmation by a close under the hanging
man's real body.

When analyzing a single candle line, one should consider both the real
body and the shadows.

Remember the importance of stops.

The entire space of the rising window ts a support area, with the most im-
portant area the bottom of the rising window.

The entire area of the falling window 1s a resistance zone, with its most
important area the top of the falling window.


Progressive
Charting

USING CANDLESTICK ANALYSIS

At my seminars one of the most frequent questions 1s, “What's the best way
to get comfortable with candle charting techniques?" My reply is to print out
a chart, place a blank piece of paper over the chart, and hide all the candle
Ines. Slide the blank piece of paper from left to nght, revealing a single can-
die line, or a few candle lines, at a time. Looking at the exposed single candle
lines (or a few candle lines) the student of candle charts asks, “What signal
do I see and what are the market applications of the signal?"

To reinforee the material presented so far, we will do something simi-
lar—we will dissect a single market bit by bit. We will look at five months’
worth of data on a candlestick chart, going a day or afew days at atime. One
chart will be broken into 44 parts, with each part another day or a few days
into the next time frame. For example, chart 3 has candle lines ending on
June 15, and chart 4 has the same candle lines in chart 3 plus the next ses-
sion's candle line.

The techniques discussed in the answer section are related to the ideas
already presented in this book. Some of you who are very familiar with can-
dles may see signals in the charts that are not addressed in the answers. This
was done because some candle patterns and techniques are beyond the
scope of this book. Nonetheless, even with these basic concepts, using this
section will let you get up to speed quickly, harnessing the unique insights
provided by candles.

123


124 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

For each of the 44 Exhibits, ask yourself these questions:

. What candlestick signal do I see (if any)?

What are the potential implications of that signal?

How }s this candlestick line related to the prior price action?

Are there any other aspects of recent or prior price action that are im-
portant?

* 9 N

At the end of this section I will give you my observations. These are de-
noted in Exhibits 5.45 to 5.88

OLESTIONS

|
\

!

Hs

EAGEBIT 5.4 © Question 5.1


Progressive Charting

Frees
EXGIBITS.2 Question 5.2

Brest
EXGIBITS.3 © Question 5.3

125


B ]
Nome

EAGIBIT 5.4 = Question 5.4

Pa 1.
Nowwnber

EXBIBITS.5 «Question 5.5

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting

p11
Neewwntes

EXBIBITS.6 Question 5.6

zt 16 '
Nemertes

EXBIBITS.7 Question 5.7


128

PJ 1 n
Nowwnder

EXBEBIT 5.8 Question 5.8

Pa 1 Tr
Nowwnber

EXGIBITS.9 = Question 5.9

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting

PJ 16 a
Nowrtes

EXBIBITS.10 Question 5.10

i |
!

zt 16 | a |
Nome rtes

EXBIBITS.10€ Question 5.11

129


io

PJ id Tr =
Noeweter

EXBIBITS.42 Question 5.12

Pd 16 ros
Nowwnter

EXGIBIT 5.13 Question 5.13

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting

!

I

B 16 ee a
Nowe rtes Cree

EXBIBIT 5.14 Question 5.14

!

on
\

E an a |
Nomwrter Deemed

EXBIBITS.15 Question 5.15


132

!

\ |
1 ht

Pd id a a | 5
Noeweter Deere

EXBIBIT 5.16 Question 5.16

|
y
| |

ae

Pd 16 a a | J
Nowwnter Deer nter

EXBEBIT 5.17 Question 5.17

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting

iv

5 16 1
Nome rtes Ceewntes

EXBIBITS.18 Question 5.18

ie
"

i! a a | s |
Nome rter Deer rter

EABIBITS.19 Question 5.19


134

3 10
Noeweter Deemer

EXBIBIT 5.20 Question 5.20
iy

i.

EXGIBIT 5.21 © Question 5.21

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE




136 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE




13a




140 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE




142

EABIBIT S360 © Que

ie

EXGIBITS.37 Que

fe

Sereery

a

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE




144 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

EA\BIBIT 5.405 © Question 5.40

EXGIBIT 5.41 Question 5.41




146

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

yy be :

Lett ee Tae uw ss + b wes f f+ ws
Deeweder Jereery Femuey Mew

EXGIBIT 5.44 Question 5.44

ANSWERS, OR MARKET OBSERVATIONS

In Exhibit 5.45, although the market was ascending, the extended upper
shadow of the candle line at the arrow reflects that one of two things was
happening: Either the bulls were retreating as the market approached the
upper end of its daily range, or the bears had enough force to overwhelm the
bulls. In either scenario the result ts the same: a market whose rally had
stalled as it approached the upper end of its trading range and then closed
near the lows of that session. This candle line is a shooting star, which as the
Japanese say, represents trouble overhead.

In Exhibit 5.46, the potential bearish applications of the shooting star
were reinforced in this session with a long black real body that wrapped
around the small white real body of the shooting star. The result was a bear-
ish engulfing pattern. This reinforced the likelihood of a top (if the bulls had
had enough wherewithal to push the market above the high of the shooting
star, that would be a bullish breakout). I want to point out something inter-
esting about this bearish engulfing pattern. When you see a bearish engulfing
pattern, you may think it resembles a Western key reversal or outside day. A


Progressive Charting

'<— Shooting

Fone
EXGIBIT 5.45 Answer to Question 5.1

Freen
EXBIBIT 5.46 Answer to Question 5.2

147


1428

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

key reversal day, or outside day, takes place when the market makes a new
high during an uptrend. It then falls to clase below the prior day's close, re-
sulting in a bearish signal. With this bearish engulfing pattern, the second ses-
sion that made up this pattern (1Le., the black candle) did not make a new high
for the session. Therefore, if this was a bar chart, there would have been no
reversal signal via an outside reversal session. All we need for the bearish en-
gulfing pattern, however, 1s a black real body wrapping around a white real
body, which occurred here. Consequently, we were able to obtain a bearish
reversal signal on the candlestick chart that was not available on a tradi-
tional bar chart.
