
57

58

Candles

AMGEN_ DAILY

7g
78

79
7B
77
76
75
71
73
72
7l
70
6S
68
67
66
65
61
63
62
6l
60
59
5B
57
56

)7

7S
7q

71
1a
I J

72
7l
70
68
67
bb

65
61
63

[ilrItil'+rIr-i
+rl-+++l*oril
*r,n+r\1n*ilta4ill1rt,*,,,,0,*tn*

bt

6l
60
59
5B
57
56
'92

Hammer
|

S

08 t4

2t

28 0

'"'t

t2

19

26

N

09

16

23

D

MetaStock
by EQUISInt'l
EXHIBIT 3.2.

Hammer as Support, Amgen-Daily

will react once a support or resistancearea is pierced. In effect, these
traders act like the aforementioned "moving shadow," testing the battlefield by entering a large order to try and break support (or resistance).
For example, if a large-scaletrader places a sell order as the market gets
near support, their sell order may be enough to drag prices under the
support area. Now, this trader, as a "moving shadow,,, will now learn
about the underlying strength of the market. If the market fails to hold
under a broken support area and forms a spring, these "moving shadows," (i.e., the sellers who were attempting to probe the market), now
have learned about the tenacity of the bulls and as a result may decide
to cover their shorts.

", ," ",
Suppod

EXHIBIT 3.3. Spring

,"',,""
\_

\Sprins

The Patterns

EXHIBIT 3.4. Hammer and a Spring, Gold-Weekly

In Exhibit 3.4, we seeone of the more powerful combinationsof Eastern and Western technicals-a hammer and a spring. The 1993low was
formed by a hammer. This hammer was also a spring since the low of
the hammer's lower shadow stightly punctured a support zone, but
sprang back above this broken support line. Also of interest in this chart
is that the high made near $360in mid-1992rwasformed by a doji following a tall white candle.
The Hanging Man
As shown in Exhibit 3.5, a hanging man has a very long lower shadow,
a small real body (white or black) near the upper end of the trading range
and little or no upper shadow. This is the same shape as the hammer
"If it appearsfrom
line. However, as expressedin the Japaneseliterature,
below, buy, and if appearsfrom above, sell."
This phrase means that the same shape line can be bullish or bearish,
"from
depending on where it appears in a trend. If this line appears
below," that is, during a decline, it is a bullish hammer. However, if this
same shape line appears "from above," that is, during an uptrend, it is
a sell signal and is referred to as a hanging man line.

59

60

,,Black
,_rr or White

crose
shourd
be

I l-

,|
,I

l

l
EXHIBIT3.5. The HangingMan

underhangingman's
reatbody

|

l

T

l

I

Thus, the hanging man line is a top reversal signal that must arrive
during a rally, while the hammer is a bottom reversal line that must
appear during a decline; the same line can be bullish or bearish, depending on the trend preceding it. In this context, it is interesting that
the japanesehave two words for rice. They call it either "raislJ,, oi ,,gohan." Raisu is the |apanese term for rice when it is prepared westJrn
style. The term "raisu" even sounds like the western word "rice.,, Gohan alsomeansrice, but it is rice prepared japanesestyle. In other word.s,
the Japaneserefer to the exact same product-rice-by different names.
\tVhat surrounds the rice determines whether the rice is referred to as
raisu or gohan. So it is with the hammer and hanging man. whether the
candle line is a bullish pattern (the hammer) or a bearish pattern (the
hanging man) is dependent on what precedesthe line.
with the hanging man's long lower shadow reflectingbuying interest,
it may seem that the hanging man is a bullish signal. However, the
hangman's action shows that once the market has fallen, it has become
very fragile. The small teal body of the hanging man also shows that the
prior uptrend may be in the processof changing. Becauseof the bullish
action of the hanging man session(during the sessionthe market sells
off and then rallies by the close),an important aspectof the hanging man
lines is that there should be bearish confirmation. A common method of
bearish confirmation of a hangman is to wait to see if the next session,s
closeis under the hanging man's real body. This is shown in Exhibit 3.5.
The reasonfor the importance of this confirmation has to do with the
fact that the hanging man's long lower shadow shows that there is still
rising power left in the market. However, if prices fall under the hanging
man's real body, it translatesinto the fact that everyone who bought at
the open or close of the hanging man sessionis now losing money. In
such a scenario,these longs may decide to liquidate, and by doing so,
may engender a further weakening of prices.
since my seminar on the candles at the world Bank in washington,

The Patterns

61

C A I I D L ES T I C X ( D A I L I )

I
I

;r "'*[l
I . I I

'lr,

,'tl

,

r--HansinsMan

gu",-t:1

}-ffliil'
I

FteutersGraphics

trrr

EXHIBIT 3.6. Confirmation of
a Hanging Man, German
Bund-Daily

DC, some of their traders have asked my opinion on candle patterns on
various markets. One of their traders asked what I thought about the
chart of the German Bund shown in Exhibit 3.6. She asked my opinion
on April 10 after the hanging man was formed. I explained to her that if
the hanging man were confirmed by a weaker sessionthe next day, the
outlook would be bearish. In this case,the market confirmed the bearish
hanging man during the next session.
Exhibit 3.7 shows how important it is to wait for confirmation of a
hanging man session. In that chart, we see a hanging man. However,
note how the following week the bulls pushed prices above the high of
the hanging man. This means that those who bought during the hanging
man sessionnow have a profit. Consequently, there is little reason for
them to liquidate their longs. The result is that a higher close than the
hanging man sessionvoids any of the bearish potential of the hanging
man. That is what happened here as the market exceededthe hanging
man session.Also of interest in this chart is that in April 1992,there was
a hammer that was also a bullish spring, since the hammer made a new
low which failed to hold.
An article about my work with candles in The Wall Streetlournal displayed the chart shown in Exhibit 3.8. In this article, I discussedhow the
hanging man at $40 helped confirm a top. I explained that before the
1990Mid-east crisis, the highest crude oil futures reached was around
$32 (crude oil futures began trading in 1983).Once the market exceeded
that level, I had a target at around $40. That was a resistancearea in the
cash market back in 1979.Note that at the $40 area, there was a bearish
candle signal via the hanging man line. The market retreated from this
g40level and tested a support line. It then rallied and, with sort of a last

Candles

EXHIBIT 3.7. waiting for Confirmation of a Hanging Man, Bonds-weekly

EXHIBIT 3.8. Hanging Man Confirms Resistance, November 1990 Crude Oil-Dailv

The Patterns

",,,,",,,,",,,,"',,,
*ewResisrance

rorr*r Support

",,iT,

I

lr

rr

rr

rlr

t'

NewSupport
EXHIBIT 3.9. Change of Polarity Principle

gasp, the bulls temporarily nudged the market above $40before the floor
fell out of the market.
There is a basicWestern technicalconceptthat statesthat a penetrated
resistanceareashould then be convertedto support and a broken support
area should be resistance.I call this concept the changeof polaity pinciple
(it is discussedin detail in my first book). This conceptis shown in Exhibit
3.9. I find the changeof polarity a very useful tool, especiallywhen joined
with candles.You should find that the more often a support or resistance
area is tested before prices break them, the better the change of polarity
principle should work.
In Exhibit 3.10 we see that an evident support area from mid- to late

EXHIBIT 3.10. Hanging Man and the Change of Polarity Principle, March 1993 Crude Oil

63

64

Candles

November was slightly above $20. Once this important support was bro_
ken, the changeof polarity rule implied that this$2Or,rppori should then
becomeresistance.This is what unfolded as this $20 resistancearea was
confirmed with the mid-Decemberhanging man session.The long black
real body, also near $20, on December 28, showed that the bears had
taken control.

The Shooting Star
A session with a long upper shadow and a small real body near the
bottom end of the trading range is called a shootingstar (seeExhibit 3.11).
|ust as the long lower shadow of a hammer is bullish, so the long upper
shadow of the shooting star is bearish. The long upper shadow *eit s
that the bearshave been able to sharply drag pricesback from their highs.
In Exhibit 3.12,we seehow the mid-August shooting star,slong ulper
shadow reflectedthe aggressiveness
of the bears.Following this shooting
star, another symptom of market uncertainty came with ihe high-wave
candle. The fact that the shooting star and the high-wurr. .u.,lle both
appearednear the psychologicallyimportant 100 area reinforced the importance of those signals.
In Exhibit 3.13, I show how a support area from late August (marked'
s) changed to resistancethrough september and into october. The october failure of this resistanceareawas via a shooting star. The long upper
shadow of this line reflected the heaviness of supply towards the-1^.66
level. Another attempt to breach 1.66 failed in eariy october with a long
black real body.
In the section on hammers, I discussedthe concept of springs (when
the price springs back above a broken support area)utra tnui the opposite
of a spring is an upthrust. As shown in Exhibit 3.\4, an upthrust is
createdwhen prices break above a resistancearea, but then retreat back
under the previously broken resistance.This scenariohas bearish impli-

white I

3L*11
l r l

EXHIBIT 3.11.

The Shooting Star

The Patterns

EXHIBIT 3.12. Shooting Star with a High-Wave Candle, September 1993fapanese
Yen

EXHIBIT 3.13. Shooting Star and the Change of Polarity, Cash Deutsche Mark

66

Candles

EXHIBIT 3.14. An Upthrust

cations. At times, the upper shadow of a shooting star can also be part
of an upthrust.
In Exhibit 3.15, there is a shooting star that pierced the January7 and
8 resistancearea with its long upper shadow. The failure of the 6u[s to
keep prices in the new territory created a bearish upthrust.
To help clarify the difference between the hammer, hanging man, and
shooting star lines, I have annotatedExhibit 3.16with un "*u-ple of each
candle line. Note that for each signal the market must be in a clearly
defined trend.
L. Shooting star-we can see how the shooting star must appear after
an uptrend. The shooting star's long upper shadow reflects market
rejection of higher prices.

EXHIBIT 3.15. shooting star and Upthrust, March 1992Bonds-Intra-Day

ThePatterns

67

DISNEY_ DAILY

47.5

iliq,:ii"'Man@

47.0
16.5

16.5

dlll
hn' ilril-nsMan@
il||ttil
.l-,*s,,.r1'oil

\'
'-lryil|']h**
'o'rl
*rJlrrJ
",,,il
45.5
15.0

45.5
46n

14.5

44.5

41,0

41.0

4 ? 6

13.5
43.0
1t. x

12.0

13.0
42.5

llV

U

u

4?n

ammer
F - - H@
I'

4 15,
11.0
10.5
40.0

4 t .0
40.5
10.0

47n

46.0

46.0

1 15.

47.5

'92 2I

' 9 3 11

18

l b

22

I3

29

MetaStockbY EQUIS Int'l

EXHIBIT 3.16. Hammet, Hanging Man, and Shooting Star Lines, Disney-Daily

2. Hammer-A long lower shadow candle that must aPPearduring a
downtrend.
3. Although this has the correct shape of a hammer or hanging man line
(a long lower shadow with a small real body near the highs of the
session),candle 3 is neither a hammer nor a hanging man. This is
becausethis line did not aPPear during an uptrend or a downtrend,
but was in the middle of a trading range. Thus, line 3 is not a hammer
(although the long, lower shadow could be viewed as a positive signal).
4.,7. Rallies preceded these hanging man lines, which were confirmed
during the next sessionby a closeunder the hanging man's real body.
In line 7, we can see a small uppef shadow. If the uPPer shadow is
relatively small, it is still considered a hanging man. (A small uPPer
shadow is also allowable with a hammer.) Note how the real body of
the hanging man can be white or black.
5. This line has the correct shape of a shooting star (a tall uPPer shadow
and a small real body at the lower end of the session'srange). However, since it does not appear after an uptread, it does not have the
bearish implications as would a traditional shooting star.

68

6. This particular hammer should be viewed as being relatively unimportant since it appeared only after a minor downtrend. It did, however, show, via its long lower shadow, a successfultest of a support
area near $43 from the late |anuary and early February lows.
To summerize, always look at the preceding trend to determine if the
hammer, shooting star, or hanging man lines should be acted upon.
Rememberthat as reversal signals; they need a prior trend to reverse.

DUAL CANDLE LINES
In the preceding section, I looked at individual candle lines. In the remainder of this chapter, I will review some of the more important or
common candle patterns that are comprised of two or more candle lines.
Dark Cloud Cover
A dark cloud (shown in Exhibit 3.17) shows, as the Japaneseexpressit,
that the market has a poor chanceof rising. The dark cloud cover's first
candle is a strong white session.During the next session,there is buying
pressureleft over and the market opens higher, but later in that session,
prices decline as the market closesunder the center of the previous session. This pattern reflectsa period in the market when the upward power
of the tall white candle has been dissipatedby next session'sweak black
candle. Note how the blended candle line in Exhibit 3.17 has a longer

cand'e
lf close on second
day not under
middle of white -->
real body wait for
confirmation

p
/ \

II
EXHIBIT 3.17. Dark Cloud Cover

ThePatterns

upper shadow. In other words, the dark cloud cover displays pictorially
a time in the market in which selling Pressure is exceeding the buying
pressure.
An ideal dark cloud cover's second session should close under the
midpoint of the prior white candle. If the black candle does not close
below the halfway point, it is consideredby some fapanesetraders to be
an incomplete dark cloud cover. In such cases,it is best to wait for confirmation during the next session in the form of a weaker close. As a
generalrule, the deeperthe closeof the dark cloud cover's secondsession
pushes into the white candle, the more bearish the signal.
A dark cloud that fails to move under the center of the prior candle
is shown in Exhibit 3.18. Looking at the blended candle in Exhibit 3.18,
we seehow there is less of an upper shadow than in the caseof the more
classicdark cloud cover's blended candle shown in Exhibit 3.17. This
means the dark cloud cover in Exhibit 3.18 may be less bearish than a
standard dark cloud cover. This is why there should be confirmation by
further weakness after the type of dark cloud cover shown in Exhibit
3.18.
There is a difference in how I would view the dark cloud cover in
stocks and futures. The ideal dark cloud cover has the second session's
open above the high of the prior session.Since there is generally higher
price volatility in the futures market as compafed to stocks,it means that
I am more flexible about the definition of a dark cloud cover with stocks
than with futures. Specifically, with stocks I still view it as a dark cloud
cover if the second sessionopens above the prior session'sclose,rather
than its high. This is shown in Exhibit 3.19.

.fi;

I r--:-----------:r
II
I

I
I
EXHIBIT

Close of candle(2) above
midpointof candle(1)
3.18.

Dark Cloud Variation

I
I
1

Oo"nof candle(2)
abovecloseof candle(1)

EXHIBIT 3.19. Dark Cloud Variation 2

69

70

Candles

However, if the secondsessionof the dark cover of a stock does open
above the prior session'shigh (instead of its close), it would be more of
a potential reversal signal. This is becauseit is more bearish if the market
reverses after failing from a new high than it is if the market fails from
an area that was not a new high.
A dark cloud cover often becomesresistance.In Exhibit 9.20, we see
a dark cloud cover in late |anuary near 975.50.The market retreatedfrom
there until a hammer (that was also a spring) formed near 969 in February. The rally from this hammer stalled in March at the resistanceset
by the dark cloud. However, as with any form of technicalanalysis,there
should be a price at which you should reconsideryour original outlook.
For a pattern like the dark cloud cover, if the market closes above the
high of the dark cloud cover, the chancesare that the market will continue
its upward path. In this example,observehow the market not only closed
above the high of the dark cloud cover in late March, but did so via a
bullish rising gap. Another interesting aspectof this gap is that the ses-

SW BELL_ DAILY

B3

83

82

B2
81
80
Z9
7B

8l
BO
Z9
78
77
76
75

iltil

s**-df,1j'
77

e

t l

Dark Cloud

7+

76
75

7+

' 'r ' t'10*,,_,,00,/f
*1lriltlol+,pt,*Jot'lo.,,
lilI',o
,0il{r+nrilil*'+i,l,o,
rr,l,+il

73

73
72
7l
70

(L

7l
7D
ht

' 9 2 0 2t + 2 t z B ' $ l t

l B 2 5 F 0 B L 6 z ? f i 0 B1 5 z z 2 9 R 1)
MetaStockby EQUIS Int'l

EXHIBIT

3.20.

Dark Cloud

Cover as Resistance, Southwest

bJ

and Spring

F-Hammer

Bell-Daily

1q '(.

71

ThePatterns

sion after the gap createda shooting star. Yet the bearish implications of
the shooting star was not confirmed sincethe market failed to closeunder
the rising gap (this will be discussedin detail later in this chapter under
the section on "windows"). Thus, when selling short based on a dark
cloud cover, consider a stop on a close above the highs of that pattern.
For those who are looking to buy, you should consider it when on the
close, prices pierce the high of the dark cloud cover.
Exhibit 3.21 is an example of two less than ideal dark cloud covers at
1 and 2. Dark cloud cover L was not ideal since the second session(the
black candle) failed to close under the mid-point of the prior session.
Dark clorrd cover 2lost some of its bearishimportance becausethe second
sessionof the pattern opened just above the prior close instead of the
prior high. Yet, sinceboth of thesenon-classicdark cloud coversemerged
so close to one another, they served to reinforce each other. In other
words, both dark cloud coversreflected the fact that as prices made new
highs near $45, the bears were able to drag prices back down under the

EASTERNKODAK- DAILY

466

+5.5

4En

46n

++,5

446

++.0

++.
0

4?5

4?6

u

+3.D
+2.5
+2.0
41 6

+3,0

l,lil+ililolqt\10'
'*t
41 tr

"r,J

+2.D
4l

E

+1.D

+1.
0

+0,5

4n6

+0.0

+0.0

'92

t(

l 1

1D t (

08 1+

?B

t2 l 9 LD

MetaStockbv EQUIS Int'l
EXHIBIT

3.21.

Dark Cloud

Covers in Close Proximity,

Eastman Kodak-Daily

nq l 5

/<

72

Candles

HOcl Candlc Stick

,

il

Congestion

Band

-----;

(Dailrr)

DarkCloud
Cover

qi

t t0;ntnr,*ho,oo
rll

1,, , ^,ilI'fo+

T*'f4[onlr+[[+'

ReutersGraphics
EXHIBIT 3.22. Dark Cloud Cover Confirms Resistance,February 1993Heating Oil

prior closes.This is not a healthy scenario.The gap lower was final proof
of a break to the downside.
Exhibit 3.22 shows a congestionband between 59 and 60Qduring the
first half of November. When the market trends laterally for an extended
period, the congestion zone often becomesa resistanceor support area
once prices break out of that range. This is becausethe longer the market
trades sideways, the more traders get involved in the market as either
buyers or sellers. In this example, once prices broke under the bottom
end of the early November congestionband, those who went short while
the market was within the lateral band were making a profit on the
downside breakout. However, those who went long while the market
was within that early November trading band were in a losing trade when
prices broke under the bottom end of the congestionband. This means
that if the market rallies back up to the congestionband, those longs may
use that rally to try to get out of their losing trade. In other words, the
existing longs should be new sellerson rebounds to the congestionband.
In Exhibit 3.22, once the early November congestionarea was broken, it
then becameresistance.The Decemberfailure at that resistanceareacame
with the dark cloud cover (the empty area between the two candles of
the pattern was due to a holiday).

ThePatterns

The Piercing Pattern
As shown in Exhibit 3.23, the piercing pattern is the opposite of the dark
cloud cover. The dark cloud cover appearsafter an uptrend, and is comprised of a black real body that closeswell into the prior white body. The
piercing pattern is a white real body that closeswithin the prior black
real body. This pattern shows that there is fierce buying at lower levels.
The following is an interesting and graphic explanation used in a
]apanesebook to describe what happens during the formation of the
piercing pattern
the last of the bulls that were backedinto a cornerand cameout fighting
in a heroic fight. Kamikazefights are always frigh,tening,so the bears
seeingthis taketo the sidelinesfor the moment.In this quiet period,the
or after all the sellingthat has occurred,
bulls may get reinforcements,
the supply road for the bearsmay be alreadybroken."1
In other words, the downward energy of the market has been dissipated.
There are various names for the two candle patterns that have the
secondwhite candle close less than halfway into the prior black candle.
These are discussedin detail in my other book. For the purposes of the
discussionhere, these names are unimportant. What is important is the
generalconcept that the more the white candle piercesthe black candle,
the more constructivethe signal. If the white candle fails to move deeply
into the black candle, it reflects a weak counterattackby the bulls and

Closeabove prior black
/candle's center

\
j
t

f I +
I +l

i

EXHIBIT 3.23. The PiercingPattern

73

74

Candles

rrl
EXHIBIT 3.24. IA/hite Candle Under Center of Prior Black Candle

selling could resume. As illustrated in Exhibit 3.24, you can see that a
pattern that has the secondsessionbelow the midpoint of the prior black
candle createsa blended candle with a short lower shadow. Note, by
comparison,the long lower shadow of the blended candle in Exhibit 3.23.
This shows the bulls successfullymounted a strong counterattack.Also
considerthat the lower the secondcandle's opening, the longer the lower
shadow of the blended candle will be. This means that a pieicing pattern
that has a low opening secondsessionand then closeswell into the prior
candle would be an optimum example of that pattern.
