
This page intentionally left blank

nine
TURTLE-STYLE
BUILDING BLOCKS
Don’t spend all your time admiring the fancy tools
in the magazines. First learn how to use the basic ones well.
It’s not the size of your tools that counts but how well you use them.

hapter 2 provided an overview of the various market states: stable and quiet, stable and volatile, trending and quiet, and
trending and volatile. I also pointed out the importance of being
able to identify the state of the market you are trading in since
many systems are designed to keep you out of that market when it’s
in a state that is not favorable given their trading styles.
I refer to the tools that indicate market states as building blocks.
Some building blocks have speciﬁc names such as indicators, oscillators, and ratios, but I group them all into the more general category. This chapter focuses on the building blocks for trend-following
systems. These are tools that indicate when the market may have
moved from a stable state to a trending state and, conversely, when
it has moved back to a stable state. Simply put, they indicate when
a trend may have started and when it may have ended.

C

• 123 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

124 • Way of the Turtle

Unfortunately for traders, there are no building blocks that work
all the time, no secret formulas that lead to an easy fortune. The best
we can do is ﬁnd tools that help us identify times when the odds that
a trend has started or ended have improved. This is sufﬁcient for our
purposes since it is possible to make good returns even when the odds
are only slightly in your favor (ask your favorite casino owner).

One Brick at a Time
Let’s begin with a survey of many common trend-following building blocks, including the ones we were taught in the Turtle program. These are ways to determine when a trend may be starting
and when it may have ended. This is not a complete survey: You
can ﬁnd entire books that do nothing more than outline different
indicators and system rules that can be used to build trend-following systems. For other types of trading there are other types of building blocks that may be useful. Since this book is not a
comprehensive treatise, however, I’ll leave the discovery of those
tools as an exercise for the reader. The building blocks discussed in
this chapter are the following:
• Breakouts: These are situations when the price exceeds the
highest high or the lowest low for a speciﬁc number of days.
This was the primary tool used in the original Turtle system.
• Moving averages: These are continuously calculated
averages of the price for a speciﬁc number of days. They are
called moving averages because they are calculated each
day and their value therefore moves up and down with the
new prices.

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 125

• Volatility channels: These are built by adding a speciﬁc
amount of price to a moving average that is based on a
measure of market volatility such as the standard deviation
or ATR.
• Time-based exits: These are the simplest possible exits: You
exit the market at a speciﬁc, predetermined time (e.g., exit
the market after 10 days or after 80 days).
• Simple lookbacks: These involve a comparison of the
current price with a historical price at some earlier period.
We will explore each building block in more detail and demonstrate how it can be used in a trend-following system.

Breakouts
Earlier in the book I discussed breakouts and showed how they
have an edge. A new high price is a strong indicator of the possibility that a trend is beginning. The number of days used to calculate the highest high or the lowest low for the breakout will
determine the type of trend you may be entering. Fewer days will
indicate the possibility of a shorter-term trend. A large number of
days will be more indicative of the possibility of a longer-term trend.
Breakouts work especially well when they are combined with other
indicators of overall trend, such as the Donchian Trend system,
which uses breakouts for both entry signals and exit signals and
moving averages to indicate the overall trend.

Moving Averages
Moving averages are continuously calculated averages of the price
for a speciﬁc number of days. The simplest type of moving average,

126 • Way of the Turtle

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
14.0

13.5

13.0

12.5

12.0

11.5

11.0

10.5

Figure 9-1

05

05

20
ov
N

ct
O

Se

p

20

20

05

05
20
A

ug

20
l
Ju

Ju

n

20

05

05

10.0

20-Day and 70-Day Exponential Moving Averages

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

called a simple moving average, is the average of the price for a speciﬁed number of days. The 10-day moving average of the close is the
average of the prior 10 days’ closes, and a 70-day moving average
of the high is the average of the previous 70 highs.
There are other kinds of moving averages that are slightly more
complex, the most common being the exponential moving average.
This is an average that is computed by taking a portion of the previous day’s average and mixing it with a portion of the current price.
Figure 9-1 presents two moving averages: a 20-day exponential
moving average and a 70-day exponential moving average.
You can see how the 20-day moving average follows the price
more closely and how it crosses the longer-term moving average in
mid-June, indicating the start of an up trend. This is a very com-

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 127

mon system entry: A trade is taken in the direction of the shorter
moving average when it crosses over the longer moving average. In
this case, a long trade would have been initiated in early June at
the point of the crossover.
Many other different types of moving averages have been proposed by system designers and researchers. Most of the additional
complexity offered by their designers is not all that useful in actual
practice and presents a greater potential for curve ﬁtting and unrealistic test results. This potential pitfall is considered in greater
detail in Chapter 11.

Volatility Channels
Volatility channels are good indicators of the beginning of a trend.
If the price exceeds a particular moving average plus some additional amount, this means that the price is going up. In other words,
it indicates that a trend possibly has begun. We will examine two
different systems built on volatility channels in Chapter 10.
Figure 9-2 shows an 80-day moving average with a volatility
channel plotted both above and below the moving average. You
can see from the graph that the prices remain inside the channel for the most part except in the right-hand part of the graph,
when they descend below the channel. You also can see how the
moving average slowly turns down and follows the prices as they
go lower.

Time-Based Exits
A simple time-based exit can be very effective and useful. It also
can help smooth out the drawdowns associated with a breakdown
in a trend. This is the case because very often a time-based exit

128 • Way of the Turtle

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
12.00

11.75

11.50

11.25

11.00

10.75

10.50

10.25

Figure 9-2

05

05

20
n
Ju

ay
M

pr
A

ar
M

20

05
20

05
20

05
20
Fe

b

20
n
Ja

D

ec

20

05

04

10.00

Moving Average with Volatility Channel

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

occurs before the drawdown is revealed by a moving average or
breakout, both of which follow price more closely.

Simple Lookbacks
If you consider at a very basic level what trend following is, you can
devise even simpler mechanisms for determining the potential start
of a trend. One method that works reasonably well is to simply look
at a price some number of days earlier. You can add those prices
by using a volatility-based measure such as ATR. For example, you
can buy if the prices exceed the price 100 days ago by 2 ATR.
Chapter 10 will explore some systems that use other types of simple lookbacks.

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 129

Want More?
Over the years, hundreds of different types of indicators have been
invented. Recently, advances in technology have made it easier for
traders to program their own formulas and create their own indicators, and trading magazines publish new indicators and systems
built on those indicators in each new issue. For those who want to
learn about other indicators and system building blocks in more
detail, some sources are included in the bibliography. However,
before you dig in too deeply, here are some words of advice. I’ll use
trend following as an example, but this advice applies to other types
of trading as well.
If a market starts to go up, sooner or later it will trigger a long
entry signal using any of the trend-following building blocks. All
the building blocks can be tuned so that they react more quickly
or more slowly. Therefore, in effect you can use any of them to
build systems that will perform similarly to systems built with other
building blocks.
My advice is that there are better ways to spend your time than
searching for the perfect newfangled nuclear-powered indicator
that works perfectly in past years’ markets. I suggest that instead you
try out some simple systems that use the basic building blocks that
were outlined above. We will look at some of them in Chapter 10.

This page intentionally left blank

ten
TURTLE-STYLE TRADING:
STEP BY STEP
Keep it simple. Simple time-tested methods that are
well executed will beat fancy complicated methods every time.

his chapter will look at some Turtle-style trading systems, more
commonly known as long-term trend-following systems. Those
systems are as follows:

T

• ATR Channel Breakout: A volatility channel system that
uses ATR as the volatility measure.
• Bollinger Breakout: A volatility channel system that uses
the standard deviation as the volatility measure.
• Donchian Trend: A breakout system with a trend ﬁlter.
• Donchian Trend with Time Exit: A breakout system with a
trend ﬁlter and a time-based exit.
• Dual Moving Average: A system that buys and sells when a
faster moving average crosses over a slower moving average.
Unlike the other systems, this system is always in the market,
either long or short.
• 131 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

132 • Way of the Turtle

• Triple Moving Average: A system that buys and sells when a
faster moving average crosses over a slower moving average
but only in the direction of the major trend deﬁned by a
very slow-moving average.
To examine the differences among these systems, I ran a series
of historical simulations to determine how much money one would
have made if one had used each of those systems for the last ten
years. This chapter will use some of the metrics discussed in Chapter 7 to compare the relative performance of each of the systems.

To Test or Not to Test
There are many traders, including quite a few successful ones, who do
not believe in historical testing, sometimes referred to as backtesting.
They believe that testing with historical data is not useful because the
past will not repeat itself. For readers who are not familiar with this
debate, I am going to spend several paragraphs convincing you of
something that you probably think needs no explanation. To those who
do not believe in historical testing, my question is: What is the alternative? How do you arrive at any strategy without knowledge of the
past? How do you determine when to buy or sell? Do you guess?
The only information you have is what the markets have done
so far. Even if you are a discretionary trader who does not use rules
or systems, you still have your personal experience of historical
price action as a guide. You are relying on your interpretation of
the past; in effect you are relying on historical data.
Smart discretionary traders can develop systems after years of
experience in trading. They note repeating patterns that offer

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 133

opportunities for proﬁts. They then trade by using ideas designed
to capitalize on those opportunities. New traders often pore over
charts for months before starting to trade so that they can understand what the market did in the past. They do this because they
know that the best indication of what the markets are likely to do
in the future is contained in the past.
It is not hard to argue that computers can test ideas more reliably using the same historical data. Computer simulation enables
traders to perform a more rigorous analysis of a particular strategy
before trading begins. Then the traders often ﬁnd that ideas that
appeared promising will not work because of something that was
not anticipated. It is much better to ﬁgure this out by computer
than with an actual account.
The reason some traders do not believe in historical simulation
is that there are many ways to distort backtesting. It is easy to use
the power of a computer to ﬁnd methods that appear to work but
will not work in real markets. These problems are tractable if you
make sure to avoid the most common pitfall: Overoptimization.
This topic is covered in Chapter 11.
Proper historical testing requires some experience and skills that
beginning traders do not possess. However, the fact that you would
not give a sharp knife to a small child does not mean you don’t want
to use one in the kitchen when you are cooking. You just need to
be careful with sharp instruments.
A historical simulation does not predict what you will encounter
in future trading, but it will give you a way to determine whether
an approach is likely to be proﬁtable in the future. It is not the optimal solution—a crystal ball or time machine would be better—but
it is the best tool that is currently available.

134 • Way of the Turtle

The Myth of the Expert
The “don’t optimize” counsel is an effect of what my friends and
I like to call the myth of the expert. Unfortunately, in most ﬁelds the
number of people who really understand what’s going on is very
limited. For every true expert, there are scores of pseudo-experts
who are able to perform in the ﬁeld, have assembled loads of knowledge, and in the eyes of those who are not experts are indistinguishable from the true experts. These pseudo-experts can function but
do not really understand the area in which they claim expertise.
True experts do not have rigid rules; they understand what’s
going on, and so they do not need rigid rules.
Pseudo-experts, however, don’t understand, and so they tend to
look at what the experts are doing and copy it. They know what to
do but not why it should be done. Therefore, they listen to the true
experts and create rigid rules where none were intended.
One sure sign of a pseudo-expert is writing that is unclear and
difﬁcult to follow. Unclear writing comes from unclear thinking.
A true expert will be able to explain complicated ideas in ways that
are clear and easy to understand.
Another common characteristic of pseudo-experts is that
they know how to apply complex processes and techniques and
have been well trained but do not understand the limits of those
techniques.
In trading, a good example would be someone who can perform
complex statistical analyses of trades, runs a simulation that generates 1,000 trades, and then assumes that she can draw conclusions
from those trades without regard for the fact that they might have
been drawn from only two weeks of short-term data. These people

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 135

can do the math but do not understand that the math does not
matter if next week is radically different from the last two weeks.
Don’t confuse experience with expertise or knowledge with
wisdom.

Common Building Blocks
The testing described in this chapter was performed using a common portfolio of markets and a common money management algorithm to keep the differences in results isolated to those effects
which are due to changes in the rules of the system. Here are the
variables used in the testing discussed in this chapter.

Markets
The markets in the testing portfolio include the Australian dollar,
the British pound, corn, cocoa, the Canadian dollar, crude oil, cotton, the euro, the eurodollar, feeder cattle, gold, copper, heating oil,
unleaded gas, the Japanese yen, coffee, cattle, hogs, the Mexican
peso, natural gas, soybeans, sugar, the Swiss franc, silver, Treasury
notes, Treasury bonds, and wheat.
These markets were selected from the liquid (high-tradingvolume) U.S. markets. A few liquid markets were eliminated
because they were very highly correlated with other, more liquid
markets. We decided to limit our testing for these purposes to U.S.
markets because many of the providers of historical data sell the
information for foreign markets separately. For that reason, many
new traders start with the U.S. markets only, and we wanted to
make it as easy as possible for traders to duplicate our results in their
own testing.

136 • Way of the Turtle

Money Management
The money management algorithm used here was the same as that
used by the Turtles except that we employed a ﬁgure that was half
as aggressive. Instead of equating 1 ATR to 1 percent of our trading equity, we equated it to 0.5 percent. To arrive at number of contracts for the test, we divided 0.5 percent of the equity by the value
of a given market’s ATR in terms of dollars at the point when the
orders were entered for a speciﬁc trade.

Test Dates
The testing was performed using data from January 1996 through
June 2006 for all the systems.

The Systems
Let’s examine each system in greater detail before revealing the
testing results.

ATR Channel Breakout
The ATR Channel Breakout system is a volatility channel system
that uses the average true range as the volatility measure. The channel is formed by adding 7 ATR to a 350-day moving average of the
closing prices for the channel top and subtracting 3 ATR from the
moving average for the channel bottom. A long trade is entered on
the open if the previous day’s close exceeded the top of the channel; a short trade is entered if the previous day’s close fell below the
bottom of the channel. Trades are exited when the close crosses
back through the moving average price.
A variation of the ATR Channel Breakout system was popularized as the PGO (Pretty Good Oscillator) system by the trader Mark

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 137

FC: Cattle-Feeder-CME
117.5

115.0

112.5

110.0

107.5

105.0

102.5

100.0

97.5

Figure 10-1

6
20
0
Ju

n

20
ay
M

A

pr

20

06

06

6
00
M
ar
2

Fe

b

20

06

95.0

ATR Channel Breakout System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Johnson on Chuck LeBeau’s System Trader’s Club (www.
traderclub.com) forum. It is also a variant of the Bollinger Breakout system discussed below. Figure 10-1 shows a graph of the
volatility channel for the ATR Channel Breakout system.
The middle line is the 350-day moving average, and the top line
is the top of the volatility channel formed by adding 7 ATR to the
moving average.

Bollinger Breakout
This system was described by Chuck LeBeau and David Lucas in
their 1992 book Technical Traders Guide to Computer Analysis of

138 • Way of the Turtle

the Futures Markets (using different numbers for the days in the
moving average and the standard deviations for the channel width).
A Bollinger band is a volatility channel that was invented by John
Bollinger. The Bollinger band for this system is formed by adding
and subtracting 2.5 standard deviations of the close to a 350-day
moving average. A long trade is entered on the open if the previous day’s close exceeded the top of the channel; a short trade is
entered if the previous day’s close fell below the bottom of the channel. Trades are exited when the close crosses back through the moving average price. Figure 10-2 shows a graph of the volatility
channel for the Bollinger Breakout system.
SI: Silver-COMEX
1500

1400

1300

1200

1100

1000

900

800

Figure 10-2

Bollinger Breakout System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

20
pr
A

M

ar
2

00

06

6

06
b
Fe

n
Ja

20

20
06

05
20
D

ec

20

05

700

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 139

Donchian Trend
This Donchian Trend system, which was described in Chapter 5, is
a simpliﬁed version of the system we used as Turtles. It uses a 20-day
breakout for entry and a 10-day breakout for exits and includes a 350day/25-day exponential moving average trend ﬁlter. Trades are taken
only in the direction indicated by the faster moving average. If the
25-day moving average is above the 350-day average, only longs may
be taken; if the 25-day moving average is below the 350-day average,
only shorts may be taken. The system also uses a 2-ATR stop just as
the original Turtle system did. Figure 10-3 shows the breakout levels
and moving averages for the Donchian Trend system.

CD: FX-Canadian Dollar-CME
0.76

0.74

0.72

0.70

0.68

0.66

Figure 10-3

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

00
3
l2

n
Ju

Donchian Trend System

Ju

20
03

03
20
ay
M

pr
A

M

ar

20

20
03

03

0.64

140 • Way of the Turtle

The smooth line that follows the prices fairly closely is the short
moving average; the lower smooth line at the bottom is the long
moving average. The graph indicates that a long-trend is in
progress, and so only long trades will be taken. The jagged lines at
the top and bottom of the prices are the breakout levels. The highest high moves directly as a new high is made, and so it closely follows the price on the way up. Note that the lowest low does not
follow the price as closely as the price moves up.
The chart shows that a long trade would have been entered on
April 10 as the price penetrated the former highest high at 0.6802,
which had been made on March 7. Note too how a previous
attempt to exceed that price at the end of March was unsuccessful. This is a good example of resistance indicating selling. The
second time the price rose to that level, it was able to break
through and rally 6 cents to 0.74 without any signiﬁcant pullbacks.
The price was able to rise because there were no more traders willing to sell at that level but there were buyers willing to buy at the
higher prices.
