
Investment activity
This section of the cash flow statement shows you how a company spends
its money for growing long-term assets, such as new buildings or other new
acquisitions, including major purchases of property, equipment, and other
companies. It also shows you a company’s sales of major assets or equity
investments in other companies. Tracking investment activities gives investors
a good idea of what major long-term capital planning activities have taken
place during the period.
The bottom line: This section shows a company’s total cash flow from investing
activities. Comparing three successive years of investment activities by Home
Depot and Lowe’s, Table 6-12 indicates that both companies had significant
capital outlays that more than likely were for opening new stores in 2006 and
2007. If you’ve followed the news about these two major home-improvement
players, you know they’re expanding the numbers of their stores around the
country in a battle for market share. Home Depot did slow its expansion efforts
in 2008 and decided to sell off some of its non-retail assets, which is reflected in
the cash inflow of $4.8 billion in 2008 rather than a cash outlay that year.

Table 6-12

Total Cash Flow from Investing Activities
(All Numbers in Thousands)

Fiscal Year

2008

2007

2006

Home Depot

4,758,000

(7,647,000)

(4,586,000)

Lowe’s

(4,123,000)

(3,715,000)

(3,674,000)

Scouring the Balance Sheet
The balance sheet gives you a snapshot of the company’s assets and liabilities at a particular point in time. This differs from the income statement,
which gives you operating results of a company during a particular period of
time. A balance sheet has three sections, including

Chapter 6: Digging Into the Critical Parts of Fundamental Analysis
✓ An assets section that details everything the company owns
✓ A liabilities section that details the company’s debt or any other claims
on the company’s assets made by debtors
✓ A shareholder’s equity (also called owner’s equity) section that lists all
the claims made by owners or investors
The balance sheet gets its name because the total assets of the company
are supposed to equal the total claims against it — total liabilities plus total
equity.
Assets and liabilities are listed on the balance sheet according to their
liquidity, or how quickly and easily they can be converted into cash. Assets
or liabilities that are more liquid appear first on the list, while the ones that
are increasingly more difficult to convert to cash — long-term assets or
liabilities — appear later. The asset section is divided into current assets (the
ones that are used up in one year) and long-term assets (the ones whose life
spans are longer than a year), as is the liabilities section — current liabilities
and long-term liabilities.
Current assets include cash and other assets that can quickly and easily be
converted into cash — marketable securities, money market mutual funds,
accounts receivables, and inventories. Long-term assets include holdings
such as buildings, land, and equipment. Similarly, on the liabilities side, current
liabilities include any claims against assets that are due during the next 12
months, such as accounts payable and notes payable. Long-term liabilities
are claims due in more than 12 months, such as mortgage or lease payables.
Equity accounts include outstanding (remains on the market) preferred
and/or common stocks and retained earnings. Retained earnings reflect the
profits that are reinvested in the company rather than paid out to owners or
shareholders.

Analyzing assets
In analyzing assets, two key ratios to look at are how quickly a company is
collecting on its accounts receivable — the accounts receivable turnover —
and how quickly inventory is sold — the inventory turnover.
A two-step process is used to find the accounts receivable turnover. First
you must find out how quickly a company turns its accounts receivables into
cash using this formula:
Accounts receivable turnover = sales on account ÷ average accounts
receivable balance

95

96

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
Then you need to find out how quickly a company collects on its accounts
by dividing the accounts receivable turnover into 365 to find out the average
number of days it takes to collect on accounts.
Testing for inventory turnover uses a similar two-step process. First you
must find out how quickly inventory turns over during the year using this
formula:
Inventory turnover ratio = cost of goods sold ÷ average inventory balance
Then you need to divide the inventory turnover ratio into 365 to find out
the average number of days it takes a company to turn over its inventory.
Comparing these results for the companies you’re considering can help you
determine how well each company is handling the collection of its accounts
receivable and the sale of its inventory. Obviously, the faster a company
collects on accounts or sells its inventory, the better that company is doing
in managing its assets. You should compare companies in the same industry
to determine how well a company is doing.
Whenever you see accounts receivable rising rapidly, and the number of days
to collect on those accounts also is rising, that signals a red flag that indicates
cash problems likely lie ahead. Whenever you see inventory numbers rising, a
company can be having a hard time selling its product, which also raises a red
flag, indicating problems ahead.
We’re summarizing these two common ratios so that you know what they
mean whenever you see them mentioned by analysts. As a trader, you aren’t
likely to take the time to do these calculations yourself.

Looking at debt
When considering debt, or what a company owes, the two primary ratios
you want to look at are the current ratio and acid or quick ratio. You can
quickly calculate the current ratio, which tests whether a company can make
its payments, by looking at the balance sheet and using this formula:
Current ratio = current assets ÷ current liabilities
Again, like the other ratios in this chapter, you must compare the ratio of
one company to that of other companies in the same industry. A current
ratio that’s lower than most other companies in the industry can indicate the
company is having a problem paying its short-term debts, which, in turn, is
a strong sign that bankruptcy may be just around the corner. A current ratio
that’s significantly higher can be a bad sign too, because it can mean the
company isn’t using its assets efficiently. For these reasons, traders like to
see companies with current ratios that are close to the industry average.

Chapter 6: Digging Into the Critical Parts of Fundamental Analysis
Luckily, you won’t have to calculate current ratios, because they’re easily
found on any Web site that includes fundamental statistics. Using Yahoo!
Finance, we found that Home Depot’s current ratio is 1.253 and Lowe’s is
1.091.
The acid test, or quick ratio, is almost the same as the current ratio; however,
the key difference is that inventory value amounts are subtracted from current
assets before dividing that result by current liabilities. Many financial
institutions take this extra step because inventories aren’t as easy to convert
to cash. The acid test ratio is calculated by:
Acid test ratio = (current assets – inventory) ÷ current liabilities
The acid test ratio is primarily of interest to financial institutions thinking
about making a short-term loan to a company. They look for an acid test
ratio of at least 1 to 1 before considering a company a good credit risk. Even
though as a trader you’re not likely to be in the business of making loans, a
company that has problems getting short-term debt is likely to have problems
meeting its short-term obligations in the near future. As the market recognizes
the problem, the company’s share price is likely to drop.

Reviewing goodwill
Goodwill is not a tangible asset but rather is usually collected through the
years as companies are bought and sold. Goodwill reflects a competitive
advantage, such as a strong brand or reputation. When one company buys
another and pays more than the tangible assets are worth, the difference is
added to the acquirer’s balance sheet as goodwill. In other words, it’s the
premium in price that one company pays for another.

Determining Stock Valuations
By now the key question you’re probably asking is, “How do I use all this data
to decide how much I should pay for a stock?” Basically, the value of a stock
is the amount buyers are willing to pay for the stock and the amount for
which sellers are willing to sell the stock under current business conditions.
The actual value of a stock shifts throughout the day and usually in a matter
of seconds when the trading volume is high.
Fundamental analysis is one of the tools that investors and some traders use
to analyze earnings, revenue growth, market share, and future business plans
so they can determine the value of the stock and the price they’re willing to
pay for or sell it. Earnings and earnings growth are key factors and are
considered a part of fundamental analysis. Common ratios used to determine
a stock’s value include the price to earnings multiple, or P/E ratio; price to

97

98

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
book multiple, or price/book ratio; return on assets (ROA); and return on
equity (ROE). We talk more about how these ratios are calculated in the
sections that follow.
After considering all this data, investors decide whether a company’s stock
is undervalued or overvalued. Although past performance is no guarantee
about a company’s or stock’s future success, fundamental analysts believe
collecting and analyzing the appropriate data enables investors to make
more of an educated guess about a stock’s value.

Earnings
Using the income statement, we’ve talked extensively about a company’s
earnings. Remember the three types of earnings figures to consider are
✓ Gross profit, which is calculated after considering the direct costs
related to sales
✓ Operating income, which shows a company’s profit after subtracting
operating expenses
✓ Net income, which is the bottom-line earnings after all expenses, taxes,
and interest are subtracted

Eyeing the most fundamental data of all
If we were allowed to choose only one piece
of fundamental data to guide our trading, we’d
choose the earnings growth rate (you’ll sometimes see this called the EPS Growth Rate —
EPS stands for earnings per share). You can use
it as a quick summary of a company’s performance. Evaluating the entire financial condition
of a company isn’t necessary when its earnings
aren’t up to par.
We don’t put much faith in analysts’ estimates
and don’t use them when evaluating trading
candidates. We’re much more interested in
actual earnings reported than we are in the
analysts’ estimates for future earnings. And we’re
interested only in companies whose earnings
are growing and growing at a faster rate than
most other companies. Those companies
typically outperform the broad market.

Investor’s Business Daily is an excellent source
for EPS growth rate data. A proprietary ranking
that shows which companies are growing earnings fastest is published in it.
As much as we like this tool, we don’t follow
the rankings blindly. (And we don’t believe
the good folks at IBD recommend that you do
so, either.) IBD doesn’t distinguish between
companies that are earning more and companies
that are losing less. That companies can and
do turn from losing money to making money is a
fact, and that situation can be lucrative for the
knowledgeable trader. Call us old-fashioned,
but we prefer companies that actually have a
history of reporting real, positive earnings.

Chapter 6: Digging Into the Critical Parts of Fundamental Analysis
When you encounter discussions about earnings figures, be certain that you
know which types of earnings are being discussed for the stock you’re eyeing.
To be able to compare apples with apples, you must know that you’re using
the same type of earnings figures.

Earnings growth rate
The earnings growth rate, which shows how quickly the company is expected
to grow, isn’t something you’ll calculate. What you will find in the fundamental
analysis statistics for stocks are earnings growth rate projections made by
industry analysts based on their analysis of a company’s potential earnings.
The earnings growth rate is included on all the Web sites that we mention
in Chapter 4 that provide fundamental statistics. When looking for this data,
be sure to check out the earnings growth rate potential at a number of those
sites.
Continuing the comparison of Home Depot and Lowe’s, Yahoo! Finance
projected
✓ Home Depot’s earnings growth rate was at –24.3 percent
✓ Lowe’s earnings growth rate was at –7.9 percent
Clearly, at this point in time, analysts believe Lowe’s will lose less than Home
Depot in the future, but they expect losses at both companies.

Figuring Your Ratios: Comparing
One Company’s Stock to Another
In this section, we show you how to calculate four key ratios — P/E, Price/
Book, ROE, and ROA — but luckily you can find all these where fundamental
statistics are reported (newspapers, Web sites, and so on — see Chapter 4
for more). Each of these ratios gives you just one more piece in the puzzle of
determining how much you want to pay for a stock. By comparing each of the
ratios for each of the companies you’re considering, you can make a more
educated case about the price you want to pay for any stock.

Price/earnings ratio
The P/E ratio is probably the one that’s quoted more often in news stories.
This ratio reflects a comparison of a stock’s earnings with its share price.
You calculate this ratio using this formula:

99

100 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
P/E ratio = stock price ÷ earnings per share
You’ll probably find two types of P/E ratios for a stock. The trailing P/E is
based on earnings reported in previous quarters, and the forward P/E is
based on projected earnings. At Yahoo! Finance, the trailing P/E for Home
Depot was 12.29, and its forward P/E, expectations as of February 3, 2010,
was 13.68. Lowe’s trailing P/E was 12.28, and its forward P/E, expectations
as of February 1, 2010, was 14.16. There is much difference in the trailing P/E
ratios for Home Depot and Lowe’s, but analysts seem to favor Lowe’s with a
higher forward P/E. Historically, market analysts believed a P/E ratio of 10 to
15 was reasonable. For a while, much higher P/Es were tolerated, but during
the 2008 market conditions, people drifted back to historical P/Es. When
comparing companies, you can get a good idea of how the market values
each stock by looking at its P/E ratio. While the P/E ratio is actually a percent,
it is rarely stated that way. However, you will sometimes hear it called a price
multiple because the P/E ratio represents how much you are paying for each
dollar of a company’s earnings.

Price/book ratio
The price/book ratio compares the market’s valuation of a company to the
value that the company shows on its financial statements. The higher the
ratio, the more the market is willing to pay for a company above its hard
assets, which include its buildings, inventory, accounts receivable, and other
clearly measurable assets. Companies are more than their measurable assets.
Customer loyalty, the value of their locations, and other intangible assets
add value to a company. Investors looking to buy based on value rather than
growth are more likely to check out the price/book ratio. Price/book ratios
are calculated using this formula:
Price/book ratio = stock price ÷ (book value – total liabilities)
Lowe’s price/book ratio at Yahoo! Finance was 1.88 and Home Depot’s was
2.26. Based on price/book ratio, the market is willing to pay a higher premium
for Home Depot’s stock.

Return on assets
Return on assets (ROA) shows you how efficiently management uses the
company’s resources. ROA, however, doesn’t show you how well the
company is performing for its stockholders. To calculate return on assets,
use this formula:
Return on assets = earnings after taxes ÷ total assets

Chapter 6: Digging Into the Critical Parts of Fundamental Analysis
Home Depot’s ROA at Yahoo! Finance was 7.78 percent; Lowe’s was 8.89
percent. Lowe’s is doing a more efficient job using its resources based on
those two ROA numbers.

Return on equity
Investors are more interested in return on equity (ROE), which measures how
well a company is doing for its shareholders. This ratio measures how much
profit management generates from resources provided by its shareholders.
Investors look for companies with high ROEs that show signs of growth. You
calculate ROE by using this formula:
Return on equity = earnings after taxes ÷ shareholder equity
Home Depot’s ROE was 14.40 percent, and Lowe’s was 15.51 percent.
The ROEs show that Lowe’s is doing a better job for its shareholders, which,
again, is reflected in the price investors are willing to pay for its shares.
As a trader, you may not make your buy and sell decisions based on
fundamental analysis, but collecting and having access to this information as
part of your arsenal certainly helps you to make better and more informed
stock choices. Knowing a company has strong fundamentals helps to back up
what you’re seeing in the technical analysis (see Part III). If you’re trying to
decide between two stocks whose technical charts are positive, you can use
the fundamental analysis to tip the scale toward your best trading opportunity.

101

102 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis

Chapter 7

Listening to Analyst Calls
In This Chapter
▶ Exploring the analyst role
▶ Deciphering analyst language
▶ Discovering how to listen
▶ Locating analyst calls online
▶ Differentiating analyst types

S

tock analysts are supposed to be independent oracles who help mere
mortal traders understand a company’s financial future. Don’t count
on them, however, because they’re not always looking to protect the small
investor’s pocketbook.
Scandals exposed by then New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer in the
early 2000s showed how analysts recommended stocks to the public to
help their companies land lucrative investment banking deals, while at the
same time privately writing and sending e-mails calling those same stocks
junk. (This is the same Spitzer who, after becoming New York Governor,
was exposed on an FBI wiretap for patronizing high-priced prostitutes. He
should have stuck with the high-priced stock analysts.) Whenever you read
recommendations from an analyst, you must determine whether that analyst
is a buy-side analyst, sell-side analyst, or independent analyst before you
ever consider using the information he or she is providing.
Analysts get much of their information from conference calls sponsored
by companies when they report their earnings or make other key financial
announcements. Today, individual investors are invited to listen in on more
and more of these calls. You can find out a great deal about a company’s
prospects by listening in on analyst calls, but the language of these calls can
be confusing. This chapter explains the types of analysts, their importance,
and the language unique to what they do. We also introduce you to resources
on the Internet that can make listening in on analyst calls easier.

104 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
Getting to Know Your Analysts
If you watch any of the financial news cable television stations, you’ve
probably seen numerous industry analysts frequently touting certain stocks
and panning others. Do you know who those analysts represent? Do you
know whether they’re independent analysts, buy-side analysts, or sell-side
analysts? Before deciding whether to follow an analyst’s recommendations,
be sure that you understand who pays his or her salary and what’s in it for
him or her.

Buy-side analysts: You won’t see them
You rarely come in contact with a buy-side analyst, because they work
primarily for large institutional investment firms that manage mutual funds or
private accounts. Their primary role is analyzing stocks that are bought
by the firm for which they work and not necessarily the ones bought by
individual investors. Their research rarely is available outside the firm that
hired them. Buy-side analysts focus on whether an investment that’s under
consideration is a good match for the firm’s investment strategy and portfolio.
In fact, buy-side analysts frequently include information from sell-side
analysts as part of their overall research on an investment. You’re most likely
to hear from a buy-side analyst if you listen to analyst conference calls. They
tend to be much harsher on the company officials.

Sell-side analysts: Watch for conflicts
When you read stock analyses from brokerage houses, you’re more than
likely reading information from sell-side analysts. These analysts work
primarily for brokerage houses and other financial distribution sources
where salespeople sell securities based on the analysts’ recommendations.
The primary purpose of sell-side analysts is providing brokerage salespeople
with information to help make sales. As long as the interests of the investor,
the broker, and the brokerage house are the same, sell-side analysts’ reports
can be useful sources of information. A conflict arises, however, when sell-side
analysts also are responsible for helping their brokerage houses win investment
banking business.
New York State AG Spitzer exposed why this conflict is a primary reason for
all the scandals you’ve read about regarding star analysts, such as Henry
Blodget of Merrill Lynch, whose e-mails privately called stocks “dogs,”
“toast,” or “junk” at the same time he and his team were publicly recommending

Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls
that their customers buy the same stocks. Why do this? Well, according to
Spitzer’s charges, Blodget’s recommendations brought in $115 million in
investment banking fees for Merrill Lynch, and Blodget took home $12 million
in compensation.
Merrill Lynch was only the first to be exposed. Similar charges were raised
against many other firms, including Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter, and Credit
Suisse First Boston. Few firms that sell stocks and have an investment
banking division avoided the scandal. These companies didn’t learn much
from the scandals. Merrill Lynch was taken over by Bank of America because
of errors made during the mortgage crisis.
At one time in the distant past, analysts were separated from investment
banks by what companies called a “Chinese Wall.” Analysts’ work supposedly
was kept completely separate from deals that were being generated in a
company’s investment banking business. At some point, the lines between
the two broke down and analysts actually were included in the process of
generating deals for mergers, acquisitions, and new stock offerings. By
writing glowing reports, analysts helped their companies sign more lucrative
investment banking deals, all the while putting their small investors at great
risk of losing all their money by buying the recommended stocks. When the
market bubble burst in 2000, many of the stocks that were recommended
because of these deals, particularly in the Internet, telecommunications, and
other high-tech industries, dropped to being worthless, and investors lost
billions.
Merrill Lynch, in trying to settle their problems with Spitzer, agreed to publicly
disclose its investment banking connections and list its clients. As of June
2002, Merrill Lynch began stating in all its research reports whether it
received or will receive fees for investment banking services from any
company that was followed by the Merrill Lynch analysts in the prior 12
months. Other companies followed Merrill Lynch’s lead in settling their
disputes with Spitzer.
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) finally stepped
into the fray in April 2002 and announced it was broadening the investigation
into analysts’ roles and was developing new regulations regarding analyst
disclosure. The SEC ultimately endorsed rulemaking changes recommended
by the New York Stock Exchange and the National Association of Securities
Dealers, including the following:
✓ Structural reforms that increase analysts’ independence. These reforms
include a prohibition on investment banking departments supervising
analysts or approving research reports.
✓ A prohibition on tying analysts’ compensation to specific investment
banking transactions.
