
THE THUGS, or PHANSIGARS.
Orribili favelle -- parole di dolor.--DANTE.
Among the black deeds which Superstition has imposed as duties upon her wretched
votaries, none are more horrible than the practices of the murderers, who, under the name
of Thugs, or Phansigars, have so long been the scourge of India. For ages they have
pursued their dark and dreadful calling, moulding assassination into a science, or
extolling it as a virtue, worthy only to be practised by a race favoured of Heaven. Of late
years this atrocious delusion has excited much attention, both in this country and in India;
an attention which, it is to be hoped, will speedily lead to the uprooting of a doctrine so
revolting and anti-human. Although the British Government has extended over Hindostan
for so long a period, it does not appear that Europeans even suspected the existence of
this mysterious sect until the commencement of the present century. In the year 1807, a
gang of Thugs, laden with the plunder of murdered travellers, was accidentally
discovered. The inquiries then set on foot revealed to the astonished Government a
system of iniquity unparalleled in the history of man. Subsequent investigation extended
the knowledge; and by throwing light upon the peculiar habits of the murderers,
explained the reason why their crimes had remained so long undiscovered. In the
following pages will be found an epitome of all the information which has reached
Europe concerning them, derived principally from Dr. Sherwood's treatise upon the
subject, published in 1816, and the still more valuable and more recent work of Mr.
Sleeman, entitled the "Ramaseeana; or, Vocabulary of the peculiar Language of the
Thugs."
The followers of this sect are called Thugs, or T'hugs, and their profession Thuggee. In
the south of India they are called Phansigars: the former word signifying "a deceiver;"
and the latter, "a strangler." They are both singularly appropriate. The profession of
Thuggee is hereditary, and embraces, it is supposed, in every part of India, a body of at
least ten thousand individuals, trained to murder from their childhood; carrying it on in
secret and in silence, yet glorying in it, and holding the practice of it higher than any
earthly honour. During the winter months, they usually follow some reputable calling, to
elude suspicion; and in the summer, they set out in gangs over all the roads of India, to
plunder and destroy. These gangs generally contain from ten to forty Thugs, and
sometimes as many as two hundred. Each strangler is provided with a noose, to despatch
the unfortunate victim, as the Thugs make it a point never to cause death by any other
means. When the gangs are very large, they divide into smaller bodies; and each taking a
different route, they arrive at the same general place of rendezvous to divide the spoil.
They sometimes travel in the disguise of respectable traders; sometimes as sepoys or
native soldiers; and at others, as government officers. If they chance to fall in with an
unprotected wayfarer, his fate is certain. One Thug approaches him from behind, and
throws the end of a sash round his neck; the other end is seized by a second at the same
instant, crossed behind the neck, and drawn tightly, while with their other hand the two
Thugs thrust his head forward to expedite the strangulation: a third Thug seizes the
traveller by the legs at the same moment, and he is thrown to the ground, a corpse before
he reaches it.

But solitary travellers are not the prey they are anxious to seek. A wealthy caravan of
forty or fifty individuals has not unfrequently been destroyed by them; not one soul being
permitted to escape. Indeed, there is hardly an instance upon record of any one's escape
from their hands, so surely are their measures taken, and so well do they calculate
beforehand all the risks and difficulties of the undertaking. Each individual of the gang
has his peculiar duty allotted to him. Upon-approaching a town, or serai, two or three,
known as the Soothaes, or "inveiglers," are sent in advance to ascertain if any travellers
are there; to learn, if possible, the amount of money or merchandize they carry with them,
their hours of starting in the morning, or any other particulars that may be of use. If they
can, they enter into conversation with them, pretend to be travelling to the same place,
and propose, for mutual security, to travel with them. This intelligence is duly
communicated to the remainder of the gang. The. place usually chosen for the murder is
some lonely part of the road in the vicinity of a jungle, and the time, just before dusk. At
given signals, understood only by themselves, the scouts of the party station themselves
in the front, in the rear, and on each side, to guard against surprise. A strangler and
assistant strangler, called Bhurtote and Shamshea, place themselves, the one on the right,
and the other on the left of the victim, without exciting his suspicion. At another signal
the noose is twisted, drawn tightly by a strong hand at each extremity, and the traveller,
in a few seconds, hurried into eternity. Ten, twelve, twenty, and in some instances, sixty
persons have been thus despatched at the same moment. Should any victim, by a rare
chance, escape their hands, he falls into those of the scouts who are stationed within
hearing, who run upon him and soon overpower him.
Their next care is to dispose of the bodies. So cautious are they to prevent detection, that
they usually break all the joints to hasten decomposition. They then cut open the body to
prevent it swelling in the grave and causing fissures in the soil above, by which means
the jackals might be attracted to the spot, and thereby lead to discovery. When obliged to
bury the body in a frequented district, they kindle a fire over the grave to obliterate the
traces of the newly turned earth. Sometimes the grave-diggers of the party, whose office,
like that of all the rest, is hereditary, are despatched to make the graves in the morning at
some distant spot, by which it is known the travellers will pass. The stranglers, in the
mean time, journey quietly with their victims, conversing with them in the most friendly
manner. Towards nightfall they approach the spot selected for their murder; the signal is
given, and they fall into the graves that have been ready for them since day-break. On one
occasion, related by Captain Sleeman, a party of fifty-nine people, consisting of fifty-two
men and seven women, were thus simultaneously strangled, and thrown into the graves
prepared for them in the morning. Some of these travellers were on horseback and well
armed, but the Thugs, who appear to have been upwards of two hundred in a gang, had
provided against all risk of failure. The only one left alive of all that numerous party, was
an infant four years old, who was afterwards initiated into all the mysteries of Thuggee.
If they cannot find a convenient opportunity for disposing of the bodies, they carry them
for many miles, until they come to a spot secure from intrusion, and to a soil adapted to
receive them. If fear of putrefaction admonishes them to use despatch, they set up a large
screen or tent, as other travellers do, and bury the body within the enclosure, pretending,
if inquiries are made, that their women are within. But this only happens when they fall in

with a victim unexpectedly. In murders which they have planned previously, the finding
of a place of sepulture is never left to hazard.
Travellers who have the misfortune to lodge in the same choultry or hostelry, as the
Thugs, are often murdered during the night. It is either against their creed to destroy a
sleeper, or they find a difficulty in placing the noose round the neck of a person in a
recumbent position. When this is the case, the slumberer is suddenly aroused by the alarm
of a snake or a scorpion. He starts to his feet, and finds the fatal sash around his neck. -He never escapes.
In addition to these Thugs who frequent the highways, there are others, who infest the
rivers, and are called Pungoos. They do not differ in creed, but only in a few of their
customs, from their brethren on shore. They go up and down the rivers in their own boats,
pretending to be travellers of consequence, or pilgrims, proceeding to, or returning from
Benares, Allahabad, or other sacred places. The boatmen, who are also Thugs, are not
different in appearance from the ordinary boatmen on the river. The artifices used to
entice victims on board are precisely similar to those employed by the highway Thugs.
They send out their "inveiglers" to scrape acquaintance with travellers, and find out the
direction in which they are journeying. They always pretend to be bound for the same
place, and vaunt the superior accommodation of the boat by which they are going. The
travellers fall into the snare, are led to the Thug captain, who very often, to allay
suspicion, demurs to take them, but eventually agrees for a moderate sum. The boat
strikes off into the middle of the stream; the victims are amused and kept in conversation
for hours by their insidious foes, until three taps are given on the deck above. This is a
signal from the Thugs on the look-out that the coast is clear. In an instant the fatal noose
is ready, and the travellers are no more. The bodies are then thrown, warm and
palpitating, into the river, from a hole in the side of the boat, contrived expressly for the
purpose.
A river Thug, who was apprehended, turned approver, to save his own life, and gave the
following evidence relative to the practices of his fraternity: -- "We embarked at
Rajmahul. The travellers sat on one side of the boat, and the Thugs on the other; while we
three (himself and two "stranglers,") were placed in the stern, the Thugs on our left, and
the travellers on our right. Some of the Thugs, dressed as boatmen, were above deck, and
others walking along the bank of the river, and pulling the boat by the joon, or rope, and
all, at the same time, on the look-out. We came up with a gentleman's pinnace and two
baggage-boats, and were obliged to stop, and let them go on. The travellers seemed
anxious; but were quieted by being told that the men at the rope were tired, and must take
some refreshment. They pulled out something, and began to eat; and when the pinnace
had got on a good way, they resumed their work, and our boat proceeded. It was now
afternoon; and, when a signal was given above, that all was clear, the five Thugs who sat
opposite the travellers sprang in upon them, and, with the aid of others, strangled them.
Having done this, they broke their spinal bones, and then threw them out of a hole made
at the side, into the river, and kept on their course; the boat being all this time pulled
along by the men on the bank."

That such atrocities as these should have been carried on for nearly two centuries without
exciting the attention of the British Government, seems incredible. But our wonder will
be diminished when we reflect upon the extreme caution of the Thugs, and the ordinary
dangers of travelling in India. The Thugs never murder a man near his own home, and
they never dispose of their booty near the scene of the murder. They also pay, in common
with other and less atrocious robbers, a portion of their gains to the Polygars, or native
authorities of the districts in which they reside, to secure protection. The friends and
relatives of the victims, perhaps a thousand miles off, never surmise their fate till a period
has elapsed when all inquiry would be fruitless, or, at least, extremely difficult. They
have no clue to the assassins, and very often impute to the wild beasts of the jungles the
slaughter committed by that wilder beast, man.
There are several gradations through which every member of the fraternity must regularly
pass before he arrives at the high office of a Bhurtote, or strangler. He is first employed
as a scout -- then as a sexton -- then as a Shumseea, or holder of hands, and lastly as a
Bhurtote. When a man who is not of Thug lineage, or who has not been brought up from
his infancy among them, wishes to become a strangler, he solicits the oldest, and most
pious and experienced Thug, to take him under his protection and make him his disciple;
and under his guidance he is regularly initiated. When he has acquired sufficient
experience in the lower ranks of the profession, he applies to his Gooroo, or preceptor, to
give the finishing grace to his education, and make a strangler of him. An opportunity is
found when a solitary traveller is to be murdered; and the tyro, with his preceptor, having
seen that the proposed victim is asleep, and in safe keeping till their return, proceed to a
neighbouring field and perform several religious ceremonies, accompanied by three or
four of the oldest and steadiest members of the gang. The Gooroo first offers up a prayer
to the goddess, saying, "Oh, Kalee! Kun-kalee! Bhud-kalee! Oh, Kalee! Maha-kalee!
Calkutta Walee! if it seems fit to thee that the traveller now at our lodging should die by
the hands of this thy slave, vouchsafe us thy good omen." They then sit down and watch
for the good omen; and if they receive it within half an hour, conclude that their goddess
is favourable to the claims of the new candidate for admission. If they have a bad omen,
or no omen at all, some other Thug must put the traveller to death, and the aspirant must
wait a more favourable opportunity, purifying himself in the mean time by prayer and
humiliation for the favour of the goddess. If the good omen has been obtained, they
return to their quarters; and the Gooroo takes a handkerchief and, turning his face to the
west, ties a knot at one end of it, inserting a rupee, or other piece of silver. This knot is
called the goor khat, or holy knot, and no man who has not been properly ordained is
allowed to tie it. The aspirant receives it reverently in his right hand from his Gooroo, and
stands over the sleeping victim, with a Shumseea, or holder of hands, at his side. The
traveller is aroused, the handkerchief is passed around his neck, and, at a signal from the
Gooroo, is drawn tight till the victim is strangled; the Shumseea holding his hands to
prevent his making any resistance. The work being now completed, the Bhurtote (no
longer an aspirant, but an admitted member) bows down reverently in the dust before his
Gooroo, and touches his feet with both his hands, and afterwards performs the same
respect to his relatives and friends who have assembled to witness the solemn ceremony.
He then waits for another favourable omen, when he unties the knot and takes out the
rupee, which he gives to his Gooroo, with any other silver which he may have about him.

The Gooroo adds some of his own money, with which he purchases what they call goor,
or consecrated sugar, when a solemn sacrifice is performed, to which all the gang are
invited. The relationship between the Gooroo and his disciple is accounted the most holy
that can be formed, and subsists to the latest period of life. A Thug may betray his father,
but never his Gooroo.
Dark and forbidding as is the picture already drawn, it will become still darker and more
repulsive, when we consider the motives which prompt these men to systematic murder.
Horrible as their practices would be, if love of plunder alone incited them, it is infinitely
more horrible to reflect that the idea of duty and religion is joined to the hope of gain, in
making them the scourges of their fellows. If plunder were their sole object, there would
be reason to hope, that when a member of the brotherhood grew rich, he would rest from
his infernal toils; but the dismal superstition which he cherishes tells him never to desist.
He was sent into the world to be a slayer of men, and he religiously works out his destiny.
As religiously he educates his children to pursue the same career, instilling into their
minds, at the earliest age, that Thuggee is the noblest profession a man can follow, and
that the dark goddess they worship will always provide rich travellers for her zealous
devotees.
The following is the wild and startling legend upon which the Thugs found the divine
origin of their sect. They believe that, in the earliest ages of the world, a gigantic demon
infested the earth, and devoured mankind as soon as they were created. He was of so tall
a stature, that when he strode through the most unfathomable depths of the great sea, the
waves, even in tempest, could not reach above his middle. His insatiable appetite for
human flesh almost unpeopled the world, until Bhawanee, Kalee, or Davee, the goddess
of the Thugs, determined to save mankind by the destruction of the monster. Nerving
herself for the encounter, she armed herself with an immense sword; and, meeting with
the demon, she ran him through the body. His blood flowed in torrents as he fell dead at
her feet; but from every drop there sprang up another monster, as rapacious and as
terrible as the first. Again the goddess upraised her massive sword, and hewed down the
hellish brood by hundreds; but the more she slew, the more numerous they became.
Every drop of their blood generated a demon; and, although the goddess endeavoured to
lap up the blood ere it sprang into life, they increased upon her so rapidly, that the labour
of killing became too great for endurance. The perspiration rolled down her arms in large
drops, and she was compelled to think of some other mode of exterminating them. In this
emergency, she created two men out of the perspiration of her body, to whom she
confided the holy task of delivering the earth from the monsters. To each of the men she
gave a handkerchief, and showed them how to kill without shedding blood. From her they
learned to tie the fatal noose; and they became, under her tuition, such expert stranglers,
that, in a very short space of time, the race of demons became extinct.
When there were no more to slay, the two men sought the great goddess, in order to
return the handkerchiefs. The grateful Bhawanee desired that they would retain them, as
memorials of their heroic deeds; and in order that they might never lose the dexterity that
they had acquired in using them, she commanded that, from thenceforward, they should
strangle men. These were the two first Thugs, and from them the whole race have

descended. To the early Thugs the goddess was more direct in her favours, than she has
been to their successors. At first, she undertook to bury the bodies of all the men they
slew and plundered, upon the condition that they should never look back to see what she
was doing. The command was religiously observed for many ages, and the Thugs relied
with implicit faith upon the promise of Bhawanee; but as men became more corrupt, the
ungovernable curiosity of a young Thug offended the goddess, and led to the withdrawal
of a portion of her favour. This youth, burning with a desire to see how she made her
graves, looked back, and beheld her in the act, not of burying, but of devouring, the body
of a man just strangled. Half of the still palpitating remains was dangling over her lips.
She was so highly displeased that she condemned the Thugs, from that time forward, to
bury their victims themselves. Another account states that the goddess was merely
tossing the body in the air; and that, being naked, her anger was aggravated by the gaze
of mortal eyes upon her charms. Before taking a final leave of her devotees, she
presented them with one of her teeth for a pickaxe, one of her ribs for a knife, and the
hem of her garment for a noose. She has not since appeared to human eyes.
The original tooth having been lost in the lapse of ages, new pickaxes have been
constructed, with great care and many ceremonies, by each considerable gang of Thugs,
to be used in making the graves of strangled travellers. The pickaxe is looked upon with
the utmost veneration by the tribe. A short account of the process of making it, and the
rites performed, may be interesting, as showing still further their gloomy superstition. In
the first place, it is necessary to fix upon a lucky day. The chief Thug then instructs a
smith to forge the holy instrument: no other eye is permitted to see the operation. The
smith must engage in no other occupation until it is completed, and the chief Thug never
quits his side during the process. When the instrument is formed, it becomes necessary to
consecrate it to the especial service of Bhawnee. Another lucky day is chosen for this
ceremony, care being had in the mean time that the shadow of no earthly thing fall upon
the pickaxe, as its efficacy would be for ever destroyed. A learned Thug then sits down;
and turning his face to the west, receives the pickaxe in a brass dish. After muttering
some incantation, he throws it into a pit already prepared for it, where it is washed in
clear water. It is then taken out, and washed again three times; the first time in sugar and
water, the second in sour milk, and the third in spirits. It is then dried, and marked from
the head to the point with seven red spots. This is the first part of the ceremony: the
second consists in its purification by fire. The pickaxe is again placed upon the brass
dish, along with a cocoa-nut, some sugar, cloves, white sandal-wood, and other articles.
A fire of the mango tree, mixed with dried cow-dung, is then kindled; and the officiating
Thug, taking the pickaxe with both hands, passes it seven times through the flames.
It now remains to be ascertained whether the goddess is favourable to her followers. For
this purpose, the cocoa-nut is taken from the dish and placed upon the ground. The
officiating Thug, turning to the spectators, and holding the axe uplifted, asks, "Shall I
strike?" Assent being given, he strikes the nut with the but-end of the axe, exclaiming,
"All hail! mighty Davee! great mother of us all!" The spectators respond, "All hail!
mighty Davee! and prosper thy children, the Thugs!"

If the nut is severed at the first blow, the goddess is favourable; if not, she is
unpropitious: all their labour is thrown away, and the ceremony must be repeated upon
some more fitting occasion. But if the sign be favourable, the axe is tied carefully in a
white cloth and turned towards the west, all the spectators prostrating themselves before
it. It is then buried in the earth, with its point turned in the direction the gang wishes to
take on their approaching expedition. If the goddess desires to warn them that they will
be unsuccessful, or that they have not chosen the right track, the Thugs believe that the
point of the axe will veer round, and point to the better way. During an expedition, it is
entrusted to the most prudent and exemplary Thug of the party: it is his care to hold it
fast. If by any chance he should let it fall, consternation spreads through the gang: the
goddess is thought to be offended; the enterprise is at once abandoned; and the Thugs
return home in humiliation and sorrow, to sacrifice to their gloomy deity, and win back
her estranged favour. So great is the reverence in which they hold the sacred axe, that a
Thug will never break an oath that he has taken upon it. He fears that, should he perjure
himself, his neck would be so twisted by the offended Bhawanee as to make his face turn
to his back; and that, in the course of a few days, he would expire in the most
excruciating agonies.
The Thugs are diligent observers of signs and omens. No expedition is ever undertaken
before the auspices are solemnly taken. Upon this subject Captain Sleeman says, "Even
the most sensible approvers, who have been with me for many years, as well Hindoos as
Mussulmans, believe that their good or ill success depended upon the skill with which the
omens were discovered and interpreted, and the strictness with which they were observed
and obeyed. One of the old Sindouse stock told me, in presence of twelve others, from
Hydrabad, Behar, the Dooah, Oude, Rajpootana, and Bundelcund, that, had they not
attended to these omens, they never could have thrived as they did. In ordinary cases of
murder, other men seldom escaped punishment, while they and their families had, for ten
generations, thrived, although they had murdered hundreds of people. 'This,' said the
Thug,' could never have been the case had we not attended to omens, and had not omens
been intended for us. There were always signs around us to guide us to rich booty, and
warn us of danger, had we been always wise enough to discern them and religious
enough to attend to them.' Every Thug present concurred with him from his soul."
A Thug, of polished manners and great eloquence, being asked by a native gentleman, in
the presence of Captain Sleeman, whether he never felt compunction in murdering
innocent people, replied with a smile that he did not. "Does any man," said he, "feel
compunction in following his trade? and are not all our trades assigned us by
Providence?" He was then asked how many people he had killed with his own hands in
the course of his life? "I have killed none," was the reply. "What! and have you not been
describing a number of murders in which you were concerned?" "True; but do you
suppose that I committed them? Is any man killed by man's killing? Is it not the hand of
God that kills, and are we not the mere instruments in the hands of God?"
Upon another occasion, Sahib, an approver, being asked if he had never felt any pity or
compunction at murdering old men or young children, or persons with whom he had sat
and conversed, and who had told him, perchance, of their private affairs -- their hopes
