
BASIC MOVING-AVERAGE CROSSES

The 5/13 EMA cross is a very simple strategy that can be used for scalping
in smaller time frames, such as 1 or 5 minutes. I just plot a 5-period and a
13-period EMA on a chart and wait for a cross of both to happen. When the
5 EMA crosses upward above the 13 EMA, I open a long position at the
open of the next candle; when the 5 EMA crosses downward below the 13
EMA, I open a short position at the open of the next candle. This is a very
short-term strategy that has to be tightly monitored because changes on
those small time frames occur very fast.

264

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

TRADING GAPS

A gap is a measurable difference in prices between the close of the preceding trading day and the open of the current day. Small gaps of a few points
can occur throughout the week, but significant gaps usually are seen on
Monday open after the weekend pause. As you can see in the figure picture,
the price closed at 1.2861 and opened at 1.2792, 69 points lower, on the
next trading session.
About 80 percent of gaps get filled during the day or at most during the
trading week. This can give you a quite predictable pattern to place a trade
in the opposite direction of the gap opening: If prices gap down, you buy;
if prices gap up, you sell. Of course, it is not as simple as seeing the gap and
jumping directly into a position. All the usual other factors have to be taken
in consideration: pivots, patterns, and possible reversal signals. The first
directional impulse of the gap tends to continue for a while, and sometimes
prices can move a fair number of pips before turning back to fill the gap.
I personally wait for prices to settle down and start a consolidation pattern
or a clear reversal signal in candlesticks; then I open the corresponding
position. In the case shown in the figure above, you can see a series of
reversal candles and the start of a bullish impulse, which gives me the signal that the market can indeed start moving back to fill the gap. Only then
will I open a long position. The stop loss would be set a few points below
the lowest low of the recent down move, preferably also below a strong
pivot line or established support.

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

265

DAILY HIGH-LOW
This is a quite simple and almost “set and forget” type of medium- to longterm trading strategy. It also uses a basket of currencies, which can range
from four to six optimally.

I personally use six of the majors—EUR/USD, GBP/USD, USD/JPY,
USD/CHF, EUR/JPY, and AUD/USD—but you can choose any combination of pairs that suit you and more especially that have tested well in preliminary assessment conditions. The risk per pair shouldn’t be higher than
2 percent of your equity balance for a total risk of between 8 percent of
your account for four pairs and 12 percent for six pairs.
You will only need a few minutes daily before and during the New York
close (5 p.m. ETor GMT 22:00) to monitor and adjust your trades. Here is
a more detailed description of the overall steps: Open positions daily at
5 p.m. ET (just after the New York close). Use the weekly high/low and the
daily high/low as references for the initial stop loss. Some pairs will require

266

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

wider stops, but as an average, you could consider around 100 pips for a
moderate stop. This means that your position size has to be defined accordingly. I personally use a fixed-percentage amount of the balance that represents a maximum risk of 2 percent per each pair based on a 100-pip stop
loss, which lowers the risk on pairs that will need much smaller stop levels.
Preparation of the trade and definition of the entry price: Draw a line
at the low and the high of the previous week and at the low and high of the
trading day that has just closed. Calculate the median line by adding both
high and low and dividing by 2. If the price is below the weekly and daily
median lines, be on the lookout for a long position; if the price is above
weekly and daily median lines, check if overall conditions can indicate a
short position. The entry will be mostly discretionary, but you usually can
assume that after a pronounced rise or decline there will be more chances
for a reversal or at least a good correction, so when prices are near the lows,
you should look for long opportunities, and the inverse applies when they
are nearing the highs: You would try to assess whether a short position has
a good possibility of success.

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

267

However, this is not a fixed, blind rule: You should check the overall
trend from weekly to H4 down, and if there is a strong trend in development, you should stick with the overall trend. I place the market orders
as soon as the new trading day begins, based in my trading plan and
because this should be an ideal trading system for traders who do not have
much time to sit and monitor the charts. However, depending on the positions of the prices with regard to the weekly and daily lows and highs and
eventuality of pullbacks or corrections inside a given trend, a more precisely priced limit order could be set, allowing stops to be much tighter.
In general, though, an average 100 pips distance is mostly what you will
encounter.
Stop-loss price: the high of the previous day plus 10 pips for a short
position; the low of the previous day minus 10 pips for a long position.
Should the weekly high or low be very near the daily extremes, stops would
have to be set at plus or minus 10 pips from those prices.
The trades usually can last for a week or more if a good trend is going
on. This strategy, however, is not suited to sideways markets. It is definitely
a trend-following system. The risk-reward ratio, if the system is followed to
the letter with discipline and letting the market close your positions by
itself instead of exiting earlier than needed, is higher than 1:3 or even than
1:4. The percentage of winning positions might be lower than 50 percent,
though, but the winners could ride up to 600 or 700 points; meanwhile, the
losing positions will not be more than 100 or 120 pips each.
Exit prices and daily adjustments: Every day at the same exact time,
you check your positions and adjust the stop losses to the preceding daily
high or low accordingly. If any of the pairs has been stopped out, reentry on
that pair is done only and exclusively at 5 p.m. ET based on the preceding
entry criteria. You keep on adjusting the stops every day as the market
keeps moving in your direction, and the positions will be closed only and
exclusively when they are finally stopped out by the market.
An addition to this system would be to include a new position in the
same direction as the trend under the same rules as soon as the stop of the
previous one is in the positive zone so that you can maintain the same riskreward ratio and benefit from one or more free trades as the trend evolves.
This would be considered position trading longer term. For example, when
your previous position for the USD/JPY pair has its stops set at ⫹20 at the
moment of the daily adjustment, and only after determining the good probability of continuation of the current trend, you open a new position of
USD/JPY, setting the corresponding stop loss at a 10-pip distance from the
preceding day’s high or low.

268

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

The figures above present an example with short and long entry levels on EUR/USD and USD/JPY. This is a quite simple and stress-free
strategy that can yield handsome profits over time if you employ patience
and discipline.

CONCLUSION
An Endless Quest for the Holy Grail
I have been teaching and trading the FOREX market for nine years. It has
really been available to retail traders such as ourselves for only about
11 years. In addition, I have been a stock broker for more than 16 years. The
one thing I always like to point out when I am talking to my many students
is that there is no “Holy Grail” of trading. I often run into traders who think
that they can buy FOREX trading software and use it like an ATM
machine—just put in a pin number, and out pops the cash. It just doesn’t
work that way.
This is a real market. It is the largest financial market in the world, and
you have to treat it as such. You can trade this market part time, or you can
do it every day. In fact, you can make it your business—the business of
trading.
The real “Holy Grail,” if any, is inside—your brain, in conjunction with
your psychological awareness and control and the cumulative experience
and knowledge you have acquired and the alignment of your goals and your
actions in harmony and perfection through a good amount of practice, then
again practice, and then again more practice until knowledge transforms
into intuitive wisdom.
Trading can be learned, of course, but the experience can’t be transmitted. It has to be constructed by every individual through a personal effort of
understanding and hard work. It will not happen overnight. Trading needs a
269

270

CONCLUSION

similar dedication as any precision-driven career. Theory is good, but practice makes perfect and integrates all the knowledge you have acquired.
Another thing that is important to understand is that you will never,
ever stop learning. Markets are changing every day, and the FOREX is a
living organism that evolves in the same way as all its traders. Always
remember that although it seems to be an anonymous entity, at the end of
the day, the market is merely made up of investors, large and small, from all
corners of the world, each with his or her own emotions, psychology, and
predictable behaviors and reactions.
As I asked earlier, how long does a doctor, lawyer, engineer, or any
other regulated professional have to go to school to learn his or her trade?
Some of these individuals literally could be in school for 10 years just
learning to be good at what they do, and that doesn’t include any practical
experience. Wow! That’s a long time; to be a FOREX trader is no different.
Okay, you don’t have to go to school for 10 years, but you do have to put in
your “seat time” on the computer.
You will only get out of this what you put into it. You will definitely
have to invest in your education; you will have to seek out knowledge and
someone who can help you learn to trade this market. I hope that after reading this book, you will easily decide that I am the person from whom you
want to learn more.
You can go to www.JamesDicks.com to join my FOREX network for
free, and you can access the many chat rooms and forums to learn from my
other traders just like you, people who want to trade this amazing market
and learn how to do it successfully.
The eagerness to learn at least one new thing every day is paramount.
I keep having “Ah-ha” moments after all these years, and I hope they
won’t stop happening. But these consciousness-expanding experiences
can’t be transmitted either. Some of them will be considered common
sense and obvious by many, whereas others will fail to grasp the true
meaning. Finally, a few will have their own “Ah-ha” awareness through
understanding of a particular situation.
Always remember that the essence of the market is the price, always the
price, and only the price. Price action is the core of it all, and everything else
revolves around it. The path is in the price. The market is always showing
you where it will or will not go. You have to stop for a while and start listening to what the market is telling you. Most often the obvious things are the
ones that are overlooked. The easiest path seems unbelievable, so we tend to
complicate everything. Go back to the basics. Go back to the simple things.

CONCLUSION

271

In the FOREX and in life as well, this will be very useful to you. Keep it
simple and straight (KISS)!
Learn to move on after losses. Don’t dwell on missed trades or missed
pips after you decide to close. There will be hundreds of opportunities in
the future. Follow your plan, and follow your system. Practice every day,
and experience will come with time, patience, and discipline. Don’t look
outside for what’s already inside. Leave your ego behind; be humble and
smart. You can’t decide where the market will go, so learn to see where it
wants to lead you, not the other way around. Exit bad trades, and hold onto
good trades. Set yourself a goal, and stop trading when you have reached it.
Be realistic about your annual percentage growth. Do not force yourself
into overproduction. Don’t open the doors to greed. Each FOREX trade is
a new one with new conditions and perspectives. Do not dwell in the past.
Choose the currency pairs that have proven to be profitable. Leave behind
those you can’t understand.
Finally, take a deep look inside yourself: There it is indeed—your own
and personal “Holy Grail.” The rest is history yet to be written, assuredly
the history of your own path to the greatest of successes!
Keep checking www.JamesDicks.com for important FOREX information. We have FOREX conferences, and I personally hope to meet you soon.
Happy investing!

This page intentionally left blank

A

P

P

E

N

D

I

X

38 STEPS TO BECOMING
A TRADER
BY ANONYMOUS TRADER
[As published in Commodity Futures Trading Club News and in Traders
Organization’s “Real Success Day Trading Course”]
1. We accumulate information—buying books, going to seminars, and
researching.
2. We begin to trade with our “new” knowledge.
3. We consistently “donate” and then realize that we may need more
knowledge or information.
4. We accumulate more information.
5. We switch the commodities we are currently following.
6. We go back into the market and trade with our “updated” knowledge.
7. We get “beat up” again and begin to lose some of our confidence.
Fear starts setting in.
8. We start to listen to “outside news” and to other traders.
9. We go back into the market and continue to “donate.”
10. We switch commodities again.
11. We search for more information.
12. We go back into the market and start to see a little progress.

273

274

APPENDIX

13. We get “overconfident,” and the market humbles us.
14. We start to understand that trading successfully is going to take more
time and more knowledge than we anticipated.
Most people will give up at this point, as they realize work is involved.
15. We get serious and start concentrating on learning a “real”
methodology.
16. We trade our methodology with some success but realize that
something is missing.
17. We begin to understand the need for having rules to apply our
methodology.
18. We take a sabbatical from trading to develop and research our trading
rules.
19. We start trading again, this time with rules, and find some success,
but overall, we still hesitate when we execute.
20. We add, subtract, and modify rules as we see a need to be more
proficient with our rules.
21. We feel we are very close to crossing that threshold of successful
trading.
22. We start to take responsibility for our trading results as we understand
that our success is in us, not the methodology.
23. We continue to trade and become more proficient with our
methodology and our rules.
24. As we trade, we still have a tendency to violate our rules, and our
results are still erratic.
25. We know we are close.
26. We go back and research our rules.
27. We build the confidence in our rules and go back into the market and
trade.
28. Our trading results are getting better, but we are still hesitating in
executing our rules.
29. We now see the importance of following our rules as we see the
results of our trades when we don’t follow the rules.
30. We begin to see that our lack of success is within us (a lack of
discipline in following the rules because of some kind of fear),
and we begin to work on knowing ourselves better.
31. We continue to trade, and the market teaches us more and more about
ourselves.
32. We master our methodology and our trading rules.

APPENDIX

275

33. We begin to consistently make money.
34. We get a little overconfident, and the market humbles us.
35. We continue to learn our lessons.
36. We stop thinking and allow our rules to trade for us (trading becomes
boring but successful), and our trading account continues to grow as
we increase our contract size.
37. We are making more money than we ever dreamed possible.
38. We go on with our lives and accomplish many of the goals we had
always dreamed of.

DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE (DJIA)
COMPANIES INCLUDED IN THE DJIA
Company

Symbol

3M
Alcoa
American Express
AT&T
Bank of America
Boeing
Caterpillar
Chevron Corporation
Cisco Systems
Coca-Cola
DuPont
ExxonMobil
General Electric
Hewlett-Packard
Home Depot
Intel
IBM
Johnson & Johnson
JPMorgan Chase
Kraft Foods
McDonald’s
Merck
Microsoft
Pfizer
Procter & Gamble
Travelers
United Technologies Corporation
Verizon Communications
Walmart
Walt Disney

MMM
AA
AXP
T
BAC
BA
CAT
CVX
CSCO
KO
DD
XOM
GE
HPQ
HD
INTC
IBM
JNJ
JPM
KFT
MCD
MRK
MSFT
PFE
PG
TRV
UTX
VZ
WMT
DIS

APPENDIX

276

CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
BULLISH REVERSAL PATTERNS
High Reliability
Bullish Piercing Line

Bullish Kicking

Bullish Abandoned Baby

Bullish Morning Doji Star

Bullish Morning Star

Bullish Three Inside Up

Bullish Three Outside Up

APPENDIX

277

Bullish Three White Soldiers

Bullish Concealing Baby Swallow

Medium Reliability
Bullish Dragonfly Doji

Bullish Long Legged Doji

Bullish Engulfing

Bullish Gravestone Doji

APPENDIX

278

Bullish Doji Star

Bullish Harami Cross

Bullish Homing Pigeon

Bullish Matching Low

Bullish Meeting Lines

Bullish Stick Sandwich

Bullish Three Stars in the South

Bullish Tri Star

APPENDIX

279

Bullish Three River

Bullish Breakway

Bullish Ladder Bottom

Low Reliability
Bullish Belt Hold

Bullish Hammer

Bullish Inverted Hammer

Bullish Harami

APPENDIX

280

BULLISH CONTINUATION PATTERNS
High Reliability
Bullish Side-by-Side White Lines

Bullish Mat Hold

Bullish Rising Three Methods

Medium Reliability
Bullish Upside Gap Three Methods

Bullish Upside Tasuki Gap

Low Reliability
Bullish Separating Lines

Bullish Three Line Strike

APPENDIX

281

BULLISH REVERSAL/CONTINUATION PATTERNS
Low Reliability
Bullish Long White Candlestick

Bullish White Marubozu

Bullish White Closing Marubozu

Bullish White Opening Marubozu

BEARISH REVERSAL PATTERNS
High Reliability
Bearish Dark Cloud Cover

Bearish Kicking

APPENDIX

282

Bearish Abandoned Baby

Bearish Evening Star

Bearish Evening Doji Star

Bearish Three Black Crows

Bearish Three Inside Down

Bearish Three Outside Down

Bearish Upside Gap Two Crows

APPENDIX

283

Medium Reliability
Bearish Dragonfly Doji

Bearish Long-Legged Doji

Bearish Engulfing

Bearish Gravestone Doji

Bearish Doji Star

Bearish Harami Cross

Bearish Meeting Lines

Bearish Advance Block

APPENDIX

284

Bearish Deliberation

Bearish Tri Star

Bearish Two Crows

Bearish Breakaway

Low Reliability
Bearish Belt Hold

Bearish Hanging Man

Bearish Shooting Star

Bearish Harami

APPENDIX

285

BEARISH CONTINUATION PATTERNS
High Reliability
Bearish Falling Three Methods

Medium Reliability
Bearish in Neck

Bearish on Neck

Bearish Downside
Gap Three Methods

Bearish Downside Tasuki Gap

Bearish Side-By-Side White Lines

APPENDIX

286

Low Reliability
Bearish Separating Lines

Bearish Thrusting

Bearish Three Line Strike

BEARISH REVERSAL/CONTINUATION PATTERNS
Low Reliability
Bearish Long Black Candlestick

Bearish Black Marubozu

Bearish Black Closing Marubozu

Bearish Black Opening Marubozu

APPENDIX

287

NEUTRAL REVERSAL PATTERNS
Medium Reliability
Neutral High Wave

Neutral Long Legged Doji

Neutral Umbrella

Neutral Inverted Umbrella

NEUTRAL REVERSAL/CONTINUATION PATTERNS
Low Reliability
Neutral Doji

Neutral Four Price Doji

Neutral White Spining Top

Neutral Black Spinning Top

APPENDIX

288

Neutral Short White Candlestick

Neutral Short Black Candlestick

Neutral White Candlestick

Neutral Black Candelestick

GLOSSARY
Ask (ask price, ask rate) The price at which a currency pair or security
is offered for sale; the quoted price at which an investor can buy a currency
pair. This is also known as the offer, ask price, and ask rate.
Appreciation
An increase in value of an asset.
Arbitrage Profiting from differences in the price of a single currency
pair that is traded on more than one market.
Asset An item having commercial or exchange value.
Bank rate The percentage rate at which the central bank of a country
lends money to the country’s commercial banks.
Base currency In FOREX trading, currencies are quoted in terms of a
currency pair. The first currency in the pair is the base currency. The base
currency is the currency against which exchange rates generally are quoted
in a given country. Examples: In USD/JPY, the U.S. dollar is the base currency; in EUR/USD, the euro is the base currency.
Bear market An extended period of general price decline in an individual
security, an asset, or a market.
Bid The price at which an investor can place an order to buy a currency
pair; the quoted price where an investor can sell a currency pair. This is also
known as the bid price and bid rate.
Bid/ask spread The point difference between the bid and offer (ask) price.

289

290

GLOSSARY

Bretton Woods The site of a conference that in 1944 led to the establishment of the postwar foreign exchange system that remained intact until the
early 1970s. The conference resulted in formation of the International
Monetary Fund. The system fixed currencies in a fixed exchange-rate system with 1 percent fluctuations of the currency to gold or the dollar.
Broker An agent who executes orders to buy and sell currencies and
related instruments either for a commission or on a spread. Brokers are
agents working on commission and not principals or agents acting on their
own account. In the FOREX market, brokers tend to act as intermediaries
between banks, bringing buyers and sellers together for a commission paid
by the initiator or by both parties. There are four or five major global brokers
operating through subsidiaries, affiliates, and partners in many countries.
Bull market A market that is on a consistent upward trend.
Buy limit order An order to execute a transaction at a specified price
(the limit) or lower.
Broker One of the market participants that acts as an intermediary
between retail traders and larger commercial institutions.
Buy on margin The process of buying a currency pair where a client pays
cash for part of the overall value of the position. The word margin refers to
the portion the investor puts up rather than the portion that is borrowed.
Cable FOREX traders’ slang word that describes the British pound/U.S.
dollar exchange rate (GBP/USD).
Candlestick chart A chart that displays the daily trading price range
(open, high, low, and close). A form of Japanese charting that has become
popular in the West. A narrow line (shadow) shows the day’s price range. A
wider body marks the area between the open and the close. If the close is
above the open, the body is white (not filled); if the close is below the open,
the body is black (filled).
Carry (interest-rate carry) The income or cost associated with keeping
a foreign exchange position overnight. This is derived when the currency
pairs in the position have different interest rates for the same period of time.
Carry trade In the FOREX, holding a position with a positive overnight
interest return in hope of gaining profits without closing the position just
for the central bank’s interest-rate difference.
Central bank A bank, administered by a national government, that regulates the behavior of financial institutions within its borders and carries
out monetary policy.
