eventually finds balance at a new price level. This type of trend ending is more likely
to be followed by an extended trading range, which itself may be a consolidation for
another leg in the direction of the original trend. The other classic trend-ending pattern
occurs when a trend ends in a parabolic range expansion that culminates in a buying (or
selling) climax. These moves are dramatic and powerful, often exceeding any reasonable
limits that could have been imagined. They seem to be the ultimate expression of a strong
trend, but they carry within themselves the seeds of a dramatic trend reversal.
In the case of a buying climax, every buyer who wants to buy does so into the climax,
spurred by the powerful emotions that accompany such a move. When the buying stops
and the market pauses for even a moment (again, dependent on the time frame), it becomes obvious that the last willing buyer just bought and there is no one left to buy. The
market then collapses into that vacuum; sharp countertrend momentum emerges that
usually extends into multiple trend legs. This pattern is not common, but it is very powerful. Trapped traders can drive markets much farther, much faster than anyone would
have expected, and this problem is magnified by the already elevated volatility levels
around these spots in the market.
Every trend that eventually ends in a parabolic expansion begins life as a normal
trend. It goes through the same normal stages of evolution as any other trend, and it is
usually impossible to identify good candidates for parabolic expansion early in the life
cycle of the trend. (If it were possible, then it would be worthwhile to do nothing other
than to trade these trends, which might offer 10 or 20 times the profit potential of any
normal scenario.) Typically, trends that end this way develop two characteristics: they
last a long time and they accelerate into a steeper trend before the actual expansion. This
acceleration can either be a series of ever-steeping trend legs or occur at a single inflection, as in Figure 5.12. In this example, Wheat futures in mid-1996, the market lifted above
a recent trend channel at point A and began a new, steeper trend. At B, it engaged a multiyear trend channel and traded cleanly through it as momentum continued to increase.
At C, it showed many bars trading completely outside the Keltner channels (multiple free
bars), a most unusual event. This type of price action is unsustainable, and the market
collapsed back into the vacuum at D. The price extreme reached in this parabolic move
was a high-water mark that would remain unchallenged for more than a decade; it is common for the extreme points marked by these parabolic moves to represent long-lasting
and significant elements of market structure.
Psychologically, one of the keys to this type of action is the acceleration of the normal trend preceding the parabolic expansion. It is unusual to see a trend that is simply
trading with a normal trending pattern break into this kind of expansion without first
having an inflection or a series of accelerating trend legs. In the section on trend lines in
Chapter 3, we looked at how a set of steeper trend lines was needed to contain a trend
that increases in strength; seeing many of these steeper, short trend lines is one warning
that a market could be primed for a blow-off. If you are ever on the wrong side of one
of these moves, remember than they can go much further than anyone would ever think
possible—there is great danger of a career-ending loss at these points. This should be a
hard-and-fast trading rule: if you are ever on the wrong side of a parabolic expansion,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

139

FIGURE 5.12 Wheat Futures in Mid-1996 Had a Parabolic Expansion and Subsequent Reversal
into a Downtrend

limit risk with iron discipline. Do not hold on hoping the market will come back, and do
not add to your position hoping to average out of your loss. At some point the market
will reverse, but you may have been margin called and taken out of business long before
that happens.
Like most things in technical analysis, we see similar patterns on all time frames—
intraday, daily, and all the way out to monthly and beyond, but the pattern varies in
significance depending on the time frame. A parabolic exhaustion on a 1-minute chart
might mark a high that lasts for several hours, whereas the corresponding pattern on a
daily chart could set a high that would hold for many years. It is also fairly common to
see lower time frame moves that are counter to a higher time frame exhaust themselves
in a small climax into ideal entry points on the higher time frame. For instance, if you are
watching a potential complex pullback in an uptrend on the daily chart, watch intraday
time frames carefully as the market comes near the measured move objective for the
complex pullback (see Figure 5.13). If you see a selling climax and a parabolic exhaustion
on the intraday time frame, entering long in the reversal is an excellent trade because it
plays to both the intraday selling climax and the market structure of the higher time

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

140

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

FIGURE 5.13 Watch for Parabolic Expansion and Exhaustion into Ideal Higher Time Frame
Entry Points

frame. Though slightly more complex because it depends on the interaction of two time
frames, this is actually one of the best and most reliable trend reversal setups: positioning
with a higher time frame pattern against a parabolic exhaustion on a lower time frame.
Position sizing and risk points may be different depending on whether you want to trade
it as a stand-alone reversal on the shorter time frame or want to focus on the entry on the
higher time frame pattern, but this is a powerful pattern that should be in every technical
trader’s arsenal.
Expectations Following Parabolic Exhaustion Once the entry in the parabolic
expansion has been identified, it is important to start considering reasonable expectations for the trade. There is, of course, the possibility that the exhaustion will be absorbed and the market will continue in the direction of the original trend. In the case of
large-scale exhaustions, this is very unlikely as they tend to cause structural shifts in the
psychology of market participants, but there are also many smaller climaxes, especially
on shorter time frames, that do often result in continuation after further consolidation.
One classic example is a small climax that caps a trend, resulting in a two-legged complex consolidation. After this structure, the extreme condition created by the climax may
be worked off, and it is quite likely the market can continue the original trend. Again, this
is extremely unusual after larger climaxes as in Figure 5.12, but, even then, it is possible.
More common is the sequence of a sharp countertrend move, consolidation, and
then another sharp break in the direction of the countertrend move. This technically
completes a two-legged complex consolidation, but the distinguishing factor is that the
countertrend momentum is much sharper than in a standard pullback. The easy trade
is usually playing for this second countertrend leg, but this is also the point where the
market may extend into a new trend. The key will be judging the bounces that are in
the direction of the original (preclimax) trend. If they are reluctant and are smaller, ideally both in price and in time, than the legs in the direction of the new trend, there is a
good chance that a trend change has taken place. It is also not unusual to see a market
spend an extended period of time consolidating before making another move.
Last, another pattern to be aware of is the triangle consolidation that is set up by
two back-to-back impulse moves in opposite directions. If a market makes a sharp move,
followed by an almost equally sharp move in the opposite direction, there is a very high
probability of an extended consolidation. One of the most common areas to find this

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

141

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

B

A

FIGURE 5.14 Two Sharp Moves in Opposite Directions Usually Lead to a Triangle

formation is following these parabolic climaxes. If the first, very strong countertrend
move is immediately reversed by another movement in the direction of the original trend,
there is a good chance of a protracted consolidation following. For most traders, these
are not profitable areas in which to tie up mental or financial capital. Learn to read this
pattern, pictured in Figure 5.14, as a warning sign, and simply avoid trading in these areas.

Last Gasp
There is a trading rule that says, only half in jest, that the market will always do whatever
will hurt the greatest number of traders. Part of this is subjective—we all use humor to
deal with losses at times—but there also is a reality here, driven by that core tendency
of markets to seek volume and activity. After an extended run-up followed by a wellrecognized topping formation (e.g., head and shoulders or double top), there will likely
be many traders who short in anticipation of a trend reversal with stops just beyond
the recent highs. In addition, there will be traders who think they are smarter than the
market, and who will be playing for trend continuation at these points. They too will
buy, either on stops or with contingent orders when the market violates the previous
high. Regardless of the reason behind the buying, there is almost always a lot of latent
buying pressure waiting just beyond the previous highs.
The moment of truth comes as soon as the market probes that area, stops are elected,
and the initial buying dries up. Are there larger buyers there, waiting to bid the market
higher with commitment, or was the whole move a fake-out? If the latter, this will be
obvious as prices fall back below the previous highs and many of the shorts who were
stopped out will reestablish (selling pressure). Trapped longs will eventually have to sell
as well, whether they were holding established positions or entered on the breakout.
The result of all of this selling pressure is that the market finally reverses and downside
momentum develops as selling leads to more selling.
This is a special case of a failure test at the highs of an old trend, and, in the right
context, is an extremely reliable trend termination pattern. The actual “last gasp” pattern
is nothing more than a Wyckoff upthrust, but the key is that it is preceded by sufficient
consolidation to set up the potential for another trend leg up; the pattern draws its power

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

142

MARKET STRUCTURE

FIGURE 5.15 Two Upthrusts in Disney Cap an Uptrend

from the failure of that potential. (It is exactly reversed for a downtrend—i.e., a spring
after a long-enough consolidation that the market appeared to be primed to break down.)
Traders who recognize this pattern early can establish short positions at advantageous
prices or at least can aggressively limit damage on long positions. Figure 5.15 shows a
fairly brutal example in Walt Disney Company (NYSE: DIS): after a gap up and a short
consolidation, the stock put in an upthrust at the highs. After consolidating again for
nearly a quarter, another upthrust back above the level decisively ended any hopes for
another easy trend leg up and the market gapped open lower the next day.

Trend Change Without Warning
Sometimes the absence of a pattern is a pattern in itself. Trends are powerful forces
in markets, and it is very rare to see one stop and turn with no warning. Strong trends
usually require time and substantial price action to reverse, so with-trend traders are
usually rewarded for being somewhat stubborn in their exits. With a winning trend trade,
it often pays to give it a little more room, or even to add to the position as it fluctuates
against the trend. This is normal, but there are cases in which a market makes a stunning
reversal into a trend in the opposite direction without any warning.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

Printer: Hamilton Printing

143

This is very rare, but that is precisely why it deserves attention. Trends do not normally stop and turn on a dime. When they do, it is usually driven by some new piece of
information or a major catalyst. Whether it is company-specific news, a crop report, or
a large-scale economic report, fresh information causes market participants to immediately and dramatically reassess their commitment to the market. As traders scramble to
adjust positions in the new environment of heightened uncertainty, volatility increases
and a feedback loop develops in which large price movements trigger further price movements. The large price movements eventually provoke a reaction from traders who would
not have reacted to the news alone as they are forced to make a decision about existing
positions or potential entries. Markets can make breathtaking moves under these conditions, so be on guard for these large-scale reversals with no warning.

Change of Character
In all of these cases of a trend reversing into the opposite trend, the common ground is
that the market displays a distinct change of character. The pattern of the established
trend is first broken, and then a new movement emerges that shows strong momentum
counter to the established trend. Traders who are actually watching the price bars
develop will see that price is moving differently; this is a form of tape reading. Traders
who are only looking at static price bars, for instance, examining charts at the end of the
day, will still be able to infer price action to some extent by carefully examining lower
time frames.
Though this is a very important point, do not overcomplicate it. Working with the
traders I have trained, I sometimes refer to a trading skill I (half) jokingly call “Hey, that’s
different.” Sometimes it really is that simple—sometimes it is enough to notice a break
in the established pattern. Intuition is useful here, as it can often alert the trader that
something has changed, even if it is stubbornly nebulous at first. Once you know that the
pattern has been broken, you can dig deeper and attempt to better quantify the break.
For instance, if a market has been uptrending for quite a while, a change of character
could be as simple as a downswing that is bigger than the preceding upswing. If this is
the first time this has happened in many swings, it is time to carefully monitor the market
over the next few swings to see if something crucial has changed. Confirmation can come
from a number of other factors, indicators, or market relationships, but be open to a hint
from your intuition that the pattern has somehow shifted.

TREND TO SAME TREND
(FAILURE OF TREND REVERSAL)
A successful trend reversal is a trend failure: the trend fails to continue. A failed trend
reversal, then, could be described as a failed failure pattern. This may seem like an unnecessary complication; it is certainly important to keep our labeling system as clean
and simple as possible, but there is a distinction between simple trend continuations

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

144

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

and failed trend reversals. In both cases, prices continue to move in the direction of the
trend, but the difference is that, in a failed trend reversal, traders may have been encouraged to enter countertrend positions in anticipation of the trend change. An example of
this might be if a well-watched index or commodity puts in a large-scale head and shoulders pattern. The media will be discussing the obvious pattern for weeks, some large
traders and funds will establish countertrend positions, and many small traders will join
the party. If this trend does not reverse, if the trend reversal fails, these traders will be
forced to adjust their positions, and their activity will add fuel to the fire as the original
trend continues on. Another much more common example is the complex pullback. The
second countertrend leg of this pullback will be viewed by some market participants as a
legitimate trend reversal. When it becomes obvious they are wrong, their efforts to adjust
their positions add momentum to the other side.
It is probably not necessary to study these failed trend reversals in detail, because, at
some level, they are just a type of trend continuation. Realize that they derive their power
from potentially trapped traders who were aggressively anticipating trend reversal (see
Figure 5.16). Anytime too many people are leaning in the same direction, the market is
vulnerable to an outsized move in the opposite direction.

FIGURE 5.16 Failed Breakdown (Arrow) Leads to a Retest of Highs with the Possibility of Continuation into Another Trend Leg

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

145

SUMMARY
Part One of this book laid a solid foundation for the need to have a verifiable edge in the
market. Part Two has taken the basic forces driving price movements—mean reversion
and range expansion—and has begun to put them in the context of actual, practical market structure. All of this has still been more or less theoretical, with no attempt being
made to delineate precise entry and exit points in patterns. Before moving on to examine
actual trading patterns, this is a good time to review what we have learned so far, and to
put it all in context.
First Principles
r Markets are highly random and are very, very close to being efficient.
r It is impossible to make money trading without an edge.
r Every edge we have is driven by an imbalance of buying and selling pressure.
r The job of traders is to identify those points of imbalance and to restrict their activities in the markets to those times.
r There are two competing forces at work in the market: mean reversion and range expansion. These two forces express themselves in the market through the alternation
of trends and trading ranges.
The Four Trades
r Traders usually view market action through charts, which are useful tools, but are
only tools.
r Trades broadly fall into with-trend and countertrend trades. These two categories
require significantly different mind-sets and approaches to trade management.
r There are only four technical trades. Some trades are blends of more than one trade,
or an application of one trade to a structure in another time frame, but these are just
refinements. At their root, all technical trades fall into one of these categories:
r Trend continuation.
r Trend termination.
r Support and resistance holding.
r Support and resistance failing.
r Each of these trades is more appropriate at one phase of the market cycle than another. If you apply the wrong trade to current market conditions, you will lose.
Market Structure and Price Action
r Market structure refers to the pattern of relative highs and lows and the momentum
behind the moves that created that pattern. Market structure is a more or less static
element.
r Price action refers to the actual movements of price within market structure. Price
action is dynamic and ephemeral and must sometimes be inferred from market
structure.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

146

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

r There are three critical areas of market structure to consider: trends, trading ranges,
and the interfaces between the two.
Trends and Retracements
r Trends move in a series of with-trend impulse moves separated by retracements.
r Retracements often contain lower time frame trends that run counter to the trading
time frame trend.
r Trends that run counter to the higher time frame trends tend to reverse.
r Complex consolidations in trends are a reflection of the lower time frame trend structure and are common.
Trend Terminations into Trading Ranges or Reversals
r Trend terminations are usually set up by momentum divergences, and are confirmed
by market structure. Do not attempt trend termination trades without clear evidence
of a change of character.
r Trends may terminate either into trading ranges or into trend reversals.
r Trends end in one of two ways: by rolling over as the trend loses momentum, or in
parabolic climaxes.
Trading Ranges
r Trading ranges are defined by support and resistance zones, which may or may not
be clean, exact levels.
r Classic accumulation/distribution patterns are recognizable at the extremes of
ranges.
r Violation of support and resistance does not necessarily invalidate the trading range.
It is possible that the range has simply expanded or moved to a new level.
r Trading ranges serve a structural function in the higher time frame; higher time frame
market structure can give a bias to the direction of the break from a trading range.
In the absence of contradictory information, assume that any trading range is a continuation pattern.
Breakouts
r Breakouts from trading ranges are volatile and are driven by disagreement over
price.
r The first pullback after a breakout is critical for assessing the strength of the nascent
trend.
r Breakout failures are far more common than successful breakouts.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

PART III

Trading Strategies

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 6

Practical Trading
Templates

Do not [just blindly] repeat the tactics which have gained you one
victory, but let your methods be regulated by the infinite variety of
circumstances.
—Sun Tzu, The Art of War (ca. 210 CE)

his chapter presents eight specific trading patterns that should be seen as guidelines for actual trades. They are also concrete expressions of quantifiable, directional edges in the market; they highlight points in market structure around
which there are sometimes imbalances of buying and selling pressure that can set up
profitable trading opportunities. These are not a simple set of patterns to be memorized,
found in the market, and then traded profitably. We do not trade these patterns; we trade
the underlying buying and selling pressure that sometimes creates these patterns. This is
an important and subtle distinction that sets my approach apart from that of many other
traders. There are reliable, repeatable patterns in the markets, but these patterns are
useful only inasmuch as they reveal the buying and selling pressure that shapes evolving market structure. The true value in these patterns is that they define precise points
for your entries and exits and give you tools to manage the risk in each trade, but enduring success will follow only if these are part of a larger analytical framework that
encompasses a complete understanding of market structure, price action, and the psychological dynamics that create them.
These patterns are introduced in order of complexity: Failure tests, though they are
aggressive countertrend trades, are clearly defined with relatively few subjective elements. The next three patterns are variations of pullbacks; the first two are distinguished
by whether they enter with or against the direction of the short-term trend. The last pullback pattern is the complex pullback, which is often the source of consistent losses for
ill-prepared trend traders. The fifth pattern in this chapter is the Anti, which offers a
rigidly disciplined entry at a potential trend change. Last, three variations of breakout
trades bring up the rear and close out the chapter.
