
: In terms of the buy stop and sell stop, is it something that
you still use right now?

A : Not anymore. I used to only use it for news trading. But like
I said before, because of the issues I’ve had with brokers and their
execution around news, I’ve actually stopped trading this way and
have advised my students to do the same.

: It seems that you increase your positioning a lot more nowa-
days to make meaningful profits. Before you said that you had
$1,000 so you were probably trading a mini-account, right? Now it
sounds like you are trading a regular account?

A : Yes, that is right.

Q.: can you tell us a little about your success, in dollar terms and
percent terms over the past few years?

A : [would say, I’ve been quite successful, but the first few years
were very, very difficult. I was winning and then losing and then
winning and then making a little bit here and there. Right now,
though, I trade the British pound in the early morning and then
silver later on. Between those two, I earn enough to sustain myself
from trading alone.

Q.: That's great. Do you trade every single day except weekends?

A : Every single day, but I have a tendency to not trade on Friday
afternoons.

130


RAGS TO RICHES

Q.:do you ever hold positions overnight?

A : No, very rarely. On silver though I’ve had two trades that went
overnight I think.

QO: Lets talk a little bit about silver. Why did you start trading
that?

A : About four months ago, my eldest brother came to me. Now
he’s aware that I’m trading currencies, and he said that he wanted
to trade gold. I said to him, why would you want to trade gold
when you've got all of these opportunities in the euros and the
pound, and he said, listen just do me a favor and find out whether
the company that you trade with allows us to trade gold. So I went
to my trading platform and checked that they certainly had gold.
So my brother was the one that started it all. 1 opened up a chart
of gold, I looked at it, analyzed it, and I was quite shocked at the
move that gold actually makes. However, I realized that you need
a lot more capital to trade gold [laughter]. Silver is cheaper.

Q.: How long did you demo trade silver before going live?
A : I demo traded it for a month every single day.

: It seems that you typically demo trade for a pretty decent
amount of time before actually going live, is that right?

A : Yes, the shortest will be a month.

Q.- why did you decide to teach classes on trading?

A : It started off with three friends and one other guy who was
interested, the fourth person was a friend of a friend. If you re-
member from the beginning of our discussion, it was only five or
six years ago that I was financially crippled and practically broke.

131


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

That period of unemployment was a very difficult period of my life.
There were some things that occurred back then which sometimes
when I think about it, it gives me the creeps, the hair on my arms
just starts standing up. So I promised myself that it was something
I would not wish on my worst enemy. Yet the funny thing is that I
stuck it out, I hung in there and today, in my opinion, I am quite
successful. So I felt that it was time to give something back because
I am a firm believer that the more you give, the more you will re-
ceive, not necessarily in monetary terms, but it could be in all sorts
of other ways and I felt one of the motivating things was that if I
can do it, anybody else can. Originally, I was going to write a book,
but I found it too difficult to put my thoughts onto paper. Also,
through my own personal experiences, I realized that in order for
the average person to succeed, they are going to need guidance.
They are going to need somebody to speak to and that is when I
came up with the idea of offering the classes. I basically started
with three or four guys who were friends of mine, and when they
went live, they started doing fine, and they told their friends about
the classes. From there, it’s basically taken off.

Q.:Do you feel that having a mentor was really that much of an
advantage?

A : [ think you need a mentor. Somebody who you can speak to
because whenever I got stuck and I wasn’t sure what was happen-
ing, I would be very nervous that night, and I would pick up the
phone and call Steve. He would verbally explain to me what he was
trying to say through e-mail and that made a big difference.

Q.: How long are your classes, how many days a week?

A : The classes are in the evening, Monday through Thursday.
That’s four evenings and it’s three hours per session. What I do
is give them an introduction to the trading platform. I use my
own indicators that I’ve developed and basically I show them how
those indicators work for different timeframes and how to use
them properly. By Thursday, they are generally pretty good with

132


RAGS TO RICHES

knowing how the platform and the indicators work. Then they need
to go back and demo trade, do exactly what I did which is to triple
that account, three times over. They will also need to give me their
demo account number and password so that I can track how they
are doing and see if these guys actually follow the things that I
have taught them. We also go through a process of analyzing their
trades, especially the losing ones. I will help them figure out why
they may have lost money in a trade and typically the problem is
that they forgot to look at the calendar for news releases. This is a
part of the learning process however and that is basically how I do
the courses, and I provide a lot of support afterwards.

: So it’s a one-week course and the indicators that you’ve
developed, do you send them in a file that they load onto a chart?

A : Yes, the course lasts from Monday to Thursday, and the
indicators are sent to them in an encrypted file.

Q.- How many people have you trained so far, and what is their
success rate?

A : I’ve trained probably just over 30, of which 16 are currently
live. In fact, the 16th guy just went live today. So I’m not going
to count him. 15 people have been trading live anywhere ranging
from just over a year to three or four months. Out of the 15, 12—80
percent—have been fairly successful. The rest do not follow the
rules. They trade on emotion, anger etc., and take the occasional
knock. There is one guy who took his account from $500 to $6,000
and in just over a month, he blew it all on one single trade.

Q.utes called greed, isn’t it?

A: Yes. Greed is not something you can control in another person.
You know your system works, that’s the bottom line, period. How
people treat the system is entirely in their hands.

133


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Do you think there’s a common characteristic amongst those
people whom you know just won't be able to make it verses people
whom you think will succeed at FX trading?

A : Yes, I think that I’ve found certain characters who have a diffi-
cult time in this market. You can see immediately that they are very
gung ho, almost like gunslingers. I'll warn them over and over and
over again, Forex is not a game, it’s not gambling like in a casino.
It’s a very serious business and it should be treated as such. It
requires a phenomenal amount of discipline. However, sometimes
these lessons need to be actively learned by these people. Once
they've knocked their heads a couple of times in the live environ-
ment, then they will tend to pick up that phone and tell me, “You
know what you said in the class? Now I realize what it was that you
were trying to say.” They cannot see it when we are merely talking
about it, but once they've experienced it two or three times, once
they've lost money, in other words, they become good traders.

Q: Doe you think everyone can be trained? Or are bad habits just
too ingrained in some traders?

A : | think that most people can be taught the discipline. Unfor-
tunately, that’s going to involve that person probably losing some
money before he learns, but because it is his own money, it tends to
pull him right once he’s taken a couple of knocks. I’ve seen it with
my own guys who have funded an account, lost it, refund it again,
lose it again, refund it, lose it again, and then suddenly, by the fourth
time, they are up and running and finally trading well. Very few do
it right from the beginning. They will blow their account at least
once. But these are $200, $300 accounts, nothing too damaging.

Q.: How much support do you give them after they've taken your
course? A month? Two months?

A : No, indefinitely. I’m available to them over the telephone
or over e-mail. We have regular forums in which past students

134


RAGS TO RICHES

who have become live traders convene to share their experiences,
strategies, etc, and learn about new developments I may be working
on. It’s a good support network as past students share experiences
amongst themselves.

Q.: what is the number-one rule or tip that you would give to
new traders?

A : [think it is discipline, perseverance, don’t give up if you don’t
succeed initially. When you teach a person a strategy or a system, he
wins his first trade and he’s absolutely ecstatic. He wins the second
one, he loses the third one, and suddenly the system doesn’t work.
It is not that the system doesn’t work; it is usually a problem that is
easy solve. He probably traded when there was a news release, for
example. What people do not want to do is actually analyze those
losing trades—find out, “Why did I lose?” They do not want to ask
themselves that question. Instead, they just say that the system is
useless and they move onto to the next one. But the same thing
happens with the next system, and they lose one or two trades, and
then they move to another system and the cycle happens over and
over again.

Q.: How do you help people figure out why they lose?

A : One of my questions to a trainee was, “When do you actually
trade?” His answer to me was that he goes to work, he comes
home, has supper, spends a little time with the wife, and by the
time he switches on his laptop and he gets to trading, it is about
8:00 P.M. South African time. He will place a trade, he doesn’t get
the profits immediately, and he will leave it on overnight. When
he wakes up the next morning, he'll find that he has lost 20 pips.
I immediately told the guy that he is trading at the end of the
U.S. session, and he’s then heading into the Asian session, which
is normally quite flat and that is where his loses are coming from.
I asked him if it is possible that he could trade between 7 and 9
A.M. South African time because that would mean that he would

135


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

be trading the open of the European session. So that was exactly
what he did, and that was when he started to become successful.
It had nothing to do with him or his system, but rather he was just
trading at the wrong time of day. Self-reflection is key to becoming
a profitable trader in my opinion. You have to consciously make
every effort to balance these activities with your daily activities and
implement consistency in daily trading times.

: Sound like it just falls back to what we talked about earlier,
which is going back reviewing your trading and seeing the mistake.

A : I think that people always like to shift blame to someone or
something else, such as an indicator not working or the market is
reacting weird. They have difficulty admitting that the problem or
fault is actually themselves, and I think they need to make mental
adjustments to be okay with that. You need to be very honest with
yourself when you are trading.

Q.: What do you find is the most interesting part of trading itself?
A : L love looking at the charts and doing the analysis.

Q.. what's the most frustrating then?

A : Sometimes waiting for a trade setup to occur can be a bit boring
and frustrating. In the beginning there was a huge adrenaline rush.
You will be waiting for a trade. You can see the signal building up,
and it’s getting closer and closer. It was like a roller coaster ride.
But what I found was that it’s not as glamorous as people seem to
make it out to be. A lot of the time now I just sit around and watch
the screen, waiting for something to happen and sometimes that
could take hours, and I would get frustrated. There were even days
before I had the robot, where I was away from the screen, and I

136


RAGS TO RICHES

would come back and realized that I missed the signals. What I find
the most exciting to me now is the development of systems, getting
them to work, and helping other people become successful.

Q.: Do you ever have a problem keeping yourself out of trades?
For example if you are trading the British pound and then all of
a sudden, the Japanese yen has really big movements, do you feel
the urge to participate?

A : No. I have studied the euro / U.S. dollar and British pound /
U.S. dollar in particular, and developed strategies for trading these
specifically. I believe that every currency pair is unique So I stick
to what I know best and have no regrets if I have missed a big
move on another pair. To me the bottom line is that I am making
money, irrespective of whether it is in the Canadian dollar or the
euro or the British pound or silver or gold. It doesn’t matter to
me where the money is coming from. That is the important thing,
and I’m quite happy with the British pound, and I obviously now
trade silver as well. To me it all comes back to discipline. When I
first started in the market, I would hop in just for the sake of being
in the market. If 1 was bored of waiting, for example, I'll see the
signal in the yen, and even though I do not really trade the yen, I'll
enter simply because I wanted to be in the market. Then I would
lose. And, after having lost a couple of trades, I learned discipline.
I'd rather just stay out, because it would take two winning trades
to make up a losing one, and I cannot stand losing. I look at it this
way, by staying out of the market at the right time, to me that was
actually a winning trade.

Q.: How is trading currencies different from trading silver?

A : Well the primary difference is that silver moves very, very
slowly. You need a tremendous amount of patience, because silver
might only move 4 or 5 pips in two or three hours, but each point
is worth a lot more money. I am earning $50 for every pip that’s it
moving. So, even though it’s only moved five pips, in the last three

137


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

or four hours, for example, that’s $250 to me. So I’m quite happy
with that, but it takes patience.

Q:s0 are you ever competitive with your students or your brother
in terms of trading?

A : No, I only compare myself with myself. I was taught from
quite a small age to always give of your best, and my dad always
used to tell me that even if you think that you're the best, you are
probably not. There’s probably somebody, somewhere out there
who is better than you. So you always need to strive to be better. I
think that is where he instilled in me, the passion to learn as much
as I can. The passion for traveling, meeting other people, learning
about other cultures. What I’ve found was that with the silver now,
I’ve got the indicators, I’ve proven the indicators work, and yet
every single day I am still looking for something to make it better
and that just drives me.

Q.: Do you feel like you have changed a lot of your systems or

strategies along the way?

A : It has really been fairly small changes, just little adaptations
as I’ve discovered new things.

There’s one more thing that I want to talk about. When I
started teaching people in the beginning, I realized that there was
one thing that is terribly wrong with many new traders, they tend to
open demo accounts with $50,000. These people will start trading
this amount, and they will make money or they will only incur
small losses, because the bottom line is that it is very difficult to
blow $50,000. Then these people feel confident and open up a live
account with $300 and they start to lose money. It may be because
they do not have enough capital to withstand the same amount
of stop-loss or they cannot take as many lots as they could with
a $50,000 demo account. Either way, they are trading differently
and it has a huge negative impact on how they are doing live.
Therefore, I think that it is extremely important to ask for a demo
account with a balance that you plan on funding with when you go

138


RAGS TO RICHES

live. This way, if you triple your account, three times over like I
teach people to do, you know that you are playing with the same
amount of capital and there should be no major surprises when
you go live. That to me, is absolutely critical.

LESSONS FROM HOOSAIN HARNEKER
Triple Your Demo Three Times in a Row

Hoosain Harneker has not had an easy life. Being born in a country
that was formerly segregated by race, Hoosain worked hard to earn
enough money to start a partnership. When that partnership turned
sour, he was left with nothing. It took him six to seven months to
save up enough money to start a $1,000 trading account. Yet his
struggle may be the key to his success. Having gone through so
much difficulty, Hoosain has become extraordinarily conservative.
When he persuaded his wife to let him give trading a try, he knew
that $1,000 was his one and only chance to prove that he could make
trading a career. That is why Hoosain made it a rule for himself
to triple his demo account three times in a row before actually
trading live. Although this rule is exceptionally hard to follow, both
in terms of patience and actual results, itis one worth implementing
because it forces you to develop a trading methodology that has
a substantial chance for success in real market conditions. For
anyone who is serious about trading and who has the patience or
discipline to earn your stripes before heading off to battle with the
markets, this is a trading rule worth following.

Focus on Your Pip Target

Compared to many other traders, Hoosain’s 10-pip-a-day goal is
also extremely conservative because, in certain cases, this is no
more than the spread of a currency pair and is a fluctuation that
can occur within a blink of an eye. However at 10 pips a day, five
days a week, four weeks a month, that adds up to 200 pips per
month or 2,400 pips a year. At those levels, the numbers are not
conservative at all. There are many different ways to make money
trading. Some traders in our book aim for 200 pips a day rather than

139


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

200 pips a month. Both of the methods are sound, but for short-
term traders who seek instant gratification, Hoosain’s methodology
may actually be more suitable. You can always alter your trading
size. On one standard 100,000 unit lot, 10 pips are worth $100, but
on 10 of those lots, they are worth $1,000 a day. Focusing on the
point potential may be more intelligent than focusing on the dollar
amount.

In order to lock in profits and to increase the probability of
success, Hoosain also uses trailing stops. For example, if his trade
is up by 8 pips and goes back down by 3 pips to positive 5 pips,
Hoosain’s robot will kick in and automatically lock in the profit.
Once again, these singular pips may seem tiny, but we already
know that Hoosain’s conservatism has paid off.

Practice Regular Self Reflection

One of our favorite pearls of wisdom from Hoosain is his practice of
going back and analyzing his trades. When he first started trading,
there were times when Hoosain would incur a string of losses. In
those cases, he would go back and revisit his trades to see if there
was any pattern to those unsuccessful trades. We practice this as
well. Even when we do not face a string a losses, every week we will
reanalyze our trades to see how we could have improved them. This
may involve things like timing trades differently, perhaps avoiding
trades around certain news releases or tightening up the stops. In
fact, in our trading, we have found that when trades go wrong by
more than 70 pips against us, they will end up in a loss 90 percent
of the time. Therefore, what we learned going forward is to limit
the majority of our stop-losses to 70 pips. When you reanalyze your
own trades, you will find ways to improve your own trading results.

140


CHAPTER 6

THE WISDOM OF
EXPERIENCE

FRANKI LAW

Meet Franki Law, the man who turned $200,000 Hong Kong
dollars (HKD) into HKD$6 million. Having been in the business
for over 20 years, Franki is a big believer that success comes with
experience, and time. A technician at heart, he ranks price move-
ments on an A-B-C scale, not in terms of complex indicators like
Elliott wave patterns, but in terms of potential profit opportunities.
He identifies a trading zone, commits to it and scales down as long
as the zone holds. His relaxed, simple and philosophical approach
to trading has served him well and we were delighted to sit down
with him for an interview in his office in Hong Kong.

Q : How did you get into the business of trading?

A : I started in 1986 and have been in this business for over 20
years. When I first started, Hong Kong just released the Hang Sang

141


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Index futures. The only other product available for trading besides
the stock index futures were gold futures. Unlike the wealth of
products available abroad such as oil, foreign exchange, merchan-
dise, and bonds, what I had to trade were Hang Sang and Gold,
both of which did not have very high volume. After the 1987 crash,
I wanted to trade something else, so in 1988 I started trading
currencies and later on I returned to trading stocks as well.

Q.: what sparked your interest in trading? Was it something that
you learned in school?

A : Twenty years ago we did not have the opportunities that many
people do today in Hong Kong, so I only finished high school and
never had to opportunity to go to college or get a CFA or CMT
designation. The good thing was that this left most people on the
same playing field, with equal opportunities. Everyone started at
zero. Even if you did get the opportunity to go to college, although
there were economics classes, there were barely any classes that
talked about investments. When I started in the industry, I started
in the financial markets doing administrative work. I didn’t seek
out financial markets—but that came more by chance, and shortly
after I realized there were many opportunities in the financial
markets. That was when I changed my job and decided to become
an investment representative. I was a broker who specialized in
futures and then later on in currencies and stocks. Only after I
became a broker did I begin to trade for myself. That was not until
1988 because, unlike some people who enter the industry with a
