
Chatter Box—AJ
With over two and a half decades spent in the option markets, I have,
for the most part, favored selling option premiums. I feel comfortable
taking on the role of “the insurance company” for stock traders, but
before you begin selling option premiums, please make it a point to
understand all of your risk points. This includes your obligated buy or
sell points, breakeven points, and strategies you would use to bail out
of a risky situation should the stock price move against you.
While living in Florida, I’ve learned a great deal from insurance
companies that insure homeowners during hurricane season. When

c11.indd 234

11/2/07 12:46:44 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

235

the skies begin to darken and the seas start to swell, insurance companies will send out the alarm to all of their representatives to cease all
activity with regard to accepting new insurance applications. Why do
they do this? It’s simple: There is a much greater chance that they will
have to pay out claims as the storm heads for the coast. So they do this
in an effort to eliminate additional risk should the storm hit.
A perfect example of this was when Hurricane Katrina came ripping through Florida. Rick and I were actually recording one of our
radio shows when Katrina first hit the east coast of Florida. I was stuck
in a hotel room in Palm Beach after finishing up a seminar, and we
were talking about the possibility of this whopper of a storm regrouping in the Gulf of Mexico. While we had no idea this would be the
deadliest storm in U.S. history, it just so happened that the topic of
our discussion was risk management. We were using this storm as an
analogy to describe what investors would do to limit risk in a financial
storm. We have this show archived on the Internet where we mentioned that if Katrina strengthened in the Gulf, it would be a powerful
one, and those who lived on the Gulf shores should run for cover. It’s
unfortunate that more people didn’t listen to the warnings we put out,
but our point is if you are insuring stock price, you had better heed the
warnings when the financial storm front approaches. If you are ever in
doubt about what to do when you’re in a risky position, it is best to just
close that position out and take the loss rather than to attempt to ride
out the storm. I have seen too many people bury their heads in the
sand when they get confused. This ostrich approach to trading is not
a strategy at all and can wind up with only one outcome: big losses.
Just be smart and use your common sense.
Rick
It has been said that common sense is the least common sense of
all. Unfortunately, many traders who are otherwise very smart and
calculating individuals tend to ignore the warnings that the market
gives them. Perhaps it really is the same mind-set that affects the
beach dwellers in hurricane country. They figure that they’ve made it
through the storms this far without taking a direct hit. They’re lulled into
a sense of invincibility that is broken only by the catastrophic loss. If AJ
and I can get you to take away only one point in this discussion, it is
this: Learn from those who have been through the storm and know its
power. You can really profit from trading, but only when you give the
market the respect it requires.

c11.indd 235

11/2/07 12:46:45 PM

236

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Now You Have Options
The strategies we covered in this chapter are just a small fraction of
what’s available to you. You can even combine strategies to create
risk/reward profiles that are better suited for your tastes—and that
is something that cannot be done with stock alone.
Options were created as a way to buy and sell risk. If there is a risk
you’re willing to assume, you can now get paid to assume it. If there
is a risk you don’t want, you can pay someone to assume it for you.
Once you understand that options are about reducing risk, you’ll
see that they are not meant to be risky at all. Of course, someone can
speculate and bet lots of money just because they have a hunch that
the stock will rise or fall. That person is a speculator. But you must
realize that doesn’t mean that the whole options market is comprised
of speculators. These risk seekers may be buying or selling options to
traders and investors who are using them to reduce the risk in their
portfolios. The options market is the only forum that allows us to
meet speculators and trade risk.
Not all option strategies are speculative; it all depends on how
they are used. If you think you’ve found some interesting aspects to
options trading, we encourage you to find out more. If not, there’s
no harm done and you can at least say you know more about them
than when you started. Either way, you’re a better investor or trader
for taking the time to learn about this fascinating market!

c11.indd 236

11/2/07 12:46:46 PM

IV
P O I N T

THE 1% RULE
Protect Your Position

c12.indd 237

11/2/07 12:47:37 PM

c12.indd 238

11/2/07 12:47:37 PM

12

C H A P T E R

Managing Risk
L E A RN IN G T O LOSE MONEY THE R IGHT WAY

I

s it reasonable to trade the markets and expect not to lose money?
The answer is no, of course. So the challenge for any trader or investor is to know when to close a trade at a loss so that you can stay to
trade another day. We refer to this as learning to lose the right way.
The stunned looks on the faces of our audience still amuse us when
we step before a new group at a financial conference and announce
that our first goal is to teach the correct way to lose money. More than
a few people reply that they already have that part of the game down
pat, no more instruction needed. Joking aside, do you really know
how to lose money in such a way that you can remain in the markets
for the profits?
The Market Guys’ approach to limiting losses is called the 1%
Rule. In a nutshell, you shouldn’t lose more than 1 percent of your
trading account value on any given trade. Let’s break the rule down
a little before we move forward.
First, your trading account is not your net worth. We don’t
recommend actively trading with more than about 20 percent of
your portfolio value. The rest of the 80 percent should be allocated
according to your overall financial plan and may include such investments as cash, bonds, real estate, and dividend stocks or funds. To
keep the numbers easy, let’s assume that your entire portfolio is
worth $500,000. In that case, your trading account should not be
greater than $100,000.
239

c12.indd 239

11/2/07 12:47:37 PM

240

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Second, each and every trade is capped to a loss of 1 percent of
the trading account. Your first trade in our example account should
not lose more than 1 percent of $100,000, or $1,000. If you have
two open positions, they each get $1,000 for a total possible loss of
$2,000. Notice that we’re not saying anything about the stock yet.
The stock may fall 10 percent, but the corresponding loss in your
account should not exceed $1,000. We’ll explain how to tie these two
concepts together later in the chapter.
Finally, there is nothing magical about 1 percent. It’s a good
number that we have found to work very well in practice. If you tend
to be an active day trader, you might want to reduce the 1 percent to
½ percent. However, if you trade less often and tend to hold your
trades for six months or longer, you would do well with a 2 percent limit.
The point that we want to stress is that you shouldn’t adjust it on the fly.
If you’re using the 1% Rule, then every trade should follow the rule.

Is There Really Such Thing as a Safe Investment?
Certainly, some investments carry different types and degrees of risk,
but you need to recognize that every financial venture includes
risk. Even if you have insider information that would guarantee your
returns, you assume the risk of getting a call from the attorney general about your trading patterns prior to the release of the news that
propelled your stock.
In order to understand the bigger picture of risk in the markets, it’s helpful to list the risks and see where we might encounter
them. By reviewing the variety of ways that we may be impacted, you
develop an appreciation of the inherent nature of financial risk and
how to best manage these risks.
Market risk. Market risk is the risk associated with falling stock
prices when the market moves as a whole. This is the risk most
familiar to traders because it captures the loss of value when
the equity drops due to market forces. Market risk is generally associated with an entire market, asset class, or segment
of the broad market. As the name implies, it is a risk to our
position when the overall market forces conspire against us.
The old saying about a rising tide lifting all boats is another
way to describe market risk. In the same way, a falling tide
tends to leave even the good boats stranded on the beach.

c12.indd 240

11/2/07 12:47:37 PM

Managing Risk

241

Business risk. The risk that is unique to the specific business that
you’re trading or investing in is known as the business risk.
The overall market may be doing just fine, but you read
in the press that your company just announced they’re
starting a new series of internal seminars entitled, “Keeping the Books the ENRON Way.” This would likely create
a business risk that would have a somewhat deleterious
impact on the stock price.
Credit risk. The risk associated with bonds is commonly known
as credit risk. This is the possibility of a default by the bond
issuer where they are unable to pay interest or principle in
a timely manner. Credit risk is higher with corporate bonds
than with government bonds since corporate bonds are
backed by the strength of the issuing company, whereas
government bonds are backed by the taxing authority of the
issuing municipality.
Interest rate risk. When a debt security such as a bond decreases
in value as the interest rates rise, this is called interest rate
risk. Bond values generally drop with a rise in interest rates,
even though the bond will continue to pay its stated interest
rate until maturity. For example, let’s assume you buy a bond
with a 6 percent coupon when the prevailing interest rate is
6 percent. You would most likely pay par, or the face value of
the bond. However, if you wanted to buy a 6 percent coupon
when the prevailing interest rate is 4 percent, you would pay
a premium over par for the added value of a higher coupon.
Likewise, if you bought this same bond at a premium and
then interest rates rose to 10 percent, your coupon would be
worth less and, therefore, you would have to discount your
bond if you wanted to sell it. That is how interest rate risk
affects a debt security investment.
Currency risk. Currency risk is the risk that comes from volatility
in exchange rates between various currencies. Many companies that have extensive international business also have
hedging programs to mitigate the impact of currency risk.
This risk comes into play when you buy a company with substantial international exposure. However, it may also impact
you directly when you trade on a foreign exchange and need
to convert your currency for trading. This is also known as

c12.indd 241

11/2/07 12:47:38 PM

242

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

exchange rate risk. With the growth in forex trading, many
individual traders are able to create their own currency
hedges to protect against this type of risk.
Country risk. As we write this book, Venezuela’s President Chavez
is seeking to exert greater national control over the banks
and industries within his country. He is quoted as telling one
steelmaker, “I’ll grab your company.” As a result, the main
index of the Caracas stock exchange fell almost 3 percent
while Venezuela’s currency, the bolivar, also fell about 3 percent. This type of country-specific volatility is known as country risk. It is usually political in nature, but the results are
directly seen in investments that are exposed to the country’s
turmoil.
Liquidity risk. If you own an investment that is not readily turned
into cash when you’re ready to sell it, you are subject to
liquidity risk. Hard assets such as real estate and vehicles are
most susceptible to liquidity risk. However, stocks with very
low volume or funds that aren’t publicly traded also run into
liquidity risk. If you buy 100,000 shares of a penny stock that
trades only 5,000 shares per day on average, it will be very
difficult for you to sell your position without driving down
the stock price.
Inflation risk. Inflation risk is what you encounter when you have
such a distrust of the markets that you invest only in your
mattress fund. Every dollar you invest goes right into the
sack under your mattress. Even in this case, your money isn’t
growing to keep up with inflation and, while your principal
doesn’t decrease, your buying power falls. It’s easy to see how
$50 that was stashed in a coffee can in 1950 isn’t going to get
you the same level of goods and services today as it did then.
Regulatory risk. Will Rogers is quoted as saying, “The only difference between death and taxes is that death doesn’t get worse
every time Congress meets.” He was creatively describing what
is known as regulatory risk. This is the unknown and unpredictable consequences of changing laws and regulations.
Whether we’re talking about long-term versus short-term capital gains, distribution requirements for retirement accounts,
or corporate tax policy, the activities of our elected officials
represent an undercurrent of risk in every financial venture.

c12.indd 242

11/2/07 12:47:38 PM

Managing Risk

243

I’d Like to Buy a Vowel
Now that we’ve described the myriad ways in which your money can
shrink beyond recognition, where does that leave us? Some readers
at this point may be thinking that any trade or investment is simply a
spin on their own personal Wheel of Fortune. “Since I can’t control
my financial destiny, I may as well spin for the new car!” they reason
to themselves. Of course, there are many varied risks that we face, but
it should rather leave us with the clear understanding that risk is ever
present and that we shouldn’t attempt to avoid risk. Risk is a factor that
must be recognized and properly managed, not avoided entirely.
One of the problems with managing risk is our skewed perception of the risks that we face. In Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story
of Risk (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996), Peter Bernstein relates
this story:
One winter night during one of the many German air raids
on Moscow in World War II, a distinguished Soviet professor of statistics showed up in his local air-raid shelter. He had
never appeared there before. “There are seven million people
in Moscow,” he used to say. “Why should I expect them to hit
me?” His friends were astonished to see him and asked what had
happened to change his mind. “Look,” he explained, “there are
seven million people in Moscow and one elephant. Last night
they got the elephant.”

We recently presented a seminar at the Chicago Board Options
Exchange. Just prior to the start of the second day, one of the attendees was talking to his brother, who had purchased 200 out-of-themoney call contracts on Yahoo! (ticker symbol: YHOO). On this
particular morning, rumors were rampant about a possible buyout
of Yahoo! by Microsoft. The contracts that were purchased for mere
pennies were now over $3 in-the-money. Absent a major news event
such as this, it is quite likely that the contracts would have expired
worthless. Now, our friend’s brother was enjoying a profit of more
than $60,000. The next time this trader picks up a load of cheap outof-the-money options, how much confidence of making a profit do
you think he’ll display? Most likely, he will be thinking about this last
trade and considering the possibility of doing it all over again, even
though the likelihood is quite small.

c12.indd 243

11/2/07 12:47:38 PM

244

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

On the other side of the trade, consider the trader who sold
the contracts. Especially consider the scene if the trader sold them
naked; that is, he didn’t own shares of Yahoo! to deliver when the
options were assigned to him. In effect, he is short the stock and has
to come up with $60,000 cash to cover his exposed position. How
likely do you think this same trader will be to sell uncovered calls
again? Once again, the probability of losing money from selling the
calls is very small. It is just as likely as our friend’s brother making
money by purchasing the same contracts. But his experience showed
him that it can happen, and all future decisions will be clouded by
that experience.
This is the contemporary market version of the Port-Royal Logic,
published in 1662. Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole noted that
people overestimated the probability of being struck by lightning in
a thunderstorm. Statistically, the odds of such an occurrence may be
very low but the consequences are high and, therefore, add weight to
the fears beyond the mere likelihood of occurrence. Furthermore,
any experience with a lightning strike (having witnessed a strike,
knowing an acquaintance that experienced a strike, etc.) only added
to the fears. The underlying probability didn’t change, but the perception is greatly influenced by these other factors. When we experience
a “highly unlikely” market event, it’s all but impossible not to take
the event into account when we face future risk/reward decisions.

Everyone Should Be Above Average
We’ve talked many times about the importance of having a trading
plan that removes your emotion from the decision process and holds
you accountable for your defined strategy. The biases we just discussed that we bring to our degree of confidence in trading and
investing decisions are another reason for having a strict risk management plan. Some traders like to adjust their risk levels as their
confidence in a trade rises or falls. As a rule, this will not serve your
best interests. We offer this advice more from a practical standpoint
than from an empirical study. We have watched traders take this
approach, and it usually comes back to bite them.
As much as we’d all like to believe that we’re different, there
is also a fundamental misunderstanding of probability and statistics
among the general population. There’s a reason that college freshmen refer to this subject as “Probability and Sadistics.” For most of

c12.indd 244

11/2/07 12:47:38 PM

Managing Risk

245

us, we’re not going to improve our lot by estimating probabilities in
trading and investing decisions.
Perhaps the most famous evangelist on the subject of statistics-based
decision making was W. Edwards Deming. Dr. Deming worked with
Japan in the rebuilding of the post–World War II economy, teaching
the principles of statistical quality improvement. In 1960, the emperor
of Japan awarded him the Second Order Medal of the Sacred Treasure for his contributions. In 1982, he published his classic book, Out
of the Crisis (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), highlighting his approach
to decision making through data analysis. Dr. Deming included the
following two news articles that demonstrate how statistical misunderstanding can be our Achilles heel in making sound decisions. The first
article, published in 1983, is from the San Diego Union. Author Bob
Dvorchak writes:
“In general, we have been blessed with above-average leadership,” said Robert K. Murray, who is tabulating the responses of
970 historians questioned in the survey.
“We’ve been remarkably lucky, considering the relatively haphazard way we select a president. Historians have determined
that almost one out of every four has been great or near great,
and over half are above average,” said the professor of history at
Pennsylvania State University.

It’s important to note that “greatness” is defined as being in the
top 25 percent. Should we not, therefore, expect that one in four
would end up in the top 25 percent? What a travesty that one in
four should be in the bottom 25 percent!
The next article was published in 1983 in the Wisconsin State
Journal under the headline, “Half Still under Median”:
Despite the increase, union officials said, more than half the
league’s players earned less than the league-wide median of
$75,000 a year.

Recognizing that the median, by definition, is the point that
separates the top half from the bottom half, how do we resolve the
problem stated above? Should we not be equally concerned about
the fact that nobody makes more than the top-paid player? Nobody!

c12.indd 245

11/2/07 12:47:39 PM

246

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Let’s take one more example to illustrate the disconnect between
probability and expected outcome. The lottery is quite similar to the
trader who speculates with very cheap options or penny stocks. In both
cases, the cash outlay is very small and the likelihood of success is correspondingly small. Nevertheless, our judgment is clouded by visions
of what we’ll do when the 15-cent option is now trading with $5 of
intrinsic value. One of the top lotteries in the United States is the Mega
Millions game. This lottery requires the player to choose five numbers
from 56 choices. On top of this, the player selects one Mega Millions
number from a total of 46 choices. The jackpot is hit when all six numbers match the winning drawing. The Mega Millions site lists the odds
of winning the jackpot at 1 in 175,711,536. Ask any player at the local
convenience store what they think about their chances of winning
and they’ll always admit to an inflated possibility. “Someone has to win,”
they’ll reason. However, their interests are not served by “someone”
winning; their interests are served when they win. And the likelihood of
someone’s winning is much greater than the likelihood of their winning.

Five Principles of Risk Management
There are myriad reasons to employ a solid risk management strategy. If you distill the reasons down to the simplest concept, it is the
fact that risk management is the single most important key to success in the markets. Gamblers in Vegas make money from time to
time. These runs are called streaks, and they occur in the markets,
too. However, whether a streak is long or short, there will come
a time when the markets zig at the very moment we think they
will zag. When that moment arrives, our lifesaver will be our risk
management plan. Here are five principles of The Market Guys’
approach to managing risk:
1. Risk management moves you from emotion to discipline.
