
Chart 13-7 shows the same period for Microsoft, as shown in Chart 135,
but this time with candle volume. Note that from November 30 the bulk of
the candles are thin, indicating low volume. The only thick candles are black
ones, which indicate potential selling pressure. Finally, the right-shoulder
rally consists of thin candles, indicating low (bearish) volume. The early
December bear rally is also associated with thin candles. Rising prices 07
weak volume is bearish because it indicates that prices are rallying on a Jack

Microsoft

704 (Candle vou ty seat
a.)

s5-{il, Series of thin candles

vw Vs
XT |
604
a} [ pS
404
2» I <<
= 2
, [13 hm fe ps] 6 fis 22 Be]
ber is \eaaeer fs iDecember j2001 [February
Chart 13-8 Boeing, 2000-2001, and candle volume. (From www.pring.com.)
ne Engulfing pattern

“ih he A J
i, 1 Hy a | |
la | 9-day RSI

Oe

i i er
Piercing line Hamm

i i)
lb De

th (

i 2p fe ps po 6| poprim life bei _ hs ELA

JOctober |November [December [2001

February}



276 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

of selling rather than enthusiastic buying. Then, on the day of the rally high,
the relatively thick black candle indicates that the days of the bulls are num-
bered because selling pressure has started to pick up.

You can see that the February down trendline break is associated with a
thick belt hold and a trendline break in the RSI. Also, it’s important to note
that the nature of the RSI changes with candle volume, because the wider
candles involve a slower, but more deliberate price action by the oscillator.
Thin lines work in the opposite way, of course.

Chart 13-8, featuring Boeing, shows a piercing line in October. Note that
the white candle is fairly thin. Normally, we would like to see a thick one
because that would mean expanding volume. The engulfing day in January
is a thick candle and the high volume that this reflects adds to the bearish-
ness of the pattern. Finally, note how the candles break out from the sym-
metrical triangle at the same time the RSI completes a base.

Summary

* Candle charts can be constructed only from data that include opening
prices, and therefore the technique is not one that can be applied to all
markets.

Candle charts provide a unique visual effect that emphasizes certain mar
ket characteristics not easily identifiable from bar or closing charts.
Candle patterns can be reversal or continuation in nature.

Western charting techniques can be used in conjunction with candles for
superior results.

Candle volume charts add an additional dimension to the analysis.

14

Point and
Figure Charting

Point and Figure Charts
versus Bar Charts

Point and figure charts differ from bar charts in two important ways. First,

.__ bar charts are plotted at specific time intervals regardless of whether there

is any change in price. A new plot on a point and figure chart, on the other
hand, is made only when the price changes by a given amount. Point and
figure charts are only concerned with measuring price, whereas bar charts
measure both price (on the vertical axis) and time (on the horizontal axis).

The second major difference is that bar charts record every change in
Price for the period they are measuring, but point and figure charts ignore
all price movements that are smaller than a specified amount. For exam-
ple, if a box is set at price movements of 5 points for the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA), only price changes in excess of 5 points will be recorded,
and smaller fluctuations will not appear.

Construction of Point
and Figure Charts

ie Point and figure charts are constructed using combinations of X’s and O’s,

own as boxes. The X shows that prices are moving up, the O that they
ate moving down. Once the amount of historical data to be plotted has been
€stablished, there are two important decisions to be made before a chart
Can be constructed.

277



278 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

First, the size of each box must be determined. For individual stocks, it
is common practice to use a |-point unit or box for issues trading above $20
and a Y=point unit for lower-priced stocks. However, for very long term
charts or for averages consisting of much higher numbers, it is more con-
venient to use 5-, 10-, or even 20-point boxes. As the box size is decreased,
the detail of price movement graphically displayed is increased, and vice
versa. In following the price action of a stock or market over many years, it
is more convenient to use a relatively large box since small boxes will make
the chart unduly large and unmanageable. Often, it is a good idea to main-
tain two or three different versions, just as daily, weekly, and monthly bar
charts may be plotted.

The second decision is whether to use a regular point and figure formula
or to use a reversal chart (which should not be confused with a reversal pat-
tern). The straight point and figure chart is plotted just as the data are
recorded. If the price moves from 64 to 65, five X’s will be plotted on a 20¢-
point chart, as in Fig. 14-1(a). If the price reverses from 67 to 66, five O’s
will be posted. Reversal charts, on the other hand, follow a predetermined
tule: A new series of X’s or 0’s cannot begin until prices have moved by a
specified amount in the opposite direction to the prevailing trend. The use
of the reversal technique therefore helps to reduce misleading or whipsaw
signals and to greatly compress the size of the chart so that more data can
be plotted. Figure 14-1(6) shows the same data plotted as a line chart.

The construction of point, 5-point, or 10-point charts, or charts by any
other measure, is identical to the previous method except that a new box
can be posted only when the price has moved by the degree specified, that
is, by /2 point, 5 points, or 10 points, respectively. Since only price is
recorded, it could take several days or even weeks before a new box is plot-
ted. Hence, a common practice is to record dates either at the foot of the
chart or in the boxes at the appropriate points. A combination of both date
locations is used for longer-term charts. For example, the year is recorded
at the bottom of the chart against the column that the first posting of that
year was made for, and the beginning of each month is recorded in a box
using the number of the month, | for January, 2 for February, and so on.

The decision about unit size (and thus the degree of price change
required to trigger a new column of O’s or X's) is essentially based on per
sonal judgment. It is determined by the price range and degree of volatil-
ity of the indicator, stock, or market under consideration. Reducing the size
of the units (figures) increases the detail of the price movement portrayed.
Making the unit larger expands the base of data, that can be included, but
this limits the number of fluctuations that can be illustrated (see Chart 141 ).
Following a market with bar or line charts on a daily, weekly, or monthly

Point and Figure Charting 279
x
xOX
xXOXOX
XOXOXO
xO OXO
7 x Oxo
x Oo Ox
XX XK Oxo
toxoxgxox 0x9
70 FORBKBXBE 8¥8x
xo 00 0 OXOXOK xX
x OXxOKOXOXd
69 x 7" 9X0 KOR
x x 0 OXOXOX x,
Xo x x OXOXOXOX|
6a SEE CE DES QOxOXO 7
x0 OXOXO 0 9
x 8 \
x 7
XX
875 xox 5
8 XOX t
2 xOx {
< xo iH
x
66r~- x 1
§ l
4X
KO X °
ox
tb 8S
0
63
62

(a)
Figure 14-1 20¢ point chart.

basis corresponds to keeping several point and figure charts using various
unit sizes.

Point and figure charts are plotted on an arithmetic scale. If drawn on
Paper, they would have traditionally been constructed with 8, 10, or 12
Squares to the inch. Occasionally, point and figure charts are plotted on a
semilogarithmic or ratio scale, though this is not the norm, because price
objectives are calculated in a different way than those on regular charts with
a time scale,

Data published in the financial press covering the high, low, and close for
Specific stocks are not suitable for accurate point and figure charts. For
example, if a $15 stock has an intraday price range of $11/, it is impossible



280 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

73

72

"1

vi NY
: hi

vy

Price
<_<
=
.-

67

WLW
65 I \ i.
aL]

63 4 1 1 1 L 1 1 n
wt 2 3 4 86 9 10 NH 14 15 16 17 +18 2 22 23

Trading Days in September

(b)

Figure 14-1 Closing prices (line chart).

to know for point and figure purposes the actual course of the stock from
14/2 to 16. It could have risen from 14'/2 to 16 in one move, which for a /
point chart would have been represented by three rising X's. Alternatively,
it might have moved from 14'/2 to 1512, back to 14/2, and then to 16, which
would have resulted in two X's, two O’s, and then a column of three X's.
The character of the rally has a very important bearing on the appearance
of a point and figure chart.

When dealing with data published in this form, it is better to use larger
units so that intraday fluctuations do not distort the chart unduly. If more
detail is required, the data should be purchased from a source that publishes
intraday price movements. Charting packages featuring intraday data that
have point and figure options are not affected by this problem.

Accepted rules for plotting point and figure data where the actual prices
on the tape are not known are as follows:

¢ If the opening price is closer to the high than the low, assume that the
course of prices is open, high, low, and close.

Point and Figure Charting 281

Chart 14-1 Gold price $5 and $2 reversals. These two charts show the price plotted
‘on $5 and $2 reversals. The trendlines are self-explanatory. Note that the $5 chart captures
10 years of history very concisely. On the other hand, the 2-point reversal chart, which cov-
ers March to November 1982, offers far better detail. (From Chart Analysis London.)

;__ Gold
ee oe

= F (a.m. ;p.m.close) (5$)
= +- =,

7

(a.m.; p.m. close) (2$)



282 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

* Ifthe opening price is closer to the low, assume open, low, high, and close.

* If the opening price is also the high, assume open, high, low, and close.

* If the opening price is also the low, assume open, low, high, and close.

* If the opening price is the low and the closing price is the high, assume
open, low, close, and high.

* If the opening price is the high for the day and the close is the lowest
price, assume open, high, close, and low.

Interpreting Point
and Figure Charts

General

Since point and figure charts do not include volume, moving averages
(MAs), or time, price action is the only element to be examined. In this
respect, the basic principles of bar chart analysis are applied. There are cer-
tain disadvantages to using point and figure charts; for example, key rever-
sal days, islands, gaps, and other such formations do not show up. On the
other hand, if properly constructed, these charts represent all important
price swings, even on an intraday basis. They effectively emphasize impor-
tant support and resistance areas. For example, on a weekly bar chart, a sin-
gle bar representing a weekly price action can take up only one line.
However, if there was considerable volatility during the week in which sup-
port and resistance were each tested three or four times, this would most
likely show up on a point and figure chart as a congestion area. As a result,
the importance of these levels would be drawn to the attention of the tech-
nician, who would then be in a good position to interpret the significance
of any breakout that might develop.

Point and figure patterns are similar in nature to those of price patterns
and may be of the continuation or reversal type. The most common ones
are shown in Fig. 14-2. Head-and-shoulders (H&S) and inverse H&S pat-
terns, double tops and bottoms, and rounding tops and bottoms can easily
be recognized as the point and figure equivalent of regular bar or close-only
price formations, discussed previously. Most of the price patterns shown in
Fig. 14-2 are explained in Chapter 5.

The Count Method

Chapter 5 pointed out that the minimum downside projection from an H&S
top is derived by projecting the vertical distance from the top of the head

Point and Figure Charting 283

Bottoms Tops

li

Duplex horizontal

FEET

i

i

ial

Estes

fassitissiiat

Hi

Figure 14-2 Point and figure price patterns (study helps in point and figure techniques).



284 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

to the neckline downward at the point of breakout. In point and figure
charting, the width of the pattern is used to determine the measuring objec-
tive, which is again projected from the breakout point. No one to my knowl
edge has thus far satisfactorily explained why this principle appears to work.
Itseems to be based on the idea that lateral and vertical movements are pro-
portional to each other on a point and figure chart. In other words, the
more times a price has undergone price swings within two given levels (as
dictated by the price pattern), the greater the ultimate move is likely to be
once the breakout has taken place. On a point and figure chart, the dimen-
sions of the consolidation or reversal pattern can be easily discerned by
adding up the number of boxes and projecting the number downward or
upward, depending on which way prices break out.

The problem with the count method is that formations with irregular out-
lines can generate confusion about where the count should begin. The best
approach is to select an important horizontal line in the formation, mea-
sure across it, and add (or subtract) the number of boxes in the line to (or
from) the level of the line.

Price projections for point and figure formations are by no means 100
percent accurate in all situations. In general, upside projections are likely
to be exceeded in bull markets, and downside projections surpassed in bear
markets. Projections that are made counter to the prevailing trend have a
tendency not to be achieved, such as a downside projection in a bull mar-
ket. Chart 142 shows a couple of examples of the count method in action.

Trendlines on Point
and Figure Charts

It is possible to construct trendlines on point and figure charts by joining
a series of declining peaks. Up trendlines are drawn by connecting a series
of rising lows, and horizontal trendlines are created by joining identical sup-

Point and Figure Charting 285

Chart 14-2 Honeywell (.50 x 1). This chart features a number of price formations for
Honeywell using a .50 x 1 combination. Note that the measuring objective from the base on
the left was reached almost to the dollar. The H&S top that followed offered a nice sell signal
as the neckline was penetrated. The objective in this case called for the price to fall back to its
previous low. As it turned out, this was exceeded. Note how the subsequent rally found resis-
tance in approximately the same area as the objective. Finally, we see a nice trendline break
in the right-hand side of the chart. (From www.pring.com.)

Objective

po jis Foe [Mis JAji2_|Mjoo oe pp2_ Ape jsfiz_ jo IN[is__ O's

Port or resistance levels. The same principles of interpretation discussed in
Chapter 8 apply to trendlines drawn on point and figure charts. The trend-
line takes its significance from a combination of length, the angle of descent
or ascent, and the number of times it has been touched. Misleading or whip-
Saw signals occur occasionally. However, if a carefully chosen reversal amount
is used as a filter in the construction of the chart, such whipsaws can be kept
‘oa minimum. Another possibility would be to draw a parallel line one box
above (or below) the actual trendline as a filter and use this as the signal to
buy (or sell). Although some timeliness is clearly lost with this type of
approach, it does offer some protection from misleading price moves.

Itis also possible to construct oscillators and plot them underneath point
and figure charts. Since time is ignored in the point and figure charts, oscil-
lators will appear differently than on regular charts where the time scale is
Plotted for each unit (hour, day, week, and so on). An example using a
l4period relative strength indicator (RSI) is shown in Chart 14-3.



286 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 14-3 Boeing (1 x 1) and an RSI. This chart of Boeing shows that it is possible to
combine an oscillator with a point and figure chart. The joint breakout by the price and RSI
offered a timely buy signal on June 16. (From www.pring.com.)

684
604
564
604
454
404
364
(ae

80+
70

By SAT TT

30
boi Bo Flo IM Als Imps [is pr lie Dir Als Ise jis

Summary

* Point and figure charts measure only one dimension: price.

* Point and figure charts are constructed from columns of X’s and O’s,
known as figures, which represent a specified, predetermined price
movement.

* Point and figure charts often point up support/resistance zones better
than bar charts because they emphasize the number of price swings that
take place within a given congestion area.

* Point and figure charts are interpreted similarly to bar charts, the main
exception being the measuring formula, which is achieved by the princi
ple of the count.

Ke

Miscellaneous
Techniques for
Determining
Trends

Introduction

The two techniques discussed in this chapter, support and resistance and prow Ne
portion, are concerned with estimating the potential extent or duration of

a trend. This contrasts with most of the indicators previously examined that
attempt to confirm a change in trend after it has already occurred. These
techniques should be used only as an indication of the probable extent of the
Move, not as the basis of an actual forecast.

Support and Resistance Defined

Support and resistance are terms that we hear bandied about quite a lot,

but to many of us their meaning is quite vague. Quite often seasoned pros

lajor: Technical Principle There is no known method of pre-
dicting the exact magnitude or duration of a price. trend.
. (oy heee

287



288 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

say resistance when they actually mean support, and support when they
really mean resistance. It’s no wonder there is a lot of confusion. Support
and resistance are points on a chart where the probabilities favor a halt or
even a reversal in the prevailing trend.

-~» Support is where a declining trend can be expected to halt temporarily
due to a concentration of demand. Resistance is where an advancing trend
can be expected to halt temporarily due to a concentration of supply. «—

Obviously, demand and supply are always equal, so the concentration of
demand means that buyers are more enthusiastic than sellers and are there-
fore more willing to bid up prices and vice versa.

At the beginning of Fig. 15-1, the price is in a downtrend. Ths, ice ral-
lies from point B. Since previous bottoms and tops represent potentialpongel points
on the charts, it would be reasonable to expect the price to bottom at level
B the next time its falls. However, this is not the case and it quickly falls to
A. At this point, the bear market is interrupted by a consolidation pattern
(rectangle) from which prices ultimately break down as the price is unable
to hold at A. In technical jargon, we say that the support level was violated.
If you jump up and down on the tenth floor of an old and décrepit multi-

» story building, evéhtually the floor gives way. The floor was your support
area, which has now been violated. Thinking of personal safety, you must
now look out for the next area of support, which is the floor of the ninth
story. The same is true in markets; when a particular support level is violated,
you need to look for the next one down.

The price reaches its low and then, after a brief period of consolidation,
mounts a rally. This advance is halted at the dashed line, which is at the same
level as the lower end of the rectangle. People who bought during the period
when the rectangle was being formed have all lost money up to this point,
and many of them are keen to liquidate their positions and break even.

tnd

Figure 15-1 Support and resistance.

Miscellaneous Techniques for Determining Trends 289

Consequently, there is a concentration of supply at this level, transforming
what was formerly a zone of support to one of resistance. Such levels are
often formed at round numbers such as 10, 50, or 100 since they represent
easy psychological points upon which investors often base their decisions.
Prices then fall off slightly and mount another 4ssdult on the resistance level
at A, but still more of the asset is put up for sale. This is important, because
itis a rule of technical analysis that what becomes support on the way down turns
out to be resistance on the way up “Just remember our analogy of falling
through the tenth floor and finding support at the ninth. If you want to get
back to the tenth, you are going have to jump through the ceiling of the
ninth floor because that now becomes resistance. It’s the same in the
markets.

Eventually, the resistance level is violated and prices advance to the next
level of resistance at B. Once again, the previous level of support on the wa’

down is reversed to one of resistance on the way up. The rationalé for this (34>

lies in the fact that quite a few people bought at B, and when the price broke
below it, they ended up with a paper loss. Now that the price has returned
to Bagain, they have the chance to pretty well break even, so a lot of them

. take advantage of the opportunity and sell. You will also find that once a

resistance level has been violated on the upside, subsequent declines will
find support there. Consequently, the final decline on the chart halts at A.
Thus, resistance levels once violated reverse their role to support.

Estimating Future Support/Resistance Levels

There are certain guidelines for identifying potential areas of support or
resistance:

we hear people say, “I’m going to sell when it reaches so and so.” Well, if
they are picking a number out of the air, chances are it’s going to be a
round number like 25, 50, 100, and so forth. The same thing works on
the downside where you might say, “I'll buy some if it comes down to 10,
5, or a certain value.” Round numbers, then, have a tendency to become
Support and resistance zones. I say zones as opposed to levels because
Prices will often move a little bit beyond or just fail to reach the actual
Tound numbers, so zone is a more accurate description.~~
