
The First Step
An alcoholic who wants to recover has to go through twelve steps—twelve stages
of personal growth. He needs to change how he thinks and feels, how he relates to
himself and others.
The first step of AA is the hardest: to admit that one is powerless over alcohol.
An alcoholic must recognize that his life has become unmanageable, that alcohol
is stronger than he is. Most cannot take that step, drop out, and go on to destroy
their lives.
If alcohol is stronger than you, then you can never touch it again, not even a sip,
for as long as you live.You have to give up drinking forever. Most drunks do not want
to give up that pleasure. They destroy their lives rather than take the first step of AA.
Only the pain of hitting rock bottom can motivate them to take that first step.

One Day at a Time
You may have seen bumper stickers that say, “One day at a time” or “Easy does it.” â•— Those
are AA slogans, and people who drive those cars are probably recovering alcoholics.
Planning for life without alcohol can seem overwhelming. That’s why AA encourages its members to live sober one day at a time.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

9. LOSERS ANONYMOUS

23

The goal of every AA member is to stay sober today and go to bed sober tonight.
Gradually, days become weeks, then months, then years. AA meetings and other
activities help each recovering alcoholic stay sober, one day at a time.
Recovering alcoholics receive—and give others—invaluable support and fellowship at these meetings. They are held at all hours, all over the world. Traders have
much to learn from those meetings.

An AA Meeting
One of the best things that a trader can do is go to an AA meeting. I especially recommend it to any trader on a losing streak. Call Alcoholics Anonymous and ask about
the next “open meeting” or “beginners’ meeting” in your area.
A meeting lasts about an hour.You can sit in the back of the room and listen carefully. There is no pressure to speak, and nobody asks for your last name.
Each meeting begins with a long-term member getting up and speaking about his
or her personal struggle for recovery from alcoholism. Several other members share
their experiences. There is a collection to cover expenses—give a dollar if you like.
All you have to do is listen carefully, and every time you hear the word “alcohol,”
substitute the word “loss” for it.You will feel as if the people in the meeting are talking about your trading!

■■9. Losers Anonymous
A social drinker enjoys an occasional drink, but an alcoholic craves alcohol. He denies that alcohol controls and destroys his life—until he reaches a personal crisis.
It may be a life-threatening illness, unemployment, abandonment by the family, or
another unbearably painful event. AA calls it “hitting rock bottom.”
The pain of hitting rock bottom punctures an alcoholic’s denial. He sees a stark
choice—to drown or to come up for air. His first step to recovery is to admit that he
is powerless over alcohol. A recovering alcoholic can never drink again.
Loss is to a loser what alcohol is to an alcoholic. A small loss is like a single drink.
A big loss is like a bender. A series of losses is like an alcoholic binge. A loser keeps
switching between different markets, gurus, and trading systems. His equity shrinks
while he is trying to recreate the pleasurable sensation of winning.
Losing traders think and act like alcoholics, except that their speech is not slurred.
The two groups are so similar that you can predict what a loser will do by using
alcoholics as a model.
Alcoholism is a curable disease—and so is losing. Losers can change by using the
principles of Alcoholics Anonymous.

The Urge to Trade
Successful traders treat drawdowns the way social drinkers treat alcohol. They have
a little and stop. If they take several losses in a row, they take that as a signal that

24

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

something isn’t working: perhaps their system isn’t in gear with the current market
environment. It’s time for a break and a fresh look at the markets. Losers, on the
other hand, cannot stop—they keep trading because they are addicted to the excitement of the game and keep hoping for a big win.
A prominent trading advisor who has since busted out wrote that to him the
pleasure of trading was higher than that of sex or flying jet aircraft. Just as alcoholics
proceed from social drinking to drunkenness, losers take bigger and bigger risks.
They cross the hugely important line: the one between taking a business risk and
gambling. Many losers don’t even know that line exists.
Losers feel the urge to trade, just as alcoholics feel the urge to drink. They make
impulsive trades, go on trading binges, and try to trade their way out of a hole.
Losers bleed money from their accounts. Most of them bust out, but some turn
to managing other people’s money after losing their own; still others sell advisory
services, like burned-out drunks who wash glasses in a bar.
Most losers hide their losses from themselves and from everyone else. They keep
no records and throw away brokerage statements. A loser is like an alcoholic who
doesn’t want to know how many ounces of liquor he drank.

Into the Hole
A loser trades in a fog and doesn’t know why he keeps losing. If he knew, he would
have done something about it and become a winner. A loser tries to manage his trading the way an alcoholic tries to manage his drinking.
Losers’ desperate hopes for magic solutions help advisors sell their services to the
public. They switch to new trading systems, buy more software, and look for tips
from new gurus.
As losses mount and equity shrinks, a loser grows desperate and converts outright
positions into spreads, doubles up on losing positions, reverses and trades in the opposite direction, and so on. All of that does him no more good than switching from
hard liquor to wine can help an alcoholic.
A losing trader careens out of control, trying to manage the unmanageable. Alcoholics die prematurely, and most traders bust out of the markets and never come
back. New trading methods, hot tips, and improved software will not help a person
who cannot handle himself.
A loser keeps getting high from trading while his equity shrinks. Trying to tell him
that he is a loser is like trying to take a bottle away from a drunk. A loser has to hit
rock bottom before he can begin to recover. You have to change how you think in
order to stop losing and begin your recovery as a trader.

Trader’s Rock Bottom
Hitting rock bottom feels horrible. It is painful and humiliating. You hit it when you
lose money you cannot afford to lose.You hit it when you gamble away your savings.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

9. LOSERS ANONYMOUS

25

You hit it after you tell your friends how smart you are and later have to ask them for a
loan.You hit rock bottom when the market comes roaring at you and yells: “You fool!”
Some people hit rock bottom after only a few weeks of trading. Others keep adding money to their accounts to postpone the day of reckoning. It hurts to see a loser
in the mirror. We spend our lifetime building up self-esteem. Most of us have a high
opinion of ourselves. Your first impulse may be to hide, but remember, you are not
alone. Almost every trader has been there.
Many traders who hit rock bottom slink away from the market and never look
back. Many who trade today will be gone in a year, if not sooner. They’ll hit rock
bottom, crumble, and leave. They’ll try to forget trading like a bad dream.
Some will lick their wounds and wait until the pain fades away and then return,
having learned little.They’ll be fearful, and their fear will further impair their trading.
Fortunately, some traders will recoil from rock bottom to begin the process of
change and growth. For these individuals, the pain of hitting rock bottom will break
the vicious cycle of getting high from winning and then losing everything and crashing. When you admit that your personal problem causes you to lose, you can begin building a
new trading life. â•—You can start developing the discipline of a winner.

Trader’s First Step
Just as an alcoholic needs to admit that he can’t control his drinking, a trader needs
to admit that he cannot control his losses. The first step of an AA member is to say: “I
am an alcoholic, I am powerless over alcohol.” As a trader, you have to take your first
step and say: “I am a loser, I am powerless over losses.”
Recovering alcoholics struggle to stay sober, one day at a time. A trader can recover, using the principles of AA. Now you have to struggle to trade without losses,
one day at a time.
You may say that’s impossible. What if you buy, and the market immediately declines? What if you sell short, and it turns out to be the bottom tick, and the market
immediately rallies? Even the best traders lose money on some trades.
The answer is to draw a line between a businessman’s risk and a loss. As traders,
we always take businessman’s risks, but we may never take a loss greater than this
predetermined risk.
For example, a storekeeper takes a risk every time he stocks new merchandise.
If it doesn’t sell, he’ll lose money. An intelligent businessman takes only risks that
will not put him out of business, even if he makes several mistakes in a row. Stocking
two crates of merchandise may be a sensible business risk, but stocking a full trailer
is probably a gamble.
As a trader, you are in the business of trading. You need to define your businessman’s risk—the maximum amount of money you’ll risk on any single trade. There
is no standard dollar amount, just as there is no standard business. An acceptable
businessman’s risk depends, first of all, on the size of your trading account. It also
depends on your trading method and pain tolerance.

26

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

The concept of a businessman’s risk will change the way you manage your money
(see Section 9, “Risk Management”). The absolute maximum a trader may risk on any
trade is two percent of his account equity. For example, if you have $30,000 in your
account, you may not risk more than $600 per trade, and if you have $10,000, you
may not risk more than $200. If your account is small, limit yourself to trading fewer
shares, less expensive futures, or mini-contracts. If you see an attractive trade, but a
logical stop would have to be placed where more than 2 percent of equity would be
at risk—pass on that trade.You may risk less, but you may never risk more.You must
avoid risking more than 2 percent on a trade the way a recovering alcoholic avoids bars.
A trader who blames high commissions on a broker and slippage on a floor trader
gives up control of his trading life. Try to reduce both, but take responsibility for
them. If you lose even a dollar more than your businessman’s risk, including commissions and slippage, you are a loser.
Do you keep good trading records? Poor record-keeping is a sure sign of a gambler. Good businessmen keep good records.Your trading records must show the date
and price of every entry and exit, slippage, commissions, stops, all adjustments of
stops, reasons for entering, objectives for exiting, maximum paper profit, maximum
paper loss after a stop was hit, and any other data necessary to review and fully understand your trade later in the future.
If you bail out of a trade within your businessman’s risk, it is normal business.
There is no bargaining, no waiting for another tick, no hoping for a change. Losing
a dollar more than your established businessman’s risk is like getting drunk, getting
into a brawl, getting sick to your stomach on your way home, and waking up in a
gutter.You would never want that to happen.

A Meeting for One
When you go to an AA meeting, you’ll see people who have not had a drink in years
stand up and say: “Hello, my name is so-and-so, and I am an alcoholic.” Why do they
call themselves alcoholics after years of sobriety? Because if they think they have
beaten alcoholism, they will start drinking again. If a person stops thinking he is an
alcoholic, he is free to take a drink, then another, and will probably end up in the gutter again. A person who wants to stay sober must remember that he is an alcoholic
for the rest of his life.
Traders would benefit from our own self-help organization—I’d call it Losers
Anonymous. Why not Traders Anonymous? Because a harsh name helps focus attention on our self-destructive tendencies. After all, Alcoholics Anonymous doesn’t call
itself Drinkers Anonymous. As long as you call yourself a loser, you’ll focus on avoiding losses.
Several traders have argued against what they thought was the “negative thinking”
of Losers Anonymous. A retired woman from Texas, a highly successful trader, described her approach. She is very religious, prays every morning, and then drives to
an office where she actively trades. Whenever the market starts moving against her,
she cuts her losses very fast because it would not please the Lord for her to lose His
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

10. WINNERS AND LOSERS

27

money. I thought that our methods were similar.The goal is to cut losses due to some
objective, external rule.
Trading within a businessman’s risk is like living without alcohol. A trader has to
admit that he is a loser, just as a drunk has to admit that he is an alcoholic. Then he
can begin his journey to recovery.
This is why every morning before trading I suggest saying: “Good morning, my
name is so-and-so, and I am a loser. I have it in me to do serious financial damage to
my account.” â•—This is like an AA meeting—it keeps your mind focused on the first
principles. Even if you take thousands of dollars out of the market today, tomorrow
you say: “Good morning, my name is so-and-so and I am a loser.”
A friend of mine joked: “When I sit in front of my quote screen in the morning,
I say, ‘My name is John, and I’m gonna rip your throat out.’” His thinking generates
tension. “Losers Anonymous” thinking generates serenity. A trader who feels serene
and relaxed can focus on looking for the best and safest trades. When a sober man
and a drunk enter a race, you know who is more likely to win. A drunk may win
once in a while, but the sober man is the one to bet on. You want to be the sober
man in that race.

■■10. Winners and Losers
We come to trading from different walks of life and bring along our mental baggage.
Many of us find that when we act in the market the way we do in our everyday life, we
lose money. Most of all, your success or failure depends on your ability to use intellect rather than act emotionally. A trader who feels overjoyed when he wins and depressed when he loses is at the mercy of market moves and cannot accumulate equity.
To be a winner in the market you must act coolly and responsibly.The pain of losing
drives people to look for magic methods. At the same time, they discard much of what
is useful in their professional or business backgrounds.

Like an Ocean
The market is like an ocean—it moves up and down regardless of what you wish.
You may feel joy when you buy a stock and it explodes in a rally. You may feel
drenched with fear when you go short but the market rises, melting your equity
with every uptick. Those feelings have nothing to do with the market—they exist
only inside of you.
The market doesn’t know you exist.You can do nothing to influence it. The ocean
doesn’t care about your welfare, but it has no wish to hurt you either. You can only
control your behavior.
A sailor cannot control the ocean, but he can control himself. He can study currents and weather patterns, learn good sailing techniques, and gain experience.
He can learn when to sail and when to stay in the harbor. A successful sailor uses
his intelligence.

28

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

An ocean can be useful—you can fish in it and use its surface to get to other
islands. An ocean can be dangerous—you can drown in it. The more rational your
approach, the more likely you are to get what you want. On the other hand, when
you act out your emotions, you cannot focus on the reality of the ocean.
A trader has to study trends and reversals in the market the way a sailor studies the
ocean. He must trade on a small scale while learning to handle his account. You can
never control the market, but you can learn to control yourself.
After a string of profitable trades, a beginner may feel he can walk on water. He
starts taking wild risks and blows up his account. On the other hand, an amateur
who takes several losses in a row often feels so demoralized that he cannot place an
order even when his system gives him a signal to buy or sell. If trading makes you
feel elated or frightened, you cannot fully use your intellect. When joy sweeps
you off your feet, you will make irrational trades and lose. When fear grips you,
you’ll miss profitable trades.
A sailor whose boat is being battered by ocean winds battens his sails—reduces
sail area. The first remedy for a trader battered by the market is to reduce the size of
his trades. Trade small while you’re learning or when feeling stressed.
A professional trader uses his head and stays calm. Only amateurs become excited
or depressed. Emotional trading is a luxury that nobody can afford.

Emotional Trading
Most people crave excitement and entertainment. Singers, actors, and professional
athletes command much higher incomes than such mundane workmen as physicians,
pilots, or college professors. People love to have their nerves tickled—they buy lottery tickets, fly to Las Vegas, and slow down to gawk at road accidents.
Emotional trading can be very addictive. Even those who drop money in the markets receive a fantastic entertainment value.
The market is a spectator sport and a participant sport rolled into one. Imagine
going to a major-league ball game in which you are not confined to the bleachers.
Pay a few hundred dollars and be allowed to run onto the field and join the game. If
you hit the ball right, you’ll get paid like a professional.
You would probably think twice before running onto the field the first few times.
This cautious attitude is responsible for the well-known “beginner’s luck.” Once a
beginner hits the ball right a few times and collects his pay, he is likely to get the idea
that he is as good as the pros or even better and could make a good living from the
game. Greedy amateurs start running onto the field too often, even when there are
no good playing opportunities. Before they know what hit them, a short string of
losses destroys their accounts.
The market is among the most entertaining places on the face of the Earth, but
emotional decisions are lethal. If you ever go to a racetrack, turn around, and watch
the humans instead of horses. Gamblers stomp their feet, jump up and down, and
yell at horses and jockeys. Thousands of people act out their emotions. Winners embrace, and losers tear up their tickets in disgust.The joy, the pain, and the intensity of
wishful thinking are caricatures of what happens in the markets. A cool handicapper
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

10. WINNERS AND LOSERS

29

who makes his living at the track does not get excited, yell, or bet the bulk of his roll
on a single race, or even in a single day.1
Casinos love drunks. They pour gamblers free drinks to make them more emotional and gamble more. Casinos also throw out calm and intelligent card-counters.
There is less free liquor on Wall Street than in a casino, but at least here, they do not
throw you out for being a good trader.

In Charge of Your Life
When a monkey hurts its foot on a tree stump, he flies into a rage and kicks the
piece of wood. You laugh at a monkey, but do you laugh at yourself when you act
like him? If the market drops while you are long, you may double up on your losing
trade or else flip and go short, trying to get even. This is acting emotionally instead
of using your intellect. What’s the difference between a trader trying to get back at
the market and a monkey kicking a tree stump? Acting out of anger, fear, or elation
destroys the chance of success. You have to analyze your behavior instead of acting
out your feelings.
We get angry at the market; we become afraid of it and develop silly superstitions.
All the while, the market keeps cycling through its rallies and declines like an ocean
going through its storms and calm periods. Mark Douglas writes in The Disciplined
Trader that in the market, “There is no beginning, middle, or end—only what you
create in your own mind. Rarely do any of us grow up learning to operate in an arena
that allows for complete freedom of creative expression, with no external structure
to restrict it in any way.”
We try to cajole or manipulate the market, acting like the ancient emperor Xerxes,
who ordered his soldiers to horsewhip the sea for sinking his fleet. Most of us aren’t
aware of how manipulative we are, how we bargain and act out our feelings. Most of
us consider ourselves the center of the universe and expect every person or group to
be either good or bad to us. This does not work in the market, which is completely
impersonal.
Leston Havens, a Harvard University psychiatrist, wrote: “Cannibalism and slavery
are probably the oldest manifestations of human predation and submission. Although
both are now discouraged, their continued existence in psychological forms demonstrates that civilization has achieved great success in moving from the concrete and
physical to the abstract and psychological, while persisting in the same purposes.”
Parents threaten their children, bullies hit them, and teachers try to bend their will
in school. Little wonder that most of us grow up either hiding in a shell or learning
how to manipulate others in self-defense. Acting independently doesn’t feel natural
to us—but that is the only way to succeed in the market.

1

I carry in my wallet a free lifetime pass to New York’s Belmont racetrack that belonged to my late
great friend Lou Taylor. It looks like an employee card, but on the “position” line it says—winner.
He won many handicapping championships and continued to take money from the racetrack until a
few months before he died.

30

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Douglas warns, “If the market’s behavior seems mysterious to you, it’s because
your own behavior is mysterious and unmanageable.You can’t really determine what
the market is likely to do next when you don’t even know what you’ll do next.”
Ultimately, “the one thing you can control is yourself. As a trader, you have the power
either to give yourself money or to give your money to other traders.” He adds, “The
traders who can make money consistently...approach trading from the perspective
of a mental discipline.”
All of us have our own demons to exorcise on the journey to becoming successful
traders. Here are several rules that worked for me as I grew from a wild amateur
into an erratic semiprofessional and finally into a calm professional trader. You may
change this list to suit your personality.
1. Decide that you are in the market for the long haul—that is, you want to be a
