
and two percent of Blue Chip Stamps13—he and Susie had hauled home roughly $16 million in cash by the
end of 1969. During the ensuing year, the shares of Berkshire and Diversified quickly began to change hands,
as though a giant were shuffling a deck of cards. As he had promised—but on a scale that might have
staggered his partners, had they known—Buffett used the cash he got from the partnership to buy still more
Berkshire and Diversified for his own account. He used Berkshire’s cash to buy its own stock, and for DRC,
offered to buy the company’s stock from some people in exchange for a DRC note that paid interest at nine
percent.14 He bought from people ranging from his former brother-in-law Truman Wood to his first investor,
Homer Dodge, and his son Norton.15 Those who rejected these offers had to be willing to ride along and let
Buffett reinvest the earnings without ever paying out a dime—a show of trust that was important to him.16
Forever after, he would feel a loyalty to those who kept the stock—a loyalty of such depth and strength that
the standard-model modern CEO would find it completely incomprehensible. Berkshire, he would later
reflect, is still “like a partnership. You basically have the closest thing to a private business with
shareholders who identify with you and who like to come to Omaha.” He thought of partners as people who
had come together out of a complex set of shared values and interests, not out of short-term economic
convenience. He often said that he tried to treat his partners the way he would his family. His partners were
people who trusted him, people to whom he owed a special duty. In return, he expected loyalty from them.
Yet people made their decisions for all sorts of reasons. Some needed money. Others simply invested in the
Sequoia Fund after listening to Bill Ruane. Many people’s brokers urged them to sell the stock of a moneygobbling textile mill. Some listened, some didn’t. Some professional investors had other options and thought
they were better off without these humdrum stocks. When Warren went to the West Coast in person and
offered the DRC note, Estey Graham’s sister Betty sold her stock; Estey didn’t. Rhoda Sarnat, Ben Graham’s
cousin, and her husband, Bernie, decided not to sell, telling themselves, Warren’s buying, and if it’s good
enough for him, it’s good enough for us.17 When he offered the note to his sister Doris, she refused it,
thinking, If he’s buying, why would I sell?
A few partners quizzed Buffett more closely in person for his opinion of how the stocks would do. He said,
carefully, that he thought they would do well, but it could take a long time. People like Jack Alexander and
Marshall Weinberg parsed those words, considered the fact that they were good investors themselves, and
sold him part of their stock.
Munger would later call Buffett an “implacable acquirer,” like John D. Rockefeller in the early days of
assembling his empire, who let nobody and nothing get in his way.18 With hindsight, some people felt hard
done by, enticed, or even misled. Others said to themselves, in effect, Well, that’s just Warren. I should have
known.
By the end of 1970, many of the former partners had cashed out while Warren continued buying more stock.
His and Susie’s ownership of Berkshire had shot from eighteen percent to almost thirty-six percent. Their
ownership of DRC had nearly doubled, to thirty-nine percent. As a practical matter, Buffett now controlled
both.19 He had also bought more Blue Chip, taking him from two percent to over thirteen percent ownership
of its stock.
But it was clear to Susie Buffett that Warren’s gyrations to get control of Diversified and Berkshire
Hathaway meant that her husband’s second “retirement” would be similar to his first. One reason was that
Blue Chip was in the same sort of trouble as Berkshire Hathaway.20 The business was no longer just
shrinking, it was dying, so he and Munger would have to buy something new to springboard its capital.
In late 1971, after President Nixon abandoned the gold standard, the price of oil skyrocketed and half the
country’s oil companies suddenly stopped issuing trading stamps. With prices of everything leapfrogging day
by day because of inflation, the classic retailing method of enticing customers into a store through a panoply
of services and giveaways was thrown overboard. People wanted the lowest price, and retailers headed to a
discount model.21 Any chance that housewives would plan their shopping to collect enough books of trading
stamps to get an electric frying pan evaporated.

Then one day Buffett got a call from Bill Ramsey, Blue Chip’s president, saying that a local Los Angeles
company, See’s Candies, was for sale. Buffett had carved out a tiny subspecialty of studying candy
companies, keeping a file on Fanny Farmer22 and looking into the company that made Necco Wafers. But
candy companies were expensive. So far, he had never bitten. “Call Charlie,” he said.23 Munger was in
charge of Blue Chip, their West Coast business.
See’s, founded in 1921 by a Canadian candy salesman, competed by using the finest quality butter, cream,
chocolate, fruits, and nuts, painstakingly prepared to “See’s Quality,” which was better than “top quality.”
During World War II, rather than dilute its recipes to stretch rationed ingredients, See’s had put signs in its
distinctive black-and-white stores: “Sold out. Buy war bonds for Christmas.”24 The company became a
California institution.
“See’s has a name that nobody can get near in California,” Munger told him. “We can get it at a reasonable
price. It’s impossible to compete with that brand without spending all kinds of money.” Ed Anderson thought
it was expensive, but Munger was overflowing with enthusiasm. He and Buffett went through the plant, and
Munger said, “What a fantastic business. And the manager, Chuck Huggins—boy, is he smart, and we can
keep him on!”25
See’s had a tentative deal on the table already and wanted $30 million for assets worth $5 million.26 The
difference was See’s brand, reputation, and trademarks—and most of all, its customer goodwill. Susie
Buffett, for example, was crazy about See’s, which she had discovered in California.
They decided that See’s was like a bond—worth paying $25 million for. If the company had paid out its
earnings as “interest,” the interest would average about nine percent. That was not enough—owning a
business was riskier than owning a bond, and the “interest rate” was not guaranteed. But the earnings were
growing, on average twelve percent a year. So See’s was like a bond whose interest payments grew.27
Furthermore:
“We thought it had uncapped pricing power. See’s was selling candy for about the price of Russell Stover
at the time, and the big question in my mind was, if you got another fifteen cents a pound, that was two and
a half million dollars on top of four million dollars of earnings. So you really were buying something that
perhaps could earn six and a half or seven million dollars at the time, if just priced a little more
aggressively.”
They had to negotiate to buy the company from two people: first, Charles B. See—or “Candy Harry,” as
Buffett, Munger, and Guerin called him—who was managing the estate of his recently deceased older
brother, Larry See. The two brothers were partners, but Larry had run the business.
“Candy Harry really didn’t want to run See’s. He was interested in wine and girls. He wanted to chase
after girls. But, of course, he got cold feet about selling at the last minute. Rick and Charlie went to see
him, and Charlie gave one of the great lectures of all time on the advantages of grapes and girls, how the
highest and best use of Candy Harry’s time was chasing after women.”
The other person involved was “Numbers Harry,” Harry W. Moore, the company’s finance chief and a
director. Through its lawyers, Blue Chip set about courting Numbers Harry through the financial advantages
of the deal, while suggesting to Candy Harry that a sale would relieve him of potential conflicts of interest
that arose from serving as his brother’s executor.28
At the price Blue Chip offered, $25 million, the $4 million it was earning pretax would give Buffett and
Munger payback of nine percent after-tax on their investment from the first day they bought it—not factoring
in future growth. Adding in the $2 to $3 million of price increases they thought See’s could institute, the
return on their capital would rise to fourteen percent: a decent level of profitability on an investment,
although it wasn’t a sure thing. The key was whether the earnings would continue to grow. Buffett and

Munger came close to walking. The pickings had been so easy until now, and they had such an ingrained
habit of underbidding, that it was like swallowing live guppies for them to pay the asking price.
“You guys are crazy,” Munger’s employee Ira Marshall said. “There are some things you should pay up
for—human quality, business quality, and so forth. You’re underestimating quality.”
“Warren and I listened to the criticism,” says Munger. “We changed our mind. In the end, they came to the
exact dollar limit of what we were willing to pay.”29
While the deal was being struck, Buffett discovered that Tweedy, Browne already owned a thousand shares
of See’s. Buffett ordered the firm to tender its stock to him. The Tweedy, Browne partners knew how
valuable See’s was and thought the price was too low. They resisted and debated the issue briefly with
Buffett. They did not see why they should give him their See’s stock. He insisted he needed the stock more
than Tweedy, Browne did. Buffett won. They gave him the stock.30
The instant that the deal was inked and the trio of Buffett, Munger, and Guerin joined the board, Buffett
threw himself into the candy business with an enthusiasm he had never displayed with companies like
Dempster and Berkshire Hathaway, where he had appointed proxies. He sent boxes of See’s to his fellow
Grahamites. Within days, he wrote a detailed letter to Chuck Huggins, executive vice president, explaining
that he had been talking to shopping-center owners around the country about opening new See’s stores in
locations like Colorado Springs, Fayetteville, and Galveston. He suggested that Huggins avoid Iowa, because
the shopping-center executives had told him that “Iowans are generally not candy enthusiasts.”31 He gave
Huggins permission to stop sending monthly boxes of candy to the long list of women whom Candy Harry
had designated as his special friends. He started following sugar futures and cocoa futures, which at 58 cents
a pound were approaching prices unheard of since the year of the Rockwood cocoa caper.32
Buffett suggested experimenting with prepackaged candy. He wanted to see results, budgets, and lots and lots
of financial information. He wrote Huggins about a store in Las Vegas: “It’s interesting how many more
dollars we can take out of a community when we get the right sort of location. You are doing a first-class job
of extending our ring of preeminence.” Buffett suggested that Huggins “play around with” advertising slogans
and try to come up with one along the lines of Coca-Cola’s “pause that refreshes,” or the “Rocky Mountain
spring water” of Coors beer.33 It was as if, over his breakfast cornflakes, Huggins could dream up an
advertising slogan as compelling as Coca-Cola’s.34 One longtime employee described Buffett’s Dale
Carnegie management style this way: “He’d always praise you while he gave you more to do.”35
As the bar subtly rose an inch or two with each new accomplishment, and the hurdler was reassured that he
could surely leap to ever-higher heights, the effect was like a tiny stream of water: Its gentle, unrelenting
pressure felt wonderful until it finally drove its recipient mad. Thus, when Buffett’s attention broke, as it
inevitably did, it could seem like a relief. Deceived by the initial gush of enthusiasm, Huggins signed up
Buffett for several candy-industry trade magazines. Eventually, Buffett, turning his attention to some newer
interest, asked for a cease-and-desist. “Charlie may have visions of becoming a candymaker someday,” he
wrote, “but I will continue to just read the statements.”36 He had discovered that he liked owning a candy
company, not running one.
It was much the same at home. Buffett would tell someone with great sincerity, “Please come visit, I really
want to see you,” then bury his head in a newspaper when they arrived, apparently satisfied with their
presence. But there was also the odd chance that he wanted to talk and talk, and they might go away
exhausted. Susie had seen his enthusiasms come and go.
Warren was still besotted with his wife, praised her constantly in public, and cuddled her on his lap. But at
home, as always, he withdrew into his private pursuits and wanted to be taken care of. Susie referred to him
as an “iceberg” to one of her friends. However, nothing had really changed in their relationship since the
beginning—except her feelings. He was content. He reasoned that because she loved to give, by receiving he
served her. Based on their past and her behavior with people in general, and with him in particular, there was

no reason for him to think otherwise. But Susie’s own desires were changing. She, the emotional vending
machine, was now taking care of many more people than Warren alone; recently she had watched over Alice
Buffett as she succumbed after a painful battle with cancer. Yet this time, Susie was developing a yearning to
be taken care of herself.
Thus, while her husband pursued his new businesses away from Omaha or sat sunk in thought in his office,
Susie spent less and less time at home, going to lunch, to dinner, or to jazz clubs in the evening with friends,
and traveling more widely. She now had a number of new friends much younger than she. They admired her
and returned her generosity and tenderness with openly expressed feelings that ranged from warmhearted
affection to outright adoration. But they were less like adopted children and more like genuine friends, albeit
friends who, like all her friends, needed her.
At home, Susie had begun paying attention to Peter, her quiet son, in a different way, treating him, too, as
friend, confidant, and source of emotional support, now that he was growing up and about to enter high
school.
Susie Jr. was living in Lincoln, having enrolled at the University of Nebraska. Howie, who had broken the
family record for getting grounded, was in his junior year of high school and Susie now devoted herself to
launching him into college; she took him to debate meets and helped him corral his energy and burnish his
high school record. Warren, as usual, was happy to delegate all these responsibilities to her.
Susie did succeed in enticing Warren to really pitch in and get involved—rather than simply write checks
—whenever business intersected with a cause to which he could lend his expertise. Her friend Rodney Wead
and other leaders in the black community had gotten the idea of starting a minority-owned bank to enhance
community pride and economic development on the North Side. Promoting “black capitalism,” they came to
Buffett and his friend Nick Newman, the man who had sponsored Warren in local civil-rights activities.37
Wead was a respected figure in Omaha, and Buffett liked banks. He had just joined the board of Omaha
National Corporation, the biggest bank in town, a long-held ambition.38 He had an automatic—and rational
—predisposition toward any business where people gave money to the business faster than the company
disbursed it. So he was willing to listen to Wead, but wanted to know if a minority bank was viable. Since the
hope was that Community Bank would attract a diverse group of customers, he hired Peter and one of his
friends to sit outside another minority bank to count how many people went inside and to classify them by
race.39 Peter’s tally made Warren optimistic, so he joined an advisory board of directors for the Community
Bank of Nebraska and also got John Harding from Ruane, Cunniff on the board.40 Buffett told the founders
that if they could raise $250,000 in stock from the black community, the advisory board would raise money
to match it.41 The bank set up its office in a trailer. “You’re really hitting bottom, Warren,” said Joe
Rosenfield, “when we’re asking people to put their money into something you can drive off in the middle of
the night and take the whole bank with it.”
Most of the managers and the board of directors—which included Buffett’s baseball player friend Bob
Gibson—were black, and most were financial tender-foots. To stave off disaster, Buffett went into his
teaching mode and tried to educate the founders on the need for strong lending standards. The bank, he
stressed, was not a charity or social-services agency. He attended monthly board meetings that stretched late
into the night, but, as with the companies he owned, he was never involved in the day-to-day management.42
Harding, however, spent every day at the bank, making sure its numbers balanced. “The management from
the community was well-intentioned,” Harding says, “but not financially savvy.” Asked for more money to
cover bad loans, Buffett said no. Wead felt Buffett “didn’t understand the cycle of poverty” and “never
understood his role as a wealthy man in our beleaguered community.”43 But Buffett understood the numbers;
he knew the bank wouldn’t help anyone by relaxing its lending standards and making uncollectible loans,
which would only teach the wrong financial lesson. So the bank limped along for years without growing.
He got a chance to help in another way when Hallie Smith, a friend of Susie’s, began to bring her the names
of black kids who needed money because they couldn’t pay for college. Susie started giving a thousand

dollars here and there. “I’ve got to ask Warren,” she said over and over. “Susie, you have money; why don’t
you just pay for it?” Smith asked in amazement. “No, I can’t,” Susie always said. “It has to go through
Warren.” Smith found it incredible that someone as rich as Susie allowed her husband to make every decision
involving money.44
Thus, while Susie was in charge of the family foundation, they worked together on funding and donations.
She would have given away huge sums had Warren not put on the brakes. The foundation made small grants
to education, and it didn’t have professional management. To do a proper job of managing it required
thinking forward: What was going to happen to all that money someday when it ended up in the foundation?
Warren felt that someday was far away. Susie had a passionate desire to help in the here and now, but
someone needed to strategize for the future.
A year before, Warren had had what for many forty-year-olds would have been a wake-up call. During a
dinner at the Sarnats’in California, one of his fingers started to swell. He had taken a double dose of delayedaction penicillin earlier that day for a minor infection. Bernie Sarnat, a surgeon, suspected an allergic
reaction. He gave Warren antihistamines and advised him to get to a hospital.45
Buffett didn’t want to go to the hospital. He had already had enough of sickness in 1971, after a recent bout
of salmonella.46 Besides, said Susie, he was a bad patient and had a palpable horror of doctors and hospitals,
sickness and medicine.47 He had Susie drive him back to the house they were renting for the summer. But as
he continued ballooning and grew dizzy and sick, she began an urgent search for a doctor who could see
Warren in a hurry. The one she finally reached insisted that they go to an emergency room immediately
instead. By then Buffett was barely conscious, and the emergency room team started working to save his life.
Three days later, he was still in the hospital. He was lucky, the doctors told him. His penicillin allergy was so
severe that if he took it again, he would be dead. As he recovered, Roy and Martha Tolles tried to cheer him
up by bringing him a copy of Playboy magazine, but he was too weak to hold it himself and had Susie turn
the pages for him. Warren complained, however, that she flipped the pages too fast.
Yet even after this encounter with his own mortality, back home in Omaha he remained as fixated on
business as ever. Retirement, in Buffett’s special sense, meant no longer acting as a fiduciary. He would be
investing as long as he was breathing. He could not help but be competitive—so much so that recently, when
six-year-old Jonathan Brandt, son of his friends Henry and Roxanne Brandt, had taken him on in chess,
Warren couldn’t bear it when it looked as though he was losing. As the game neared its conclusion, he began
Buffetting little Jonny until he won.48
By the time her husband had vanquished little Jonny Brandt, Susie had cultivated an attitude of ironic
detachment about Warren’s stubbornness. “Whatever Warren wants, Warren gets,” was her way of
describing the man who, as his little sister Bertie had observed all those years ago, always got his way.49 On a
visit to Des Moines with a friend to hear the writer and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel speak at one of the
local synagogues, Susie had spent hours talking to Milt Brown, who now lived there, at a dessert party at
somebody’s house.50 For some time she had been filled with feelings of regret about that interrupted
relationship; she now wondered openly to close friends whether it was too late to go down a different path.
While she rarely talked about her problems or showed self-pity, she acknowledged being depressed about the
state of her marriage. But despite her unhappiness, she made no move to address her issues directly or to
leave; rather, she rekindled her relationship with Milt. And increasingly she seemed drawn to California. She
had “fallen in love” with the place they had been renting at Emerald Bay in Laguna Beach, perched fifty feet
above the ocean among a group of other luxury vacation homes.51
Warren particularly disliked buying houses, considering money spent on them as lying fallow, not earning its
keep. Susie needled him about money. “If we were rich,” she said, “you would just go up to that house, and
ask the owner how much she wants for it, and pay however much she asked. But I know we’re not rich.” In
their perpetual tug-of-war, however, Susie was usually able to dislodge the cash from him in the end. Buffett
eventually sent Roy Tolles’s wife, Martha, a canny bargainer, to negotiate for the house. She dickered the
