
Fibonacci numbers tie closely to Elliott Wave Theory. Fortunately, swing traders can apply Fibs
with little knowledge of wave motion. Understand that primary trends travel in five waves (three
forward and two backward), while countertrends move in three waves (two forward and one
backward). Those simple mechanics allow easy Fib grid manipulation. Try to place the grid from a
double top or bottom through a fifth-wave parabola. Then apply subset grids closer to the intended
trade setup. Pullbacks from primary trends tend to display A-B-C countertrend motion. In an
uptrend, price drops through an A wave, bounces into a B wave that usually won’t reach the former
high, and then falls into a C wave that violates the A bottom.
Trends in all time frames have common elements and similar proportionality. Most markets swing
off Fib ratios as they move from support to resistance and back. In many respects, this proportional
motion reveals the underlying nature of price movement. But Fib ratios rarely align perfectly with
each other through all time frames. This generates most of the noise that prints on stock charts.
Discord creates whipsaw, range, and a host of other charting features that occupy the landscape.
This phasing relationship between Fib proportions illustrates the power of this mathematics. It also
advises swing traders to seek price action with strong Fib convergence between trends at different
levels and time frames. These well-aligned segments offer highly predictive price action with very
low noise.
Include detailed reward:risk analysis in all trade decisions that rely upon Fib retracement. Other key
Fib percentages will hinder progress after a price reversal. This may not hurt the trade if it depends
upon a longer holding period. But should the strategy profit from a single direct price thrust,
sufficient reward must justify the position. Focus on getting into the market at major Fib ratios
while standing aside as price hovers between key zones. The smartest execution will be counter to
the most immediate short-term trend with most strategies.
Fibonacci defines trend movement over broad time frames as well as very short ones. This
retracement science also works in bear markets as well as bull markets. Major declines frequently
recover 50% or 62% of the last selloff before rolling over to retest the lows. Keep in mind that short
squeezes should not retrace 100% of the last opposing move. Use the Fib grid to locate their natural
failure level for a lower risk short sale.
This proportional force tests trends while volatility and volume decrease. No guarantees exist that
any particular retracement level will hold price and trigger a solid bounce. So many swing traders
just wait. They adopt a defensive strategy that stands aside until the stock reaches the 62%
barrier. Since this represents the deepest potential bounce, odds favor stronger S/R than other
levels. Of course, many trends never pull back this deeply, and they miss opportunities. But this
tactic also avoids false bottoms and tops.
Execute positions at this deep retracement as soon as it strikes if three to four forms of crossverification support the trade. If not, stand aside and wait a little longer. While the 62% level should
provide S/R, this zone can experience strong whipsaws. One excellent signal arises when 62%
breaks and price expands toward 70–75% before it remounts the broken level. While this
contradicts natural trend rules, modern markets demand new flexibility.
Fibonacci remains poorly understood, but this may change. Most new software packages contain
grids and instructions on how to use them. As the crowd’s knowledge of classic retracement grows,
these levels will experience more unforeseen behavior. But don’t toss aside this important tool just
yet. Nature cannot be undone by manipulation. S/R at these levels should persist although violations
and whipsaws will increase. Learn to step in front of, stand behind, or oppose the crowd when
building swing strategies that rely on Fibs.

FIGURE 5.28
Five-wave rally stretches across the Fibonacci landscape. The first wave carries 38%, where it congests into a
second wave pullback. A continuation gap then appears right on schedule through the midpoint of the trend. The
fourth wave forms quickly as it whipsaws across the 62% level until a fifth wave finally ejects from the 50% line.
The rally peaks and the A corrective wave carries down to the 38% retracement, where it bounces into a B wave.
This small move fails and carries the C wave to a successful test at 62%.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Intraday Fib applications keep swing traders ahead of the competition. Find an active stock and start
a grid from the high or low of a session’s last hour. Stretch it to the opposite end of the next
morning’s first-hour high or low. This grid now defines hidden S/R that may carry the stock into a
new trend. This method shows great success in dynamic markets with gap opens. The gap will often
stretch right across a key retracement level and allow low-risk entry. Another strategy builds a grid
across the first hour’s range. Use the levels to locate S/R as the stock swings back and forth. Many
issues will finally base at the 38% level at either end before breaking out of the range.
Expect greater violations on intraday Fibs than longer-term charts. A single tick can distort a perfect
pullback. Don’t count on tight movement to the 38%, 50%, and 62% levels. Very small trends also
resolve many larger mathematical forces that impact retracement. Use candlesticks instead of bar
charts to filter out this intraday noise. Also keep track of larger-trend Fib levels that price might
cross during that session. Larger time frames always take precedence over smaller ones in swing
trading tactics.

FIGURE 5.29
Strong trends frequently generate vertical third wave movement through their 38–62% Fibonacci zones. When these
primary rallies and selloffs pull back into typical ABC corrections, the central B waves often tighten into congestion at
the 38–62% zone of that smaller countertrend. Although multiple Fibonacci and wave levels appear confusing at first
glance, they intertwine into a proportional system that helps the swing trader predict the next sharp price expansion.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Target new high and low extremes with Fib extensions. Look within congestion to locate the
inception point for the trend that leads into the break. Price will often thrust 38% beyond the
distance from this point to the prior high or low (see Figure 5.27). Then locate smaller trend
impulses and lay new grids over these. They will target intermediate resistance as price breaks into
uncharted territory.
Many participants can’t figure out where to start and end Fib grids. In fact, the absolute lows or
highs within a trend may not yield the best results. But always try them first and see whether the
intermediate levels correspond with obvious S/R. Try another approach when retracements pass
through zones that show little interest. High and low congestion often prints a test just before a
trend impulse starts and price exits the pattern. Use this second bottom or top in place of the
absolute level. In many cases, intermediate Fib levels will now fit right where they belong.
FIGURE 5.30
Original Fibonacci analysis builds profits quickly. Pull a Fib grid from the high or low extension of the prior
session’s last 60–90-minutes through the first price thrust after a sharp morning gap. The boundaries now define

expected pullback and breakout levels for the new trading day. Notice how Altera retraces exactly to 38% before
returning to test and fail the first-hour range in a 2B reversal. The next morning ALTR completes a perfect cup
and handle breakout after a final pullback.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

MARKET NUMBERS
Support and resistance have many faces. Trendlines, price extremes, and hidden Fibonacci levels all
push markets back and forth. But the charting landscape does not end there. Trend development
also responds to a common decimal system of 10 and tenths. These important market numbers
spawn yet another S/R barrier with specific trading properties. And one peek at your fingers and
toes will explain their simple logic.
Round numbers generate predictable trend dynamics because markets shape patterns that involve
their participation. Watch a small stock pause just below $10 for months or a larger one fail to
mount $100 repeatedly. Read how an index finally breaks through an “important psychological
barrier” that turns out to be a big round number. This numbers logic even works in very small-scale
trading. Scalpers routinely fade rallies when price mounts a whole number but then falls back after
reaching 1/16 or 1/8 through the barrier. Then they flip positions as the pullback drops to 3/4 or
13/16 of the lower number.

Market participants respond to whole-number logic through self-fulfilling mechanics. The
unconscious mind computes profit-loss by dropping the fractions and acting at whole numbers.
Buyers plan to sell and sellers intend to buy when their favorite stocks hit prechosen ones. Analysts
publish reasoned price targets at them, and even stops tend to congregate right above and below
these powerful magnets.
Unique crowds tend to trade within each increment of $10 in valuation. Small retail participants
favor lower-priced stocks, while institutions and professionals fill their portfolios with more
expensive issues. One way to understand whole-number levels ($10, $20, $30, $40, etc.) visualizes
price action as one crowd hands off to the next at these major interfaces. Demand at the new whole
level must be great enough to absorb supply or price will not mount resistance.
Movement often narrows as price approaches the next level, and a range may form with one
boundary limited by the market number. Even strong trends can stall into quiet profit-taking,
frequent testing, and small retracements. This area of consolidation sets the stage for price to test
and mount the next whole number level. Measure the reduction in price volatility and prepare for
the climax of this redistribution process using classic empty zone strategy. Look for a sharp drop in
rate of change and the appearance of narrow range bars. This sets the stage for price to mount the
whole number. Stay alert during this quiet period—the new trend can emerge very quickly.
Whole number breakouts mimic other types of S/R. Negative feedback yields to directional
momentum as the level breaks. Price may pull back and test the new barrier repeatedly in the same
way as a classic breakout. When strong volume accompanies the move, small violations back across
the whole number represent low-risk entry. But if congestion forms for too long on the new side of
the barrier, many exit orders build and generate higher risk.
Once trend successfully tests a new market number, expect sharp movement away from that level.
Price often pushes quickly to the midpoint between the last whole number and the next one. This
divisor of 10 (10/2 = 5 in this case) presents a natural price magnet. Fifty, 100, and other multiples
of 10 also signal major barriers. Price faces much sharper retracement off these points than smaller
whole numbers. Look for complex patterns to form on both sides and persist longer than other
interfaces.
Congestion zones below key market numbers may signal bad news for uptrends. Major trend
changes occur more often near whole numbers than any other prices. These reversals first trumpet
their presence after they break through the barrier. Price then falls back and turns sideways into a
tight consolidation zone. The rangebound bars print a topping pattern that then fails on high
volume.
Step back and study the next-longest trend when price drops sharply off whole market numbers.
Significant reversals at these resistance points may not retrace for months or years. Trend change
dynamics reflect the unique crowd that holds positions through each round number series. As one
group attempts to take profits, the next crowd refuses to carry their stock. The trapped longs then
trigger a selloff that ends the trend.
Market numbers provide strong support in downtrends. One dependable scalping trade buys the first
failure of a market number unless it gaps to get there. But exercise caution with this classic strategy.
Bounce momentum back above a market number dies quickly, so profit depends upon tight stops
and defensive trading. Insider knowledge makes this trade very dependable. Market makers and
specialists know that stops concentrate just below market numbers. They manipulate price through
these levels to gather the sell orders and invite new short sales. Paradoxically, the volume surge

induced by this violation quickly alleviates selling pressure and triggers a short squeeze that pushes
a rebound above the round number.
Knowledge of market numbers evokes interesting short sale strategies. In an uptrend, aggressive
participants may sell short on the first strike when price action meets certain criteria. Look for
stocks that reach the number after an extended rally. Technical indicators should show an
overbought condition and suggest an impending rollover. Add cross-verification whenever possible
to increase safety. Then ensure that no congestion pattern sits right below this key resistance. For
example, don’t short 30 when a stock pushes up out of a base at 28 or 29.
A second short sale enters at the final breakdown of the market number. Declines below this
resistance can be sharp and nasty if cross-verification confirms a break through other support, such
as a moving average. In fact, market numbers routinely appear at major moving averages, Bollinger
Band extremes, and key retracement percentages. Watch closely for those times when multiple
indicators intersect at round numbers. Trades that initiate from these points represent high-reward
opportunities.
FIGURE 5.31
Immunex responds to market number logic. Over this 4-month period, whole numbers reversed at least eight rallies and
seven selloffs. Price first thrusts through the barrier, takes out the volume, and then quickly reverses in almost every
episode. Market numbers tend to short-circuit trends because large order volume behind these barriers can quickly
deplete the supply of buyers or sellers.

TICK
Intraday crowd behavior generates pulses of buying and selling pressure. Although one might
suspect chaos in modern markets, this constant oscillation exhibits both order and dimension. These
pulses track the 90-minute S&P alternation cycle but display much smaller and more detailed waves
of activity. Swing traders should align intraday execution to this important phenomenon.
The TICK indicator tracks the number of stocks whose last trade represents an uptick vs. a
downtick. This measurement prints for each major exchange in real time. The NYSE TICK
provides a highly predictive indicator for all American stock activity. Specifically, Nasdaq traders
can avoid that exchange’s TICK information and use the NYSE classic for all entries and exits.
Follow the TICK through real-time quotes and build a charting landscape that illustrates recent
historical activity. Avoid daily or weekly views of this powerful oscillator. The measurement moves
constantly between short-term extremes of –500 and +500. Longer-term charts look like jagged
mountains that reflect into clear lakes and provide little useful information to the swing trader.
The most effective TICK charts match the nature of the intraday markets. Try 5-minute or 15minute data with 2–3 days of market action, or use 60-minute charts with 5–10 days of history.
Always use candles in place of price bars. TICK charts print highly predictive doji and hammer
reversals. Candles tend to print 1-2-3 waves as buying-selling behavior oscillates between
extremes. Display the chart without any top-pane indicators because TICK responds to pure
trendline analysis better than any other examination.
The NYSE TICK routinely forms trendlines and parallel channels that reveal complex intraday S/R.
It also finds support at recent horizontal extremes that set natural limits on buying and selling
behavior. Start TICK analysis by drawing lines and channels that define the recent action. Extend
these lines and watch how they align to intraday reversals, breakouts, and price congestion.
Major violations shoot through the lines repeatedly. But TICK candle real bodies hold S/R and
allow decent trendlines most of the time. The sharp shadow zones flash important reversal signals
when they stretch out past a prior floor or ceiling. Never demand perfection when using this
important indicator. Its greatest value lies in the pure oscillations that uncover small cycles of herd
behavior.
TICK identifies natural entry and exit zones. When channels or trendlines break, activity surges in
the direction of the violation. These bar expansions exhibit a common trait with other forms of S/R.
Candles often pull back to test the break point before pushing further in the new direction. TICK
movement also has a natural advantage over price movement. While price can trend for hours or
days in a single direction, TICK will only carry to a short-term extreme and then reverse as supplydemand shifts. Align position entry with expected TICK behavior. Use the oscillator reversals and
breakouts for cross-verification. Also prepare to terminate a trade without price verification when
TICK flashes important contrary information.
TICK channel behavior organizes time into distinct units with high and low extremes appearing at
predictable points. These market fractals define time resistance. In other words, swing traders can
estimate the number of candles that will print before a new surge or reversal. This oscillation
persists into larger market cycles. It can mimic segments of the intraday S&P cycle or even the
broader 3-day swing cycle.
Watch TICK readings at important market turning points. In past years, strong reversals began
when the indicator struck extreme +1000 or –1000 levels. These natural overbought-oversold

boundaries persisted for years. But modern markets exhibit greater volatility than in the past. TICK
prints from +1500 through –1500 now occur during severe conditions. Swing traders can still apply
the older limits when estimating market turns on a relative basis. But always seek cross-verification
through index chart patterns for large-scale reversals.
FIGURE 5.32
NYSE TICK draws typical 5-minute patterns during early June. At least four distinct parallel channels and harmonics
print in less than 3 days. These well-marked zones uncover hidden reversals and point to impending price breakouts
during each intraday session. Note how candle shadows reach out to 400 and –400. Horizontal resistance define peaks
of buying or selling that can persist for days.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIGURE 5.33
TICK repeatedly strikes –1000 as the indicator signals the end of a deep correction. The third strike corresponds
directly to a 6-month low that Nasdaq hits just before it ejects into a strong rally. Unfortunately, modern markets don’t
always respond to these classic turning points. Recent corrections have sent the indicator closer to –1500 before a
significant reversal. Always look for several tests at deep TICK extremes to confirm a major shift in buying or selling
pressure.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

6 CHAPTER
UNDERSTANDING TIME

THE TIME ELEMENT
Price patterns reveal opportunity. But many participants fail to comprehend how poor time
management weakens tactics and empties accounts. Each promising setup has a holding period that
maximizes reward:risk. This optimal phase may not match the time frame anticipated in the
personal trading plan. Position and plan must synchronize time or they will lead to poor
results. Unfortunately, many ignore this important consideration and jump into the market anyway.
Proper time management separates winners from losers. Lazy participants misinterpret signals and
waste valuable resources when they ignore this essential strategic element. Time impacts two
charting landscape features. First, it defines how execution aligns with the price swing. Second, it
reveals internal market tendencies that impact trend on an intraday, daily, weekly, and monthly
basis.
Match holding period to time-sensitive setups and aggressively manage the information interface.
Real-time screens and databases must tune into specific time frames. It makes perfect sense to filter
databases through technical screens that favor important time characteristics. Align charts, indicator
settings, and focused attention to those same dimensions and synchronize tactics to a single layer of
market activity.
Tune trade entry to the time frame below the setup whenever possible. This optimizes reward and
visualizes short-term danger. Pay close attention to this view during active position management,
but base exit decisions on the chart that produced the opportunity in the first place. Use mental time
stops to manage holding period even when price avoids major violation.
Become a student of market time bias. The first and last hours as well as a variety of intraday quirks
bend short-term price development. Broader time periods bring about odd phenomena such as
Turnaround Tuesday, the 3-day swing, and tax loss season. Scheduled fundamental events routinely
impact price and distort index charts, and options expiration ensures that unwinding positions will
impact certain days of each market month.
Swing traders manipulate opportunity cost through their working capital. This important concept
reveals why cutting losses efficiently is so important for long-term survival. Assumption of a stock
position dictates that those funds will not be available for another trade. A critical issue then arises
on account drawdowns when the wrong decision dictates failure or triggers a margin call.
Mediocrity also impacts opportunity cost. Poor choices tie up capital when they lead to positions
that neither benefit nor hurt the trading account.
Time ignorance triggers expensive trend relativity errors. Great trade setups in one time frame lead
to terrible positions in another. All directional movement is time frame-specific. For example, a
rally on a daily chart says nothing about price movement on the monthly or intraday charts.
Effective planning reduces relativity errors. Calculate reward:risk, visualize the holding period, and
measure S/R only for the expected duration of the trade.
Technical indicators lose their effectiveness when improperly time-tuned. Alternatively, resonant
time readings produce startling accuracy with ordinary data input. Realize that canned settings offer
a general crowd snapshot but rarely produce effective signals for custom time strategies. Also note
that the length chosen for the chart view affects results just as much as the settings themselves.
