
Bargain Issues, or Net-Current-Asset Stocks
In the tests discussed above we did not include the results of buying 30 issues at a price less than their net-current-asset value. The reason was that only a handful, at most, of such issues would have been

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

391

found in the Stock Guide at the end of 1968. But the picture changed in
the 1970 decline, and at the low prices of that year a goodly number
of common stocks could have been bought at below their workingcapital value. It always seemed, and still seems, ridiculously simple
to say that if one can acquire a diversified group of common stocks at
a price less than the applicable net current assets alone—after deducting all prior claims, and counting as zero the fixed and other assets—
the results should be quite satisfactory. They were so, in our
experience, for more than 30 years—say, between 1923 and 1957—
excluding a time of real trial in 1930–1932.
Has this approach any relevance at the beginning of 1971? Our
answer would be a qualified “yes.” A quick runover of the Stock
Guide would have uncovered some 50 or more issues that appeared
to be obtainable at or below net-current-asset value. As might be
expected a good many of these had been doing badly in the difficult year 1970. If we eliminated those which had reported net
losses in the last 12-month period we would be still left with
enough issues to make up a diversified list.
We have included in Table 15-2 some data on five issues that
sold at less than their working-capital value* at their low prices of

TABLE 15-2 Stocks of Prominent Companies Selling at or Below
Net-Current-Asset Value in 1970

Company
Cone Mills
Jantzen Inc.
National Presto
Parker Pen
West Point
Pepperell

Earned
Book
Net-CurrentValue Per Share,
1970 Asset Value
1970
Price Per Share Per Share

Current
Dividend

High Price
Before
1970

13
111⁄8
211⁄2
91⁄4

$18
12
27
91⁄2

$39.3
16.3
31.7
16.6

$1.51
1.27
6.15
1.62

$1.00
.60
1.00
.60

411⁄2
37
45
311⁄4

161⁄4

201⁄2

39.4

1.82

1.50

64

* Technically, the working-capital value of a stock is the current assets per
share, minus the current liabilities per share, divided by the number of
shares outstanding. Here, however, Graham means “net working-capital
value,” or the per-share value of current assets minus total liabilities.

392

The Intelligent Investor

1970. These give some food for reflection on the nature of stockprice fluctuations. How does it come about that well-established
companies, whose brands are household names all over the country, could be valued at such low figures—at the same time when
other concerns (with better earnings growth of course) were selling
for billions of dollars in excess of what their balance sheets
showed? To quote the “old days” once more, the idea of good will
as an element of intangible value was usually associated with a
“trade name.” Names such as Lady Pepperell in sheets, Jantzen in
swim suits, and Parker in pens would be considered assets of great
value indeed. But now, if the “market doesn’t like a company,” not
only renowned trade names but land, buildings, machinery, and
what you will, can all count for nothing in its scales. Pascal said
that “the heart has its reasons that the reason doesn’t understand.”* For “heart” read “Wall Street.”
There is another contrast that comes to mind. When the going is
good and new issues are readily salable, stock offerings of no quality at all make their appearance. They quickly find buyers; their
prices are often bid up enthusiastically right after issuance to levels
in relation to assets and earnings that would put IBM, Xerox, and
Polaroid to shame. Wall Street takes this madness in its stride, with
no overt efforts by anyone to call a halt before the inevitable collapse in prices. (The SEC can’t do much more than insist on disclosure of information, about which the speculative public couldn’t
care less, or announce investigations and usually mild punitive
actions of various sorts after the letter of the law has been clearly
broken.) When many of these minuscule but grossly inflated enterprises disappear from view, or nearly so, it is all taken philosophically enough as “part of the game.” Everybody swears off such
inexcusable extravagances—until next time.
Thanks for the lecture, says the gentle reader. But what about
your “bargain issues”? Can one really make money in them without taking a serious risk? Yes indeed, if you can find enough of
them to make a diversified group, and if you don’t lose patience if

* Le coeur a ses raisons que la raison ne connaît point. This poetic passage is one of the concluding arguments in the great French theologian’s
discussion of what has come to be known as “Pascal’s wager” (see commentary on Chapter 20).

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

393

they fail to advance soon after you buy them. Sometimes the
patience needed may appear quite considerable. In our previous
edition we hazarded a single example (p. 188) which was current
as we wrote. It was Burton-Dixie Corp., with stock selling at 20,
against net-current-asset value of 30, and book value of about 50. A
profit on that purchase would not have been immediate. But in
August 1967 all the shareholders were offered 533⁄4 for their shares,
probably at just about book value. A patient holder, who had
bought the shares in March 1964 at 20 would have had a profit of
165% in 31⁄2 years—a noncompounded annual return of 47%. Most
of the bargain issues in our experience have not taken that long to
show good profits–nor have they shown so high a rate. For a somewhat similar situation, current as we write, see our discussion of
National Presto Industries above, p. 168.

Special Situations or “Workouts”
Let us touch briefly on this area, since it is theoretically includable in the program of operations of an enterprising investor. It
was commented upon above. Here we shall supply some examples
of the genre, and some further remarks on what it appears to offer
an open-minded and alert investor.
Three such situations, among others, were current early in 1971,
and they may be summarized as follows:
Situation 1. Acquisition of Kayser-Roth by Borden’s. In January
1971 Borden Inc. announced a plan to acquire control of KayserRoth (“diversified apparel”) by giving 11⁄3 shares of its own stock in
exchange for one share of Kayser-Roth. On the following day, in
active trading. Borden closed at 26 and Kayser-Roth at 28. If an
“operator” had bought 300 shares of Kayser-Roth and sold 400 Borden at these prices and if the deal were later consummated on the
announced terms, he would have had a profit of some 24% on the
cost of his shares, less commissions and some other items. Assuming the deal had gone through in six months, his final profit might
have been at about a 40% per annum rate.
Situation 2. In November 1970 National Biscuit Co. offered to
buy control of Aurora Plastics Co. at $11 in cash. The stock was selling at about 81⁄2; it closed the month at 9 and continued to sell there at
year-end. Here the gross profit indicated was originally about 25%,
subject to the risks of nonconsummation and to the time element.

394

The Intelligent Investor

Situation 3. Universal-Marion Co., which had ceased its business
operations, asked its shareholders to ratify dissolution of the concern.
The treasurer indicated that the common stock had a book value of
about $281⁄2 per share, a substantial part of which was in liquid form.
The stock closed 1970 at 211⁄2, indicating a possible gross profit here, if
book value was realized in liquidation, of more than 30%.
If operations of this kind, conducted on a diversified basis for
spreading the risk, could be counted to yield annual profits of, say,
20% or better, they would undoubtedly be more than merely
worthwhile. Since this is not a book on “special situations,” we are
not going into the details of the business—for it really is a business.
Let us point out two contradictory developments there in recent
years. On the one hand the number of deals to choose from has
increased enormously, as compared with, say, ten years ago. This is
a consequence of what might be called a mania of corporations to
diversify their activities through various types of acquisitions, etc.
In 1970 the number of “merger announcements” aggregated some
5,000, down from over 6,000 in 1969. The total money values
involved in these deals amounted to many, many billions. Perhaps
only a small fraction of the 5,000 announcements could have presented a clear-cut opportunity for purchase of shares by a specialsituations man, but this fraction was still large enough to keep him
busy studying, picking, and choosing.
The other side of the picture is that an increasing proportion of
the mergers announced failed to be consummated. In such cases, of
course, the aimed-for profit is not realized, and is likely to be
replaced by a more or less serious loss. Reasons for nonsuccess are
numerous, including antitrust intervention, shareholder opposition, change in “market conditions,” unfavorable indications from
further study, inability to agree on details, and others. The trick
here, of course, is to have the judgment, buttressed by experience,
to pick the deals most likely to succeed and also those which are
likely to occasion the smallest loss if they fail.*

* As discussed in the commentary on Chapter 7, merger arbitrage is wholly
inappropriate for most individual investors.

Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor

395

Further Comment on the Examples Above
Kayser-Roth. The directors of this company had already
rejected (in January 1971) the Borden proposal when this chapter
was written. If the operation had been “undone” immediately the
overall loss, including commissions, would have been about 12%
of the cost of the Kayser-Roth shares.
Aurora Plastics. Because of the bad showing of this company
in 1970 the takeover terms were renegotiated and the price reduced
to 101⁄2. The shares were paid for at the end of May. The annual rate
of return realized here was about 25%.
Universal-Marion. This company promptly made an initial
distribution in cash and stock worth about $7 per share, reducing
the investment to say 141⁄2. However the market price fell as low as
13 subsequently, casting doubt on the ultimate outcome of the liquidation.
Assuming that the three examples given are fairly representative of “workout or arbitrage” opportunities as a whole in 1971, it
is clear that they are not attractive if entered into upon a random
basis. This has become more than ever a field for professionals,
with the requisite experience and judgment.
There is an interesting sidelight on our Kayser-Roth example.
Late in 1971 the price fell below 20 while Borden was selling at 25,
equivalent to 33 for Kayser-Roth under the terms of the exchange
offer. It would appear that either the directors had made a great
mistake in turning down that opportunity or the shares of KayserRoth were now badly undervalued in the market. Something for a
security analyst to look into.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 15

It is easy in the world to live after the world’s opinion; it is easy
in solitude to live after our own; but the great man is he who in
the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE
Max Heine, founder of the Mutual Series Funds, liked to say that
“there are many roads to Jerusalem.” What this masterly stock picker
meant was that his own value-centered method of selecting stocks
was not the only way to be a successful investor. In this chapter we’ll
look at several techniques that some of today’s leading money managers use for picking stocks.
First, though, it’s worth repeating that for most investors, selecting
individual stocks is unnecessary—if not inadvisable. The fact that most
professionals do a poor job of stock picking does not mean that most
amateurs can do better. The vast majority of people who try to pick
stocks learn that they are not as good at it as they thought; the luckiest ones discover this early on, while the less fortunate take years to
learn it. A small percentage of investors can excel at picking their own
stocks. Everyone else would be better off getting help, ideally through
an index fund.
Graham advised investors to practice first, just as even the greatest
athletes and musicians practice and rehearse before every actual performance. He suggested starting off by spending a year tracking and
picking stocks (but not with real money).1 In Graham’s day, you would

1

Patricia Dreyfus, “Investment Analysis in Two Easy Lessons” (interview
with Graham), Money, July, 1976, p. 36.
396

Commentary on Chapter 15

397

have practiced using a ledger of hypothetical buys and sells on a
legal pad; nowadays, you can use “portfolio trackers” at websites like
www.morningstar.com, http://finance.yahoo.com, http://money.cnn.
com/services/portfolio/ or www.marketocracy.com (at the last site,
ignore the “market-beating” hype on its funds and other services).
By test-driving your techniques before trying them with real money,
you can make mistakes without incurring any actual losses, develop
the discipline to avoid frequent trading, compare your approach
against those of leading money managers, and learn what works for
you. Best of all, tracking the outcome of all your stock picks will prevent you from forgetting that some of your hunches turn out to be
stinkers. That will force you to learn from your winners and your losers.
After a year, measure your results against how you would have done if
you had put all your money in an S & P 500 index fund. If you didn’t
enjoy the experiment or your picks were poor, no harm done—selecting
individual stocks is not for you. Get yourself an index fund and stop
wasting your time on stock picking.
If you enjoyed the experiment and earned sufficiently good returns,
gradually assemble a basket of stocks—but limit it to a maximum of
10% of your overall portfolio (keep the rest in an index fund). And
remember, you can always stop if it no longer interests you or your
returns turn bad.
LOOKI NG U N D E R TH E R IG HT ROCKS
So how should you go about looking for a potentially rewarding
stock? You can use websites like http://finance.yahoo.com and
www.morningstar.com to screen stocks with the statistical filters suggested in Chapter 14. Or you can take a more patient, craftsmanlike
approach. Unlike most people, many of the best professional investors
first get interested in a company when its share price goes down, not
up. Christopher Browne of Tweedy Browne Global Value Fund,
William Nygren of the Oakmark Fund, Robert Rodriguez of FPA Capital Fund, and Robert Torray of the Torray Fund all suggest looking at
the daily list of new 52-week lows in the Wall Street Journal or the
similar table in the “Market Week” section of Barron’s. That will point
you toward stocks and industries that are unfashionable or unloved
and that thus offer the potential for high returns once perceptions
change.
Christopher Davis of the Davis Funds and William Miller of Legg

398

Commentary on Chapter 15

FROM E PS TO ROIC
Net income or earnings per share (EPS) has been distorted in
recent years by factors like stock-option grants and accounting
gains and charges. To see how much a company is truly earning
on the capital it deploys in its businesses, look beyond EPS to
ROIC, or return on invested capital. Christopher Davis of the
Davis Funds defines it with this formula:
ROIC = Owner Earnings  Invested Capital,
where Owner Earnings is equal to:
Operating profit
plus depreciation
plus amortization of goodwill
minus Federal income tax (paid at the company’s average rate)
minus cost of stock options
minus “maintenance” (or essential) capital expenditures
minus any income generated by unsustainable rates of return on
pension funds (as of 2003, anything greater than 6.5%)
and where Invested Capital is equal to:
Total assets
minus cash (as well as short-term investments and non-interestbearing current liabilities)
plus past accounting charges that reduced invested capital.
ROIC has the virtue of showing, after all legitimate expenses,
what the company earns from its operating businesses—and
how efficiently it has used the shareholders’ money to generate
that return. An ROIC of at least 10% is attractive; even 6% or
7% can be tempting if the company has good brand names,
focused management, or is under a temporary cloud.

Commentary on Chapter 15

399

Mason Value Trust like to see rising returns on invested capital, or
ROIC—a way of measuring how efficiently a company generates what
Warren Buffett has called “owner earnings.” 2 (See the sidebar on
p. 398 for more detail.)
By checking “comparables,” or the prices at which similar businesses have been acquired over the years, managers like Oakmark’s
Nygren and Longleaf Partners’ O. Mason Hawkins get a better
handle on what a company’s parts are worth. For an individual
investor, it’s painstaking and difficult work: Start by looking at the
“Business Segments” footnote in the company’s annual report, which
typically lists the industrial sector, revenues, and earnings of each subsidiary. (The “Management Discussion and Analysis” may also be
helpful.) Then search a news database like Factiva, ProQuest, or
LexisNexis for examples of other firms in the same industries that have
recently been acquired. Using the EDGAR database at www.sec.gov
to locate their past annual reports, you may be able to determine the
ratio of purchase price to the earnings of those acquired companies.
You can then apply that ratio to estimate how much a corporate
acquirer might pay for a similar division of the company you are investigating.
By separately analyzing each of the company’s divisions this way,
you may be able to see whether they are worth more than the current
stock price. Longleaf’s Hawkins likes to find what he calls “60-cent
dollars,” or companies whose stock is trading at 60% or less of the
value at which he appraises the businesses. That helps provide the
margin of safety that Graham insists on.
WHO’S THE BOSS?
Finally, most leading professional investors want to see that a company is run by people who, in the words of Oakmark’s William Nygren,
“think like owners, not just managers.” Two simple tests: Are the
company’s financial statements easily understandable, or are they full
of obfuscation? Are “nonrecurring” or “extraordinary” or “unusual”
charges just that, or do they have a nasty habit of recurring?
Longleaf’s Mason Hawkins looks for corporate managers who are

2

See the commentary on Chapter 11.

400

Commentary on Chapter 15

“good partners”—meaning that they communicate candidly about
problems, have clear plans for allocating current and future cash flow,
and own sizable stakes in the company’s stock (preferably through
cash purchases rather than through grants of options). But “if managements talk more about the stock price than about the business,”
warns Robert Torray of the Torray Fund, “we’re not interested.”
Christopher Davis of the Davis Funds favors firms that limit issuance
of stock options to roughly 3% of shares outstanding.
At Vanguard Primecap Fund, Howard Schow tracks “what the company said one year and what happened the next. We want to see not
only whether managements are honest with shareholders but also
whether they’re honest with themselves.” (If a company boss insists
that all is hunky-dory when business is sputtering, watch out!) Nowadays, you can listen in on a company’s regularly scheduled conference
calls even if you own only a few shares; to find out the schedule, call
the investor relations department at corporate headquarters or visit
the company’s website.
Robert Rodriguez of FPA Capital Fund turns to the back page of
the company’s annual report, where the heads of its operating divisions are listed. If there’s a lot of turnover in those names in the first
one or two years of a new CEO’s regime, that’s probably a good sign;
he’s cleaning out the dead wood. But if high turnover continues, the
turnaround has probably devolved into turmoil.
K E E P I N G YO U R E Y E S O N T H E R OA D
There are even more roads to Jerusalem than these. Some leading
portfolio managers, like David Dreman of Dreman Value Management
and Martin Whitman of the Third Avenue Funds, focus on companies
selling at very low multiples of assets, earnings, or cash flow. Others,
like Charles Royce of the Royce Funds and Joel Tillinghast of Fidelity
Low-Priced Stock Fund, hunt for undervalued small companies. And,
for an all-too-brief look at how today’s most revered investor, Warren
Buffett, selects companies, see the sidebar on p. 401.
One technique that can be helpful: See which leading professional
money managers own the same stocks you do. If one or two names
keep turning up, go to the websites of those fund companies and
download their most recent reports. By seeing which other stocks
these investors own, you can learn more about what qualities they

Commentary on Chapter 15

401

W A R R E N ’ S W AY
Graham’s greatest student, Warren Buffett, has become the
world’s most successful investor by putting new twists on
Graham’s ideas. Buffett and his partner, Charles Munger, have
combined Graham’s “margin of safety” and detachment from
the market with their own innovative emphasis on future growth.
Here is an all-too-brief summary of Buffett’s approach:
He looks for what he calls “franchise” companies with strong
consumer brands, easily understandable businesses, robust
financial health, and near-monopolies in their markets, like H & R
Block, Gillette, and the Washington Post Co. Buffett likes to
snap up a stock when a scandal, big loss, or other bad news
passes over it like a storm cloud—as when he bought Coca-Cola
soon after its disastrous rollout of “New Coke” and the market
crash of 1987. He also wants to see managers who set and
meet realistic goals; build their businesses from within rather
than through acquisition; allocate capital wisely; and do not pay
themselves hundred-million-dollar jackpots of stock options.
Buffett insists on steady and sustainable growth in earnings, so
the company will be worth more in the future than it is today.
In his annual reports, archived at www.berkshirehathaway.
com, Buffett has set out his thinking like an open book. Probably
no other investor, Graham included, has publicly revealed more
about his approach or written such compellingly readable
essays. (One classic Buffett proverb: “When a management
with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for bad economics, it is the reputation of the business that
remains intact.”) Every intelligent investor can—and should—learn
by reading this master’s own words.
