
I described in my previous book just such a strategy proposed by Khandani and Lo (Example 3.7 of Chan, 2009; original paper is Khandani and Lo,
2007). With this strategy, we invest in every stock from some favorite index
such as S&P 500, S&P 1500, or Russell 2000, but with different capital allocation per stock. Near the market close of each day, we will determine the
long or short capital wi allocated to the ith stock as
wi = −(ri − 〈rj〉)/ ∑ k |rk − 〈rj〉|

(4.1)

where ri is the daily return of the ith stock, and 〈rj〉 is the average daily return
of all the stocks in the index. In other words, if a stock has a very positive
return relative to its peers, we will short lots of it, and if it has a very negative return relative to its peers, we will buy lots of it. Note that we always
invest the same total gross capital of $1 to the portfolio every day because of
the normalization factor in the denominator. The MATLAB code fragment
for this is displayed in Example 4.3.
Example 4.3: Linear Long-Short Model on Stocks

ret=(cl-lag(cl, 1))./lag(cl, 1); % daily returns
marketRet=smartmean(ret, 2); % equal weighted market index
% return
weights=-(ret-repmat(marketRet, [1 size(ret, 2)]));
weights=weights./repmat(smartsum(abs(weights), 2), ...
[1 size(weights, 2)]);
dailyret=smartsum(backshift(1, weights).*ret, 2); % Capital
% is always one

It has an APR of 13.7 percent and Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from January
2, 2007, to December 30, 2011, even if we backtest on the SPX.
(Usually, backtesting on a smaller cap universe will generate even
higher returns.) The cumulative returns are plotted in Figure 4.4.
(Continued )

103
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

The implementation of Equation 4.1 in MATLAB is very compact.
We assume an input T × N array cl of daily closing prices,
where as usual T is the number of trading days and N is the
number of stocks in the SPX. This code can be downloaded as
andrewlo_2007_2012.m.

Example 4.3 (Continued)

FIGURE 4.4 Cumulative Returns of Linear Long-Short Model

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

104

The notable feature of this strategy is that it is completely linear,
has no parameters, and is almost perfectly dollar neutral. What
strategy can be simpler than this? And remarkably, it achieved an APR
of 30 percent in 2008, the year of Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy, and
an APR of 11 percent in 2011, a year filled with high anxiety about
the U.S. federal debt rating downgrade and the Greek default. (Its
performance since the beginning of 2008 is a true out-of-sample test,
as the strategy was published in 2007.)

In my previous book, I also suggested that we may enhance the returns
of this strategy by using the return from the previous close to today’s open
to determine the weights for entry at the open. All the positions will be
liquidated at the market close, thus turning it into an intraday strategy. The
modified MATLAB code fragment is displayed in Example 4.4.
There are possibly other variables (also called “factors”) that are better at
predicting cross-sectional mean reversion of stock prices than the relative
returns that we have used in Examples 4.3 and 4.4. One popular variable
that traders use to rank stocks is the price-earnings (P/E) ratio, where the
earnings may be that of the last quarter, or they may be projected earnings
estimated by the analysts or the companies themselves. The reasoning is that

Example 4.4: Intraday Linear Long-Short
Model on Stocks
In addition to the inputs required in Example 4.3, we need also the
T × N array op, which contains the daily open prices of the stocks.
ret=(op-backshift(1, cl))./backshift(1, cl); % daily returns
marketRet=smartmean(ret, 2); % equal weighted market index
% return
weights=-(ret-repmat(marketRet, [1 size(ret, 2)]));
weights=weights./repmat(smartsum(abs(weights), 2), ...
[1 size(weights, 2)]);
dailyret=smartsum(weights.*(cl-op)./op, 2) ...
./smartsum(abs(weights), 2);

stock prices will drift toward a new equilibrium value if there are earning
announcements or estimates changes. So a stock that experiences a positive change in earnings estimates will likely enjoy a positive return, and we
should not expect the price to mean-revert if this return is in line with the
percent change in its earnings estimates. We can therefore avoid shorting
such a stock if we use P/E ratio to rank the stocks.

105
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

The APR and Sharpe ratio over the same period are 73 percent
and 4.7, respectively. Despite such seemly stellar performance, the
open-to-close version suffers from a few drawbacks that the close-toclose version does not have.
First, the transaction costs (not included in our backtests) will
be doubled, because we are trading twice a day instead of just once
a day. Second, since this strategy also has to use “open” prices to
determine the trading signals for entry at the open, it is subject to the
same trading signal noise that I mentioned in the Buy-on-Gap Model
in Example 4.1.
Actually, even for the close-to-close strategy, we also can’t use
the exact closing price to determine the weights and then enter at
exactly those prices. But in that case, the prices just a few seconds
before the close are typically much closer to the actual official
(primary exchange) closing prices because these preclose prices are
printed when the primary market is open and has high liquidity.

KEY POINTS
• Are you tempted to trade pairs of stocks because of the enormous number
of choices? Beware of changes in companies’ fundamentals that can
render out-of-sample performance quite poor despite stellar backtest
results.
• Trading a portfolio of cointegrating ETFs can be better than pair-trading
stocks.
• Are you pair trading ETFs that hold futures? Beware of the role of roll returns
in determining total returns of futures.
• Seasonal or intraday mean reversion is hard to detect with usual stationarity
or cointegration tests, but can be very profitable.
• Imposing momentum filter on mean-reversal strategies typically improves
their consistency.
• Do you think that index arbitrage between stocks and futures is no longer
profitable? Try selecting only a subset of the stocks in the index.
• Cross-sectional mean reversion strategies can be implemented very easily
with a linear long-short strategy.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

106

• The variable used for ranking stocks in a cross-sectional mean reversion
strategy is typically relative return, but it can be other fundamental factors
such as P/E ratio.

CHAPTER 5

Mean Reversion
of Currencies
and Futures
C

onventional wisdom tells us that currencies and futures are the domain
of momentum traders, and conventional wisdom is right about this.
Indeed, most CTAs (Commodities Trading Advisors) are momentum based.
It is also true that most currency or future pairs would not cointegrate, and
most portfolios of currencies or futures do not exhibit cross-sectional mean
reversion. So opportunities for mean reversion strategies in currencies and
futures are limited, but not nonexistent. This chapter will guide the reader
toward those situations where mean reversion is the exception rather than
the rule, such as the trading of futures calendar spreads. In particular, we
will discuss a trading strategy for one unique futures intermarket spread: the
volatility future versus the stock index future.
In the course of exploring mean reversion in futures, we will also discuss
a simple mathematical model of futures prices that will illuminate concepts
such as spot versus roll returns and backwardation versus contango. Understanding this model will also help suggest new futures trading strategies
without resorting to ad hoc technical indicators.
Trading currencies has certain nuances that are foreign to stock traders. Care must be taken when testing for cointegration of currencies or
when computing the returns of a portfolio of currencies by making sure
that a point move in one currency pair has the same dollar value as a

107

point move in another currency pair; otherwise, the results will not make
sense. Furthermore, rollover interests might sometimes play an important role in determining total returns. These nuances will be covered in
this chapter.
■ Trading Currency Cross-Rates

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

108

The basic idea in forming a stationary portfolio of foreign currencies is very
similar to the trading of stock index ETF pairs from different countries:
we need to find countries that have similar economic fundamentals. Since
we found, for example, that EWA (Australian stock index ETF) and EWC
(Canadian stock index ETF) cointegrate, we might expect to find AUD
(Australian dollar) to cointegrate with CAD (Canadian dollar) as well. In
addition, because both Australia and South Africa have major mining revenues, we might expect AUD to cointegrate with ZAR (South African rand).
In fact, traders have called these and other currencies such as the Norwegian
krone commodity currencies.
Trading currency pairs has a number of advantages compared to trading their corresponding stock index ETF pairs. Usually, liquidity in currencies is higher (especially for best bid/ask sizes), thus lowering transaction
costs. The leverage that can be employed for currencies is also much higher,
though this can be a double-edged sword of course. There are no short-sale
constraints for currencies. Finally, currency trading can be done around the
clock, at least five days a week from 5:00 p.m. ET on Sunday to 5:00 p.m.
ET on Friday. (ET can be either EDT or EST; i.e., it is either GMT-4 or
GMT-5.) This means that we have a lot more trading opportunities in currencies, and we can also employ stop losses in a meaningful way. (If a market
is closed for a long period, stop losses are useless as the market can gap up
or down when it reopens.)
Despite the conceptual similarity with trading ETF pairs, the mechanics
of currency trading is quite different. Let’s start with some basic terminology. If we are trading the cross-rate AUD.ZAR, then AUD is called the base
currency, and ZAR is the quote currency. (My personal mnemonic for this:
B is ahead of Q alphabetically, so the order is B.Q.) If AUD.ZAR is quoted
at 9.58, it takes 9.58 South African rand to buy 1 Australian dollar. Buying
100,000 AUD.ZAR means buying 100,000 Australian dollars, while selling the equivalent amount (100,000 × 9.58 = 958,000 at the preceding
quote) of South African rand. However, few brokers actually offer AUD.

r (t + 1) =

n y1,U (t) r1(t + 1) + n y , (t)r2 (t + 1)
|n | y1,U (t) + |n2| y , (t )

(5.1)

109
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

ZAR as a cross-rate. So usually we have to buy X units of B.ZAR and sell X
units of B.AUD to effectively buy X Australian dollar worth of AUD.ZAR,
where B is some other base currency. We usually choose a very liquid base
currency such as USD or EUR for this operation. We can denote such a
synthetic pair as USD.ZAR/USD.AUD, since the quote of AUD.ZAR will
be exactly equal to this ratio of quotes. When we actually trade this synthetic pair live, the realized profit and loss (P&L) will be denominated in
both ZAR and AUD. In general, when we compute the returns of a strategy trading B.Q, we are assuming that the profits are denominated in our
local currency (USD for U.S. investors), which may be neither B nor Q. So
in order for our actual realized P&L to conform to our backtest P&L, we
need to regularly convert B and Q into our local currency. For example, if
our local currency is USD, and we have realized profits of X units of AUD
and Y units of ZAR after a round trip trade, we need to buy X units of
ZAR.USD and Y units of ZAR.AUD. If we don’t do this regularly, a large
accumulated P&L in AUD and ZAR may cause significant deviation from
our backtest results.
Even when a cross-rate such as AUD.CAD is ready-made for trading, we
may sometimes find it advantageous to weigh the two currencies differently
by trading AUD.USD versus USD.CAD separately. The code in Example 5.1
illustrates such a strategy. In this strategy we use the Johansen test to find out
the best hedge ratio of capital, or capital weights, between AUD.USD versus
CAD.USD. Why not use the conventional quote USD.CAD instead of CAD.
USD? That’s because in order to interpret the eigenvector from the Johansen test as capital weights, the two price series must have the same quote
currency. Otherwise, the point moves of the two presumptive cointegrating
instruments would not have the same value, rendering the Johansen test
meaningless. Using CAD.USD in our backtest program doesn’t make live
trading any more difficult: Whenever the program sends an order to “Buy 1
unit of CAD.USD,” we should just “Sell 1/y of USD.CAD,” provided y is the
current quote for USD.CAD.
In Example 5.1, we focus on trading two currencies that can ultimately be reduced to a pair with a common quote currency USD: B1.USD −
B2.USD. So the returns of a portfolio with n1 units of B1.USD and n2 units
of B2.USD is

as displayed in the last line of the MATLAB code in the example. Here ri is
the return of Bi.USD:
ri(t + 1) = ( yi,U (t + 1) − yi,U (t))/yi,U (t)

(5.2)

where yi,U(t) and yi,U(t + 1) are the quotes for Bi.USD at t and t + 1 respectively. This is because one unit of Bi.USD is worth yi,U in U.S. dollars.
However, if a portfolio has n1́ units of USD.Q1 and n2́ units of USD.Q2
instead, then the return can be written more simply as
n′r (
r ( t + 1) = 1 1

) 2′ 2
|n1′|+|n2′ |

)

(5.3)

where
ri(t + 1) = ( yU,i (t + 1) − yU,i (t))/yU,i (t)

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

110

(5.4)

and yU, i(t) and yU, i(t + 1) are the quotes for USD.Q i at t and t + 1, respectively. This is because one unit of USD.Q i is worth exactly one U.S. dollar.
Let me immediately say that Equations 5.2 and 5.4 are not strictly correct, as we have ignored the rollover interests, which we will discuss in the
next section. But the impact of rollover interests is usually not large for
short-term strategies like the one I describe in Example 5.1, so we have
omitted them here for simplicity.

Example 5.1: Pair Trading USD.AUD versus
USD.CAD Using the Johansen Eigenvector
This is a classic linear mean-reverting strategy similar to the one in
Example 3.1 (PriceSpread.m). Previously, we used a look-back of 20
days to compute the hedge ratio, while here we use a fixed training
set of 250 days (which gives better results in hindsight), though
we are still using a look-back of 20 days for computing the moving
average and standard deviation. However, our current strategy
is very different from a typical forex strategy such as the one in
Example 2.5. Here, the hedge ratio between the two currencies is
not one, so we cannot trade it as one cross-rate AUD.CAD. Instead

Example 5.1 (Continued)
of running the Johansen test on USD.AUD versus USD.CAD, we
actually should run it on AUD.USD and CAD.USD, so that the dollar
value of a point move in each instrument is the same. Intuitively, this
also makes sense, since in a mean-reverting strategy we want to buy
CAD if CAD.USD is much lower than AUD.USD.
We assume the input to be two T × 1 arrays usdcad and usdaud,
both daily price series. The T × 1 array yport is the market value of a
unit portfolio of AUD.USD and CAD.USD expressed in USD, while
numUnits is the number of units of this unit portfolio our strategy asks
us to own. The T × 2 array positions denote the market values in USD
of AUD.USD and CAD.USD that we should own. Naturally, the P&L
(in USD again) is just the sum of the market value of each instrument
times their returns, and the daily return of the portfolio is the P&L
divided by the total gross market value of the portfolio at the end of
the previous day.
The code can be downloaded as AUDCAD_unequal.m.
cad=1./usdcad.cl;

111

aud=audusd.cl;

MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

y=[ aud cad ];
trainlen=250;
lookback=20;
hedgeRatio=NaN(size(y));
numUnits=NaN(size(y, 1), 1);
for t=trainlen+1:size(y, 1)
res=johansen(log(y(t-trainlen:t-1, :)), 0, 1);
hedgeRatio(t, :)=res.evec(:, 1)’;
yport=sum(y(t-lookback+1:t, :).* ...
repmat(hedgeRatio(t, :), [lookback 1]), 2);
ma=mean(yport);
mstd=std(yport);
zScore=(yport(end)-ma)/mstd;
numUnits(t)=-(yport(end)-ma)/mstd;
end
positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(y, 2)]).*hedgeRatio.*y;
pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*(y-lag(y, 1))./lag(y, 1), 2);
ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);

(Continued )

Example 5.1 (Continued)
Taking care to exclude the first 250 days of rolling training
data when computing the strategy performance, the APR is 11
percent and the Sharpe ratio is 1.6, for the period December 18,
2009, to April 26, 2012. The cumulative returns curve is plotted in
Figure 5.1.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

112
FIGURE 5.1 Cumulative Returns of USD.AUD versus

USD.CAD Strategy

You may sometimes find profitable opportunities trading two pairs of
entirely different cross-rates against each other: B1.Q1 versus B2.Q2. If the
strategy calls for a portfolio of n1 units of B1.Q1 and n2 units of B2.Q2, the
daily return (in the presumed local currency of USD) of the portfolio is
given by the same Equation 5.1. The ri there will be the return of Bi.Qi, so
Equation 5.2 is replaced by
ri(t + 1) = {log ( yi,Qi(t + 1)) − log( yi,Qi(t))}

(5.5)

where yi,Qi(t) is the quote for Bi.Qi. The same equations, 5.1 through 5.5,
are valid if we had used EUR or any other currency instead of USD as the
local currency for computing returns.
As you can see, the key difficulty in backtesting currency arbitrage strategies is not the complexity of the strategies, but the right way to prepare

the data series for cointegration tests, and the right formula to measure
returns!
■ Rollover Interests in Currency Trading

113
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

A feature of trading currency cross-rate is the differential interest rate earned
or paid if the cross-rate position is held overnight. Note that “overnight” in
currency trading means holding a position untill or beyond 5:00 p.m. ET. If
we are long a pair B.Q overnight, the interest differential is iB − iQ, where iB
and iQ are the daily interest rates of currency B and Q, respectively. If iQ >
iB, then this interest differential, also called a rollover interest, is actually a
debit interest (i.e., your account will be debited). Actually, for reasons that
have to do with the T + 2 day settlement system, if a position was held past
the 5 p.m. ET close on day T, and day T + 3 is a weekend or holiday for either
currency of the cross-rate, the rollover interest accrued on that position will
be multiplied by one plus the number of days the market remains closed. So
if a position was held past 5 p.m. ET on Wednesday, the rollover interest is
three times the daily rate since the market is closed on Saturday and Sunday.
A further exception to this rule applies when we are trading USD.CAD or
USD.MXN, where the settlement occurs on day T + 1, so we only multiply
the rollover interest by one plus the number of nontrading days if day T + 2
is a weekend or holiday. (Thus, only if a position was held past 5:00 p.m. ET
on Thursday will the rollover interest be three times the daily rate.) All these
considerations impinge on the accuracy of a backtest of strategies that hold
overnight positions.
When we calculate the Sharpe ratio for any strategy, we need to calculate
the excess return, because the Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the average excess
return divided by the standard deviation of the excess returns, suitably annualized. The excess return is the return of the positions that the strategy
holds minus the financing cost of those positions. So if we have only intraday
positions, the financing cost is zero. If we are trading a long-short dollar
neutral equity portfolio, we can assume the financing cost is close to zero,
even though the credit interest is usually slightly less than the absolute value
of the debit interest. For futures positions, the financing cost is also zero,
because futures positions are just contracts, not assets that require cash to
finance. (We do not count the margin cash requirement, since that cash generates interest in the account.) In the case of currency cross-rates, we can
again set the financing cost to be zero, as long as we are careful to add the

rollover interest to the percent change of the cross-rate. That is, we need to
modify Equation 5.5 so that the excess return rt+1 from holding a cross-rate
position POSB.Q from day t to day t + 1 is
r(t + 1) = {log ( yB.Q(t + 1)) − log( yB.Q(t)) + log(1 + iB(t)) − log(1 + iQ(t))}
(5.6)
where y(t) and y(t + 1) are the quotes for BQ at t and t + 1, respectively
(Dueker, 2006).
In Example 5.2, we see how we can take into account rollover interests in
backtesting the linear mean-reverting strategy on AUD.CAD.

Example 5.2: Pair Trading AUD.CAD
with Rollover Interests

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

114

We continue to use the linear mean-reverting strategy in this example,
but in contrast to Example 5.1 and in the interest of simplicity, we
trade the ready-made pair AUD.CAD, not USD.CAD versus AUD.
USD separately. We will take into account the overnight rollover
interest rates because this strategy holds beyond 5 p.m. ET. We assume
the daily closing prices of AUD.CAD are contained in a T × 1 array
dailyCl and the corresponding trading dates in the T × 1 array tday.
The historical interest rates are taken from the Reserve Bank of
Australia website’s money market rate, www.rba.gov.au/statistics/
tables/#interest_rates, and the Bank of Canada web site’s overnight
money market financing rates, www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2010/09/selected_historical_page33.pdf. The daily AUD
and CAD interest rates are assumed to be two T × 1 arrays aud_
dailyRates and cad_dailyRates respectively, matching the dates in tday.
The source code can be downloaded as AUDCAD_daily.m
lookback=20;
% Triple rollover interest on Wednesdays for AUD
isWednesday=weekday(datenum(num2str(tday), ‘yyyymmdd’))==4;
aud_dailyRates(isWednesday)=3*aud_dailyRates(isWednesday);
cad_dailyRates=zeros(size(tday));
% Triple rollover interest on Thursdays for CAD

Example 5.2 (Continued)
isThursday=weekday(datenum(num2str(tday), ‘yyyymmdd’))==5;
cad_dailyRates(isThursday)=3*cad_dailyRates(isThursday);
ma=movingAvg(dailyCl, lookback);
z=(dailyCl-ma);
ret=lag(-sign(z), 1).*(log(dailyCl)- ...
lag(log(dailyCl)+log(1+aud_dailyRates)- ...
log(1+cad_dailyRates), 1));

This simple mean reversion strategy yields an APR of 6.2 percent, with
a Sharpe ratio of 0.54, which are much weaker results than those in
Example 5.1, which, as you may recall, use a nonunity hedge ratio. It
is also worth noting that even if we had neglected to take into account
the rollover interest in this case, the APR would increase just slightly to
6.7 percent and the Sharpe ratio to 0.58, even though the annualized
