
certain higher price as it probes for a top.
Tweezer Bottoms – Bullish
The opposite of the above. Looks like a pair of tweezers at the bottom of a downtrend.
Ideally:
First candle closes in the direction of the downtrend, the second closes up.
Lower wicks are longer than the bodies, and should be about the same length and
terminate around the same resistance (confirming a floor preventing further downside),
hence the tweezers shape.
Think of these wicks as knocking against a floor or support, or the market rejecting a certain
lower price, as it gropes for a bottom.
Notes on Triple Candle Patterns
Morning Star – Bullish/ Evening Star – Bearish
Evening Star and Morning Star are the bearish and bullish variations on the same theme:
The first candle is in the direction of the trend, ideally with a long body that suggests a
strong final push that exhausts the move.
The second candle is a doji, suggesting indecision and that the first candle was the last
big push for the trend.
The third candle is in the opposite direction of the trend, and should close beyond the
midpoint of the first candle, preferably with a long body showing a decisive reversal
move.
Three White Soldiers – Bullish
This pattern is comprised of three long-bodied bullish (higher close) candles after a
downtrend, and signals a longer-term reversal higher.
To be a valid pattern:
The second candle's body should be longer than that of the first, and should close near
its high with little or no upper wick.
The third candle's body should be the same size or larger than that of the second and
also should close at or near its high with little or no upper wick.
Three Black Crows – Bearish
The opposite of the above Three White Soldiers
This pattern is comprised of three long-bodied bearish (lower close) candles after an
uptrend, and signals a longer-term reversal lower.
To be a valid pattern:
The second candle's body should be longer than that of the first, and close near its low
with little or no lower wick.
The third candle's body should be the same size or larger than that of the second and
also should close at or near its low with little or no lower wick.
Three Inside Up – Bullish
Found during a downtrend and signals its possible end. Characterized by:
First candle closes lower and has a relatively long body in the direction of the
downtrend.
Second candle closes higher to about the midpoint of the first candle.

Third candle closes above the high of the first candle.
In sum, this is a very basic bullish swing pattern. The longer the second and third candle, the
more convincing the reversal signal.
Three Inside Down – Bearish
The opposite of Three Inside Up.
Found during an uptrend and signals its possible end.
Characterized by:
First candle closes higher and has a relatively long body in the direction of the uptrend.
Second candle closes lower to about the midpoint of the first candle.
Third candle closes below the low of the first candle.
In sum, it's a very basic bearish swing pattern. The longer the second and third candle, the
more convincing the reversal signal.

More Key Points about Japanese Candle Patterns
Though the patterns are classified as reversal (indicate reversal of the trend's direction), continuation
(indicate trend continuation), or indecision, depending on which is their more common role, these are
generalizations. Like any technical indicator, they don't always work and should be used in
combination with others that confirm or refute them. The evidence from TA is useful for timing entries
and exits but is rarely unequivocal. It's up to you to weigh contradictory or inconclusive signals from
the total of your TA and fundamental analysis and discern where the balance of evidence points. Your
interpretation of these patterns, and any other indicator, depends on the context in which it occurs.

Context and Timing Matter
As with everything, context and timing make a difference when interpreting Japanese candle patterns:
A bullish reversal pattern (like a hammer or bullish engulfing pattern) is more suggestive of a
bullish reversal pattern if it comes after an extended downtrend than it is after a brief one,
especially if that brief one comes within a longer-term uptrend.
That same bullish reversal pattern will have more credibility if it happens to occur at a strong
support level where we'd expect a downtrend to be more likely to reverse.
If the picture isn't clear enough, look for another opportunity. Remember, some of the best trades
you'll ever make are the ones you decide not to take. Missed opportunities only hurt your ego; bad
trades hurt your capital.

INTRODUCTION TO WESTERN CHART PATTERNS
Like Japanese candle patterns, Western chart patterns are indicators and forms of support and
resistance.
Western chart patterns are commonly classified as reversal or continuation patterns, but these are
rough generalizations that help us organize these patterns in our minds. Reversal patterns are often not
followed by trend reversals, and continuation patterns are often followed by breakouts up or down.

This chapter will just introduce the most widely followed Western chart patterns (as opposed to
those of Japanese candle charts). As with candle charts, this topic is vast and is worthy of its own
book. The following is meant to present a few sample chart patterns and a list of the others you should
learn.
As with candlestick patterns, you'll have a much easier time remembering what these patterns mean
if you understand the logic behind them.

Classic Western Reversal Patterns
Here are some samples of reversal patterns, and a list of others to learn from the previously
mentioned websites or other sources as time permits.

Double and Triple Tops, Double and Triple Bottoms
These are all variations on the same theme:
An s/r level is tested and holds, forming the first top or bottom.
Price retreats for a time and the farthest extent of this pullback is called the neckline.
Price rebounds to the s/r price level, which holds again, followed by another retreat, which this
time, extends past the neckline for a move equidistant to the distance from the top or bottom to the
neckline.
A third test of the s/r level makes this a triple top or bottom.
These are all reversal patterns, that is, they suggest that the current trend will reverse.
The key difference:
A double or triple top by definition comes after an uptrend.
A double or triple bottom comes after a downtrend.

Example: Double and Triple Top
A double top signals (see Figure 4.18) the reversal of an uptrend. The tops are peaks that are formed
during an uptrend, when the price hits strong resistance, bounces down, and repeats this process,
forming a double top. Ideally, this resistance will be confirmed by other forms of resistance at the
peaks, like a long-established price level, a Fib level, a long-duration MA, and so on. If this process
repeats a third time, that's a triple top.
FIGURE 4.18 NZDUSD Daily Chart, January 29 to May 14, 2008, Double Top and Neckline, a Break
Below Which Suggests an Equidistant Move Lower (within a few weeks, on June 13, 2008, the price
hit and exceeded the 365-pip drop from the neckline, hitting 0.7490, over 400 points)
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The logic of these being reversal patterns is clear: If resistance has held up through two to three
tests, odds are the uptrend is finished, so the price will likely stay below that resistance until new
fundamental factors favor the base currency and fuel a break above resistance. For example, these
could be:
1. A change in market sentiment, bullish or bearish, that favors the base currency. For example,
rising risk appetite from improving global economic data would help the risk currencies to rise
versus the safe haven currencies, so the AUDJPY, NZDCHF, or EURUSD could rise higher on an
improvement in risk appetite.
2. An interest rate increase becomes more likely for the base currency than for the counter
currency.
3. Improving growth data (GDP, jobs, spending, etc.) in the base currency's economy relative to
that of the counter currency's economy.
Remember, currency pairs move in the direction of the base currency (the one on the left of the pair
symbol). When it's stronger than the counter currency, the pair rises. When it's weaker, the pair falls.

How to Trade the Downtrend Following a Bearish Double Top Pattern
When price falls below the neckline (the lowest closing price between the two tops), that is a
confirmation of the reversal. So, that's the area where you would place your sell limit order to open a
short position because you'd be anticipating a new move lower, typically about the same distance
again as the distance from the peaks to the neckline, as illustrated in Figure 4.18. The same rules
apply for a triple top.

Double and Triple Bottoms
As you can see from the chart in Figure 4.19, double and triple bottom patterns are inverted forms of
the double and triple tops. They occur after a downtrend, as price repeatedly tests and fails to break
below a support level. That suggests the downtrend is finished, the selling is exhausted, and the odds
are higher for some kind of reversal as support is likely to hold at least until new fundamental factors

favor the counter currency over the base currency, which would fuel a break below support.
FIGURE 4.19 NZDUSD Daily Chart, October 10, 2005, to November 29, 2005
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

How to Trade the Reversal Higher
In the chart in Figure 4.19, the farthest pullback from support forms the neckline, which is where we
place an entry buy limit order to open a long position, with a profit target of twice the distance in pips
from the double bottoms to the neckline. In practice, we would consider this trade if it fit with our
risk management rules that we'll cover in Chapter 5. Here's a sneak preview of those rules. We'd
consider taking this trade if we believed:
The distance in pips from the neckline to our profit-taking target was about three times the
distance from the neckline to our stop loss.
The neckline provided solid enough support to place that stop loss order far enough beneath it to
avoid getting hit by random price movements.
Double bottoms, like double tops, are trend reversal patterns. You'll want to look for these after a
strong downtrend and wait until price reverses above the neckline (the farthest point of the bounce off
support) as likely confirmation of the reversal.
The above applies for triple bottoms, too. They include a third test of the same support level.

Beware False Breakouts, Shake Outs, and Other Fake Outs
False breakouts often occur at widely anticipated breakout points like the neckline of a double or
triple bottom. Vast flocks of inexperienced traders will attempt to go long at these points. So, big
experienced players may attempt to use these breakout points to fool you into selling too early near
the bottom or buying to late near the top.
For example, the neck line of a double or triple bottom will attract a lot of buy orders from traders
attempting to buy just as the widely anticipated breakout higher begins. As it starts, big players may
join the buying to briefly pump up the price and lure in more buyers. They may then attempt to drive
price back down with some large sell orders (taking a quick profit on those new long positions and
opening new short positions) so that enough stop loss orders get hit to start a wave of selling that
drives price down further as the selling “shakes out” more long positions. That is a basic “false
breakout.”
The big players are now sitting with large short positions they accumulated in creating the mini sell
off. The pair is now lower, so the big boys take profits on these shorts by buying back the pair at a
lower price from the inexperienced retail traders. Ideally, that buying lures in enough others to get
price back past the neckline and start the real breakout, which pros may feed by taking more long
positions, perhaps attracting more buyers and driving price higher. At some point they then take
profits on these long positions, and so on.
That's why you use stop losses. It's why you might wait to enter until the break past the neckline is a
bit more advanced (at a cost of getting in later on the move up and losing some profit), and you might
wait until price has made a false breakout pullback and has resumed its break past the neckline. In
addition, you could get other kinds of confirmation of the reversal.
We'll discuss more on how to protect yourself against these and other head-fakes in Chapter 9.

Other Reversal Patterns to Know
Here are some more reversal patterns you should be familiar with: Head and Shoulders Top and
(Inverted) Head and Shoulders Bottom. This pattern works the same way as double and triple tops
and bottoms except there's a single top or bottom to create the head, and the neckline is formed by the
lows between the two shoulders (lesser tops or bottoms) as shown in Figure 4.20.
FIGURE 4.20 USDCHF Daily Chart, August 10 to November 24, 2006
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Head and Shoulders Top
Perhaps this pattern is more intuitively appealing because the right shoulder shows a reversal starting.
To be a bearish reversal pattern, it must occur during an uptrend (so there can be a bearish
reversal), and the bullish inverted Head and Shoulders bottom needs to occur during a downtrend.
Once the neckline is broken, we expect a move roughly equal to the distance from the head to the
neckline as we saw with double and triple tops and bottoms.

Inverted Head and Shoulders Bottom
This is a flipped over version of the Head and Shoulders Top, and all rules apply.

Classic Western Continuation Patterns
Let's get familiar with some classic Western continuation patterns. As the name suggests, these
patterns imply trend continuation rather than reversal.

Cup and Handle
As the name suggests, the cup-and-handle pattern resembles the shape of a tea cup and handle on a
chart. It's a bullish continuation pattern. In other words, it occurs during an uptrend, and it suggests a
coming breakout past established resistance and a new move higher. The cup-shaped part of the
pattern should be rounded, not V-shaped, formed over a minimum of about seven weeks, and its right
side forms on low volume.
Like most chart patterns, this one shown in Figure 4.21 makes sense as a picture of mass trader
behavior.
Stage 1: An uptrend must precede this pattern. The longer the uptrend, the more the pool of
potential buyers is reduced until it is exhausted, either because of strong technical resistance, new
bearish news, or lack of new good news to fuel the up trend. The combined lack of new buyers

and profit taking (or shorting ) sellers creates a resistance price level where sellers prevent
further moves higher.
Stage 2: The pair sells off as sellers, either profit takers or short sellers, drive the price lower.
This selling forms the downtrend that is the left side of the cup. When there are no more sellers,
the price stops falling, the left side of the cup is completed, and the price stabilizes, forming the
bottom of the cup. The downtrend that forms the left side of the cup typically retraces one-third to
two-thirds of the prior uptrend. Ideally, it should be as smoothly rounded as possible because that
reflects a steady draining of sellers.
Stage 3: Price then moves in a flat trading range. With seller gone price, price stabilizes. The
ones left holding the pair are the longer-term believers who won't sell and may add to their
positions and help fuel the uptrend that forms the right side of the cup once buying resumes.
Stage 4: Buyers recognize support has been established and at some point buying resumes, due to
a positive change in underlying fundamentals, a change in overall market sentiment that favors the
base currency, or bargain hunting that causes buying to resume, driving price back to its old high,
forming the right side of the cup. The longer this cup takes to form, the more established the
resistance or rim, and thus the stronger the signal for a new move higher when the pattern
completes, and this resistance is decisively broken.
Stage 5: The typical selling pressure that occurs when a pair hits significant resistance at this old
high causes a pullback for the usual reasons. Those who bought at the bottom take profits, or
those who bought near the top and held seek to sell and break even. However, the fundamental
change that drove the rise back to recent highs at the rim of the cup has now attracted enough
believers so new buyers step in after a shallow pullback (no more than about a third of the
distance to the low of the cup). This brings the price back to the recent high or rim of the cup,
creating a short-term double top (bullish because it's part of a larger bullish cup-and-handle
pattern) or an inverted bullish head-and-shoulders pattern.
Stage 6: A decisive break above this resistance level or rim often signals a new leg higher,
marked by the arrow. The uptrend that followed was almost as long as the one that preceded it.
FIGURE 4.21 Example of Cup-and-Handle Pattern EURCHF Monthly Chart, January 1, 2003, to
November 1, 2007
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

We Repeat: False Breakouts Happen
The initial breaks above resistance (or beneath support) will often fail. These are called false
breakouts, and can happen one or more times before the real one occurs.

Analyze This!
Can you spot such a failed break within the cup of the pattern in Figure 4.21? In which month
did it occur? Where was the resistance or rim that it tried and failed to breach? (See Figure
4.22.)
FIGURE 4.22 Example of Cup-and-Handle Pattern and False Breakout, EURCHF Monthly Chart,
January 1, 2003, to November 1, 2007
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

In Figure 4.22 we see the March 2006 (marked with an arrow) candle was an initial failed breakout
for a smaller cup-and-handle pattern (with resistance or rim at around 1.5634) within the larger
pattern shown in Figure 4.21 that ultimately did produce a major upside breakout in August 2006.
Again, there are ways to protect yourself; more on that in Chapter 9.

Other Continuation Patterns
Here are other common continuation patterns that should be part of your further education, all easily
searchable online.
Bearish rectangle
Bullish rectangle
Bearish pennant
Bullish pennant
Bearish flag
Bullish flag

Patterns That Can Be Continuation or Reversal
These can serve as reversal or continuation patterns. What they share in common is that the price
range converges into a narrower range until price breaks out either in the direction of the trend

(continuation) or in the opposite direction (reversal).

Triangles
There are three kinds: symmetrical, ascending, and descending. There are lots available on these
online, so we'll only present one of them, the symmetrical triangle pattern.

Symmetrical Triangle
For example, note what happens with a symmetrical triangle (see Figure 4.23).
FIGURE 4.23 EURUSD Weekly Chart, February 6 to August 21, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Eventually the range narrows and price breaks out of the triangle higher or lower. In theory, the
initial breakout is about the same distance as the base of the triangle. In this case, it broke lower as
concern grew about the European Union (EU) debt crisis (see Figure 4.24).
FIGURE 4.24 EURUSD Weekly Chart, February 6 to August 21, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The Underlying Logic of Chart Patterns
These patterns don't come about by magic. Like the other patterns we've seen, they're pictures of
unchanging crowd psychology. The patterns repeat because crowd behavior repeats when subject to
fear, greed, and indecision, as these feelings permeate the markets in response to current events and
how markets interpret them based on their prior expectations.
By recognizing these patterns, you're better able to anticipate the likely s/r levels these patterns
create.
These patterns are widely recognized. As with any widely followed kind of s/r, you need to be
aware of it to anticipate the likely s/r levels. In other words, patterns are another way of anticipating
what the crowd is likely to do.
Remember, trading success has nothing to do with knowing what is true or right and has everything
to do with anticipating what the crowd will do, be it rational or not, and doing it first.

THE MORE S/R INDICATORS, THE BETTER
Technical indicators should almost never be used in isolation but should be used in specific kinds of
combinations (discussed in Chapter 9) that provide you enough information to decide whether you've
got sufficiently strong support and resistance in the right places to suggest a low risk high potential

yield trade. Specifically:
Strong support close enough to your entry point so you can set a stop loss order far enough away
from that support, so that the stop loss won't get hit by random price moves, but only by a move
against you that is strong enough to indicate that you were wrong and that price is reversing
against you.
The distance from likely resistance (your profit-taking point) to your entry point is two to three
times farther than the distance from your entry point to your stop loss. That way you have rewardrisk ratio of 2:1 or 3:1. That kind of reward-risk ratio is a central requirement of good risk
management and trade planning because it allows you to be wrong on the majority of your trades
and remain profitable. Under those conditions, even a less experienced trader can succeed
despite constant mistakes and losing trades. We'll go more into that in Chapter 5.
Here's another concept about s/r you must remember: The quality of an s/r level depends on the
quality of the indicators (age, number of times tested, etc.) and on the number of them that
converge on a given area and mutually reinforce each other.
The more s/r indicators you have converging on a given price level, the stronger the s/r levels and
the easier it is to find trades with great reward-risk ratios, meaning trades with small risk of loss and
large potential for gain. If you only take trades in which your worst-case loss is a third of your gain,
you can be wrong on most of your trades and remain profitable.

Multiple Mutually Reinforcing S/R Indicators: An Example
For example, in the daily EURUSD charts in Figure 4.25, the strong resistance to further price gains
around the $1.3800 price level is formed by the convergence of five kinds of resistance around March
17, 2010 (highlighted by the arrow in Figure 4.26).
FIGURE 4.25 EURUSD Daily Chart, February 8 to March 26, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
