
because your own behavior is mysterious. You will be in a constant state of
confusion, anxiety, and fear because you don't know what to do next—the
kind of state of mind that breeds superstition.
Understanding yourself is synonymous with understanding the markets
because as a trader you are part of the collective force that moves prices.
How could you begin to understand the dynamics of group behavior well
enough to extract money from the group, as a result of their behavior, if
you don't understand the inner forces that affect your own? When you do
understand the inner forces that affect your behavior and take
responsibility for what you do and don't do, and what you can or can't do,
you will begin to perceive how and why other traders comprising the
group behave the way they do.
When you attain some degree of control over yourself, you can then see
how other traders are not in control of what happens to them, like blades
of grass, all bending to the force of the prevailing wind and constantly being
stepped on. You won't be able to see this until you are no longer a blade of
grass yourself by evolving beyond the group mentality. Then it becomes
much easier to understand the group's behavior, anticipate what they will
likely do next, and take advantage of it to the best of your ability. You will
understand the group, certainly, to no greater degree than you understand
yourself Creating definition and rules to make yourself accountable is but
a first step on the road to lasting success. You could acknowledge their
necessity and establish them, but then find to your dismay, it is extremely
difficult to abide by them. In Part III we will examine the interacting mental
forces that make it difficult to follow your own rules.

55

CHAPTER 7

In the Market
Environment,
Reasons Are Irrelevant

I have titled this chapter "In the Market Environment Reasons Are Irrelevant" in
recognition of the traders who believe that if they can ascertain the reasons why
the market did what it did, these reasons will help them to determine what the
market will do next. To believe this assumes that traders know why they behaved
as they did and that the reasons they give for their actions will aid in determining
their future behavior
The reasons traders would give for their actions are irrelevant. Most traders
don't know why they did what they did because most traders don't plan their
trades, thus eliminating any connection between themselves and the results of
their trades. Most traders act spontaneously and impulsively and then ascribe the
rationale for their behavior after the fact. Most of these after-the fact reasons are
either justifications for what traders did or excuses for what traders didn't do.
Fundamentally people trade to make money. And to make money, traders have
to cake positions, hold their positions for some length of time, and then exit their
positions. When traders enter and exit positions, they act as a force on prices,
making them move. When they are observing the market, waiting to enter
or holding a position, traders are a potential force that can act on prices at
any given moment. If traders planned what they were going to do before
they did it, then the reasons they would give for why they act as they do
could definitely help other traders to anticipate how prices will be affected
by their actions. This, of course, assumes that they will reveal their plans
and that they will be telling the truth. There are only a few traders who
make money on a consistent basis, and rarely will they reveal their reasons
56

unless it suits their purposes.
In fact, traders who are confident in their ability and know they can
have a significant impact on price movement go to great lengths to keep
information about their plans away from other traders because that would
diminish the possibility of executing these plans. However, this is not to
say that after they have taken their positions they won't purposely reveal
what they have done to then draw other traders into the same position,
forcing them to compete among each other to create price movement in
their direction. On the other hand, traders who are not confident about
what they want to do will gladly share their trading ideas with anyone who
will listen, hoping to get some sort of confirmation that what they are
about to do will work. So the after-the-fact reasons they offer for why
they acted as they did usually just serve the purpose of easing the pain of
what they perceive as their mistakes, which isn't particularly useful
information. What is useful is understanding that traders typically act as
a group, very similar to a school of fish or herd of cattle. Individual
traders fall into specific groups that tend to perceive the same kind of
market conditions as opportunities or disappointments. As a result, they
will act in unison to upset the balance of the market, causing the prices
to move in predominately one direction. The various groups take
positions because they believe they can make money, and they get out
because they are either losing money or perceive the possibility of making
any more money as diminished in relationship to the perceived risk of
losing money. For example, the locals on the floor of the exchanges have
the least amount of patience, are the most impulsive, are the most easily
disappointed, and consequently have the smallest price objectives and
shortest time frame perspectives. As a result, they are the most active and
will all be trying to do the same thing at the same time.
Commercials and off-the-floor retail traders are two other groups that
have different price objectives and time frame perspectives from each other.
Individuals within these groups will also tend to act in unison, upsetting
the balance in the market by their degree of participation or lack of
participation at any given moment. You can determine what market
conditions in which they are most likely to participate, what conditions
will confirm their beliefs about the future, and what will disappoint them.
Once you learn their unique characteristics, you can anticipate how one or
more groups are likely to act and determine how their activity will affect the
balance of the market and the potential for price movement.
WHY DO WE TRADE?
Every moment we exist we are interacting with the environment,
expressing ourselves in our own unique way, and thus creating our lives by
the way we live it. Everything we do in every moment is some form of the
way we express ourselves. We express ourselves to fulfill our needs, wants,
57

desires, and goals. Today most individuals can channel their energies to
fulfill needs beyond the requirements of food and shelter, but to do so
requires money.
Money allows for a system of exchange where we can trade the goods
and services created from individuals expressing themselves in highly
specialized ways. Money has evolved to become the object of our needs
because it represents the means or path by which we can express ourselves
as individuals. All behavior is a form of self-expression, and almost any
way in which an individual wants to express himself in our society requires
money. So at the most fundamental level of cultural existence, money
represents freedom of expression.
Individuals expressing themselves in specialized ways create a highly
complex system of interdependency. To exchange goods and services,
individuals have to agree on the value of those goods and services to make
an exchange. I am defining "value" as the relative degree of importance or
potential something has in fulfilling a need. The actual price at which goods
and services are then exchanged will be determined by the fundamental
economic law of supply and demand. In psychological terms, the law of
supply and demand is founded in human fear and greed. Both fear and
greed will compel people to act or not act depending on their needs in
relation to the perceived external conditions. The price for goods and
services will be determined by the individual's needs in relationship to
their belief in their ability to fulfill those needs. Implied within that belief is
their perception of the availability of the goods and services they need.
Greed is founded in a belief in scarcity and insecurity. Both beliefs
generate fear. I am defining "greed" as a belief that there will never be
enough available to fulfill oneself in combination with a belief that one
always needs more to feel secure or satisfied. The perception that these
conditions exist either internally or externally will generate a fear that will
compel one to act or not act, depending on who controls the supply. The
behavior someone displays will be consistent with what they believe they
must do to satisfy the deficit. If two or more people have the same fears,
they will typically compete among one another for the existing supply.
If the supply of something is limited in relationship to the need, those
that are in need will compete for the available supply. They will compete
by their willingness to exchange more resources (pay more money) than
will someone else who may also be in need. If, however, the supply is great
in relationship to the need (demand), there will be no fear of scarcity;
consequently, people will conserve their resources (money) by diverting
them to other needs or just waiting for the possibility that the price may
come down.
Any system of interaction founded in individual fears of lack or scarcity
will cause the price of goods and services to fluctuate in relationship to
the relative degree of security or insecurity that is being experienced by
the collective masses at any given moment. These fluctuating prices create
58

economic risk for all those dependent on others to fulfill a need that they
cannot fill themselves. What is risk? Risk is the possibility of a net loss of
personal resources (energy, money etc.) in the exchange or pursuit of
fulfilling a need. Fluctuating prices also create opportunities for those who
are willing to assume the risk created by price movement. As long as there is
disagreement between individuals about the value of goods and services,
prices will fluctuate, thereby creating opportunities for traders to make
money if they will assume the risks.
DEFINITION OF TRADING
I define trading as two parties exchanging something of value to fulfill
some need or goal. In the context of the stock or futures markets,
participants trade for the sole purpose of accumulating wealth or protecting
physical assets from deteriorating in value. In essence, all traders in these
markets, whether they are labeled speculators or hedgers, trade to
accumulate wealth; it is only a matter of perspective. For the hedger the
motivation to protect the value of an asset from economic risk is still to
accumulate wealth.
Hedgers will trade for a higher degree of economic certainty by
transferring the risk created by changing prices to another willing trader.
Typically, it will be the speculator on the other side of the trade willing to
assume the risk of changing prices for the opportunity to accumulate
wealth from those changes. For example, stock owners will sell their stock
because they believe the possibilities for the future appreciation of the stock
are either nonexistent or minimal in relationship to their assessment of the
risk to keeping it. They may also sell even with expectations of future
appreciation if there is a need to liquidate to satisfy other needs. The buyers
(the other side of the trade) believe that the stock will appreciate in value.
We can assume that the buyer believes this because people trade to accumulate wealth.
Since the goal of a trader is to satisfy a need to accumulate wealth, we can
assume that people will not consciously enter into a trade believing they
will lose or fail at satisfying their needs. Because all traders have basically
the same goals (to win), we can then state that no two traders enter into a
trade unless they have opposing beliefs about the future value of whatever
is being traded. Keep in mind that the current price of anything is always a
reflection of what someone is willing to pay and what someone is willing to
sell for in that moment. So, although there must be agreement between
two parties for a trade to exist at a price, inherent within the transaction is
complete disagreement between buyer and seller on the future value of
what they are trading. For example, would I be incorrect in stating that any
stock owner will not sell his stock if he believed it had potential for future
appreciation. When he sells he has basically given up on the possibilities
of future appreciation. Why did the buyer buy? To lose money? To be
59

wrong? No, of course not. The buyer's belief in the future value of the stock
is opposite that of the seller's. This disparity is illustrated even more clearly
with futures trading.
Of real interest is the academic community's belief that the markets are
efficient, which assumes that traders have rational reasons for their
behavior, knowing what they are doing and having a good reason for doing
it. Academicians also believe that the markets are basically random, which
seems to be a complete contradiction to a market that is supposed to be
efficient. In fact, however, the market's behavior is mostly irrational, if you
define rational as any action that is the result of a specific methodology or is
planned in advance and definitely not random because irrational behavior is
very predictable. If you want to learn to predict price movement, you don't
need to pay attention to reasons. What you need to do is determine how the
majority of traders perceive the external conditions in relationship to either
their fear of scarcity, or their fear of missing out, or both.

60

CHAPTER 8

The Three Stages
to Becoming a
Successful Trader

Before we cover the three stages to becoming a successful trader, it would
be a good idea to review some of the material already covered. In the market
environment you have to make the rules to the game and then have the
discipline to abide by these rules, even though the market moves in ways
that will constantly tempt you into believing you don't need to follow your
rules this time. This movement allows you to indulge in any illusion or
distortion that suits you in any given moment. Certainly you wouldn't
choose to feel pain (confronting your illusions about the market) if there is
any reasonable information that would support the possibility of your
expectation being fulfilled.
In an unlimited environment, if you can't confront the reality of a loss,
then the possibility exists for you to lose everything, in each and every trade.
If you believe trading is like gambling, it isn't. In any gambling game you
have to actively participate to lose and do nothing to stop losing. In the
market environment, you have to actively participate to get into a trade and
actively participate to end your losses. If you do nothing, the potential exists
to lose everything you own.
When you participate in gambling games, you know exactly what your
risk is and the event always ends. With the markets you don't ultimately
know what your risk is, even if you are disciplined enough to use stops,
because the market could gap through your stops. Also because the event
never ends and is in constant motion, there is always the possibility of
getting back what you are losing in any trade. You won't need to actively
participate to get back what you are losing; you just have to stay in your
61

trade and let the market give it to you. As a result, there is the constant
temptation not to cut your losses which is very difficult to resist. Why
choose pain over the possibility of being made whole, when all you need do
is ignore the risk.

YOU CREATE YOUR EXPERIENCE
OF THE MARKET
Each equilibrium (the current price) presents every trader with an
opportunity to either buy low or sell high relative to the next change.
Except for the time it takes to execute a trade, it is basically the same market
for all of us. You are either able to perceive any given equilibrium as
opportunity to execute a trade, or you can agonize over what you believe is
a missed opportunity from the last price change, or you can refrain from
taking the trade at the current price—even though you perceive it as an
opportunity—because you fear the market might make you wrong. The
market does not create the ways in which you perceive it; it merely reflects
what is going on inside of you in any given moment.
Whether you perceived the current market condition as an opportunity
and didn't act on your perception, or didn't realize it was an opportunity
until after the move occurred is, again, a direct reflection of your unique
psychological makeup. You attach the meaning to any particular move.
From an objective perspective the next tick up can be described as the
price just moved one tick up from the previous price. That is a reality
about that one-tick price change we all share. However, to one trader that
one up tick could be the final defeat in a short position he had been
carrying. To another trader, it could mean a perfect selling opportunity
because the market just can't go higher.
To a third trader it could mean a buying opportunity because the market
broke out of a resistance area, based on the way he defines resistance.
The market neither chooses nor has any way of choosing the meaning
you attach to any particular price change or market condition. For example,
you could perceive an opportunity to sell high and act on that perception
by entering the market with a short position. From the point you entered,
let's say the market went in your favor and then violently reversed itself. In
doing so, it very quickly went through your entry point and kept on going
up with only a few rest periods and minor little retracements.
Each rest or retracement could have been an opportunity to get out of
your short position and reverse yourself. What would stop you? The answer
is inside of you. If you breathed a sigh of relief each time the market paused
or retraced a bit, choosing to believe it was finally all over, then I ask you,
What is all over? Is it possibly the fact that you won't have to confront
yourself and say I'm wrong. That again is inside of you. You choose (based
on the makeup of your mental environment) to believe the pauses were
62

stopping points, relief from confrontation, instead of a possibility to take
advantage of an opportunity to eliminate your risk and a high probability
to accumulate a profit by reversing yourself.
The way the market seemed to you was actually the way you created it
in your own mind. Out of all the available choices and alternate ways of
considering the possibilities, you choose one particular way. Your own
mental framework (controlling what and the ways in which you perceive
information) locked you into that losing trade. The unique way you define a
loss (your beliefs about it) and what it means to you is a component part of
your psychological makeup. Your beliefs will interact with your perception
of environmental information to form the particular way you pick and
choose whatever information you happen to focus your attention on. The
market has nothing to do with this process, even though that is where the
information is coming from.
In the trading environment the outcome of your decisions is immediate,
and you are powerless to change anything except your mind. The power
you have to create more fulfilling outcomes from your trading resides in
your degree of mental flexibility. You have to learn how to flow with the
markets; you are either in harmony with them or you are not. The less
acceptance you have for different types of market behavior, the more the
market seems to turn on you like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. In one moment it
is satisfying all your needs; in the next it is like a greedy monster taking
everything away. This Dr. Jekyll/Mr. Hyde characteristic of the markets
only represents your own mental inflexibility to flow with the changes and
your lack of understanding—that you give yourself to the best of your
ability what you end up with, out of what is available. And by the same
token, what you lost, you gave away.
You can't change what the market is doing. You can only change yourself
in a way that allows you to perceive what it may do next with increased
clarity and objectivity. As a trader you want to know what is going to
happen next, yet, how can you begin to know what could happen next, if
you refuse to open yourself up mentally in ways that allow you to perceive
the most likely possibilities? It is a complete contradiction in thought to
want to know what is going to happen next in an event over which you
have no control and at the same time to maintain a rigid mental structure
that allows for only a very limited number of possibilities.
This contradiction in thought is the result of not understanding the
nature of beliefs and how they limit a person's perception of environmental
information. When you put on the trade, you had to have some belief about
the future. What you need to do is learn how to release yourself from the
demand your expectations be fulfilled exactly the way you expect them to
be. Releasing yourself from the demand will allow you to shift your
perspective to perceive whatever opportunities exist in the market now, as if
you didn't have a trade on at all.
All of us are in a position of having to pick and choose environmental
63

information because we can't be aware of everything at once. If you pick and
choose market information on the basis of having to justify your beliefs, you
are putting yourself at an extreme disadvantage. You will be excluding from
your awareness information that may be more indicative of the consistency
of the market and its potential to move in any given direction. And it will
be extremely difficult to learn how to develop a perspective for the "big
picture," by expanding your time frame perspective.
So even though you can't actually control the market's movement, you
can learn how to control your perception of the market's movement in a way
that allows you the maximum objectivity. Learning to perceive objectively will
increase your ability to let the market tell you when to get in and when to get
out. You can learn how to trade where you won't be using information to justify
your beliefs but rather to perceive the most likely possibilities in any given
moment. As you build a solid foundation of insight and understanding into the
workings of your mental environment (which I will present in Chapters 9
through 14), you will learn how to change yourself in ways that will allow
you to perceive the markets from an objective perspective and eventually trade
intuitively.
What I will be offering you in the remainder of the book is a step-by-step
process of how to adapt yourself to function more effectively in the trading
environment. Essentially it is a process that will enable you to identify and
manipulate your beliefs to be more consistent with your goals.
There are two dominant themes that form the foundation for this approach.
The first we have already briefly covered, that you create the market that you
experience in your own mind based on your beliefs, perceptions, intents, and
rules. And, second, your trading results will be a function of the degree of skills
you develop in three primary areas: perception, or your ability to perceive
opportunity; execution, or your ability to execute a trade; and accumulation, or
your ability to allow your account balance to grow over a period of time or series
of trades.
