
A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

85

are likely to be puzzled about their source. The precipitating sounds do not
occur at the same time as the feedback variation, and so their causal role is
easy to miss. It is the same in speculative markets, but here the feedback lasts
for years. The disturbances that have begun the feedback may be so remote
in time that it seems hardly possible that they could have been the cause of
the price movements.
The theory of feedback is, as I have noted, widely known, but most people
do not use the term feedback loop to describe it. The phrase is a scientist’s term
for what might popularly be called a vicious circle, a self‑fulfilling prophecy,
a bandwagon effect. Although the term speculative bubble has more than one
meaning in common discourse, it usually appears to refer to such feedback.
In the most popular version of the feedback theory, one that relies on
adaptive expectations, feedback takes place because past price increases
generate expectations of further price increases.18 In another version of the
feedback theory, feedback takes place because of increased investor confi‑
dence in response to past price increases. Usually such feedback is thought
to occur in response not so much to a sudden price increase as to a pattern
of consistency in price increases.
The evidence discussed earlier in this chapter is consistent with both
adaptive expectation and investor confidence feedback playing a role in the
current stock market situation. The feedback can also occur for emotional
reasons, reasons unconnected with either expectations or confidence. The
effect of “playing with the house money,” as discussed previously, can result
in a sort of feedback: this frame of mind may reduce investors’ inclination to
sell after a price increase, thus amplifying the effects of the precipitating factors on price.19 The past behavior of prices can have a wide range of emotional
impacts, depending on their contexts.
Ultimately, there are a number of different kinds of feedback. Price-to-price
feedback is the most basic: price increases, via investor enthusiasm, feed back
directly into further price increases. Price-to-GDP-to-price feedback is another
form: as the value of the stock market or the housing market increases, the
resulting wealth and optimism encourages expenditures: consumption and
investment in such things as new houses, factories, and equipment. The
reaction to higher investment values is called the “wealth effect”; the wealth
effect has been shown to operate both from the stock market and from the
housing market.20 When these higher expenditures have their impact on GDP,
the appearance of economic success encourages people to bid up the markets
more. The higher GDP is interpreted by the public as evidence of a healthier
and stronger economy rather than of a bubble, which is its ultimate cause.
Price–to–corporate earnings–to–price feedback is yet another form. When
stock market prices increase, people spend more, and this boosts corporate
profits, which is interpreted as fundamental good news about the corporations

86

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

themselves, encouraging people to have higher expectations for the stock
market and therefore to bid up prices even more.
Underlying this feedback is a widespread public misperception about the
importance of speculative thinking in our economy. People are accustomed to
thinking that there is a basic state of “health” of the economy, and that when
the stock market goes up, or when GDP goes up, or when corporate profits
go up, it means that the economy is healthier, no more and no less. It seems
as if people often think that the economy is struck by some exogenous maladies, akin to earthquakes or meteor impacts, or exogenous breakthroughs,
such as sudden advances in technology, and that the movements in the stock
market, in GDP or in profits, are just a reflection of such shocks. It is true that
the economy is sometimes struck by such shocks. But people do not seem to
perceive how often it is that their own psychology, as part of a complex pattern of feedback, is driving the economy.
Regardless of which feedback theory applies, the speculative bubble cannot
grow forever. Investors’ demand for speculative assets cannot grow forever,
and when it stops growing, price increases will stop. According to the popular
version of the expectation feedback theory, at that point we would expect a
drop in the market, a bursting of the bubble, since investors no longer think
prices will continue to rise and therefore no longer see a good reason to hold
the stock. However, other versions of the feedback theory do not suggest a
sudden bursting of the bubble, since they are not predicated on continually
increasing prices.
Indeed, even according to the most popular versions of the feedback theory,
there is actually no reason to think that there should be sudden bursts of
bubbles. There must be some noise in investor demand, some unpredictability
of response to past price changes, some lack of synchrony across investors.
Moreover, the enticement to enter or exit the market that past price changes
creates is not likely to be determined only by the most recent change in price.
It is plausible that investors will look back over many days, weeks, or months
of price changes in deciding whether they find recent market performance
enticing. Thus, the simple feedback theory is consistent with a price pattern
that shows many interruptions and jiggles.21
With any of these feedback theories, we can also expect that negative bubbles
should occur, in which feedback occurs in a downward direction, as initial
price declines discourage some investors, causing further price declines, and
so on.22 (The term negative bubble always reminds me of watching a sealed
plastic soda bottle filled with warm air gradually implode as it cools, and seeing it pop back into shape when the cap is loosened—though this metaphor
is really no more apt than the soap bubble metaphor for positive speculative
events.) Price continues to decline until further price decreases begin to seem
unlikely, at which point there is no reason for people to want to stay away

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

87

from the stock and the negative bubble fills back up—even though, as with
positive bubbles, the burst will probably not be sudden.
Feedback loop dynamics can generate complex and even apparently random behavior. The so‑called random number generators in some types of
computer software are really just simple nonlinear feedback loops, and even
some quite simple feedback loops have been demonstrated to yield behavior
that looks so complicated as to suggest randomness. If we suppose that there
are many kinds of feedback loops operating in the economy and many kinds
of precipitating factors, then we may conclude that the apparent randomness
of the stock market, the tendency it has to create sudden moves for no apparent reason, might not be so inexplicable after all. The branch of mathematics
that studies nonlinear feedback loops, called chaos theory, may be applicable
to understanding the complexity of stock market behavior.23

Perceptions of Feedback and Bubbles among Investors
The feedback theory of speculative bubbles is so widely known as to be considered part of our popular culture. It is natural to wonder, therefore, whether
public perceptions of a bubble might play a role in a bubble. Conceivably, a
bubble might exist only because people think that there is a temporary bubble
and want to ride with it for a while.
A Barron’s Big Money Poll of professional money managers in April 1999,
less than a year before the 2000 peak of the market, asked, “Is the stock market
in a speculative bubble?” Seventy‑two percent of the respondents said yes,
only 28% said no.24 That is pretty solid evidence that some people thought
they were in a bubble.
One of the indices we compute at the International Center for Finance at
Yale, which we call a “valuation confidence” index, indicates the percentage of
respondents who think that the stock market is not overvalued. The question
that we pose to our respondents is this: “Stock prices in the United States, when
compared with measures of true fundamental value or sensible investment
value, are: (1) Too low, (2) Too high, (3) About right, (4) Do not know.”
The valuation confidence index indicates the number of respondents who
choose 1 (Too low) or 3 (About right) as a percentage of those who choose 1, 2,
or 3. I have been asking this question, unchanged, and as the very first question
on the questionnaire, since 1989. A plot of the valuation confidence index for
both individual and institutional investors since 1989 is shown in Figure 5.4.25
Valuation confidence declined throughout the 1990s for both individual and
institutional investors and hit bottom just before the peak in the stock market
in 2000. Valuation confidence soared right back, almost to its 1989 levels, as
the stock market declined after 2000. This behavior of valuation confidence
is further evidence that the stock market went through a bubble around 2000.

88

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

100
90

Valuation confidence index

80

Institutional

70
60
Individual 2014

50
40
30
2000

20
10
0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 5.4
Valuation Confidence Index, 1989–2014
Percentage of respondents who think that the stock market is not overvalued,
1989–2014: Institutional investors (heavy line), high-income individual investors
(light line). Source: Author’s surveys through 2000, Yale International Center for
Finance surveys thereafter.

Notably, people just did not believe in the market in 2000. As of this writing, in
2014, individual investors have been rapidly losing confidence again, though
we are not back to 1999 levels in this measure.
That said, it would still be inaccurate to think that most people have firmly
in mind that a feedback process is under way, operating through investor
psychology, and that they are knowingly participating in the bubble but hoping to get out before it collapses. The investment professionals that Barron’s
surveyed are, by their training, likely to be a little more savvy about these
things than are the general public. The general public is likely to think that
the market might be overvalued, and might be unstable, but does not have a
clear picture of the dynamics of a bubble.
In our questionnaire surveys of homebuyers in boom cities, we gave people
ample space to write in what they thought was going on in the real estate
market in which they had just participated. Some did indeed say that they
thought market psychology was driving events, and some even used the word

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

89

bubble. But in our 2004 survey, the word bubble was volunteered in reference
to the real estate boom by only 1% of our respondents. Five times as many
volunteered the term supply and demand, and much of what respondents in
boom cities offered was about the shortage of houses on the market and the
high demand. The overwhelming impression that one gets in reading their
answers is that they believed there was good reason for the real estate boom
to happen and to continue.
As part of our homebuyer surveys in 2003 and 2004, when the housing
boom was going at its fastest pace, we asked:
Which of the following better describes your theory about recent trends in
[name of city] home prices?
1. It is a theory about the psychology of homebuyers and sellers
2. It is a theory about economic or demographic conditions such as population
changes, changes in interest rates or employment growth (or decline)

Only 13% (of 771 respondents) chose 1 (psychology); 87% chose 2 (economic
or demographic conditions).
As these answers reflect, the idea that some kind of psychological feedback
drives market prices is not a natural one that informs a lot of thinking among
the general public. Indeed, the very enthusiasm that one senses during a
bubble seems inconsistent with a widespread awareness of the presence of
a bubble. If one thought that the price increases were just another instance of
herd behavior that was going to come to an abrupt end at some unpredictable
date, it would be hard to imagine being so excited.

Ponzi Schemes as Models of Feedback and Speculative Bubbles
It is hard to prove that a simple mechanical price feedback model, producing
heightened investor attention and enthusiasm, is actually a factor in financial markets. We may have a casual impression that investors are showing
enthusiasm for investments in response to past price increases, but we do not
see any concrete evidence that such feedback actually affects their decisions.
To provide evidence that such feedback mechanisms do play a role in financial markets, it is helpful to look at the example of Ponzi schemes, or pyramid
schemes, by means of which hoaxers create positive feedback from putative
current investment returns to future investment returns. These schemes have
been perpetrated so many times that governments have had to outlaw them,
yet they still keep popping up. They are particularly interesting since they are,
in a way, controlled experiments (controlled by the hoaxer!) that demonstrate
characteristics of the feedback that cannot be seen so plainly either in normal
markets or in the experimental psychologist’s laboratory.

90

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

In a Ponzi scheme, the manager of the scheme promises to make large profits
for investors by investing their money. But little or no investment of contributors’ funds in any real assets is actually made. Instead, the manager pays off the
initial investors with the proceeds of a sale to a second round of investors, and
the second round with the proceeds from a sale to a third, and so on. The name
of the scheme derives from a particularly famous (though certainly not the first)
example, perpetrated by one Charles Ponzi in the United States in 1920. A Ponzi
scheme entices initial investors, after they have made a lot of money, to tell their
success stories to another round of investors, who then invest even more in the
scheme, allowing the hoaxer to pay off the second round of investors, whose
success story entices an even larger round of investors, and so on. This scheme
must end eventually, since the supply of investors cannot increase forever, and
the perpetrator of the scheme no doubt knows this. The perpetrator may hope
to exit, not having paid off the last and largest round of investors, and then
hide from the law. (Or, possibly, he or she may imagine that with luck, fantastic
investment opportunities will be found later, thereby saving the scheme.)
We know that Ponzi schemes have been successful in making their perpetrators rich, at least until they were apprehended. Charles Ponzi attracted 30,000
investors in 1920 and issued notes totaling $15 million, all within seven months.26
The recent Bernie Madoff Ponzi scheme, carried on from the 1970s until its
collapse in 2008, is considered to be the largest financial fraud in U.S. history,
estimated at almost $65 billion. Neither experience nor sophistication seems
to effectively immunize investors against falling victim to this type of fraud.
Bubbles can appear in the unlikeliest of places and can entrap even small rural
investors. In a recent celebrated story, a former housewife, Raejean Bonham,
set up an enormous Ponzi scheme on her own in the tiny town of Fox in rural
Alaska. She promised to pay 50% returns in two months and enticed 1,200
investors in forty‑two states to pay her a total of between $10 and $15 million
between 1989 and 1995.27
A particularly dramatic story emerged in Albania in 1996 and 1997 when a
number of Ponzi schemes promising fantastic rates of return enticed a good
share of the people of that country. Seven Ponzi schemes accumulated some
$2 billion, or 30% of Albania’s annual GDP.28 Enthusiasm for the schemes was
so intense that in the 1996 local elections, members of the ruling government
party included symbols of the Ponzi scheme funds on their campaign posters,
apparently wanting to gain some credit for the new wealth sources. When the
schemes failed in 1997, enraged protesters looted banks and burned buildings,
and the government was forced to call out the army to restore peace; a number
of rioters were killed. The collapse of the schemes forced the resignations of
Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi and his cabinet.29
As part of their strategy, successful Ponzi schemes present to investors a
plausible story about how great profits can be made. Charles Ponzi told investors that he was able to make money for them by exploiting an arbitrage profit

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

91

opportunity involving international postage reply coupons. These coupons
were sold by postal services so that the purchaser could enclose the coupon in
a letter to another country and thereby prepay a reply. There were apparently
some genuine potential profit opportunities in buying postage reply coupons
in Europe and selling them in the United States, because the currency exchange
rate did not correspond exactly to the rate implicit in the coupons. Ponzi’s story
of profit opportunities from trading the coupons, eventually published in newspapers during the scheme, sounded plausible to some influential people. But the
actual profit opportunities were not realizable since there was no easy way to
sell the coupons, and the hoax began to unravel when the New York postmaster
declared that the world’s supply of international postage reply coupons was not
enough to make the fortune Ponzi claimed to have made.
Raejean Bonham in Alaska claimed she was buying unused frequent‑flier
miles from large companies, repackaging them as discount tickets, and then
selling them at a large profit. The Albanian investment company VEFA was
supposedly making a number of conventional investments in a reviving
economy. (There was also a rumor in Albania at the time that VEFA was a
front for money‑laundering, an activity that also sounded like a plausible
source of big money to many investors.)30
A critical observation to be made about these examples of Ponzi schemes
is that initial investors were reportedly very skeptical about the schemes and
would invest only small amounts. A story about an arbitrage profit opportunity
in postage reply coupons, if merely told directly, without the evidence that it
had made others a lot of money, would not sound credible enough to entice
many investors. Investors do not become truly confident in the scheme until
they see others achieving large returns.
The possibility that the so‑called investment payoffs are in fact coming only
from new money is typically raised repeatedly and publicly well before the collapse of these schemes, and the hoaxers must of course deny the claim publicly.
This was the case both for the original Ponzi scheme and for the Albanian
example. The fact that many people continue to believe in the scheme afterward
seems puzzling, and to outside observers the believers in the scheme may seem
quite foolish.31 But this only shows the powerful effect on people’s thinking of
seeing others having made substantial sums of money. That others have made
a lot of money appears to many people as the most persuasive evidence in
support of the investment story associated with the Ponzi scheme—evidence
that outweighs even the most carefully reasoned argument against the story.

Fraud, Manipulation, and White Lies
The process that generates a speculative boom is in some dimensions analogous to these Ponzi schemes. Also part of a boom is activity expressly designed
to deceive people, deliberate attempts by many people to exploit thinking

92

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

errors among general investors. Doing this effectively often requires breaking the law. But, given the slowness of our justice process, the perpetrators of
such schemes may be able to get away with deception for many years. This,
too, is part of the process of a speculative bubble.
My erstwhile professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Charles Kindleberger, was a great influence on my thinking. He lived to be
92 years old, and I corresponded with him last just before he died in 2003. In
his 1989 book Manias, Panics and Crashes, he wrote: “We believe that swindling
is demand determined. . . . In a boom, fortunes are made, individuals wax
greedy, and swindlers come forward to exploit the demand.”32
The value of most investments depends on expectations for the near to
distant future, something that cannot be seen clearly today, and so a public
focusing of attention on investments creates an opportunity for deception
and misrepresentation. During a boom, opportunists try to find some ways
of profiting from the public’s speculative attention by pretending to be the
epitome of capitalistic success, and also pretending, one way or the other, to
be the advance guard of the great new economy.
One of the reasons we are so deceived by bubbles is the same reason that we
are deceived by professional magicians. When clever persons become profes‑
sionals at deceiving people and devote years to perfecting an act, they can put
seemingly impossible feats before our eyes and fool us, at least for a while.
They only need to fool us for long enough to collect our money and leave the
scene. A public preoccupation with investments generates an immense incentive for such professionals to advance their careers in the realms of finance
and management. When we have the equivalent of professional magicians
running some of our companies or acting as some of our real estate brokers,
we have to expect that what we see is not reality.
The extreme cases are those of outright criminal behavior, like that of the
Enrons and the Parmalats. In the aftermath of a boom, the political environment
changes, the public who lost money is outraged, offenders are prosecuted, and
regulation is tightened. We saw that happen again in the United States and other
countries after the market peaked in 2000. We saw another round of prosecutions
after the runaway securitization that led to the 2008 crash. It is an important
job that the regulators and prosecutors do, and the aftermath of a speculative
boom is a sort of cleansing of our financial markets that makes it possible for
them to function even more effectively in the aftermath of the bubble.
More common than the examples of criminal behavior, however, are
examples of people who stayed entirely within the law and exploited a boom,
building businesses that they did not themselves believe in. These are cases
of disingenuity rather than fraud.
Some of these people have already taken their money and gone home.
Since 2000, many top managers of tech companies that were built promoting
