
dedication of his work to Earl Stanhope, "he spent several months in fruitless attempts to
induce the wise men of the country to study the phenomena of magnetism. His incessant
appeals for an examination of these novel facts remained unanswered, and the press
began to declare against him." With a saddened heart, he was about to renounce the
design he had formed of spreading magnetism in England, and carry to some more
credulous people the important doctrines of which he had made himself the apostle. Earl
Stanhope, however, encouraged him to remain; telling him to hope for a favourable
change in public opinion, and the eventual triumph of that truth of which he was the
defender. M. Dupotet remained. He was not so cruel as to refuse the English people a
sight of his wonders. Although they might be ungrateful, his kindness and patience
should be long enduring. In the course of time his perseverance met its reward. Ladies in
search of emotions -- the hysteric, the idle, the puling, and the ultra-sentimental crowded
to his saloons, as ladies similarly predisposed had crowded to Mesmer's sixty years
before. Peers, members of the House of Commons, philosophers, men of letters, and
physicians came in great numbers -- some to believe, some to doubt, and a few to scoff.
M. Dupotet continued his experiments, and at last made several important converts. Most
important of all for a second Mesmer, he found a second D'Eslon.
Dr. Elliotson, the most conspicuous among the converts of Dupotet, was, like D'Eslon, a
physician in extensive practice -- a thoroughly honest man, but with a little too much
enthusiasm. The parallel holds good between them in every particular; for, as D'Eslon
had done before him, Dr. Elliotson soon threw his master into the shade, and attracted all
the notice of the public upon himself. He was at that time professor of the principles and
practice of medicine at the University College, London, and physician to the hospital. In
conjunction with M. Dupotet, he commenced a course of experiments upon some of the
patients in that institution. The reports which were published from time to time, partook
so largely of the marvellous, and were corroborated by the evidence of men whose
learning, judgment, and integrity it was impossible to call in question, that the public
opinion was staggered. Men were ashamed to believe, and yet afraid to doubt; and the
subject at last became so engrossing that a committee of some of the most distinguished
members of the medical profession undertook to investigate the phenomena, and report
upon them.
In the mean time, Dr. Elliotson and M. Dupotet continued the public exhibition at the
hospital; while the credulous gaped with wonder, and only some few daring spirits had
temerity enough to hint about quackery and delusion on the part of the doctors, and
imposture on the part of the patients. The phenomena induced in two young women,
sisters, named Elizabeth and Jane Okey, were so extraordinary that they became at last
the chief, if not the only proofs of the science in London. We have not been able to meet
with any reports of these experiments from the pen of an unbeliever, and are therefore
compelled to rely solely upon the reports published under the authority of the magnetisers
themselves, and given to the world in "The Lancet" and other medical journals.
Elizabeth Okey was an intelligent girl, aged about seventeen, and was admitted into the
University College hospital, suffering under attacks of epilepsy. She was magnetised
repeatedly by M. Dupotet in the autumn of 1837, and afterwards by Dr. Elliotson at the

hospital, during the spring and summer of 1838. By the usual process, she was very easily
thrown into a state of deep unconscious sleep, from which she was aroused into
somnambulism and delirium. In her waking state she was a modest well-behaved girl,
and spoke but little. In the somnambulic state, she appeared quite another being; evinced
considerable powers of mimicry; sang comic songs; was obedient to every motion of her
magnetiser; and was believed to have the power of prophesying the return of her illness -the means of cure, and even the death or recovery of other patients in the ward.
Mesmer had often pretended in his day that he could impart the magnetic power to pieces
of metal or wood, strings of silk or cord, &c. The reader will remember his famous
battery, and the no less famous tree of M. de Puysegur. During the experiments upon
Okey, it was soon discovered that all the phenomena could be produced in her, if she
touched any object that had been previously mesmerised by the will or the touch of her
magnetiser. At a sitting, on the 5th of July 1838, it was mentioned that Okey, some short
time previously, and while in the state of magnetic lucidity, had prophesied that, if
mesmerised tea were placed in each of her hands, no power in nature would be able to
awake her until after the lapse of a quarter of an hour. The experiment was tried
accordingly. Tea which had been touched by the magnetiser was placed in each hand, and
she immediately fell asleep. After ten minutes, the customary means to awaken her were
tried, but without effect. She was quite insensible to all external impressions. In a quarter
of an hour, they were tried with redoubled energy, but still in vain. She was left alone for
six minutes longer; but she still slept, and it was found quite impossible to wake her. At
last some one present remarked that this wonderful sleep would, in all probability, last till
the tea was removed from her bands. The suggestion was acted upon, the tea was taken
away, and she awoke in a few seconds. ["Lancet," vol. ii. 1837-8, p. 585.]
On the 12th of July, just a week afterwards, numerous experiments as to the capability of
different substances for conveying the magnetic influence were tried upon her. A slip of
crumpled paper, magnetised by being held in the hand, produced no effect. A penknife
magnetised her immediately. A piece of oilskin had no influence. A watch placed on her
palm sent her to sleep immediately, if the metal part were first placed in contact with her;
the glass did not affect her so quickly. As she was leaving the room, a sleeve-cuff made
of brown-holland, which had been accidentally magnetised by a spectator, stopped her in
mid career, and sent her fast to sleep. It was also found that, on placing the point of her
finger on a sovereign which had been magnetised, she was immediately stupified. A pile
of sovereigns produced sleep; but if they were so placed that she could touch the surface
of each coin, the sleep became intense and protracted.
Still more extraordinary circumstances were related of this patient. In her state of
magnetic sleep, she said that a tall black man, or negro, attended her, and prompted the
answers she was to give to the various perplexing questions that were put to her. It was
also asserted that she could use the back of her hand as an organ of vision. The first time
this remarkable phenomenon was said to have been exhibited was a few days prior to the
5th of July. On the latter day, being in what was called a state of loquacious
somnambulism, she was asked by Dr. Elliotson's assistant whether she had an eye in her
hand. She replied that "it was a light there, and not an eye." "Have you got a light

anywhere else?" -- "No, none anywhere else." -- "Can you see with the inside as well as
the out?" -- "Yes; but very little with the inside."
On the 9th of July bread with butter was given to her, and while eating it she drank some
magnetised water, and falling into a stupor dropped her food from her hand and frowned.
The eyes, partially closed, had the abstracted aspect that always accompanies
stupefaction. The right-hand was open, the palm upwards; the left, with its back presented
anteriorly, was relaxed and curved. The bread being lost, she moved her left-hand about
convulsively until right over the bread, when a clear view being obtained, the hand turned
suddenly round and clutched it eagerly. Her hand was afterwards wrapped in a
handkerchief; but then she could not see with it, and laid it on her lap with an expression
of despair.
These are a few only of the wonderful feats of Elizabeth Okey. Jane was not quite so
clever; but she nevertheless managed to bewilder the learned men almost as much as her
sister. A magnetised sovereign having been placed on the floor, Jane, then in the state of
delirium, was directed to stoop and pick it up. She stooped, and having raised it about
three inches, was fixed in a sound sleep in that constrained position. Dr. Elliotson pointed
his finger at her, to discharge some more of the mesmeric fluid into her, when her hand
immediately relaxed its grasp of the coin, and she re-awoke into the state of delirium,
exclaiming, "God bless my soul!"
It is now time to mention the famous gold-chain experiment which was performed at the
hospital upon Elizabeth Okey, in the presence of Count Flahault, Dr. Lardner, Mr.
Knatchbull the professor of Arabic in the University of Oxford, and many other
gentlemen. The object of the experiment was to demonstrate that, when Okey held one
end of a gold chain, and Dr. Elliotson, or any other magnetiser, the other, the magnetic
fluid would travel through the chain, and, after the lapse of a minute, stupify the patient.
A long gold chain having been twice placed around her neck, Dr. Elliotson at once threw
her into a state of stupor. It was then found that, if the intermediate part of the chain were
twisted around a piece of wood, or a roll of paper, the passage of the fluid would be
checked, and stupor would not so speedily ensue. If the chain were removed, she might
be easily thrown into the state of delirium; when she would sing at the request of her
magnetiser; and, if the chain were then unrolled, her voice would be arrested in the most
gradual manner; its loudness first diminishing -- the tune then becoming confused, and
finally lost altogether. The operations of her intellect could be checked, while the organs
of sound would still continue to exert themselves. For instance, while her thoughts were
occupied on the poetry and air of Lord Byron's song, "The Maid of Athens," the chain
was unrolled; and when she had reached the line, "My life, I love you!" the stupor had
increased; a cold statue-like aspect crept over the face -- the voice sank -- the limbs
became rigid -- the memory was gone -- the faculty of forecasting the thoughts had
departed, and but one portion of capacity remained -- that of repeating again and again,
perhaps twenty times, the line and music which had last issued from her lips, without
pause, and in the proper time, until the magnetiser stopped her voice altogether, by
further unrolling the chain and stupifying her. On another trial, she was stopped in the
comic song, "Sir Frog he would a wooing go," when she came to the line, "Whether his

mother would let him or no;" while her left hand outstretched, with the chain in it, was
moving up and down, and the right toe was tapping the time on the floor; and with these
words and actions she persevered for fifty repetitions, until the winding of the chain reopened her faculties, when she finished the song. ["Lancet," vol. ii. 1837-8, p.617.]
The report from which we have extracted the above passage further informed the public
and the medical profession, and expected them to believe, that, when this species of
stupefaction was produced while she was employed in any action, the action was repeated
as long as the mesmeric influence lasted. For instance, it was asserted that she was once
deprived of the motion of every part of her body, except the right forefinger, with which
she was rubbing her chin; and that, when thrown into the trance, she continued rubbing
her chin for several minutes, until she was unmagnetised, when she ceased. A similar
result was obtained when she was smoothing down her hair; and at another time when
she was imitating the laughter of the spectators, excited beyond control by her clever
mimicry. At another time she was suddenly thrown into the state of delirious stupor while
pronouncing the word "you," of which she kept prolonging the sound for several minutes,
with a sort of vibrating noise, until she was awakened. At another time, when a
magnetised sovereign was given to her, wrapped up in paper, she caught it in her hand,
and turned it round flatwise between her fingers, saying that it was wrapped up "very
neatly indeed." The mesmeric influence caught her in the remark, which she kept
repeating over and over again, all the while twirling the sovereign round and round until
the influence in the coin had evaporated.
We are also told of a remarkable instance of the force of the magnetic power. While
Elizabeth Okey was one day employed in writing, a sovereign which had been imbued
with the fluid was placed upon her boot. In half a minute her leg was paralyzed -- rooted
to the floor -- perfectly immovable at the joints, and visited, apparently, with pain so
intense that the girl writhed in agony. "The muscles of the leg were found," says the
report, "as rigid and stiff as if they had been carved in wood. When the sovereign was
removed, the pain left her in a quarter of a minute. On a subsequent day, a mesmerised
sovereign was placed in her left hand as it hung at her side, with the palm turned slightly
outwards. The hand and arm were immediately paralyzed -- fixed with marble-like
firmness." No general stupor having occurred, she was requested to move her arm; but
she could not lift it a hair's-breadth from her side. On another occasion, when in a state of
delirium, in which she had remained three hours, she was asked to describe her feelings
when she handled any magnetised object and went off into the stupor. She had never
before, although several times asked, given any information upon the subject. She now
replied that, at the moment of losing her senses through any manipulations, she
experienced a sensation of opening in the crown of her head; that she never knew when it
closed again; but that her eyes seemed to become exceedingly large; -- three times as big
as before. On recovering from this state, she remembered nothing that had taken place in
the interval, whether that interval were hours or days; her only sensation was that of
awakening, and of something being lifted from her eyes.
The regular publication of these marvellous experiments, authenticated as they were by
many eminent names, naturally excited the public attention in an extreme degree. Animal

Magnetism became the topic of discussion in every circle -- politics and literature were
for a time thrown into the shade, so strange were the facts, or so wonderful was the
delusion. The public journals contented themselves in many instances with a mere
relation of the results, without giving any opinion as to the cause. One of them which
gave a series of reports upon the subject, thus described the girl, and avowed its readiness
to believe all that was related of her. [Morning Post, March 2, 1838.] "Her appearance as
she sits, as pale and almost as still as a corpse, is strangely awful. She whistles to oblige
Dr. Elliotson: an incredulous bystander presses his fingers upon her lips; she does not
appear conscious of the nature of the interruption; but when asked to continue, replies in
childish surprise, 'it can't.' This state of magnetic semi-existence will continue we know
not how long. She has continued in it for twelve days at a time, and when awakened to
real life forgets all that has occurred in the magnetic one. Can this be deception? We have
conversed with the poor child her ordinary state as she sat by the fire in her ward,
suffering from the headach, which persecutes her almost continually when not under the
soothing fluence of the magnetic operation, and we confess we never beheld anybody less
likely to prove an impostor. We have seen Professor Faraday exerting his acute and
sagacious powers for an hour together, in the endeavour to detect some physical
discrepancy in her performance, or elicit some blush of mental confusion by his naive
and startling remarks. But there was nothing which could be detected, and the professor
candidly confessed that the matter was beyond his philosophy to unravel."

Magnetisers -- 6
Notwithstanding this sincere, and on the point of integrity, unimpeachable evidence in
her favour; notwithstanding that she appeared to have no motives for carrying on so
extraordinary and long-continued a deception, the girl was an impostor, and all these
wise, learned, and contemplative men her dupes. It was some time, however, before this
fact was clearly established, and the delusion dissipated by the clear light of truth. In the
mean time various other experiments on the efficacy of the supposed magnetic power
were tried in various parts of England; but the country did not furnish another epileptic
girl so clever as Elizabeth Okey. An exhibition of the kind was performed on a girl
named Sarah Overton, at the workhouse of the parish of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields. The
magnetiser on this occasion was Mr. Bainbridge, the parish surgeon. It is but justice to
him to state, that he conducted the experiments with the utmost fairness, and did not
pretend to produce any of the wondrous and incredible phenomena of other practitioners.
This girl, whose age was about twenty, had long been subject to epileptic fits, and
appeared remarkably simple and modest in her manners and appearance. She was brought
into the room and placed in a chair. About twenty gentlemen were present. Mr.
Bainbridge stationed himself behind, and pointed his fingers at her brain, while his
assistant in front made the magnetic passes before her eyes, and over her body. It cannot
be said that her imagination was not at work; for she had been previously magnetised,
and was brought in with her eyes open, and in complete possession of all her faculties.
No means had been taken to prevent interruption during the sitting; new visiters
continually arrived, and the noise of the opening and shutting of the door repeatedly
called from Mr. Bainbridge a request that all should be kept silent. The girl herself

constantly raised her head to see who was coming in; but still, in direct contradiction to
M. Dupotet, and, indeed, all the magnetisers, who have repeated over and over again, that
interruption destroys the magnetic power, she fell into a deep sleep at the end of about
twelve minutes. In this state, which is that called "Mesmeric Coma," she was quite
insensible. Though pulled violently by the hair, and pricked on the arm with a pin, she
showed no signs of consciousness or feeling. In a short time afterwards, she was
awakened into the somnambulic or delirious state, when she began to converse freely
with the persons around her, but more especially with her magnetiser. She would sing if
required, and even dance in obedience to his command, and pretended to see him
although her eyes were closely blindfolded with a handkerchief. She seemed to have a
constant tendency to fall back into the state of coma, and had to be aroused with violence
every two or three minutes to prevent a relapse. A motion of the hand before her face was
sufficient to throw her, in the middle of a song, into this insensible state; but it was
observed particularly that she fell at regular intervals, whether any magnetic passes were
made at her or not. It was hinted aloud to a person present that be should merely bend his
body before her, and she would become insensible, and fall to the ground. The pass was
made, and she fell accordingly into the arms of a medical gentleman, who stood behind
ready to receive her. The girl having been again aroused into the state of delirium,
another person, still audibly, was requested to do the same. He did not; but the girl fell as
before. The experiments were sufficient to convince the author that one human being
could indubitably exercise a very wonderful influence over another; but that imagination
only, and not the mesmeric fluid, was the great agent by which these phenomena could be
produced in persons of strong faith and weak bodies.
Some gentlemen present were desirous of trying whether any of the higher mesmeric
states, such as that of lucidity and clairvoyance could be produced. Mr. Bainbridge was
willing to allow the experiment to be made, but previously expressed his own doubts
upon the subject. A watch was then put into her bosom, the dial plate and glass against
her skin, to ascertain whether she could see without the intervention of the organs of
sight. She was asked what hour it was; and was promised a shilling if she would tell by
the watch which had been placed in her bosom. She held out her hand for the shilling,
and received it with great delight. She was then asked if she could see the watch? She
said "no -- not a watch; she could see something -- something that was very pretty
indeed." "Come, come, Sally," said Mr. Bainbridge, "you must not be so stupid; rouse up,
girl, and tell us what o'clock it is, and I'll give you another shilling!" The girl at this time
seemed to be relapsing into a deep sleep; but on being shaken, aroused herself with a
convulsive start. In reply to further questions, she said, "she could see a clock, a very
pretty clock, indeed!" She was again asked, five or six times, what the hour was: she at
last replied that "it was ten minutes to two." The watch being then taken out of her
bosom, it was found to be on the stroke of two. Every one present, including the
magnetiser, confessed that there was nothing wonderful in the conjecture she had
hazarded. She knew perfectly well what hour it was before she was brought into the
ward, as there was a large clock in the workhouse, and a bell which rang at dinner time;
she calculated mentally the interval that had since elapsed, and guessed accordingly. The
same watch was afterwards advanced four or five hours, and put into her bosom without a
word being said in her hearing. On being again asked what o'clock it was by that watch,

and promised another shilling if she would tell, she still replied that it was near two -- the
actual time. Thus, as Mr. Bainbridge had predicted, the experiment came to nothing. The
whole case of this girl offered a striking instance of the power of imagination, but no
proof whatever of the supposed existence of the magnetic fluid.
The Medical Committee of the University College Hospital took alarm at a very early
period at the injury which might be done to that Institution, by the exhibitions of Okey
and her magnetisers. A meeting was held in June 1838, at which Dr. Elliotson was not
present, to take into consideration the reports of the experiments that had been published
in the Medical Journals. Resolutions were then passed to the effect, that Dr. Elliotson
should be requested to refrain from further public exhibitions of mesmerism; and, at the
same time, stating the wish of the Committee not to interfere with its private employment
as a remedial agent, if he thought it would be efficacious upon any of the patients of the
Institution. Dr. Elliotson replied, that no consideration should prevent him from pursuing
the investigation of Animal Magnetism; but that he had no desire to make a public
exhibition of it. He had only given lectures and demonstrations when numbers of
scientific gentlemen were present; he still continued to receive numerous letters from
learned and eminent men, entreating permission to witness the phenomena; but if the
Committee willed it, he should admit no person without their sanction. He shortly
afterwards sent a list of the names of individuals who were anxious to witness the
experiments. The Committee returned it to him unread, with the reply that they could not
sanction any exhibition that was so entirely foreign to the objects of the Hospital. In
answer to this, Dr. Elliotson reiterated his full belief in the doctrines of Animal
Magnetism, and his conviction that his experiments would ultimately throw a light upon
the operations of nature, which would equal, if not exceed, that elicited by the greatest
discoveries of by-gone ages. The correspondence dropped here; and the experiments
continued as usual.
The scene, however, was drawing to a close. On the 25th of August, a notice was
published in the Lancet, to the effect, that some experiments had been performed on the
girls Elizabeth and Jane Okey, at the house of Mr. Wakley, a report of which was only
withheld in the hope that the Committee of Members of the Medical Profession, then
sitting to investigate the phenomena of mesmerism, would publish their report of what
they had witnessed. It was further stated, that whether that Committee did or did not
publish their report, the result of the experiments at Mr. Wakley's house should certainly
be made known in the next number of that journal. Accordingly, on the 1st of September
appeared a statement, which overthrew, in the most complete manner, the delusion of
mesmerism. Nothing could have been better conducted than these experiments; nothing
could be more decisive of the fact, that all the phenomena were purely the results of the
excited imaginations of the girls, aided in no slight degree by their wilful deception.
The first experiments were performed on the 16th of August, in the presence of Mr.
Wakley, M. Dupotet, Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Richardson, Mr. Herring, Mr. Clarke, and Mr. G.
Mills the writer of the published reports of the experiments at the University College
Hospital. Dr. Elliotson had said, that nickel was capable of retaining and transmitting the
magnetic fluid in an extraordinary degree; but that lead possessed no such virtues. The
