hand to which it could resell the notes.
53. Kurt Eichenwald, “Wall Street Sees a Serious Threat to Salomon Bros.—ILLEGAL BIDDING
FALLOUT—High-Level Resignations and Client Defections Feared—Firm’s Stock Drops,” New York Times,
August 16, 1991.
54. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
55. Strauss later related this to Buffett.
56. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
57. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
58. Interview with Jerry Corrigan. He says that Strauss and Gutfreund had had more than one routine
conversation with him between April and June without mentioning anything, and he no longer trusted them.
59. Buffett arrived in New York between 2:30 and 3:00 p.m., during which time the press release would have
been drafted and ready to go.
60. From Salomon press release dated August 16, 1991: “In order to give the Salomon Inc., board of directors
maximum flexibility, they are prepared to submit their resignations at a special meeting of the board.”
61. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
62. Interview with Bill McIntosh, Tom Strauss, Deryck Maughan.
63. Interview with Tom Strauss.
64. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
65. Interview with Ron Olson.
66. Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon
Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.” Sessions 13 & 14, November 29, 1993.
67. This is Buffett’s recollection of Gutfreund’s remarks. (From Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of
Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14,
November 29, 1993.
68. Interview with Tom Strauss.
69. On October 8, 1991, he was displaced when the Walton family, owners of Wal-Mart stock, took over
spots 3-7; Buffett became number 8. Entertainment mogul John Kluge and Bill Gates occupied the top two
spots.

70. Through a routine letter to Mercury Asset Management when the Treasury Department discovered that
Mercury, together with its affiliate S. G. Warburg & Co., had submitted bids for greater than the 35% limit
rule for the auction. Mozer had submitted one of these bids without Mercury’s authority. Mozer was copied
on this letter and covered it up by telling Mercury that Salomon had mistakenly submitted this bid in its
name—and was going to correct it, so no need to bother responding to the Treasury. (Statement of Salomon
Inc., submitted in conjunction with the Testimony of Warren E. Buffett, Chairman and CEO of Salomon.
Before the Securities Subcommittee, Committee of Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate,
September 10, 1991.)
71. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
72. Speech to students in 1994 at University of North Carolina Kenan-Flagler Business School.
73. The one exception was Stanley Shopkorn, who ran the equities division and, by others’ recollections,
thought he should get the job.
74. Michael Lewis, Liar’s Poker.
75. Ibid.
76. Swope fired them all and turned the firm into a radical Black Power, “Truth & Soul” agency.
77. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
78. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld, who says no threats were made. But because Meriwether was not bound
by a noncompete, it was obvious that the whole arb team would leave sooner or later.
79. Gutfreund told Buffett that Susan was telling him he was unemployable.
80. Interview with Philip Howard. Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H.
Gutfreund against Salomon Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14, November 29, 1993.
81. Interview with Warren Buffett; Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H.
Gutfreund against Salomon Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14, November 29, 1993, cited
this remark as evidence that Gutfreund knew he did not have a deal. (Munger’s version of the quote was “I
won’t let you guys screw me.”)
82. Interview with Philip Howard.
83. Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon
Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14.
84. Warren Buffett, Charles T. Munger, testimonies, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H.
Gutfreund against Salomon Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14, 33 & 34.
85. Charles T. Munger testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon
Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 33 & 34, December 22, 1993.
86. Interview with Gedale Horowitz.
87. The Japanese bond market would not open until 7:30 P.M. EST, but Japanese over-the-counter trading
would begin as early as 5 P.M., at which point lenders would start selling Salomon’s paper, effectively calling
its loans.
88. Interview with John Macfarlane.

89. Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon
Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14, November 29, 1993.
90. Interview with Jerry Corrigan.
91. Jerry Corrigan and Paul Volcker contributed insight to this topic.
92. At the time, it was well understood that Buffett had “parlayed his considerable reputation into a partial
rescission of the order,” although what that meant to him was not obvious. (Saul Hansell, Beth Selby, Henny
Sender, “Who Should Run Salomon Brothers?” Institutional Investor, Vol. 25, No. 10, September 1, 1991.)
93. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
94. Interview with Charlie Munger.
95. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
96. Hansell, Selby, and Sender, “Who Should Run Salomon?”
97. Ibid.
Chapter 49
1. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair.
2. Interview with Bill McLucas.
3. This is Buffett’s recollection of the quote, but Brady’s view that Buffett would not leave was corroborated
by other regulators.
4. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair. She thought it funny that her new boss wanted to turn her into a
private eye.
5. Interviews with Donald Feuerstein, Bob Denham. Denham says only that they agreed a change was
needed.
6. Warren Buffett testified to this in “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against
Salomon Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 & 14, November 29, 1993.
7. During John Gutfreund’s arbitration hearing.
8. A number of sources said this to the author but were afraid to be quoted.
9. The firm became Munger, Tolles & Olson in 1986.
10. Law-firm sources and former employees give Buffett all of the credit for this idea, despite the law firm’s
putative role.
11. Drexel Burnham Lambert had failed after its indictment. Kidder, Peabody was sold to PaineWebber.
Salomon’s highly leveraged balance sheet put the firm in even greater jeopardy.
12. Interview with Ron Olson.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.

15. Interview with Frank Barron. Rudolph Giuliani, U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, had
pressed for Drexel Burnham Lambert to waive the privilege, but the firm did not.
16. Charlie Munger later acknowledged the morally fraught—at best, ambiguous—situation, saying he and
Buffett had no choice but to assist in criminal investigation and prosecution of potentially innocent
employees. “When the final chapter is written, the behavior evinced by Salomon will be followed in other,
similar cases,” he said. “People will be smart enough to realize this is the response we want—superprompt—even if it means cashiering some people who may not deserve it.” Lawrie P. Cohen, “Buffett Shows
Tough Side to Salomon and Gutfreund,” Wall Street Journal, November 8, 1991.
17. Warren Buffett letter to Norman Pearlstine, November 18, 1991.
18. Buffett testified to this in “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon Inc.,
and Salomon Brothers Inc.,” Sessions 13 and 14, November 29, 1993.
19. “I didn’t fire them on the spot,” said Olson in an interview. “I was a little more subtle than that.”
20. Interviews with Carolyn Smith, Warren Buffett. He added Smith to his collection of people, writing to the
head of the hotel about her, corresponding with her, and putting her on his Christmas list.
21. Interviews with Gladys Kaiser and Bob Denham.
22. House Committee on Energy and Commerce—Telecommunications & Finance Subcommittee,
September 4, 1991, regarding securities trading violations by Salomon Brothers and implications for
government securities market reform legislation.
23. Maughan had to go back to Washington a few weeks later to testify by himself. “The sea did not part,” he
says, “and I got thoroughly wet.”
24. “Our goal is going to be that stated many decades ago by J. P. Morgan, who wished to see his bank
transact ‘first-class business in a first-class way.’” Warren Buffett, “SALOMON INC—A report by the
Chairman on the Company’s Position and Outlook.”(This wording was also used in a letter to Salomon Inc.,
shareholders as reprinted in the Wall Street Journal, November 1, 1991.)
25. Senate Subcommittee on Securities Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs—Hearing on the
Activities of Salomon Brothers Inc., in Treasury Bond Activities, Wednesday, September 11, 1991.
26. At the time, sixty-five lenders had stopped entering into repurchase agreements with Salomon, and the
firm’s commercial-paper balance was falling toward zero. One major counterparty, Security Pacific, was
refusing to do daylight foreign-exchange trades without posting of collateral. Buffett says this was his
absolute low point. The news media never picked up this story, which, if reported, could have kicked off a
panic.
27. Interview with John Macfarlane. The cost of funds motivated traders to run off uneconomic trades.
Ultimately the rate went to 400 basis points over Fed Funds rate. The short-term capital-intensive trades like
the “carry-trade” (interest arbitrage) ran off.
28. Interview with John Macfarlane.
29. Senate Subcommittee on Securities Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs—Hearing on the
Activities of Salomon Brothers, Inc., in Treasury Bond Activities, Wednesday, September 11, 1991.
30. By then, many other people, including Denham and Munger, had found out about the Sternlight letter, but
they say everybody thought somebody else had told Buffett or that he somehow knew. Buffett and Munger
were also incensed to learn that at the June audit committee meeting, with Feuerstein present, Arthur

Andersen represented that no events had taken place that were required to be reported to the SEC or the
New York Stock Exchange. While Wachtell, Lipton had indeed taken that position, this statement, with
hindsight, was manifestly untrue.
31. Employees asked how much Buffett and Munger understood about the workings of Salomon before
August 1991, while serving on the board, uniformly said “not much,” or words to that effect, and that
information was skillfully meted out to the board so that much of the firm’s messiness never surfaced.
32. Lawrie P. Cohen, “Buffett Shows Tough Side to Salomon.”
33. Interview with Gladys Kaiser.
34. Buffett cannot remember who did this—although it was neither Astrid, who retires early, nor someone
from the office. He thinks it must have been some other local friend or neighbor.
35. Although securities underwriters sell service, price, and expertise, ultimately they are financial
guarantors. Salomon’s financial-strength ratings had been downgraded. With a criminal indictment and its
primary dealership threatened, that the firm managed to retain any banking clients remains one of Wall
Street’s great survival stories. It did so by giving up lead positions and switching to co-lead, in effect taking
on a supporting-cast-member role. Nevertheless, its market share fell from 8% to 2%.
36. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
37. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair. Morse Shoe filed for bankruptcy in July 1991 just weeks after
Berkshire agreed to buy H. H. Brown Shoes. Berkshire acquired Lowell Shoe, a subsidiary of Morse Shoe, at
the end of 1992, and also bought Dexter Shoe in 1993.
38. Smith Barney, Shearson Lehman, and UBS Securities. The ensuing witch-hunt atmosphere also caused
Morgan Stanley to put out a statement denying it was the subject of a government investigation.
39. The Treasury Department/Fed study also revealed that, over a period beginning in early 1986, Salomon
had bought more than half the bonds issued in 30 out of 230 auctions (Louis Uchitelle, Stephen Labaton,
“When the Regulators Stood Still,” New York Times, September 22, 1991).
40. Warren Buffett testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon
Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc.” Session 13 & 14, November 29, 1993.
41. Contracts differ by employee, by company, and by state, and the indemnification provisions use broad
wording that is subject to interpretation, but in general, corporate officers accept the legal risk that goes with
their position on the condition that their employers pay legal fees unless they are convicted of fraud or other
criminal wrongdoing or have engaged in willful misconduct. Salomon’s action was highly unusual at the time
and remains unusual. In 2005, KPMG’s refusal to pay its partners’ legal fees became the subject of lawsuits.
In July 2007, a U.S. federal judge dismissed a case against thirteen KPMG employees for promoting
aggressive tax shelters, because he determined that the government had strong-armed KPMG into denying
them legal payments.
42. Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee meeting, October 1, 1991.
43. Interview with Gary Naftalis.
44. Interview with Otto Obermaier.
45. Ibid.
46. Interview with Gary Naftalis.

47. Interview with Otto Obermaier.
48. Letter to Salomon Inc., shareholders as reprinted in the Wall Street Journal, November 1, 1991.
49. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair.
50. Ibid.
51. Salomon advertisement in the Wall Street Journal, November 1, 1991. All of Salomon’s growth in
earnings for several years had been given back to employees. Salomon performed in the bottom third of
stocks in its market-cap class. The third-quarter-income statement would have been drenched with red ink
had not the lower bonus pool reversed it. The previous “share the wealth” approach subsidized money-losers
so that everyone was richly paid. Buffett’s biggest change was to link bonuses to individual and division
performance. For the five years ending December 31, 1991, Salomon Inc.’s stock ranked 437th in
performance among S&P’s top 500 stocks. (1991 Salomon Inc., 10K)
52. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
53. Interview with Jim Robinson.
54. For decades, as a partnership, it had—literally—been run for the employees. It was the inherent
separation of capital and labor at a publicly owned investment bank that was the problem.
55. Otto Obermaier. He later wrote “Do the Right Thing: But if a Company Doesn’t It Can Limit the
Damage,” Barron’s, December 14, 1992.
56. The same was not true of the May two-year note squeeze, in which several small firms were bankrupted.
Had it ever been proven that Mozer colluded with the hedge funds to corner the market or submitted false
bids in that auction, Salomon’s and the individuals’ penalties doubtless would have been more severe; the
whole story might have ended differently.
57. Interviews with Frank Barron and Bill McLucas. McLucas confirms the gist but can’t recall the exact
words.
58. Interview with Otto Obermaier.
59. Mozer served his four months after pleading guilty to lying to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The SEC and prosecutors took no action against Feuerstein.
60. Gutfreund was also barred from heading a firm without SEC approval.
61. Interview with Paula Orlowski Blair.
62. In fact, Jerry Corrigan did not lift the full ban on Salomon until August 1992.
63. CNBC Inside Opinion, Ron Insana interview with Gutfreund, April 20, 1995.
64. Interview with John Gutfreund.
65. Interview with Charlie Munger.
66. The arbitrators were John J. Curran, Harry Aronsohn, and Matthew J. Tolan.
67. Interview with Frank Barron.
68. Those who have spent any significant amount of time with Munger will instantly recognize the sensation

of talking to him when his head is turned off, while something occasionally pierces his band of indifference.
“It’s hard to pierce Charlie’s band of indifference,” says Buffett. “I can tell you that.”
69. Charles T. Munger testimony, “In the Matter of Arbitration Between John H. Gutfreund against Salomon,
Inc., and Salomon Brothers, Inc.,” Sessions 33 & 34, December 22, 1993.
70. Interview with Sam Butler, Frank Baron.
71. Interview with Frank Barron.
Chapter 50
1. Michael Lewis, “The Temptation of St. Warren,” New Republic, February 17, 1992.
2. Ron Suskind, “Legend Revisited: Warren Buffett’s Aura as Folksy Sage Masks Tough, Polished Man,”
Wall Street Journal, November 8, 1991.
3. Patricia Matson letter to Peter Kann, Norman Pearlstine, Paul Steiger, James Stewart, and Lawrence
Ingrassia of the Journal, November 18, 1991, and attached chronology of events, in which Tom Murphy
recalls explaining to Suskind before publication that he was misquoting and misportraying the conversation;
Bill Gates letter to Warren Buffett, November 13, 1991, which says, “The quote is wrong. I never suggested
anything of the kind to the reporter.” Gates said he called the Journal before publication to ensure the
incorrect quote would not be published and was “shocked” to see the quote in the article. Memo from Patty
Matson, official spokesperson of CapCities/ABC, to “Those possibly interested,” November 19, 1991, cc:
Buffett, Murphy, Gates, Tisch, which says Steiger of the Journal called and acknowledged a “puzzlement” in
which someone might have been “gilding the lily.”
4. Bill Gates letter to Warren Buffett, November 13, 1991.
5. Interviews with Warren Buffett, Bill Gates. The latter may have heard a version from someone else, which
got exaggerated in the retelling. On the other hand, Buffett had to use the facilities somehow.
6. Interview with Bill Gates.
7. For four generations the Gateses named their sons William Henry Gates. Bill Jr.’s father, William Henry
III, changed his name to Bill Jr. and his son, the new Bill III—who was actually Bill IV—became known as
Trey. Bill Jr. then stepped up to become Bill Sr. as the oldest living William Henry Gates, and his son is now
known variously as Trey, Bill III, Bill, and The Bill Gates.
8. Interview with Arthur K. Langlie.
9. Interview with Bill Gates.
10. Noyce died June 3, 1990.
11. Interview with Roxanne Brandt.
12. Interview with Bill Gates.
13. Interview with Bill Ruane.
14. Interview with Don Graham.
15. Gates was right; Kodak was toast. From January 1990 to December 2007, Kodak stock rose a measly
20%, barely more than 1% a year. The S&P over the same period rose 315%. Berkshire Hathaway rose
1,627%. Microsoft rose 6,853%.

16. Interview with Bill Gates.
17. Ibid.
18. Statistics courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway.
19. Interview with Louis Blumkin.
20. A Scott Fetzer product.
21. Based on various comments from Kelly Broz, Roberta Buffett Bialek, Peter Buffett, Doris Buffett, Susan
Clampitt, Jeannie Lipsey, Stan Lipsey, Ron Parks, Marilyn Weisberg, and Racquel Newman.
22. Interviews with Kathleen Cole, Susie Buffett Jr.
23. Interview with Kathleen Cole.
24. Interviews with Susie Buffett Jr., Howie Buffett. This took place at McMillan Junior High.
25. Which works out to $21,000 per year.
26. Interview with Howie Buffett.
27. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
28. Kurt Eichenwald, The Informant. New York: Broadway Books, 2000.
29. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
30. Interview with Bill Gates.
31. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
32. Each die has an advantage over one other and a disadvantage to the third.
33. When Buffett pulled out the dice with the author, he kept insisting that she had to go first. She had no
idea what the numbers meant. She figured that if Buffett wanted her to go first, there must be some
disadvantage to going first. (Experience as an insurance analyst was helpful here.) She said that the dice must
somehow work like rock, paper, scissors, and refused to play. Buffett counted this as “figuring out” the dice,
but it wasn’t really.
34. The first week the author started working on this book, she came downstairs to the hotel lobby to find the
same package.
35. Interviews with Sharon Osberg and Astrid Buffett, who recalls “Sharon was just beside herself.”
36. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
37. Interviews with Astrid Buffett, Dick and Mary Holland.
38. Interview with Dody Waugh-Booth.
39. Carol J. Loomis, “My 51 Years (and Counting) at Fortune,” Fortune, September 19, 2005.
40. Depending on how rich they had gotten and how long ago they had been sunburned. Bill Scott, whom

Buffett had made breathtakingly rich, had acquired a deep tan and had begun to resemble Buffett himself.
41. Carnegie built 2,509 libraries (costing $56 million) and established other public works using over 90% of
his $480 million steel-made wealth.
42. Ruane’s first wife, Elizabeth, suffered from a mood disorder and committed suicide in 1988.
43. Bill Ruane and others recalled this speech.
44. Paul Ehrlich, The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine Books, 1968; Thomas Malthus, An Essay on
the Principles of Population. The Population Bomb was based on the work of the nineteenth-century
demographer and statistician Thomas Malthus, who said that humans procreate in a geometric rather than
arithmetic progression; thus the earth’s population would inevitably expand beyond the point at which its
resources could support it. At some point, Malthus postulated, misery and vice (e.g., war, pandemic, famine,
infant mortality, political unrest) would reduce the population to a sustainable level. Malthus’s theory had
enormous influence on many scientists, including Charles Darwin. Because Malthus failed to take into
account a number of factors—for example, simplistically assuming that economic development stimulated
population growth—his ideas were and continued to be ridiculed as predicted catastrophes failed to
materialize within a decade or two after 1970. The basic concepts of Malthus and the idea of the Malthusian
catastrophe are being taken more seriously in some quarters today, however.
45. Buffett, characteristically, uses both low and high numbers higher than the current population number (a
margin of safety against looking like an alarmist) even though some experts argue that the “carrying
capacity” has already been exceeded.
46. Organizations such as the International Humanist and Ethical Union and Planned Parenthood routinely
took this position before 1974. See Paige Whaley Eager, Global Population Policy: From Population
Control to Reproductive Rights. Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2004.
47. This was the Belous case (People v. Belous, 71 Cal.2d 954, 458 P.2d 194, 80 Cal. Rptr. 354 [1969]),
