
By What Measure? • 105

drawdown, including days other than the end of a month, was 27.58
percent rather than 22.35 percent using only month-end ﬁgures.
The resulting MAR ratio is 0.99 rather than the original 1.22 using
only month-end ﬁgures.

System Death Risk Revisited
One of the most interesting observations I have made about trading systems, strategies, and performance is that those strategies
which historically appear to offer extremely good risk/reward ratios
tend to be the ones that are the most heavily imitated by the
broader trading community. Soon you end up with billions of dollars in trades chasing that strategy, and as a result, those strategies
can implode as they outgrow the liquidity of the markets in which
they are traded. They end up suffering from early system death.
Arbitrage strategies are perhaps the best example of this. An arbitrage in its purest form is an essentially risk-free trade. You buy
something in one place, sell it at another place, subtract the cost
of transportation or storage and pocket the difference. Most arbitrage strategies are not quite that risk-free, but many come close.
The problem is that these strategies make money only when there
is a spread between the prices at different locations or between the
price of one instrument and that of a similar instrument.
The more traders implement a particular strategy, the more the
spread will drop as those traders start to compete for essentially the
same trades. This effect kills off the strategy over time as it becomes
less and less proﬁtable.
Conversely, systems and strategies that do not appeal to the typical investor tend to have much longer lifetimes. Trend following

106 • Way of the Turtle

is a good example. Most large investors are uncomfortable with the
large drawdowns and equity ﬂuctuations that are common to trendfollowing strategies. For this reason, trend following continues to
work over a long period of time.
Returns tend to be cyclical however. Every time there is a huge
new inﬂux of capital after a period of relatively sedate returns, there
is generally a period of a few relatively tough years since the market cannot easily digest the amount of new money from investors
who are using the same strategies in the same markets. This is generally followed by a period of good returns as investors withdraw
their money from trend following funds after periods of relatively
poor performance.
Be careful what you look for: If you get too greedy when examining a strategy, you are going to increase the chances that you will
not get the results you seek. Strategies that seem to be the best in
retrospect are also those most likely to attract new investors and as
a consequence often start performing poorly soon after the new
investments take place.

Everybody’s Different
Each of us has a different tolerance for pain and different expectations for reward. For this reason, there is no single measure that
universally appeals to everyone. I have used a combination of the
MAR ratio, drawdowns, and overall return while keeping an eye on
smoothness by looking at the Sharpe ratio and R-squared ﬁgures.
Recently I designed some measures that are more stable versions
of these common measures. Those measures are discussed in
Chapter 12.

By What Measure? • 107

I also try not to get too caught up in any particular ﬁgures, knowing that the future will be different and that the fact that a strategy
has a MAR of 1.5 at the moment does not mean it will continue to
maintain that ratio in the future.

This page intentionally left blank

eight
RISK AND MONEY
MANAGEMENT
Ruin is the risk you should be concerned with the most.
It can come like a thief in the night and steal everything
if you aren’t watching carefully.

ike many of the concepts we use in trading, expectation, edge,
risk of ruin and so on, the term money management comes
from gambling theory. Money management is the art of keeping
your risk of ruin at an acceptable level while maximizing your
proﬁt potential by choosing an appropriate number of shares or
contracts to trade, something we refer to as the size of the trade,
and by limiting the aggregate size of the position to control exposure to price shocks. Good money management helps ensure that
you will continue to be able to trade through the inevitable bad
periods that every trader experiences. Most discussions of the topic
make use of countless formulas and cover different methods for
determining precisely the number of contracts one should trade.
They approach risk as if it were a deﬁnable and knowable concept,
but it isn’t. This chapter won’t duplicate those discussions. If you

L

• 109 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

110 • Way of the Turtle

want a survey of the many different methods you can use to determine the number of contracts to trade, several books listed in the
bibliography cover that topic.
I believe that money management is more art than science, or
perhaps more like religion than art. There are no right answers.
There are no best ways to deﬁne one’s risk position. There are only
individual answers that work for each person; those answers can be
obtained only by asking the right questions.
At its core, money management is about ﬁnding the trade-off
between taking so much risk that you end up losing everything or
are forced to quit trading and, conversely, taking so little risk that
you end up leaving too much money on the table. There are two
primary ways that excessive risk can force you to stop trading:
extended drawdowns that exceed your psychological limits and a
sudden price shock that wipes out the account.
Your proper level of risk is very much a function of what is important to you. For that reason, if you want to trade, you have to become
intimately familiar with the implications of taking too much risk or
too little risk so that you can make an informed decision.
Many vendors of systems or courses on trading make it seem that
anyone can follow their methods and achieve riches quickly and
easily. They do this because it helps them sell more systems and
more courses on trading. They understate the dangers of risk and
overstate the probabilities and ease of attaining those riches.
They are lying. The risk is real, and trading is not easy.
It is very important to keep one thing in mind before deciding
to be aggressive: Steady returns of 20 or 30 percent per year will
make you a lot of money in a reasonably short period starting with
almost any amount of money. The power of compounding is very

Risk and Money Management • 111

strong, but only if you don’t lose everything and have to start over
again. If you begin with $50,000, you will have almost $10 million
after 20 years—if you can earn 30 percent returns.
Trying to go for very aggressive returns of 100 percent or 200 percent per year greatly increases the chances that you will blow up
and have to stop trading. I highly recommend taking a conservative approach for the ﬁrst several years of trading.
Consider what would have happened if you had been trading
with the Donchian Trend system in 1987 at aggressive levels. Figure 8-1 shows the drawdowns that are encountered as the risk levels increase.
Note how the graph rises steadily and levels off at the 100 percent point. This means that if you were trading aggressively and
risking 3 percent of your trading capital on each trade, you
would have gone bust overnight because this drawdown is due
entirely to that single day when the interest-rate markets
reversed precipitously.
For most people, a prudent way to trade would be at a level that
demonstrates a drawdown, using historical simulations, that is at
most one-half the level you believe you can tolerate. This will provide a buffer in case the system has a drawdown that is larger than
what previously had been seen during testing. It also will make it
less likely that an unexpected price shock will cause you to lose all
your trading capital.

Don’t Believe Everything You Hear
Many people have touted money management as a magical elixir
that can cure all that ails your trading. Others have devised com-

Max Drawdown as Risk Per Trade (%) Varies
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%

• 112 •

40%
30%
20%
10%

1.
0%
1.
1%
1.
2%
1.
3%
1.
4%
1.
5%
1.
6%
1.
7%
1.
8%
1.
9%
2.
0%
2.
1%
2.
2%
2.
3%
2.
4%
2.
5%
2.
6%
2.
7%
2.
8%
2.
9%
3.
0%
3.
1%
3.
2%
3.
3%
3.
4%
3.
5%
3.
6%
3.
7%
3.
8%
3.
9%
4.
0%

0%

Risk Per Trade (%)

Figure 8-1

Drawdown versus Risk

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Risk and Money Management • 113

plex formulas and written entire books about money management.
It shouldn’t be that complicated.
Proper money management is quite simple. For a trading
account of a particular size, you can safely buy a certain number
of contracts in each futures market. For some markets and for
smaller accounts this amount may be zero.
For example, the natural gas (NYMEX symbol NG) contract earlier this year had an ATR that represented more than $7,500 per contract. Remember, this means that the value of the contract ﬂuctuated
$7,500 on the average each day. Thus, for a system that used a 2-ATR
stop such as the Donchian Trend system, a single trade could mean
a loss of $15,000. If you were trading an account as large as $50,000,
this would represent 30 percent of the account. Most people would
say that risking 30 percent of your trading account on one trade is a
really bad idea. Therefore, a prudent number of contracts of NG to
trade would be zero for an account of $50,000. Even for an account
as large as $1 million, such a trade would represent a 1.5 percent risk
level, which many would consider fairly aggressive.
Trading with too much risk is probably the single most common
reason for failure among new traders. Often novices trade so aggressively that a small string of losses will wipe out their trading capital.
New traders often misunderstand the dangers of leverage, and
because their broker and the exchange permits them to buy and sell
large contracts with as little as $20,000, they often do precisely that.

Risk of Ruin Revisited
Earlier we discussed the concept of risk of ruin: The possibility of
losing so much capital as a result of a string of losses that one is

114 • Way of the Turtle

forced to quit trading. The deﬁnition as most people use it applies
to a random set of outcomes using a fairly simplistic formula based
on probability theory. Most people think in terms of the risk that
you will experience ruin due to a bad period of losses in rapid
succession. I believe that this is not generally what brings traders
to ruin. Traders do not fall prey to a period of randomly adverse
market behavior very often. It is far more likely that they have made
some serious mistakes in their analysis.
Here is what I believe accounts for a trader’s lack of success in
trading commodities:
• No plan: Many traders base their trades on hunches, rumor,
guesses, and the belief that they know something about the
future direction of prices.
• Too much risk: Many otherwise excellent traders have been
ruined because they incurred too much risk. I’m not talking
about 50 percent or 100 percent more risk than is prudent. I
have seen traders who trade at a level that is 5 or 10 times
more than I consider prudent even for aggressive trading.
• Unrealistic expectations: Many new traders trade with too
much risk because they have unrealistic expectations about
how much they can earn and what sorts of returns they can
achieve. This is often also the reason new traders believe
they can start trading on the basis of fundamental data; they
believe they are smart enough to “beat” the market with
little or no training and very little information.
When I started working with futures trading systems in high
school, I noticed something rather odd: A very high percentage of

Risk and Money Management • 115

our customers were doctors and dentists. At the time, I believed
that doctors and dentists were attracted to trading because they had
good incomes and could afford to risk money in futures markets.
Looking back on it, I can see that was only a partial answer. I now
believe that the real reason doctors and dentists are drawn in disproportionate numbers to commodities trading is that they have a
lot of conﬁdence in their intelligence and ability to translate their
success in their work to success in another industry—perhaps too
much conﬁdence in this particular instance.
A doctor, for example, is invariably quite smart. You can’t
become a doctor without attending a good university, passing difﬁcult tests, and getting good grades. Further, anyone who has graduated from medical school has achieved a level of success that
many aspire to but only a few attain. It must be quite natural for
someone who is smart and has been successful in his ﬁrst endeavors to believe that he can be successful at trading as well.
At the same time, many doctors and dentists expect to be successful traders immediately. Trading appears to be so simple that
they believe that this should be possible. However, I found that a
large percentage of them were not successful as traders because
they did not have realistic expectations. Success in one sphere of
business does not guarantee success in trading.
They did not realize that although trading is simple for the reasons
I outlined in the early part of the book, it is not easy. It takes a lot of
time and study before one realizes just how simple trading is, but it
takes many years of failure before most traders come to grips with how
hard it can be to keep things simple and not lose sight of the basics.
Consider the Turtles. We were taught the same methods and
taught in only two weeks, yet some of us did not make any money

116 • Way of the Turtle

at all. There was lots of positive reinforcement to do the right thing
since we could hear the other Turtles phoning in orders, yet some
of us did not follow the methods we were taught.

Turtle Money Management
Means Staying in the Game
The primary goal of trading should be to stay in the game. Time is
on your side. A system or method with positive expectation eventually will make you rich, sometimes beyond your wildest dreams.
This can happen only if you can continue trading. For traders,
death comes in two forms: a slow painful death that causes traders
to stop out of anguish and frustration and a spectacular rapid death
we refer to as a blowup.
Most new traders overestimate their tolerance for pain, believing that they can live through a 30 percent or 40 percent—or
perhaps even a 50 percent or 70 percent—drawdown when they
can’t. This can have an extremely adverse effect on their trading
because it usually results in their stopping completely or changing
methods at the worst possible time: After they have incurred a drawdown and suffered signiﬁcant losses.
The uncertainty of the future is what makes trading so difﬁcult,
and people do not like uncertainty. Unfortunately, the reality is that
the markets are unpredictable and the best you can hope for is a
method that generally works over a relatively long period. For this
reason, your trading methods should be designed as much as possible to reduce the uncertainty you can expect to encounter when
trading. The markets are already uncertain enough; there is no sense
adding to that variability with poor money management practices.

Risk and Money Management • 117

Since the Turtle Way is not to predict which markets will trend
and which trades will be successful, as Turtles we approached each
trade with the same expectation and commitment. To the extent
possible, that meant risking the same amount of capital in each
market. Implementing money management according to the Turtle Way increases the likelihood that you will achieve consistent
returns because our approach adjusts for the relative volatility and
risk between markets.
Oversimpliﬁed strategies such as trading one contract per market
and methods that do not normalize for volatility can cause trades in
certain markets to overshadow those in other markets. So, even a
large gain in one market may not compensate for a small loss in
another market if the losing market has a much larger contract.
Although many traders intuitively know this is true, many still
use fairly simplistic mechanisms for deciding how many contracts
to trade in any speciﬁc market. For example, they may trade one
contract of S&P 500 futures per $20,000 in the trading account.
They may have used this same formula for the last 10 years, during
which time that market’s volatility has ﬂuctuated greatly. These
rule-of-thumb approaches can increase the variability of returns
unnecessarily.

The N Factor
As was mentioned earlier, Rich and Bill used an innovative method
for determining the position size for each market on the basis of
the amount that market moved up and down each day in constant
dollar terms. They determined the number of contracts for each
market that would cause them all to move up and down approxi-

118 • Way of the Turtle

mately the same amount in dollar terms. Since the number of contracts we traded for each market was adjusted for this volatility
measure, N, the daily ﬂuctuations for any particular trade tended
to be similar.
Some traders prefer to measure risk in terms of the distance
between the price at which one will exit a trade and the price at
which that trade was entered. That is only one way of considering
risk. In October 1987, it did not matter where our stops had been.
The market gapped through our stops overnight.
If I had been using a method that relied only on the distance
between entry and stops, I would have lost four times as much as
the typical Turtle on that day because I used a stop that was onequarter the size. I used a 1⁄2-ATR stop, whereas most Turtles used a
2-ATR stop. Thus, if I had been using a method that sized purely
on the distance to the stop, my calculations would have resulted in
a position that was four times larger than that of the typical Turtle.
Fortunately, Rich used volatility-based position sizing as a way
to manage risk, and so I had the same position sizes relative to my
account as did the other Turtles, and our exposure to the price
shock was the same. I am certain that this method was not accidental. Surely Rich and Bill both recalled experiencing prior price
shocks when they determined how to limit the Turtles’ maximum
allowable risk levels.
One of the smartest things Rich and Bill did when they gave us
our trading rules was to impose overall risk limits on us. This had
important implications for our drawdowns and particularly for our
exposure to price shocks. As was mentioned earlier, we put our
positions in chunks we called units. Each unit was sized by determining the number of contracts where 1-ATR of price movement

Risk and Money Management • 119

would be equal to 1 percent of our account size. For a $1 million
trading account, this was $10,000. So, we would look at the dollar
amount represented by 1-ATR of price movement in that particular market and then divide $10,000 by that number to determine
the number of contracts we could trade for every $1 million in trading capital that Rich had allocated to us. We referred to these numbers as the unit size. Markets that were volatile or had larger
contracts had smaller unit sizes than did markets that were smaller
or less volatile.
Rich and Bill no doubt had noticed some things that anyone
who has traded for a period of time is aware of: Many markets are
highly correlated, and at the end of a large trend when the bad days
come, it seems that everything moves against you at once; even
markets that normally do not seem correlated become so on those
volatile days when a large trend disintegrates.
Recall the October 1987 overnight price shock. Almost every
market we were in moved against us signiﬁcantly that day. To
counter that effect, Rich and Bill imposed some limits on our trading: First, we could put on a maximum of only 4 units per market;
second, we could put on a maximum of only 6 units in markets that
were highly correlated; third, we could put on a maximum of only
10 units in any given direction (i.e., 10 long or 10 short). That number could be raised to 12 if there were positions in uncorrelated
markets. These limits probably saved Rich more than $100 million that day. If they had not been in place, our losses would have
been staggering.
I often have seen people claim to have tested the historical performance of the Turtle system and state that those methods did not
work well or were not proﬁtable. They would make statements

120 • Way of the Turtle

such as: “I implemented every rule except the unit limits.” The unit
limits were an integral and extremely important part of our system
because they served as a mechanism for ﬁltering out trades in lagging markets.
Interest-rate futures provide a good example. We traded four different interest-rate markets as Turtles: eurodollars, U.S. Treasury
bonds, 90-day Treasury bills, and two-year Treasury notes. During
a move of any reasonable duration there would be entry signals in
all four markets. We generally would hold positions in only two of
them at any speciﬁc time: The ﬁrst two that had signaled.
The same thing generally held for foreign currency futures. We
traded the French franc, the British pound, the German mark, the
Swiss franc, the Canadian dollar, and the Japanese yen. However,
at any given time we typically would have a position in only two or
perhaps three of those markets.
For this reason, having unit limits kept us out of a lot of losing
trades. The markets that signaled last often did not move nearly as
far and were more likely to result in losses.

Rules for Estimating Risk
One of the best ways to determine the risk a particular system may
represent or the risk inherent in holding a position is to look at the
major price shocks that have occurred over the last 30 to 50 years.
If you look at those catastrophic days and consider what would have
happened to a set of likely positions, you can determine what
amount of risk would have resulted in a 50 percent drawdown or
the amount it would have taken to go completely bust. Using computer simulation software, it is easy to see what positions you would

Risk and Money Management • 121

have held on those days and what sort of drawdowns are represented by those positions.
Now consider what would happen if something even worse had
occurred. It may be unpleasant to think about such things, but they
can happen, and you need to plan for them. What would have happened to your positions if instead of their attack on the World Trade
Center, al-Qaeda had detonated a nuclear bomb somewhere else
in Manhattan? What would have happened if a disaster of equal
magnitude had taken place in Tokyo, London, or Frankfurt?
Anyone trading aggressively will be much more likely to lose
everything in the event of a disaster of unprecedented scale. This is
something to keep in mind as you hear the siren call of 100 percentplus returns.
