
Figure 9-12:
The morning
star pattern
fails on a
chart of
JNS.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 199

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

The bullish abandoned baby pattern
The next bullish three-stick trend reversal pattern I cover in this chapter is
the bullish abandoned baby pattern. It’s a close cousin of the morning star and
bullish doji star patterns, and although its name sounds sad, you can end up
very happy with the results if you trade it wisely.

Identifying the bullish abandoned baby pattern
The bullish abandoned baby gets its name from the second day of the pattern,
which just kind of floats out on the chart by itself like it’s been abandoned by
the first and third days. The second day is also smaller than the other two
candlesticks, so it’s the baby of the pattern. Look at Figure 9-13 for an example.

Figure 9-13:
The bullish
abandoned
baby
pattern.

The first day of the pattern is a bearish day. The second day gaps lower and
has pretty tight price action, especially compared to the other two candlesticks in the pattern. Day three is a very bullish day that gaps higher than the
second day.

Making a trade based on the abandoned baby pattern
For a look at a bullish abandoned baby pattern that provides a great buying
signal, see Figure 9-14. It’s a chart of ITT Corporation, a conglomerate with
businesses in a variety of industries. Its products range from electronics for
defense systems to solutions to treat wastewater.

199

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 200

200 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-14:
The
abandoned
baby pattern
behaves as
expected
on a chart
of ITT.

The pattern develops with a bearish day in the midst of a downtrend. The
second day opens with a gap down, and the price action for that day occurs
in a fairly tight range. (A gap on a chart occurs when there’s an area or price
action that isn’t covered by two consecutive bars. The area or price range
where no trading occurs is known as the gap.) The high of the second day
never goes higher than the low of the first day, leaving a gap on the chart.
The final day gaps up above the high of the second day, and that gap isn’t
filled. The final day is also a very bullish day, and anyone watching can see
that the bulls are in the driver’s seat.
The gap openings in the abandoned baby pattern may remind you of the old
rule of thumb that “gaps always get filled.” That nugget does hold true, but
for this pattern it’s quite possible that the gap won’t be filled for quite some
time. It can take months, or even years — long past the points at which you
can profit from the trade.

The abandoned baby that didn’t work too well
In addition to successful examples of the abandoned baby pattern signaling a
trend reversal (see the preceding section), in some cases you’d be better off,
well, abandoning a trade involving this pattern.
Figure 9-15 is an unusual chart to say the least, but a good example of an abandoned baby that didn’t work and probably shouldn’t have been traded in the
first place. The stock represented on this chart is for Edison International
(EIX), a power company that does business primarily in southern California.
Even before the pattern on Figure 9-15 emerges, this stock doesn’t necessarily look like one you’d want to trade. There are several gaps on the chart
before the pattern emerges, indicating that it’s not the most liquid stock in
the world.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 201

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-15:
An
abandoned
baby pattern
fails on a
chart of EIX.

The second day of this bullish abandoned baby does appear after a few down
days and a bearish move of over 40 percent, so the pattern is complete. But it
comes very close to recent highs and reaches a level that the stock has had a
difficult time exceeding in the past. Because of this distance covered by the
last day of the pattern, I recommend avoiding entering on the close of the
third day, and I’d probably ignore this pattern altogether. I know that’s easy
to say when the results are readily available, but truthfully, that’s enough
information for me to shy away from the trade.

The bullish squeeze alert pattern
The bullish squeeze alert pattern is one of my very favorite bullish patterns.
It’s a versatile three-stick pattern, and it pops up on a relatively frequent
basis, meaning that the opportunities to trade it are more common than
some of the other patterns I discuss.

Spotting the bullish squeeze alert pattern
The rules that govern the formation of a bullish squeeze alert allow for a little
wiggle room. The strictest rule is that the first day of the pattern must be a
down day. After that, the second day has to be an inside day of the first and
the third an inside day of the second. Beyond that, though, the rules are kind
of flexible. The second and third days can be up days, down days, or a combination of the two. The only strict criteria governing the second and third
days are that they must be inside days, and they have to form a triangle.
Figure 9-16 shows a variation of the bullish squeeze alert that includes black
candles for the second and third days.

201

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 202

202 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-16:
A bullish
squeeze
alert pattern
with black
candles on
the second
and third
days.

I love this pattern’s versatility, and it owes that attractive trait to the presence
of a triangle. Regardless of how they’re formed, I’ve found that triangles usually
lead to some volatile moves. Keep on the lookout for triangles as you scan your
candlestick charts. A triangle formed on a chart shows that prices are coiling
together and will soon be ready to spring in one direction or the other.

Executing trades with the bullish squeeze alert
You can see the bullish squeeze alert at its bullish best in Figure 9-17. It’s a
chart of Southern Company (SO), which is a power company or utility that
serves customers in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and Mississippi.
Utility stocks aren’t the most exciting stocks to trade, but the advantage is
that you generally won’t rack up massive losses on a trade in this sector that
doesn’t work out.
The pattern appears during a downtrend, and the first day is a long black
candle. The second day is an up day, but also an inside day relative to the
first day. The final day is a down day, but according to the rules, it’s also an
inside day relative to the second day. I chose this chart to show that the
second and third days don’t have to be specifically down or up, but do have
to be days that are inside days of the preceding day.
The pattern forms a triangle, which means you can expect quick price moves
in either direction. Because of this high level of volatility, I like to use the low
of the pattern’s first day as my sell stop. That gives the security the opportunity to move without being stopped out just before a move in the right direction. This pattern is followed by some lower trading, but then the stock takes
off like it should.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 203

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
The bullish squeeze alert failing to bring on higher prices
If you want to see a bullish squeeze alert pattern in a failure situation, look no
farther than Figure 9-18. The figure features a chart of Target (TGT) stock.
The days go like this:
1. The first day of the pattern is a very long black candle.
2. The second day is a very encouraging (for the bulls) white candle,
which is an inside day relative to the first day.
3. Finally, the pattern is capped off with a down day, but it’s an inside
day relative to the second day, so the pattern is complete.

Figure 9-17:
The bullish
squeeze
alert pattern
performs
well on a
chart of SO.

Figure 9-18:
A bullish
squeeze
alert pattern
fails on a
chart of
Target
stock.

203

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 204

204 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
The stock shows lackluster trading for a few days after the pattern appears,
and although the high of the pattern’s third day isn’t violated, the lack of
uptrending action may indicate that the pattern is a dud. There’s no real need
to wait around for lower prices to get out; it’s probably best just to exit and
move on, or if you wait on confirmation, just bag the idea of a trade and start
looking elsewhere. You should try to be liberal with your stops on the bullish
squeeze alert, but sometimes it’s best to also require some confirmation that
the squeeze is going in the desired direction a couple of days after the pattern appears. If it’s not, feel free to stop waiting around and go on to your
next trade.

Working with Bullish Three-Stick
Trending Patterns
In addition to the trend reversal patterns that take three days to develop,
there are also a handful of three-day trending patterns. These patterns usually include a long white candle followed by a gap of some sort. Generally, the
gap or the low of the first day of the pattern may serve as a useful support
level to let you know when the prevailing trend is still intact.
Three-day patterns have three uses for traders as follows:
 If you’re considering buying a stock but hate to pay up when the price has
been rising, three-day bullish trending patterns can give you confidence
that the price you pay is as good as the price is going to be for a while.
 If you’re interested in shorting, a three-day bullish trending pattern can
tell you when to hold off for just a little longer to allow for the trend to
provide you with a better price to use in your trade.
 If you’re shorting a stock, a three-day bullish trending pattern can tell
you that it’s time to buy back and move on, because the trend definitely
isn’t your friend.
In this section I describe a number of three-stick trending patterns and how
you can incorporate them in your trading strategy.

The bullish side-by-side
white lines pattern
The first bullish three-day trending pattern is the bullish side-by-side white
lines pattern, and it’s about as bullish as it gets. If you see this pattern on a
chart, you can feel pretty confident that the prevailing uptrend is going to
continue in grand fashion.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 205

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
Spotting the bullish side-by-side white lines pattern
To locate the bullish side-by-side white lines pattern on one of your charts,
first look for a day with a long white candle that’s followed by a gap opening
on the second day. That second day should develop into an up day that never
retraces prices down to the high of the first day. Finally, look for an up third
day that basically covers the same ground as the second day and definitely
doesn’t retrace to close the gap to the high of the first day. Sound confusing?
The straightforward example in Figure 9-19 should clear things up.

Trading on the bullish side-by-side white lines
I provide a solid scenario for trading the bullish side-by-side white lines pattern in Figure 9-20, which is a chart of Tyson (TSN). Tyson is a large distributor of chicken, beef, and pork products. Because these commodities’ prices
vary due to tastes, weather, or competition, TSN can actually be a pretty
interesting stock to trade.
The pattern in Figure 9-20 emerges in an uptrend that hasn’t been in place for
long. This sign is a positive in my book because the longer the trend, the
more likely it will be reversing in the near future. The first day of the pattern
is a white candle, followed by two more white candles that cover similar
ground but don’t close the gap with the high of the first candle. It’s obvious
that the bulls have been moving the price in their direction and the bears are
continuing to lose the battle. And as you can see, that action continues for
quite some time.

Figure 9-19:
The bullish
side-by-side
white lines
pattern.

205

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 206

206 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-20:
The bullish
side-by-side
white lines
pattern
works well
on a chart
of TSN.

Although it can be considered a bit liberal, I like to use the low of the first day
as a stop for this pattern. I choose that level because there’s a gap involved
in the formation of the pattern. Gaps are made to be filled, and I know that
the bears will try to make a run at a gap like this. I would prefer not to be
stopped out until they’ve succeeded in running the price below the low of the
first day. On the chart in Figure 9-20, I highlight where the bears make a run at
the bulls, but the bulls push back, and the uptrend remains in place.
When you spot a trending pattern that includes a gap, there’s a possibility for
some aggressive trading. There’s a chance that the gap will be filled with the
trend still in place, so you can place an order to buy in the gap and a stop at
the low of the pattern. This strategy is aggressive because you can buy and
sell in a short period of time as the bears take over. But if you can execute the
move properly, it’ll allow you to enjoy a very good entry price in the midst of
an uptrend.

The bullish side-by-side white lines
failing to indicate more bullishness
Even though the bullish side-by-side white lines pattern is generally a bullish
powerhouse, it’s possible for the pattern to fail. For an example, take a look at
Figure 9-21.
Figure 9-21 is a chart of Analog Devices Inc. (ADI), a producer of semiconductors used in products that range from computers to DVD players. Because its
chips are used in several products that can be considered discretionary purchases, its stock — as well as the stocks for just about every other company
that makes semiconductors — hinges on the overall economy and is therefore very volatile.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 207

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-21:
The bullish
side-by-side
white lines
fails on a
chart of ADI.

The pattern in Figure 9-21 emerges at what appears to be the beginning of a
very strong uptrend. There are a few strong up days followed by a gap up and
two more white lines, which make up the pattern in this case. Because so
much ground was covered so quickly by the pattern, it may be prudent to
place a buy order in the gap that was created with the pattern, because there
may be some price retracement where a better buying point would occur.
Then you may place a sell stop below the low of the first day. It turns out to
be a lousy prospect because the gap and the low were both taken out on the
day I labeled as the failure day, but those losses pale in comparison to what
you could expect if you bought at the end of the pattern.

The bullish side-by-side
black lines pattern
The bullish side-by-side black lines pattern occurs during an uptrend, and
although it includes some bearish trading, it doesn’t violate the uptrend’s
validity. It has some bearish undertones, but it’s still a fairly bullish indication of an uptrend continuation.

Recognizing the bullish side-by-side black lines pattern
The first day of the bullish side-by-side black lines is a long white candle that
occurs during an uptrend. The second day opens with a large gap relative to
the first day and then trades off some during the day. However, a gap is established between the first and second days even though prices trade down

207

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 208

208 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns
during the second day. The third day opens higher, much like the second day.
Prices trade lower during the first day, but the gap that was established
between the first and second days stays intact. The picture in Figure 9-22 is
worth more than a thousand words in this case.
It may seem a bit odd that a three-day bullish pattern has two black candles
as the final two days, but that’s what it takes to create the bullish side-by-side
black lines. It works out because the bullishness of the prevailing uptrend
and the first day of the pattern are strong enough to keep the bears from
closing the price gap.
If you choose to enter on the completion of the side-by-side black lines pattern, your entry point will be a lower price point than if you made the same
decision with the bullish side-by-side white lines.

Using the bullish side-by-side black lines for a profitable trade
For an example of the bullish side-by-side black lines paying off in a realworld trading scenario, take a look at Figure 9-23. It’s a chart of Gannett (GCI),
publisher of USA Today and operator of several high profile Web sites including CareerBuilder.com.

Figure 9-22:
The bullish
side-by-side
black lines
pattern.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 209

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 9-23:
The bullish
side-by-side
black lines
pattern pays
off on a
chart of GCI.

The days play out as follows:
1. The first day of the pattern is a white candle that occurs during a
small pullback of the prevailing uptrend.
The trend appears to remain intact, but it can be moderating.
2. The second day has a gap opening and a little selling during the day.
A gap is established between the first and second days.
3. The third day of the pattern has a slightly higher opening, and some
selling takes place during the day.
The gap still exists, and the day closes slightly below the open. It takes
three or four days, but eventually, the uptrend is back in place and the
pattern in Figure 9-23 turns out to be a winner.

Failure of the bullish side-by-side black lines pattern
For my example of a failing bullish side-by-side black lines pattern, I turn to
Figure 9-24 and a chart of the drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMY).
This company is a very large drug corporation that develops new drugs and
sells many high profile drugs already in existence. It’s a great stock to trade
because of the competitive nature and constant change in the pharmaceutical industry.

209

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 210

210 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-24:
The bullish
side-by-side
black lines
pattern fails
on a chart
of BMY.

The first day of the pattern featured in Figure 9-24 is a very bullish day, and it
helps to continue a choppy uptrend. The second day has a gap opening, and
the long wick at the top of the candle tells you that the day saw some pretty
heavy buying. The second day does close lower, but a gap between the first
and second day is established. Prices open higher on the third day, and more
selling takes place during the day. Notice that the low of the second day isn’t
violated, and the gap remains in place.
This signal appears to have legs for the first few days, but prices soon start
to roll over. After a couple of weeks, the low of the first day is eventually violated and the signal fails. In this instance, it’s prudent to exit the trade even
before the stop is hit. That’s easy to say after the fact, of course, but the
sheer amount of time that passes while the price action appears indecisive
should be enough for a trader to call it quits on the trade.

The upside tasuki gap pattern
The three-stick trending pattern in this section can be considered a deviation
of the patterns described in the preceding two sections. The upside tasuki
gap can just as easily be called the upside white line beside black line pattern.
The name tasuki is a Japanese word for a sash that holds up a shirt sleeve. I’ve
got to be honest: I’m not sure how that relates to the pattern, but it’s fun to
say, and the pattern can lead you to some great trades, so I won’t question it.

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 211

Chapter 9: Getting the Hang of Bullish Three-Stick Patterns
Spotting the upside tasuki gap pattern
The upside tasuki gap starts with a white candle in an uptrend. The second
day is much like the second day of the side-by-side white lines pattern that I
explain earlier in this chapter. It gaps higher and closes higher for the day.
The third day is much like the third day of a side-by-side black lines pattern
(described in this chapter in the section “The bullish side-by-side black lines
pattern”). There’s an opening in the same range as the second day and then
some lower trading, but the gap isn’t completely filled in. Check out Figure 9-25
for a visual representation.
I like this pattern because it offers an attractive entry point, especially when
compared to the side-by-side white lines pattern. Getting to buy on the low
end of any candle when there’s a bullish signal is fine with me.

Using the upside tasuki gap pattern for a successful trade
The chart in Figure 9-26 forms the basis for my explanation of how you can
use the upside tasuki gap to make a profitable trade. The chart is for the
stock of Illinois Tool Works (ITW). It’s a great proxy on the overall economy
because its interests are wide and varied. The company creates products that
are used in just about every type of mechanical product you can imagine,
from semiconductors to dishwashers.

Figure 9-25:
The upside
tasuki gap
pattern.

211

15_178089 ch09.qxp

2/27/08

9:46 PM

Page 212

212 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 9-26:
An upside
tasuki gap
pattern that
provides a
useful signal
on a chart of
ITW.

The tasuki gap in Figure 9-26 just barely passed the rules for the pattern. The
gap between the high of the first day and the range of the last day was so
miniscule that I had to double-check the data to make sure it was valid.
There’s a gap there, but you have to get out the magnifying glass to see it!
I also chose to include more history on this chart than I do for the other
examples in this chapter, to show that although the trend is sort of flat in the
near term, there’s a longer term uptrend in place, and that trend is actually
tested with this pattern. I include a trendline on the chart to reinforce that
point.
The nuts and bolts of the pattern are where they should be. The first day is a
long white candle in the middle of an uptrend, and it’s followed by a gap up
and another up day. The third day encroaches the gap, but the gap is still
intact at the end of the day, offering evidence that the trend should continue,
as it does. If you spot this pattern and choose to take on a long position, you
can ride the trend for a nice profit. You can also put on a long position knowing that you need to either get out of the trade on the appearance of a
bearish reversal signal or some sort of trend break.
