
stocks. But the popularity of large cap funds has broadened the impact into more sectors in recent
years.
Market character changes through the summer months. But June no longer denotes the start of Wall
Street’s prolonged vacation. Heavy retail participation now keeps trading volume high until late
July. Although the summer months traditionally display a bullish bias, recent years have seen
substantial volatility and less-dependable action in the period between mid-June and late July. After
the fireworks, August’s dog days take center stage as market professionals disappear and light,
choppy action becomes more likely until Labor Day. As with holiday periods, these thin sessions
exhibit wider price swings and many technical violations. Choose more active stocks and eventdriven issues to capture cleaner moves until the crowd returns for the fall season.
FIGURE 6.5
Special trading conditions fill the seasonal landscape. Take the time to understand these important market
influences and align individual positions to their broad power. Keep a copy of the annual Stock Trader’s
Almanac by Yale Hirsch close at hand. It provides an excellent desktop reference on seasonality and market
performance.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

September presents market players with the most dangerous period of the entire year. It represents
the only month that has generated an average decline in portfolio value over a 45-year history.
Although October has witnessed the Black October events of 1929 and 1987, the harvest month

offers relatively good historical returns. On the other hand, September rarely rewards investors.
Year-end anxiety drives part of this negativity, but a more fundamental process underlies the poor
results. Autumn initiates the start of tax selling season for retail and institutional participants.
Tax loss selling infects fall market activity for several months. Investors reduce their year-end tax
burden by taking capital losses on nonperforming positions. This selling often limits broad rallies
until close to Christmas. This event’s intensity depends on the months that precede it. Long periods
of market decline increase tax loss pressure, while stable rallies relieve it. Mutual funds face their
own major reallocation near the end of October as they prepare for end-of-year reporting. This can
trigger ferocious volatility with broad strategies that dump old losers and chase new winners.
TABLE 6.1
Average Monthly Gain in the S&P 500 1950–95 and the Percentage of Time the
Market Rose
Month
Average Gain
% of Time Market Rose
January
1.55%
62%
February
.38%
58%
March
.78%
62%
April
1.23%
68%
May
.18%
58%
June
.09%
50%
July
1.29%
59%
August
.39%
53%
September
–.60%
39%
October
.45%
58%
November
1.42%
62%
December
1.78%
77%
All
.75%
58%
SOURCE: Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities V14: 6, 241–243.
The Santa Rally marks a psychological end to tax loss selling as investors jump the gun on next
year’s bargains. The last few weeks before the Christmas holiday carry a positive bias that often
triggers a substantial rally. Although investors can sell losing positions through December 31, most
of their negative impact eases by mid-month. Market players then concentrate on rebuilding
portfolios with cash directed toward broad sectors. This combines with natural holiday bullishness
to favor a pleasant end to the trading year.

PART TWO
THE 7-BELLS: TOOLS TO LOCATE OUTSTANDING
OPPORTUNITIES

7 CHAPTER
MASTERING THE SETUP

CLASSIC VS. ORIGINAL PATTERNS
Swing traders study the charting landscape to measure the active environment and identify
promising setups. They pick opportunities that match the current Pattern Cycles, implement
thoughtful positions, and respond quickly to changing conditions. They take small losses when
proven wrong, without hesitation or second-guessing. Defensive trade management guides their
tactics, emotions, and logic from initial planning through final profit-taking.
The seeds of change reveal themselves through repeating price patterns. These signposts define
characteristic crowd behavior at major Pattern Cycle intersections. They uncover classic market
mechanisms that should resolve in a predictable manner and have consistent reward:risk profiles.
They work through the force of herd behavior but lose their effectiveness when the crowd finally
responds and catches up to the prevailing market direction.
Opportunity has many faces. A few classic setups have captured the imagination of both traders and
the media over the last century. But charts exhibit dozens of lesser-known, highly predictive
formations. Since these patterns avoid the crowd’s common knowledge, they yield better results
over longer periods than popular setups. They also require greater attention than a classic double top
or esoteric Holy Grail. Swing traders must review endless charts, apply complex filters to lower
noise, and play only those formations that have the highest odds for success at any time.
A very simple mechanism underlies all setup opportunity: patterns predict outcomes as they reveal
the will of the crowd. Patterns point to direction and time because emotional herd behavior drives a
common will at market turning points. Choose the right direction at the right moment and book a
profit. Diverse crowds respond to different time frames and conditions. This allows predictable
setups to print through the different layers of the 3D charting landscape.
Skilled eyes will uncover both classic and original setups. Market evolution works through a variety
of complex, directional forces. These induce broad Pattern Cycle variations within all time frames.
Some draw perfectly according to the blue-print, but others have never been catalogued even
though they carry great predictive power. So how can the swing trader recognize these special
patterns and apply effective strategies that capitalize upon their behavior? The answer lies in the
left-right brain interaction.
Patterns represent archetypes of market inefficiency. The artistic mind instinctively perceives this
order through a purely visual process. In other words, the new pattern looks bullish or bearish but
the brain doesn’t understand why. The scientific mind then joins the process and studies the
formation. Objective analysis uncovers many pieces of classic patterns buried within the original
setup. This familiarity permits the swing trader to quickly review reward:risk, study the numbers,
and formulate a promising strategy.

These logical tactics capitalize on the original setup because they respond to the vision of the
artistic mind. The best opportunities come when many classic patterns combine to create signposts
that emit strong tension and release points. This complex application of Pattern Cycle behavior
rewards original vision with many dependable methods to take profits from the markets, although
the formations have never been named, categorized, or compared to a book illustration.

PATTERN RECOGNITION
Learn the classic setups first to recognize them instantly in any time frame chart. Then move on to
more original predictive patterns. The 7-Bells setups present the next generation of dependable
market mechanics. These classic archetypes describe predictable market forces that print through all
time frames and offer outstanding trades. They fill in the missing tactics between well-known
setups and broad market movement.
FIGURE 7.1
Three well-placed lines and a triangle draw a 12-point Xilinx profit. This complex pattern uses important elements of
the Big W, five-wave decline, first rise, and 3rd watch. Yet the setup depends only on basic trendline interpretation and
good timing. Original patterns that generate the most visual tension offer the greatest profit opportunities.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Swing traders master original setups that don’t appear in print. Watch closely when Pattern Cycles
shift toward a new environment. Markets will draw many variations of better-known patterns at

these logical intersections. Even simple reversals may morph into a variety of complex mutations
that can offer substantial profits. First see if the pattern looks like a classic one. If so, list the
potential differences in terms of underlying tendency and S/R mechanics. Then examine the broad
formation to locate any natural ejection points. Consider execution when it organizes well in time,
direction, and breakout level.
Many trading signals appear within the daily noise. But so do whipsaws and fakeouts. Filter all
potential setups through their misinformation. Look for stop gun violations at key S/R barriers.
Each one can desensitize enthusiasm or fear when price returns to that level. Evaluate the sequence
of highs and lows within the pattern. Do they carry a common message through a series of
ascending or declining prices? Or does conflict pull the action into unexpected places? Check
external forces for alignment with the setup bias. Avoid positions when they lack support from the
broader market.
Swing traders fail when they lose vision. The scientific mind assumes so much control that all
charts start to look alike and excellent setups fade from view. Perfect patterns and indicators rarely
print in the modern market environment. Learn to execute comfortably in a debris-filled landscape.
Alternatively, don’t chase every crossover as a major signal or see meaningless price bars as
textbook setups. When the eyes start to play unfortunate tricks, get away from the execution
terminal and head for the beach until they can be trusted again.
Pattern recognition does not work for everyone. Many Western participants have great difficulty
dealing with intuition and visualization. They will find far greater success if they build trading
systems that rely on heavy math input and frequent back testing. Systems and discretionary trading
do not mix well. If headed down the scientific path, abandon classic setups and rely on pure
numerical output.

MANAGING OPPORTUNITY
Good patterns never signal exactly when to trade or when to stand aside. They point to directional
and time interfaces that will trigger predictable movement under the right circumstances. Swing
traders must then formulate tactics that capitalize upon price change if it proceeds and protect them
from loss if it fails. There is no single method to trade any pattern, and no setup will evolve the
same way twice. So the chosen strategy must capture expected opportunity while managing
unexpected risk.
Categorize each setup as original or classic. This predicts the level of public participation and
whipsaw. For example, the odds for a pattern failure greatly increase when the herd sells the same
head and shoulders setup. But a carefully chosen dip trip that combines several diverse patterns
responds very well to basic tactics because the setup does not encourage a popular response. Shift
strategy when a large crowd trades the pattern. Always consider going the other way if it fails or
standing aside through a first whipsaw until the true direction emerges.
Enter an opportunity before its breaks whenever possible. Risk remains low until price finally
expands. Swing traders can efficiently enter and terminate several low-cost positions while they
wait for a bigger move. But always keep one eye on the clock. Time eventually moves against a
promising setup if it just sits there. Technical indicators start to roll over and the pattern suddenly
telegraphs an unfavorable message. Choose entry levels wisely and exit immediately if conditions
deteriorate.
Exercise patience when a setup ejects without trade entry. Risk rises dramatically and volatility
expands as a crowd joins the action. Shift execution tactics to pullback entry, but be willing to stand

aside if the market starts to run. A promising setup must stand on its own merits after a pattern
break. The price expansion alters the reward:risk calculation and forces a real-time reevaluation.
Execute on a pull-back if this new analysis supports the opportunity. But consider that many good
patterns only predict a single price swing and profit potential evaporates as soon as the move
begins.
FIGURE 7.2
One good Adobe triangle deserves another. An overnight gap completes one triangle breakout, and price action
immediately draws an identical pattern. This invites many new longs who missed the first move and now hope for
an easy profit. Unfortunately the market has other plans. Professionals use this common formation to shake out
weak hands with a sharp decline. True direction reappears the next morning when price jumps back above the
broken triangle and heads higher.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Predefined strategies work well when setups print on daily bars and allow detailed evening
analysis. But many excellent patterns suddenly appear in real-time during the intraday session. The
swing trader must internalize these archetypes so that their midday appearance permits spontaneous
action. Very short-term setups produce excellent short-term profits. But intraday charts exhibit
much higher noise levels than daily charts. Don’t wait for perfect pattern alignment or good
opportunities will be lost. Expect more stop gun extremes, trendline violations, and dirty candle
prints during the trading day.

Align intraday setups to natural time-of-day tendencies. For example, the middle of the day exhibits
fewer pattern failures than the first or last hour. But 2- or 3-day setups that point to a first- or lasthour ejection can offer highly profitable opportunities. Some patterns work better in the intraday
environment than others. Avoid those that depend on specific volume characteristics. Intraday bias
ensures that false volume readings will confuse signals.
Excellent setups never reduce the need for cross-verification. Broad elements of the charting
landscape combine to define that pattern’s reward:risk. Breakout and swing levels should always
correspond to other well-established support or resistance. Use multiple time frames to confirm that
larger market forces align with the opportunity. Check major moving averages and indicator
settings to uncover any divergences that could undermine the position.
Combine original and classic setups into a trading style that produces continuous profit
opportunities. Look for these important patterns through all markets and time frames. Choose an
appropriate strategy for each trade that defines low-risk entry, profit targets, and stop loss. Always
consider the impact of pattern failure. When these setups eject in the wrong direction, they may
offer a better reward: risk profile than the expected outcome.

TWO CLASSIC APPLICATIONS
The following patterns represent classic applications of trading science. Their persistence over the
years has established them as profit-makers for many generations. Although the 2B top executes
from the short side, it also flips over to trigger an effective bottom trade. Note that these
applications seek to defensively manage risk at natural entry levels due to their popularity. Keep in
mind that every good trade has more than one successful strategy. This presentation illustrates just a
few ways to pick the market’s pocket.

2B TOP
This setup presents a double top variation that allows much earlier entry than other classic topping
formations. Low-risk short sales can execute as early as the first bar after price falls below a prior
high.
Description
•
•

The 2B top pattern capitalizes on a failed test of the last high.
Subsequent rallies to this price level do not reactivate the setup because the odds then favor
a breakout to substantial new highs.

•
•
•

Price must exceed the first high for at least one bar before it falls back below that level.
The rally into the second high should take more bars than the rally into the first high.
Look for the test to print a candlestick shadow above the last high but a real body below
it. This may draw shooting star or doji pattern.
Keep an oscillator active in the lower pane as price rises into the test. The indicator should
roll over from an overbought state before the second high prints.
Flip over and apply identical setup rules to 2B bottom reversals that appear at new lows.

•
•

FIGURE 7.3
Multiday setups improve results when they execute during specific intraday periods. This 3-day Qualcomm
channel points to an impending breakout right near the session’s close. Last-hour entry could exit the next
morning with a healthy profit as opening volatility favors an expanding market. Use time-of-day bias whenever
possible to fine-tune setup decisions.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Swing trade entry after initial failure depends on the topping pattern. Never expect an immediate
decline to much lower levels, since the 2B reversal falls back into congestion that must still be
broken. Odds increase that the second high will fail when the first high rises into a parabolic rally.
Watch for heavy volume at the first high and much lower participation as price rises into the test of
that level.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 7.4)
•

•
•
•

•

Novell doubles in price in less than 3 weeks and prints a major high at 43. Note the deep
pullback and small descending triangle failure before price pushes back into a test of the
first high.
Stretch a Fib grid across the original rally (1) to locate S/R for the topping formation. The
triangle pattern sits right on the 38% retracement.
Use the congestion low (2) to signal the eventual top breakdown.
Track the rally into the second high with a Stochastics or RSI oscillator. Watch for a
rollover pattern right near the test. NOVL Stochastics prints a small double top (4) right at
the reversal after falling from an overbought level.
The stock breaks to a new high and closes with a bullish bar (3), but it gaps down next
morning in a hole-in-the-wall.

•
•
•
•
•
•

Visualize the next-lower time frame. That pattern also exhibits a hole-in-the-wall reversal.
The first sell signal generates when the gap remains unfilled after the first hour of trading.
Next support level sets up just below 40 (5). A second sell signal triggers when that
trendline, horizontal line, and market number all break together.
Realign the Fib grid to the second high (6) and use that setting to study the topping pattern.
Note how the shift moves the congestion low right to the 50% retracement.
The longer trendline (7) breaks and pushes the selloff into the center Fibonacci retracements,
where it tests the congestion low several times.
Look for simple swing opportunities within the congestion (8) or stand aside until the
breakdown completes.
The pattern finally breaks at 50% (9) but progress slows at 62% support. A sharp bounce
develops (10) as Fibonacci works its magic.
FIGURE 7.4

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 7.5)
Many swing opportunities appear within the double top congestion. Most of these depend on
real-time market access and a short holding period.

FIGURE 7.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

As the pattern evolves, price approaches a final breakdown that allows broader position
trades.
•

The sharp initial drop from the second high predicts a possible mesa top reversal with a
decline that prints at a trend mirror image to the prior rally. The collapse between 34 and 20
(6) perfectly matches the December parabola (6) through this level.

•

The initial break pulls back to the 62% retracement (2) and generates a high-profit, low-risk
short sale entry.
The downtrend evolves into a descending parallel price channel (3) that drops NOVL
through a large first failure (5) pattern that marks a 100% retracement of the major rally.
The channel finally breaks and expands into a huge down gap (4), but the small violation on
the last bar offers few clues to the overnight shock event.

•
•

Reward:Risk

Swing traders risk frequent trend relativity errors with this evolving reversal pattern. Some believe
they can short the entire decline by selling into the second high. Others cheat themselves by taking a

small profit when a little patience yields a much bigger one. This setup illustrates the importance of
the charting landscape and the need to find all of the hidden obstacles before trade execution.

CHANNEL BREAK
Parallel trendlines set up sharp price expansion when they break in either direction. These parallel
price channel breakouts tend to be highly dependable and free from whipsaws.
Description
•
•
•
•
•
•

Price channels generate from two sets of parallel trendlines, but each trendline may form
through only two points instead of three.
Harmonic parallel lines often mark S/R within major channel boundaries.
Bars should expand sharply when price breaks out of either side, regardless of the channel’s
angle.
Impending breakouts may signal in advance when price congests along a boundary and bars
narrow.
The intensity of bar expansion often reflects how often price struck that side of the channel
before the breakout.
Price should return to test the channel break before moving higher or lower.
FIGURE 7.6

Channel strategy fades trendline boundaries or bets on expansion momentum. Well-defined
harmonics allow precise swing trade entry with low risk. Try to execute within the channel itself
just before the expansion event begins. The pattern should signal its intentions one or two bars
before the move.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 7.6)
•

•
•
•
•
•

This rising Ciena channel feeds off a prior high to trigger an outstanding short sale pattern.
Watch what happens when the continuation gap (1) at 145 turns out to be an exhaustion gap
for the 2-week rally.
Parallel price channels build complex harmonics (2) within their wider boundaries.
Uncover channels early in their creation and use them until they break. Start to test parallel
lines as soon as three relative highs and lows print.
Treat breakouts to new highs (4) with caution when they occur on the first test of a prior
high. The scenario sets up a possible 2B top reversal.
Price strikes the top trendline (3) and appears ready to break out after it pulls back to test the
harmonic. Prepare to buy quickly if rising bars congest against the top trendline.
CIEN suddenly breaks down through the harmonic and builds congestion on top of the
continuation gap (1). The false breakout alarm rings and invites a closer look at the pattern.
