
184

And if you step back from
American society and ask
“What kind of people are
getting rich these days?”
the answer is
increasingly “People like
John W. Henry.” That is,
people on the nerdly end
of the spectrum, who
have a comfort with both
statistical analysis and
decision making in an
uncertain environment.
And these people,
increasingly, will demand
that their teams be run
along rational lines.
Michael Lewis11

When John W. Henry
purchased the Boston Red
Sox, he understood that a
combination of good
management and hard
science was the most
efficient way to run a
major league baseball
team. As a trend follower,
Henry had been
exploiting market
inefficiencies for decades.
Michael Lewis12

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

CHART 5.1: Babe Ruth Versus Dave Kingman

Babe Ruth

Dave Kingman

At Bats

8399

6677

Hits

2873

1575

Runs

2174

901

Home Runs

714

442

Batting Average

.342

.236

Slugging

.690

.478

Compare the slugging percentages. There is no comparison.
Kingman could not be considered a great run producer by any
measure. On the other hand, John Henry’s performance numbers
are consistently out-sized. He had a great slugging percentage.
People want it both ways. Henry supposedly strikes out too
much in his trading, but he’s made himself enough money to buy
the Boston Red Sox for $700 million. Where do you think he got the
money? Henry knows numerous institutional investment managers
have spent more than 20 years watching him and waiting for him to
fail.
The lesson is this: If you have confidence in your method and
yourself, temporary setbacks don’t matter and strike outs don’t
matter because you will come out ahead in the long run if you keep
swinging.
To further illustrate, consider a modern-day example: bluecollar Joe versus the entrepreneur. Blue-collar Joe is paid the same
sum every two weeks like clockwork (with the occasional raise
paced to keep up with inflation). In terms of winning percentage,
blue collar Joe is king: His ratio of hours worked to hours paid is one
to one, a perfect 100 percent. He has a steady job and a steady life.
Of course, the security he feels is something of an illusion—his
paycheck comes at the whim of his local economy, his industry, and
even the foreman of his plant. The pay isn’t exactly impressive; it
gives him a solid, livable life, but not much more.
In contrast, consider the entrepreneur. His paydays are wildly
irregular. He frequently goes for months, sometimes years, without
seeing tangible reward for his sweat and toil. His winning
percentage is, in a word, pathetic. For every 10 big ideas he has, 7

Chapter 5 • Baseball: Thinking Outside the Batter’s Box

of them wind up in the circular file. Of the remaining three, two of
those fizzle out within a year—another big chunk of time, money,
and effort down the drain. However, I can’t feel too sorry for the
poor entrepreneur who spends so much time losing. He has a
passion for life, he controls his own destiny, and his last idea paid
off with a seven-figure check.

Moneyball and Billy Beane
Billy Beane is the General Manager of the Oakland A’s baseball
team. He does things differently than the stodgy old-line baseball
managers. He makes his baseball decisions on the “numbers.”
Beane doesn’t have a fancy stadium or a wealthy owner. In fact,
this small-market team’s payroll is tiny compared to that of the New
York Yankees. However, the Oakland A’s are routinely among the
best teams in major league baseball and have reached the playoffs
four years in a row. What happened? Beane became the Oakland A’s
general manager. In a recent newsletter titled “The Buffett of
Baseball,” the old-school perspective on what constitutes a winning
baseball team (familiar truisms about talent, character, and
chemistry) is compared with the new scientific approach based on
“numbers.” This new approach is based on extensive scientific
research into baseball statistics. It is often called sabermetrics, after
SABR, the Society for American Baseball Research, and it has
proved almost all of the old truisms to be false. The genius behind
sabermetrics was a mechanical engineer named Earnshaw Cook,
who, in the early 1960s, compiled reams of data that overturned
baseball’s conventional wisdom. However, when he presented the
data to executives at a handful of struggling teams, they pushed him
away. So Cook wrote a book called Percentage Baseball, based on
statistics that were irrefutable.13
Beane-ball and trend following trading both use a scientific
thinking (a precision with numbers) as opposed to using subjective
“opinions” and “feelings.”
What are some examples of Beane’s “by-the-numbers”
approach to baseball? He “uses actuarial analysis to figure out the
odds of a high school pitcher becoming a major leaguer. And, in
drafting and acquiring talent, he relies on those sabermetric truths.
For instance, if a team draws a lot of walks and hits a lot of home
runs while giving up few of each, it will win a lot of ballgames. Not

185

When I started writing I
thought if I proved X was
a stupid thing to do that
people would stop doing
X. I was wrong.
Bill James

You know, there are a
core of institutional
investment managers,
primarily in Europe, who
manage billions of dollars
for clients, who have
waited for me to fail for
more than 20 years. They
have an inherent bias
against the notion that
data or mechanical
formulas can lead to
success over time in
markets. They have
personally watched my
success now for more
than 20 years. Yet, if
anything, they are now no
more convinced than they
were 20 years ago that I
am going to be successful
in the future using data
over analysis. I am not
legendary (on Wall Street
or off). Bill [James] is,
and I assume the inherent
bias against him within
baseball will increase
now that he has taken
sides.
John W. Henry14

186

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Even while managing
$1.1 billion using
quantitative analysis,
which he calls “quant,”
Henry knew that the
same, dispassionate
statistical investigation
could be used to help
shape a baseball team
and its budget. “It is
remarkably similar, I just
happened to apply ‘quant’
to an area that’s
extremely lucrative.”15
The nature of markets is
to trend. The nature of life
is to trend.
John W. Henry18

Usually when making
investments, it is implicit
that investors believe they
have some degree of
knowledge about the
future. So Wall Street has
more fortune tellers than
any other industry. I feel
I’ve had an advantage
over the years because I
am clear about a couple
of things: 1) it is part of
the nature of life itself
(and markets are simply
manifestations of people’s
expectations) to trend,
and 2) I will never have a
complete or full
understanding of
anything. Therefore, all
investment decisions
should be based on what
can be measured rather
than what might be
predicted or felt.
John W. Henry19

surprisingly Beane has stocked his team with sluggers who take
walks and control pitchers who rarely give up home runs.”16
Beane opines, “Get me the runs.” In his world, he neither wants
nor needs a team full of singles hitters who never hit home runs.

John W. Henry Enters the Game
Many trend followers started trading on their own with small
accounts. They grew slowly as independents. They were often
renegades, unlike the more conventional traders on Wall Street who
“earned their spurs” at Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley (well, not
now that they are bank holding companies!). Their nature and their
strategies were opposites of the traders who inhabit the world built
on commissions. Similar to Beane’s view of baseball players, trend
followers realize that large amounts of cash do not guarantee wins.
Strategy and smarts beats capital 9 times out of 10.
Trend following’s connection with baseball and numbers picked
up even more steam with John W. Henry’s hiring of Bill James, the
quintessential baseball “quant,” or numbers guy, for more than 20
years. James, the consummate outsider, was brought on to enrich
Henry’s Red Sox club with his numbers-based view of baseball.
James’ views are harsh for the majority of baseball professionals.
For example, he was excruciatingly blunt in his negative
assessment of Don Zimmer, the loveable-looking former bench
coach for the Yankees:
“[A]n assortment of half-wits, nincompoops, and
Neanderthals like Don Drysdale and Don Zimmer who are
not only allowed to pontificate on whatever strikes them,
but are actually solicited and employed to do this.”17
Unfortunately, Zimmer added fuel to James’ fire with his
boneheaded attack on Pedro Martinez during the 2003 American
League Championship Series with the Yankees. Zimmer might have
exhibited a hint of Neanderthal behavior. However, the bad feelings
James has about the establishment seem to be mutual:
“‘A little fat guy with a beard who knows nothing about
nothing,’ is how Hall-of-Fame manager Sparky Anderson
once described James, who’s neither short nor fat.”20

Chapter 5 • Baseball: Thinking Outside the Batter’s Box

How unique is the James perspective of baseball? Extremely:
“I keep thinking, however, about an e-mail that James sent
me after I visited him in Kansas, in which he tried to
explain the connection between his obsession with crime
stories and baseball. ‘I feel a need to be reminded, day in
and day out, how easy it is for a fantasy to grab hold of your
foot like a rope and dangle your life upside down while
brigands go through your pockets,’ he wrote. ‘The essential
message of crime books is: Deal with the life you’ve got.
Solve the problems you have rather than fantasizing about
a life without them.’”21
When James says solve the problems you have as opposed to
fantasizing about what your life would be like without them, I am
reminded of trend following traders’ reliance on price as objective
data. Price is a collective perception. You can accept it or ignore it.
For example, even when he owned the Florida Marlins, John Henry
knew he had to change.
By the time he sold the Marlins to buy the Red Sox, Henry was
convinced that baseball was putting too much emphasis on tools—
baseball jargon for athletic ability—and not enough on
performance. The on-the-field success of the Oakland A’s, then the
only team using sabermetrics, confirmed Henry’s view. “The
Marlins would draft athletes,” he says, “while the A’s would draft
baseball players.”22
Part of the problem, from Henry’s perspective, is the baseball
old guard’s love of the Adonis athlete over pure production—hitting,
power, plate discipline. Would you rather have the ripped stud that
looks the part, but swings and misses at every curveball, or do you
notice that short fat guy who can’t run and looks ridiculous, but
never swings at a bad pitch and produces runs by the bushel?
“Producing” is the Henry goal in both his baseball and trading. To
reach that goal requires clarity. Henry was clear:
“People in both baseball and the financial markets operate
with beliefs and biases. To the extent you can eliminate
both and replace them with data, you gain a clear
advantage. Many people think they are smarter than others
in the stock market, and that the market itself has no
intrinsic intelligence—as if it’s inert. Similarly, many

187

For nearly 25 years,
there’s been a huge food
fight in baseball. The
argument was basic:
How do you evaluate a
player? On one side were
general managers, scouts
and managers. For the
most part, they evaluated
players the old-fashioned
way—with their eyes,
stopwatches, and radar
guns and by looking at
statistics which were
popularized in the
nineteenth century. Their
mind-set was always,
“How fast does he run?
How hard does he throw?
What’s his batting
average? Does he look
like a major leaguer
should look?” On the
other side—led by
statistical gurus such as
Bill James and Pete
Palmer, and assisted by
countless lesser
“seamheads” (including,
at times, me)—were the
geeks, the outsiders, mere
fans, who thought they
knew better.
Thomas Boswell,
The Washington Post23

188

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

people think they are smarter than others in baseball, and
that the game on the field is simply what they think it is,
filtered through their set of images and beliefs. But actual
data from the market means more than individual
perception/belief. And the same is true in baseball.”24
It’s like any field. There’s
a vested interest in
maintaining the status
quo so you don’t have to
learn anything new.
Robert Neyer, ESPN25

Thinking about baseball in terms of “numbers” was not done
when I played the sport, nor do I have any memory of my coaches
preaching the Bill James gospel. It would have been nice to had
played baseball at a time when stats were the ultimate judge.

Red Sox 2003–2007
Red Sox Nation still debates whether Pedro Martinez should
have been lifted in the eighth inning of Game 7 of the 2003
American League Championship Series against the Yankees. He was
left in, and the Yankees rallied from three runs down to win the
series. Grady Little, the Red Sox manager, was blamed for Boston’s
loss and fired soon thereafter. Many people wondered if he was
unfairly scapegoated for a decision others would have possibly
made too. After all, Martinez was his ace, and Little’s gut told him
to stay with his ace.
Perhaps in this situation, Martinez gets through the eighth 9
times out of 10. After all, the percentage of innings in which a
pitcher gives up three or more runs is small, and Martinez was an
exceptional pitcher. However, a look at the numbers says that
leaving him in was the wrong decision. After 105 pitches in a given
start, his batting average against rises to .370. He ended up
throwing 123 pitches in Game 7.
By the end of the 2003
baseball season, I had
learned something from
publishing Moneyball. I’d
learned that if you look
long enough for an
argument against reason,
you will find it.
Michael Lewis27

Little’s firing as manager was summed up in The Brown Daily
Herald:
“Grady isn’t a stats guy, plain and simple. He’s an old school
manager who goes with his gut and defers to his partially
informed conscience when making decisions. Contrast this
with the front office, which has transformed itself into a
sabermetric, number-crunching machine, and the divide is
clear as day—Fast forward to the eighth inning of Game 7
of the ALCS. Grady sends Pedro back onto the mound to
the surprise of many who assumed he would be yanked

Chapter 5 • Baseball: Thinking Outside the Batter’s Box

after throwing exactly 100 pitches. Opponents hit .364 off
Pedro this year after his 105th pitch—even Tony Clark
could hit Pedro in the late innings.”26
The late, great Stephen Jay Gould, a numbers man (and lifelong
baseball fan), offered some insight into the decision-making process
that might have left Martinez in the game:
“Everybody knows about hot hands. The only problem is
that no such phenomenon exists. The Stanford psychologist Amos Tversky studied every basket made by the
Philadelphia 76ers for more than a season. He found, first
of all, that probabilities of making a second basket did not
rise following a successful shot. Moreover, the number of
‘runs,’ or baskets in succession, was no greater than what a
standard random, or coin-tossing, model would predict. Of
course Larry Bird, the great forward of the Boston Celtics,
will have more sequences of five than Joe Airball—but not
because he has greater will or gets in that magic rhythm
more often. Bird has longer runs because his average
success rate is so much higher, and random models predict
more frequent and longer sequences. If Bird shoots field
goals at 0.6 probability of success, he will get five in a row
about once every 13 sequences (0.65). If Joe, by contrast,
shoots only 0.3, he will get his five straight only about once
in 412 times. In other words, we need no special
explanation for the apparent pattern of long runs. There is
no ineffable ‘causality of circumstance’ (if I may call it
that), no definite reason born of the particulars that make
for heroic myths—courage in the clinch, strength in
adversity, etc. You only have to know a person’s ordinary
play in order to predict his sequences.”28
Gould’s friend, Ed Purcell, a Nobel laureate in Physics, did
research on baseball streaks. He concluded that nothing ever
happened in baseball above and beyond the frequency predicted by
coin-tossing models. The longest runs of wins and losses are as long
as they should be.29
Had Grady Little played the numbers in 2003, the Red Sox
might not have had to wait until 2004 to finally win the World Series
(which they followed up and won again in 2007). There is little

189

When Grady Little let
Pedro continue pitching
into the eighth in Game 7
of the ALCS against the
Yankees, he provided the
perfect demonstrator of
why the Red Sox fired
him after his second
winning season in
Boston. Little explained
his move (which allowed
the Yankees to tie and
eventually win) after the
game: “We trained him to
work just like that deep
into a game. When he
tells me he has enough in
the tank to keep going,
that’s the man I want out
there. That’s no different
than what we’ve done the
last two years.” In fact,
the stats said just the
opposite. Pedro pitched
into the eighth only five
times in his 29 regularseason starts, and simply
didn’t pitch well after
he’d thrown 100 pitches,
the number he’d tossed
before taking the mound
in the eighth. In fact,
during 2003, opponents’
batting averages went up
.139 after Pedro tossed
his 105th pitch—strong
evidence that he’d
continue to weaken. That
it would turn out badly
was likely, as most
everyone knew—and as
the Red Sox computers
knew.30

190

The truth of a theory is in
your mind, not in your
eyes.
Albert Einstein31

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

doubt that an analysis of numbers to make baseball decisions, as
evidenced by Bill James, Billy Beane, and John W. Henry, is smart
business. It is a smart way to play the odds.

Key Points
• John W. Henry: “Life is too dynamic to remain static.”
• If you have realistic confidence in your method and yourself,
then temporary setbacks don’t matter. Going for the home run
can allow you to come out ahead in the long run.
• Thinking in terms of odds is a common denominator of
baseball and trend following.

Part III

191

This page intentionally left blank

Human Behavior

6

“For me, intuition comes from experience. After years of experience, a
person will have, if they have been paying attention and revising their
thinking and behavior, intuitions about their area of experience.”
—Charles Faulkner
“[W]e are not really interested in people who are experts at the French
stock market or German bond markets [due to the technical nature of
the trading]…it does not take a huge monster infrastructure: [neither]
Harvard MBAs [nor] people from Goldman Sachs…I would hate it if the
success of Chesapeake was based on my being some great genius.
It’s the system that wins. Fundamental economics are nice
but useless in trading. True fundamentals are always unknown.
Our system allows for no intellectual capability.”
—Jerry Parker1

Perhaps not surprising, trend followers have spent as much
time observing and understanding human behavior as they have
trading. Understanding human behavior and how it relates with
markets is commonly referred to as behavioral finance.
Behavioral finance evolved out of a contradiction between
classical economic theory and reality. Economic theory is based on
the assumption that people act rationally, have identical values and
access to information, and use rational decision making. The truth
is people are irrational and seldom make completely rational
decisions even if they think they do. I have had the good fortune to

193

We understand the
distinction between simple
and easy. Simple, robust
solutions are easier to find
than robust people or firms
willing to apply them.
Jason Russell2

194

History does not repeat
itself; people just keep
forgetting it. No matter
how many stock market
bubbles there have been,
or will be, investors and
their advisors always
treat the current one as
permanent, sometimes
even calling it a “new
era.’” In the meantime,
others, myself included,
have abandoned all hope
of people permanently
remembering the lessons
of history.3

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

learn from some of the top minds in the field of behavioral finance.
From Nobel Prize winner Vernon Smith to Charles Faulkner, my
eyes have been opened. Faulkner outlined the core issues:
“The current proliferation of electronic technologies—
computers, the Internet, cell phones, 24-hour news, and
instant analysis—tend to distract us from the essentially
human nature of markets. Greed, hope, fear, and denial,
herd behavior, impulsiveness, and impatience with process
(‘Are we there yet?’) are still around, and if anything, more
intensely so. Few people have absorbed the hard neuroscience research that reasons arrive afterwards. That given
the choice between a simple, easy-to-understand explanation that works and a difficult one that doesn’t, people
tend to pick the latter. People would rather have any story
about how a series of price changes happened than that
there is no rational reason for it. Confusing hindsight with
foresight and complexity with insight are a few more
‘cognitive illusions’ of Behavioral Finance.”
Faulkner is correct, but that doesn’t make his words easy. The
problem is that by not accepting that truth, you will get into trouble
one way or another, as Carl Sagan reminds us:
“It is far better to grasp the universe as it really is than to
persist in delusion, however satisfying and reassuring.”

Prospect Theory
Investment bubbles have always been a part of market history.
For example, seventeenth century speculators in the Netherlands
drove up the prices of tulip bulbs to absurd levels. The inevitable
crash followed. Since then, from the Great Depression to the dotcom implosion to October and November 2008, people can’t seem
to steer clear from manias. They repeatedly make the same
mistakes.
Daniel Kahneman, a Princeton professor who was the first
psychologist to win the Nobel Prize in Economics, attributed
market manias to investors’ “illusion of control,” calling the illusion
“prospect theory.” He studied the intellectual underpinnings of
investing—how traders estimate odds and calculate risks—to prove

195

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

how often we act from the mistaken belief that we know more than
we do.
Kahneman found that a typical person acts on what they
christened the “law of small numbers”—basing broad predictions
on narrow samples of data. For instance, if we buy a fund that’s
beaten the market three years in a row, we are convinced it’s on a
hot streak. People are simply unable to stop themselves from overgeneralizing the importance of a just a few supporting facts. Limited
statistical evidence satisfies no matter how inadequate the
depiction of reality.4
He also determined that people dislike losses so much that they
make irrational decisions in vain attempts to avoid them. This helps
explain why some investors sell their winning stocks too early, but
hold on to losers for too long. It is human nature to take the profit
from a winner quickly on the assumption that it won’t last for long,
but stick with a loser in the futile hope it will bounce back.5
However, trend followers know if you don’t cut your losses
short, that if you don’t exit with a small loss, there’s a good chance
losses will get much larger. The more you struggle with your small
loss, the larger it might become and the harder it will be to deal with
it later. The problem with accepting a loss is that it forces us to
admit we were wrong. Human beings don’t like to be wrong.
Not surprisingly, any discussion of why investors are their own
worst enemies must start with the concept of a sunk cost. A sunk
cost is simply a cost that has already been incurred that you can’t
recoup. Thinking in terms of sunk costs lets you see a loss for what
it actually is—a loss. Although sunk costs must not influence our
present decisions, we have a hard time forgetting the past. A person
might buy more of a stock even though it is tanking simply because
of the initial decision to buy it. The person can then say proudly, “I
bought on a discount!” Of course if the price of the stock never goes
up again, as is often the case, this theory implodes.
“Take your small loss and go home” is the trend following
mantra. However, most of us are ambivalent when we have to deal
with sunk costs. Although intellectually we know that there is
nothing we can do about money already spent and we should move
on, emotionally we dwell.
An experiment with a $10 theater ticket demonstrates the
irrationality of sunk costs. Kahneman told one group of students to
