
happened with the bread and cheese of the Roman church, if it had been applied to any
others but ecclesiastics. The latter had too much wisdom to be caught in a trap of their
own setting.]
When, under Pope Gregory VII, it was debated whether the Gregorian chant should be
introduced into Castile, instead of the Musarabic, given by St. Isidore, of Seville, to the
churches of that kingdom, very much ill feeling was excited. The churches refused to
receive the novelty, and it was proposed that the affair should be decided by a battle
between two champions, one chosen from each side. The clergy would not consent to a
mode of settlement which they considered impious, but had no objection to try the merits
of each chant by the fire ordeal. A great fire was accordingly made, and a book of the
Gregorian and one of the Musarabic chant were thrown into it, that the flames might
decide which was most agreeable to God by refusing to burn it. Cardinal Baronius, who
says he was an eye-witness of the miracle, relates, that the book of the Gregorian chant
was no sooner laid upon the fire, than it leaped out uninjured, visibly, and with a great
noise. Every one present thought that the saints had decided in favour of Pope Gregory.
After a slight interval, the fire was extinguished; but, wonderful to relate! the other book
of St. Isidore was found covered with ashes, but not injured in the slightest degree. The
flames had not even warmed it. Upon this it was resolved, that both were alike agreeable
to God, and that they should be used by turns in all the churches of Seville? [Histoire de
Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, par Paul Hay du Chastelet. Livre i. chap. xix.]
If the ordeals had been confined to questions like this, the laity would have had little or
no objection to them; but when they were introduced as decisive in all the disputes that
might arise between man and man, the opposition of all those whose prime virtue was
personal bravery, was necessarily excited. In fact, the nobility, from a very early period,
began to look with jealous eyes upon them. They were not slow to perceive their true
purport, which was no other than to make the Church the last court of appeal in all cases,
both civil and criminal: and not only did the nobility prefer the ancient mode of single
combat from this cause, in itself a sufficient one, but they clung to it because an acquittal
gained by those displays of courage and address which the battle afforded, was more
creditable in the eyes of their compeers, than one which it required but little or none of
either to accomplish. To these causes may be added another, which was, perhaps, more
potent than either, in raising the credit of the judicial combat at the expense of the ordeal.
The noble institution of chivalry was beginning to take root, and, notwithstanding the
clamours of the clergy, war was made the sole business of life, and the only elegant
pursuit of the aristocracy. The fine spirit of honour was introduced, any attack upon
which was only to be avenged in the lists, within sight of applauding crowds, whose
verdict of approbation was far more gratifying than the cold and formal acquittal of the
ordeal. Lothaire, the son of Louis I, abolished that by fire and the trial of the cross within
his dominions; but in England they were allowed so late as the time of Henry III, in the
early part of whose reign they were prohibited by an order of council. In the mean time,
the Crusades had brought the institution of chivalry to the full height of perfection. The
chivalric spirit soon achieved the downfall of the ordeal system, and established the
judicial combat on a basis too firm to be shaken. It is true that with the fall of chivalry, as
an institution, fell the tournament, and the encounter in the lists; but the duel, their

offspring, has survived to this day, defying the efforts of sages and philosophers to
eradicate it. Among all the errors bequeathed to us by a barbarous age, it has proved the
most pertinacious. It has put variance between men's reason and their honour; put the
man of sense on a level with the fool, and made thousands who condemn it submit to it,
or practise it. Those who are curious to see the manner in which these combats were
regulated, may consult the learned Montesquieu, where they will find a copious summary
of the code of ancient duelling. ["Esprit des Loix," livre xxviii. chap. xxv.] Truly does he
remark, in speaking of the clearness and excellence of the arrangements, that, as there
were many wise matters which were conducted in a very foolish manner, so there were
many foolish matters conducted very wisely. No greater exemplification of it could be
given, than the wise and religious rules of the absurd and blasphemous trial by battle.
In the ages that intervened between the Crusades and the new era that was opened out by
the invention of gunpowder and printing, a more rational system of legislation took root.
The inhabitants of cities, engaged in the pursuits of trade and industry, were content to
acquiesce in the decisions of their judges and magistrates whenever any differences arose
among them. Unlike the class above them, their habits and manners did not lead them to
seek the battle-field on every slight occasion. A dispute as to the price of a sack of corn, a
bale of broad-cloth, or a cow, could be more satisfactorily adjusted before the mayor or
bailiff of their district. Even the martial knights and nobles, quarrelsome as they were,
began to see that the trial by battle would lose its dignity and splendour if too frequently
resorted to. Governments also shared this opinion, and on several occasions restricted the
cases in which it was legal to proceed to this extremity. In France, before the time of
Louis IX, duels were permitted only in cases of Lese Majesty, Rape, Incendiarism,
Assassination, and Burglary. Louis IX, by taking off all restriction, made them legal in
civil eases. This was not found to work well, and, in 1303, Philip the Fair judged it
necessary to confine them, in criminal matters, to state offences, rape, and incendiarism;
and in civil cases, to questions of disputed inheritance. Knighthood was allowed to be the
best judge of its own honour, and might defend or avenge it as often as occasion arose.
Among the earliest duels upon record, is a very singular one that took place in the reign
of Louis II (A.D. 878). Ingelgerius, Count of Gastinois, was one morning discovered by
his Countess dead in bed at her side. Gontran, a relation of the Count, accused the
Countess of having murdered her husband, to whom, he asserted, she had long been
unfaithful, and challenged her to produce a champion to do battle in her behalf, that he
might establish her guilt by killing him.[Memoires de Brantome touchant les Duels.] All
the friends and relatives of the Countess believed in her innocence; but Gontran was so
stout and bold and renowned a warrior, that no one dared to meet him, for which, as
Brantome quaintly says, "Mauvais et poltrons parens estaient." The unhappy Countess
began to despair, when a champion suddenly appeared in the person of Ingelgerius,
Count of Anjou, a boy of sixteen years of age, who had been held by the Countess on the
baptismal font, and received her husband's name. He tenderly loved his godmother, and
offered to do battle in her cause against any and every opponent. The King endeavoured
to persuade the generous boy from his enterprise, urging the great strength, tried skill,
and invincible courage of the challenger; but he persisted in his resolution, to the great

sorrow of all the court, who said it was a cruel thing to permit so brave and beautiful a
child to rush to such butchery and death.
When the lists were prepared, the Countess duly acknowledged her champion, and the
combatants commenced the onset. Gontran rode so fiercely at his antagonist, and hit him
on the shield with such impetuosity, that he lost his own balance and rolled to the ground.
The young Count, as Gontran fell, passed his lance through his body, and then
dismounting, cut off his head, which, Brantome says, "he presented to the King, who
received it most graciously, and was very joyful, as much so as if any one had made him
a present of a city." The innocence of the Countess was then proclaimed with great
rejoicings; and she kissed her godson, and wept over his neck with joy, in the presence of
all the assembly.
When the Earl of Essex was accused, by Robert de Montfort, before King Henry II, in
1162, of having traitorously suffered the royal standard of England to fall from his hands
in a skirmish with the Welsh, at Coleshill, five years previously, the latter offered to
prove the truth of the charge by single combat. The Earl of Essex accepted the challenge,
and the lists were prepared near Reading. An immense concourse of persons assembled to
witness the battle. Essex at first fought stoutly, but, losing his temper and self-command,
he gave an advantage to his opponent, which soon decided the struggle. He was
unhorsed, and so severely wounded, that all present thought he was dead. At the
solicitation of his relatives, the monks of the Abbey of Reading were allowed to remove
the body for interment, and Montfort was declared the victor. Essex, however, was not
dead, but stunned only, and, under the care of the monks, recovered in a few weeks from
his bodily injuries. The wounds of his mind were not so easily healed. Though a loyal and
brave subject, the whole realm believed him a traitor and a coward because he had been
vanquished. He could not brook to return to the world deprived of the good opinion of his
fellows; he, therefore, made himself a monk, and passed the remainder of his days within
the walls of the Abbey.
Du Chastelet relates a singular duel that was proposed in Spain.[Histoire de Messire
Bertrand du Guesclin, livre i. chap. xix.] A Christian gentleman of Seville sent a
challenge to a Moorish cavalier, offering to prove against him, with whatever weapons he
might choose, that the religion of Jesus Christ was holy and divine, and that of Mahomet
impious and damnable. The Spanish prelates did not choose that Christianity should be
com promised within their jurisdiction by the result of any such combat, and they
commanded the knight, under pain of excommunication, to withdraw the challenge.
The same author relates, that under Otho I a question arose among jurisconsults, viz.
whether grandchildren, who had lost their father, should share equally with their uncles in
the property of their grandfather, at the death of the latter. The difficulty of this question
was found so insurmountable, that none of the lawyers of that day could resolve it. It was
at last decreed, that it should be decided by single combat. Two champions were
accordingly chosen; one for, and the other against, the claims of the little ones. After a
long struggle, the champion of the uncles was unhorsed and slain; and it was, therefore,
decided, that the right of the grandchildren was established, and that they should enjoy

the same portion of their grandfather's possessions that their father would have done had
he been alive.
Upon pretexts, just as frivolous as these, duels continued to be fought in most of the
countries of Europe during the whole of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. A
memorable instance of the slightness of the pretext on which a man could be forced to
fight a duel to the death, occurs in the Memoirs of the brave Constable, Du Guesclin. The
advantage he had obtained, in a skirmish before Rennes, against William Brembre, an
English captain, so preyed on the spirits of William Troussel, the chosen friend and
companion of the latter, that nothing would satisfy him but a mortal combat with the
Constable. The Duke of Lancaster, to whom Troussel applied for permission to fight the
great Frenchman, forbade the battle, as not warranted by the circumstances. Troussel
nevertheless burned with a fierce desire to cross his weapon with Du Guesclin, and
sought every occasion to pick a quarrel with him. Having so good a will for it, of course
he found a way. A relative of his had been taken prisoner by the Constable, in whose
hands he remained till he was able to pay his ransom. Troussel resolved to make a quarrel
out of this, and despatched a messenger to Du Guesclin, demanding the release of his
prisoner, and offering a bond, at a distant date, for the payment of the ransom. Du
Guesclin, who had received intimation of the hostile purposes of the Englishman, sent
back word, that he would not accept his bond, neither would he release his prisoner, until
the full amount of his ransom was paid. As soon as this answer was received, Troussel
sent a challenge to the Constable, demanding reparation for the injury he had done his
honour, by refusing his bond, and offering a mortal combat, to be fought three strokes
with the lance, three with the sword, and three with the dagger. Du Guesclin, although ill
in bed with the ague, accepted the challenge, and gave notice to the Marshal
d'Andreghem, the King's Lieutenant-General in Lower Normandy, that he might fix the
day and the place of combat. The Marshal made all necessary arrangements, upon
condition that he who was beaten should pay a hundred florins of gold to feast the nobles
and gentlemen who were witnesses of the encounter.
The Duke of Lancaster was very angry with his captain, and told him, that it would be a
shame to his knighthood and his nation, if he forced on a combat with the brave Du
Guesclin, at a time when he was enfeebled by disease and stretched on the couch of
suffering. Upon these representations, Troussel, ashamed of himself, sent notice to Du
Guesclin that he was willing to postpone the duel until such time as he should be
perfectly recovered. Du Guesclin replied, that he could not think of postponing the
combat, after all the nobility had received notice of it; that he had sufficient strength left,
not only to meet, but to conquer such an opponent as he was; and that, if he did not make
his appearance in the lists at the time appointed, he would publish him everywhere as a
man unworthy to be called a knight, or to wear an honourable sword by his side. Troussel
carried this haughty message to the Duke of Lancaster, who immediately gave permission
for the battle.
On the day appointed, the two combatants appeared in the lists, in the presence of several
thousand spectators. Du Guesclin was attended by the flower of the French nobility,
including the Marshal de Beaumanoir, Olivier de Mauny, Bertrand de Saint Pern, and the

Viscount de la Belliere, while the Englishman appeared with no more than the customary
retinue of two seconds, two squires, two coutilliers, or daggermen, and two trumpeters.
The first onset was unfavourable to the Constable: he received so heavy a blow on his
shield-arm, that he fell forward to the left, upon his horse's neck, and, being weakened by
his fever, was nearly thrown to the ground. All his friends thought he could never recover
himself, and began to deplore his ill fortune; but Du Guesclin collected his energies for a
decisive effort, and, at the second charge, aimed a blow at the shoulder of his enemy,
which felled him to the earth, mortally wounded. He then sprang from his horse, sword in
hand, with the intention of cutting off the head of his fallen foe, when the Marshal
D'Andreghem threw a golden wand into the arena, as a signal that hostilities should
cease. Du Guesclin was proclaimed the victor, amid the joyous acclamations of the
crowd, and retiring, left the field to the meaner combatants, who were afterwards to make
sport for the people. Four English and as many French squires fought for some time with
pointless lances, when the French, gaining the advantage, the sports were declared at an
end.
In the time of Charles VI, about the beginning of the fifteenth century, a famous duel was
ordered by the Parliament of Paris. The Sieur de Carrouges being absent in the Holy
Land, his lady was violated by the Sieur Legris. Carrouges, on his return, challenged
Legris to mortal combat, for the twofold crime of violation and slander, inasmuch as he
had denied his guilt, by asserting that the lady was a willing party. The lady's
asseverations of innocence were held to be no evidence by the Parliament, and the duel
was commanded with all the ceremonies. "On the day appointed," says Brantome,
[Memoires de Brantome touchant les Duels.] "the lady came to witness the spectacle in
her chariot; but the King made her descend, judging her unworthy, because she was
criminal in his eyes till her innocence was proved, and caused her to stand upon a
scaffold to await the mercy of God and this judgment by the battle. After a short struggle,
the Sieur de Carrouges overthrew his enemy, and made him confess both the rape and the
slander. He was then taken to the gallows and hanged in the presence of the multitude;
while the innocence of the lady was proclaimed by the heralds, and recognized by her
husband, the King, and all the spectators."
Numerous battles, of a similar description, constantly took place, until the unfortunate
issue of one encounter of the kind led the French King, Henry II, to declare solemnly,
that he would never again permit any such encounter, whether it related to a civil or
criminal case, or the honour of a gentleman.
This memorable combat was fought in the year 1547. Francois de Vivonne, Lord of La
Chataigneraie, and Guy de Chabot, Lord of Jarnac, had been friends from their early
youth, and were noted at the court of Francis I for the gallantry of their bearing and the
magnificence of their retinue. Chataigneraie, who knew that his friend's means were not
very ample, asked him one day, in confidence, how it was that he contrived to be so well
provided? Jarnac replied, that his father had married a young and beautiful woman, who,
loving the son far better than the sire, supplied him with as much money as he desired. La
Chataigneraie betrayed the base secret to the Dauphin, the Dauphin to the King, the King
to his courtiers, and the courtiers to all their acquaintance. In a short time it reached the

ears of the old Lord de Jarnac, who immediately sent for his son, and demanded to know
in what manner the report had originated, and whether he had been vile enough not only
to carry on such a connexion, but to boast of it? De Jarnac indignantly denied that he had
ever said so, or given reason to the world to say so, and requested his father to
accompany him to court, and confront him with his accuser, that he might see the manner
in which he would confound him. They went accordingly, and the younger De Jarnac,
entering a room where the Dauphin, La Chataigneraie, and several courtiers were present,
exclaimed aloud, "That whoever had asserted, that he maintained a criminal connexion
with his mother-in-law, was a liar and a coward!" Every eye was turned to the Dauphin
and La Chataigneraie, when the latter stood forward, and asserted, that De Jarnac had
himself avowed that such was the fact, and he would extort from his lips another
confession of it. A case like this could not be met or rebutted by any legal proof, and the
royal council ordered that it should be decided by single combat. The King, however, set
his face against the duel [Although Francis showed himself in this case an enemy to
duelling, yet, in his own case, he had not the same objection. Every reader of history must
remember his answer to the challenge of the Emperor Charles V. The Emperor wrote that
he had failed in his word, and that he would sustain their quarrel single-handed against
him. Francis replied, that he lied -- qu'il en avait menti par la gorge, and that he was ready
to meet him in single combat whenever and wherever he pleased.] and forbade them both,
under pain of his high displeasure, to proceed any further in the matter. But Francis died
in the following year, and the Dauphin, now Henry II, who was himself compromised,
resolved that the combat should take place. The lists were prepared in the court-yard of
the chateau of St. Germain-en-Laye, and the 10th of July 1547 was appointed for the
encounter. The cartels of the combatants, which are preserved in the "Memoires de
Castelnau," were as follow:-"Cartel of Francois de Vivonne, Lord of La Chataigneraie.
"Sire,
"Having learned that Guy Chabot de Jarnac, being lately at Compeigne, asserted, that
whoever had said that he boasted of having criminal intercourse with his mother-in-law,
was wicked and a wretch,-- I, Sire, with your good-will and pleasure, do answer, that he
has wickedly lied, and will lie as many times as he denies having said that which I affirm
he did say; for I repeat, that he told me several times, and boasted of it, that he had slept
with his mother-in-law.
"Francois de Vivonne."
To this cartel De Jarnac replied :-"Sire,
"With your good will and permission, I say, that Francois de Vivonne has lied in the
imputation which he has cast upon me, and of which I spoke to you at Compeigne. I,

therefore, entreat you, Sire, most humbly, that you be pleased to grant us a fair field, that
we may fight this battle to the death.
"Guy Chabot."
The preparations were conducted on a scale of the greatest magnificence, the King having
intimated his intention of being present. La Chataigneraie made sure of the victory, and
invited the King and a hundred and fifty of the principal personages of the court to sup
with him in the evening, after the battle, in a splendid tent, which he had prepared at the
extremity of the lists. De Jarnac was not so confident, though perhaps more desperate. At
noon, on the day appointed, the combatants met, and each took the customary oath, that
he bore no charms or amulets about him, or made use of any magic, to aid him against his
antagonist. They then attacked each other, sword in hand. La Chataigneraie was a strong,
robust man, and over confident; De Jarnac was nimble, supple, and prepared for the
worst. The combat lasted for some time doubtful, until De Jarnac, overpowered by the
heavy blows of his opponent, covered his head with his shield, and, stooping down,
endeavoured to make amends by his agility for his deficiency of strength. In this
crouching posture he aimed two blows at the left thigh of La Chataigneraie, who had left
it uncovered, that the motion of his leg might not be impeded. Each blow was successful,
and, amid the astonishment of all the spectators, and to the great regret of the King, La
Chataigneraie rolled over upon the sand. He seized his dagger, and made a last effort to
strike De Jarnac; but he was unable to support himself, and fell powerless into the arms
of the assistants. The officers now interfered, and De Jarnac being declared the victor, fell
down upon his knees, uncovered his head, and, clasping his hands together, exclaimed:-"O Domine, non sum dignus!" La Chataigneraie was so mortified by the result of the
encounter, that he resolutely refused to have his wounds dressed. He tore off the
bandages which the surgeons applied, and expired two days afterwards. Ever since that
time, any sly and unforeseen attack has been called by the French a coup de Jarnac.
Henry was so grieved at the loss of his favourite, that he made the solemn oath already
alluded to, that he would never again, so long as he lived, permit a due]. Some writers
have asserted, and among others, Mezeraie, that he issued a royal edict forbidding them.
This has been doubted by others, and, as there appears no registry of the edict in any of
the courts, it seems most probable that it was never issued. This opinion is strengthened
by the fact, that two years afterwards, the council ordered another duel to be fought, with
similar forms, but with less magnificence, on account of the inferior rank of the
combatants. It is not anywhere stated, that Henry interfered to prevent it, notwithstanding
his solemn oath; but that, on the contrary, he encouraged it, and appointed the Marshal de
la Marque to see that it was conducted according to the rules of chivalry. The disputants
were Fendille and D'Aguerre, two gentlemen of the household, who, quarrelling in the
King's chamber, had proceeded from words to blows. The council, being informed of the
matter, decreed that it could only be decided in the lists. Marshal de la Marque, with the
King's permission, appointed the city of Sedan as the place of combat. Fendille, who was
a bad swordsman, was anxious to avoid an encounter with D'Aguerre, who was one of the
most expert men of the age; but the council authoritatively commanded that he should
fight, or be degraded from all his honours. D'Aguerre appeared in the field attended by
Francois de Vendome, Count de Chartres, while Fendille was accompanied by the Duke
