
AU3772_book.fm Page 330 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

330

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

the clouds. This hopefully not abstract investor, object of our attention here,
needs what? He needs data, charts, and a connection to a trading place. Data
are available at the click of a mouse. A chart occupies the screen in another
click. Another click and a trade is placed. In the Internet Age it would be
tautological to attempt to describe this process in prose when live demonstrations are as close as the desktop computer and an Internet connection.
A demonstration of this rather simple process (easy to say when one does
it without thinking) may be seen at locations linked in Resources (Appendix D).
The trade will be made, of necessity, through a broker of some sort. Perhaps
an electronic broker, or even a nonvirtual broker who communicates via
telephone. And shortly, if not already, an electronic pit where one matches
wits with a computer instead of a market maker or specialist.
How long brokers will be necessary is a question that is up in the air in
the new century. (The broker who earns his keep will always be with us,
and welcome, too.) Electronic marketplaces where investors meet without
the necessity of a broker or specialist are already proliferating (see Resources),
and will continue to gain the advantage for the investor over the trading pit,
which is one of the last remaining edges the professionals hold over off-floor
traders. Suffice it to say that their initial phases will undoubtedly be periods
of dislocation, of risk and opportunity as their glitches are ironed out.
Placing electronic orders, whether to an electronic exchange or to the
NYSE, has certain inherent advantages over oral orders. No one can quarrel
about a trade registered electronically as opposed to orally where the potential for disagreement exists. In addition, the trader has only handled the data
once — rather than making an analysis, calling a broker, recording the trade,
passing it to the portfolio. If he just hits the trade button and the transaction
is routed through his software package, no one will have any doubt as to
where an error might lie. The manual method presents an opportunity for
error at each step. And rest assured, errors occur and can be disastrous to
trading.
The efficiency and ease of the process with a computer has much to
recommend it — automation of trade processing, elimination of confusion
and ambiguities, audit tracks, automation of portfolio maintenance, and,
perhaps most important of all, automatic mark-to-market of the portfolio.
(Marking-to-market is the practice of valuing a portfolio at its present market
value whether trades are open or closed.)

Marking-to-Market
This book might have been entitled Zen and the Art of Technical Analysis if
that title were not so hackneyed and threadbare. It conveys, nonetheless, the
message of Zen in the art of archery, that of direct attachment to reality and
the importance of the present moment. In his seminal book The General
Semantics of Wall Street (now Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street) John
Magee inveighed at some length against the very human tendency to keep

AU3772_book.fm Page 331 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1:

Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century

331

two sets of books in the head — one recording profits, open and closed, and
another recording losses, but only closed losses. Open losses were not losses
until booked. Having an electronic portfolio accountant which refuses to
participate in such self-deception has much to recommend it. If the portfolio
is always marked to the market when the computer communicates with the
data vendor, or the trade broker, it is difficult not to see red ink, and to see
that the equity of the account reflects all trades, open and closed.

Separating the Wheat from the Chaff
It requires a gimlet-eyed investor to pick his way through the minefield of
temptations in electronic investing and number-driven technical analysis.
Playing with the toys, seeing what the pundits have to say, and fiddling with
“research” can subtly replace profitable trading as the activity. Actually,
almost all the research the Magee Analyst must do is addressed in this book.

Chaff
Chat rooms. Touts. News. Predictions. Punditry. Brokerage House buy, sell,
hold, strong hold, weak buy, strong buy, and any other species of Brokerage
House recommendation taken at face value. Remember brokerage firms
survive by selling securities and make their money in general on activity.
Actually, much of their money is made servicing their institutional clients
and distributing their clients’ shares to their retail cleintele – a blatant conflict
of interest which blew up in their faces in the early 2000s resulting in many
fines and some jail terms (plus ça change...). In the surging Clinton–Gore Bull
Markets of the 1990s, all of these worked. In a serious Bear Market none of
them will work. (EN9: A serious bear market started in earnest in 2000 and was
correctly identified with Magee chart analysis as may be seen from the John Magee
Letters at the edwards-magee.com web site.

Summary 2
Never in the history of the markets have so many facilities for private
investors been available. The computer is necessary to take advantage of
those facilities.
Data may be acquired automatically via Internet or dial-up sites at little
or no cost.
A (as they say) plethora of web sites offer cyberinvestors everything
from portfolio accounting to alerts sent to their personal body-carried
devices (pagers, handheld PDAs, etc.).
Some of these even offer real-time data, which is a way for the unsophisticated trader to go broke in real time.
Many of these sites offer every kind of analysis from respectable technical analysis (usually too complicated) to extraterrestrial channeling.

AU3772_book.fm Page 332 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

332

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Internet chat rooms will provide real-time touting and numerous rumors
to send the lemmings and impressionable scurrying hither and yon. But, one
expects, not the readers of this book.
Of more importance, the info-revolution and the computer will:
1. Relieve the analyst of manual drudgery, accelerate all the steps of
analysis: data gathering, chart preparation, portfolio accounting, and
analysis and tax preparation.
2. Give the analyst virtually effortless portfolio accounting and markto-market prices — a valuable device to have to keep the investor
from mixing his cash and accrual accounting, as Magee says.
3. Enable processing of a hitherto unimaginable degree. An unlimited
number of stocks may be analyzed. Choosing those to trade with a
computer will be dealt with in Chapter 21, Selection of Stocks to Chart.
4. Allow the investor to trade on ECNs or in electronic marketplaces
where there are no pit traders or locals to fiddle with prices.

AU3772_book.fm Page 333 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter 17.2

Advancements in
Investment Technology
Part 1. Developments in Finance Theory and Practice
Numerous pernicious and useless inventions, services, and products litter
the Internet and the financial industry marketplace; but modern finance
theory and technology is important and must be taken into consideration
by the general investor. This chapter will explore the minimum the moderately advanced investor needs to know about advances in theory and practice. And it will point the reader to further resources if he desires to continue
more advanced study.
Instruments of limited (or non-) availability during the time of Edwards
and Magee included exchange traded options on stocks, futures on averages
and indices, options on futures and indices, securitized indices and averages,
as the most important and as a partial list only. Undoubtedly one of the most
important developments of the modern era is the creation of trading instruments which allow the investor to trade and hedge the major indexes. Of
these, the instruments created by the Chicago Board of Trade are of singular
importance. These are the CBOT® DJIASM Futures and the CBOT® DJIASM
Futures Options, which are discussed in greater detail in Part 2 of this
chapter. (EN9: Not so singular, perhaps. Probably of greater importance to readers
of this book are the AMEX ishares, particularly DIA, SPY and QQQQ, instruments
which offer the investor direct participation in the major indices as though they were
stocks.)
General developments of great importance in finance theory and practice
are found in the following sections.

Options
From the pivotal moment in 1973 when Fischer Black and his partner, Myron
Scholes, published their — excuse the usage — paradigm-setting Model to
the third millennium, the options/derivatives markets have grown from
negligible to trillions of dollars a year. The investor who is not informed
about options is playing with half a deck. The subject, however, is beyond
the scope of this book, which hopes only to offer some perspective on the
subject and guides to the further study necessary for most traders and many
investors.
333

AU3772_book.fm Page 334 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

334

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Something in the neighborhood of 30% or more of options expire worthless. This is probably the most important fact to know about options. (There
is a rule of thumb about options called the 60–30–10 rule: 60% are closed out
before expiration, 10% are exercised, and 30% are “long at expiration,” meaning they are worthless.) Another fact to know about options is: in the Reagan
Crash of 1987, out of the money puts bought at $.625 on October 16 were
worth hundreds of dollars on October 19 — if you could get the broker to
pick up the telephone and trade them. (The editor had a client at Options
Research, Inc. during that time who lost $57MM in 3 days and almost
brought down a major Chicago bank. He had sold too many naked puts.)
The most sophisticated and skilled traders in the world make their livings
(quite sumptuous livings, thank you) trading options. Educated estimates have
been made that as many as 90% of retail options traders lose money. That
combined with the fact that by far it is the general public which buys (rather
than sells) options should suggest some syllogistic reasoning to the reader.
With these facts firmly fixed in mind, let us put options in their proper
perspective for the general investor. Options have a number of useful functions. They offer the trader powerful leverage. With an option he can control
much more stock than by the direct purchase of stock — his capital stretches
much further. So options are an ideal speculative instrument. (Exaggerated
leverage is almost always a characteristic of speculative instruments.) But
they can also be used in a most conservative way — that is, as an insurance
policy. For example, a position on the long security side may be hedged by
the purchase of a put on the option side. (This is not a specific recommendation to do this. Every specific situation should be evaluated by the prudent
investor as to its monetary consequences.)
The experienced investor may also use options to increase yield on his
portfolio of securities. He may write covered calls, or write naked puts on
a stock in order to acquire it at a lower cost (e.g., he sells out of the money
options. This is a way of being long with the stock. If the stock comes back
to the exercise price, he acquires the stock. If not, he pockets the premium.)
There are numerous tactics of this sort which may be played with
options. Note, played. Played because, for the general investor, the options
game can be disastrous, as professionals are not playing. They are seriously
practicing skills the amateur can never hope to master. Many floor traders,
indeed, would qualify as idiot savants — they can compute the “fair value”
of options in their heads and make money on price anomalies of $.625, or,
as they call it, a “teenie.” For perspective, the reader may contemplate a
conversation the editor had with one of the most important options traders
in the world. This market maker remarked casually that his fortune was
built on teenies. The reader may imagine at some length what would be
necessary for the general investor to make a profit on $.625.
This does not mean the general investor should never touch options. It
just means he should be thoroughly prepared before he goes down to play
that game. In options trading traders speak of bull spreads, bear spreads,

AU3772_book.fm Page 335 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2:

Advancements in Investment Technology

335

and alligator spreads. The alligator spread is an options strategy which eats
the customer’s capital in toto.
Among these strategies is covered call writing. This is a strategy which
is touted as being an income producer on a stock portfolio. There is no
purpose in writing a call on a stock in which the investor is long — unless
that stock is stuck in a clear congestion phase which is not due to expire
before the option expires. And if the stock is in a downtrend it should be
liquidated. But to write a call on a stock in a clear uptrend is to make oneself
beloved of the broker, whose good humor improves markedly with account
activity and commission income. The outcome of a covered call on an ascending
stock, of course, is that the writer (you, dear reader) has the stock called at the
exercise price, losing his position and future appreciation, not to mention costs.
The income is actually small consolation, a sort of booby prize — a way of
cutting your profits while increasing your costs.

Quantitative Analysis
The investor should be aware of another area of computer and investment
technology that has yielded much more dramatic and profitable results, but
that is in a model-driven market — namely the options markets. Quantitative
analysts, those who investigate and trade the options markets, are a breed
apart from technical analysts. In an interesting irony, behavioral markets,
the stock markets, are used as the basis for derivatives, or options whose
price is determined largely by the operation of algorithms called models.
The original model which for all intents and purposes created the modern
world of options trading was the Black–Scholes options analysis model,
which assumed that the “fair value” of an option could be determined by
entering five parameters into the formula: the strike price of the option; the
price of the stock; the “risk free” interest rate; the time to expiration; and the
volatility of the stock.
The eventual universal acceptance of this model resulted in the derivatives industry we have today. To list all the forms of derivatives available
for trading today would be to expand this book by many pages, and it is
not the purpose of this book anyway. The purpose of this paragraph of the
book is to sternly warn general investors who are thinking of “beating the
derivatives markets” that they should undergo rigorous training first. The
alternative could be extremely expensive.
At first the traders who saw the importance of this model and used it
to price options virtually skinned older options traders and the public, who
traded pretty much by the seat of the pants or the strength of their convictions, meaning human emotion. But professional losers learn fast, and now
all competent options traders use some sort of model or antimodel, or antiantimodel to trade. And true to form, options sellers, who are largely professionals, take most of the public’s (who are buyers) money. This is the way
of the world.

AU3772_book.fm Page 336 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

336

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Options Pricing Models and Their Importance
After the introduction of the Black–Scholes Model numerous other models
followed, among them the Cox–Ross–Rubinstein, the Black Futures, etc. For
the general investor, the message is this: he must be acquainted with these
models and what their functions are if he intends to use options. Remember
that the model computes the “fair value” of the option. One way professionals make money off amateurs is by selling overpriced options and buying
underpriced options to create a relatively lower risk spread (for themselves).
Not knowing what these values are for the private investor is like not
knowing where the present price is for a stock. It is a piece of ignorance for
which the professional will charge him a premium to be educated about.
Unfortunately, many private options traders never get educated in spite of
paying tuition over and over again. But ignorance is not bliss. It is expensive.
Technology and knowledge works its way from innovators and creative
geniuses through the ranks of professionals and sooner or later is disseminated to the general public. Of course by that time the innovators have developed new technology. Nonetheless, even assuming that professionals have
superior tools and technology, the general investor must thoroughly educate
himself before using options. As it is not the province of this book to dissect
options trading, the reader may find references in Resources (Appendix D).
Here it would not be untoward to mention one of the better books on
options as a starting point for the moderately advanced and motivated
trader. Lawrence McMillan’s Options as a Strategic Investment is necessary
reading. In addition the newcomer may contact the Chicago Board Options
Exchange, the CBOE, at www.cboe.com, which has tutorial software.

Futures on Indexes
Futures, like options, offer the speculator intense leverage — the ability to
control a comparatively large position with much less capital than the purchase of the underlying commodity or index. Futures salesmen are fond of
pointing out the fact that, if you are margined at 5% or 10% of the contract
value, a similar move in the price of the index will double your money. They
are often not so conscientious about pointing out that a similar move against
your position will wipe out your margin (actually earnest money). Unlike
(long) options, a mishap in the market can result in more than the loss of
margin. It can result in a deficit account and debts to the broker — in other
words, losses of more than 100%. For this among other reasons, it is wise
not to plunge into futures without considerable preparation.
This preparation might well begin, for the adroit investor, with the
reading of Schwager’s Technical Analysis, Schwager on Futures, currently one
of the better books on the subject.
But let us say that instead of using futures to speculate that we want
to use them as a hedge for our portfolio of Dow–Jones DIAMONDS or
portfolio of Dow–Jones stocks. Now we are purchasing insurance, rather

AU3772_book.fm Page 337 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2:

Advancements in Investment Technology

337

than speculating. As an oversimplified example, the investor might see the
failure of the DJIA to break through a top as the beginning of a congestion
zone (a consolidation or reversal pattern). He could then hedge his position
by shorting the Dow–Jones futures. Now he is both long and short — long
the cash, short the futures. He would place a stop on the futures above his
purchase price to close the trade if the market continued rising. If the market
fell, he would maintain the futures position until he calculated that the
reaction had passed its worst point, or until it were definitely analyzed to
have reversed. He would then take his profits on the futures position (taxable) but his cash position would be intact, and presumably the greater
capital gains on those positions would be safe from taxation, and also safe
from the costs and slippage and difficulties of reestablishing the stock position.

Options on Futures and Indexes
Conservative as well as speculative use may be made of options. For example, the investor might, after a vigorous spike upwards, feel that the S&P
500, or the SPDRs which he is long, were overbought. He might then buy
an index put on the S&P as a hedge against the expected decline. If it occurs,
he collects his profit on the option and his cash position in the S&P is
undisturbed. If the Index continues to climb he loses the option premium —
an insurance policy he took out to protect his stock portfolio.
Note well: The tactics described here are for the reader’s conceptual
education. Before executing tactics of this kind, or any other unfamiliar
procedure, the investor should thoroughly inform himself and rehearse the
procedure, testing outcomes through paper trading before committing real
capital. He must, in short, figure out how you lose. A number of web sites offer
facilities of this kind, and the investor may also build on his own computer
a research or paper trading portfolio segregated from his actual transactions.
The trader might also choose to buy an option on a future. At the CBOT,
the trader can trade both options and futures on the DJIA. These can be used
as the above examples for speculating or hedging, except in this case the
successful option buyer might wind up owning a futures contract instead
of the cash position. This could be disconcerting to one not accustomed to
the futures market, especially if large price anomalies between futures and
cash occurred, as happened in 1987 and 1989 when futures prices went to
huge discounts to cash. A primary reason for employing the futures would
be for leverage. And the reason for using the options on futures would be
the analysis that uncertainty was in store and the wish to only risk the
amount of the options premium.
Obviously, a speculator can choose to forget the stock or futures part of
the portfolio and trade only options. Before taking such a step the trader
should pass a postgraduate course. The proportion of successful amateur
option traders to successful professional traders is extremely skewed. In fact
one might say that all successful options traders are professionals.

AU3772_book.fm Page 338 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

338

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)
MPT is a procedure and process whereby a portfolio manager may classify and
analyze the components of his portfolio in such a way as to, hopefully, be aware
of and control risk and return. It attempts to quantify the relationship between
risk and return. Rather than analyzing only the individual instruments within
a portfolio, MPT attempts to determine the statistical relationships among the
members of the portfolio and their relationships to the market.
The processes involved in MPT analysis are (1) portfolio valuation, or
describing the portfolio in terms of expected risk and expected return;
(2) asset allocation, determining how capital is to be allocated among the
classes of instruments (bonds, stocks, etc.); (3) optimization, or finding the
trade-offs between risk and return in selecting the components of the portfolio; and (4) performance measurement, or the division of each stock’s risk
into systematic and security-related classes.
How important is this for the general investor? Not very. And there is
a large question among pragmatic analysts, such as the editor, as to its
pragmatic usefulness for professionals, although they cling to it as to a life
ring in a shipwreck. Mandelbrot observed in articles (“A Multifractal Walk
Down Wall Street”) and letters in the Scientific American (February 1999 and
June 1999) that MPT discards about 5% of statistical experience as if it didn’t
exist. (Although it [the experience] does.) And he observed that the ignored
experience includes “10 sigma” market storms which are blamed for portfolio
failures as though it is the fault of the data instead of the fault of the process.
