 If you can’t figure out what category your stocks are in, then ask your broker. If a broker recommended the stocks in the first place, then you definitely ought to ask, because how else are you to know what you’re looking for? Are you looking for slow growth, fast growth, recession protection, a turnaround, a cyclical bounce, or assets? 
 Basing a strategy on general maxims, such as “Sell when you double your money,” “Sell after two years,” or “Cut your losses by selling when the price falls ten percent,” is absolute folly. It’s simply impossible to find a generic formula that sensibly applies to all the different kinds of stocks. 
 You have to separate the Procter and Gambles from the Bethlehem Steels, and the Digital Equipments from the Alicos. Unless it’s a turnaround, there’s no point in owning a utility and expecting it to do as well as Philip Morris. There’s no point in treating a young company with the potential of a Wal-Mart like a stalwart, and selling for a 50 percent gain, when there’s a good chance that your fast grower will give you a 1,000-percent gain. On the other hand, if Ralston Purina already has doubled and the fundamentals look unexciting, you’re crazy to hold on to it with the same hope. 
 If you buy Bristol-Myers for a good price, it’s reasonable to think you might put it away and forget about it for twenty years, but you wouldn’t want to forget about Texas Air. Shaky companies in cyclical industries are not the ones you sleep on through recessions. 
 Putting stocks in categories is the first step in developing the story. Now at least you know what kind of story it’s supposed to be. The next step is filling in the details that will help you guess how the story is going to turn out.

One Up on Wall Street 

 8 
 The Perfect Stock, What a Deal! 
 Getting the story on a company is a lot easier if you understand the basic business. That’s why I’d rather invest in panty hose than in communications satellites, or in motel chains than in fiber optics. The simpler it is, the better I like it. When somebody says, “Any idiot could run this joint,” that’s a plus as far as I’m concerned, because sooner or later any idiot probably is going to be running it. 
 If it’s a choice between owning stock in a fine company with excellent management in a highly competitive and complex industry, or a humdrum company with mediocre management in a simpleminded industry with no competition, I’d take the latter. For one thing, it’s easier to follow. During a lifetime of eating donuts or buying tires, I’ve developed a feel for the product line that I’ll never have with laser beams or microprocessors. 
 “Any idiot can run this business” is one characteristic of the perfect company, the kind of stock I dream about. You never find the perfect company, but if you can imagine it, then you’ll know how to recognize favorable attributes, the most important thirteen of which are as follows: 
 (1) I T S OUNDS D ULL—OR, E VEN B ETTER , R IDICULOUS 
 The perfect stock would be attached to the perfect company, and the perfect company has to be engaged in a perfectly simple business, and the perfectly simple business ought to have a perfectly boring name. The more boring it is, the better. Automatic Data Processing is a good start. 
 But Automatic Data Processing isn’t as boring as Bob Evans Farms. What could be duller than a stock named Bob Evans? It puts you to sleep just thinking about it, which is one reason it’s been such a great prospect. But even Bob Evans Farms won’t win the prize for the best name you could give to a stock, and neither will Shoney’s or Crown, Cork, and Seal. None of these has a chance against Pep Boys—Manny, Moe, and Jack. 
 Pep Boys—Manny, Moe, and Jack is the most promising name I’ve ever heard. It’s better than dull, it’s ridiculous. Who wants to put money into a company that sounds like the Three Stooges? What Wall Street analyst or portfolio manager in his right mind would recommend a stock called Pep Boys—Manny, Moe, and Jack—unless of course the Street already realizes how profitable it is, and by then it’s up tenfold already. 
 Blurting out that you own Pep Boys won’t get you much of an audience at a cocktail party, but whisper “GeneSplice International” and everybody listens. Meanwhile, GeneSplice International is going no-where but down, while Pep Boys—Manny, Moe, and Jack just keeps going higher. 
 If you discover an opportunity early enough, you probably get a few dollars off the price just for the dull or odd name, which is why I’m always on the lookout for the Pep Boys or the Bob Evanses, or the occasional Consolidated Rock. Too bad that wonderful aggregate company changed its name to Conrock and then the trendier Calmat. As long as it was Consolidated Rock, nobody paid attention to it. 
 (2) I T D OES S OMETHING D ULL 
 I get even more excited when a company with a boring name also does something boring. Crown, Cork, and Seal makes cans and bottle caps. What could be duller than that? You won’t see an interview with the CEO of Crown, Cork, and Seal in Time magazine alongside an interview with Lee Iacocca, but that’s a plus. There’s nothing boring about what’s happened to the shares of Crown, Cork, and Seal. 
 I already mentioned Seven Oaks International, the company that processes the coupons that you hand in at the grocery store. There’s another tale that’s guaranteed to shut your eyes—as the stock sneaks up from $4 to $33. Seven Oaks International and Crown, Cork, and Seal make IBM seem like a Las Vegas revue, and how about Agency Rent-A- Car? That’s the glamorous outfit that provides the car the insurance company lets you drive while yours is being repaired. Agency Rent-A-Car came public at $4 a share and Wall Street hardly noticed. What self-respecting tycoon would want to think about what people drive while their cars are in the shop? The Agency Rent-A-Car prospectus could have been marketed as an anesthetic, but the last time I looked, the stock was $16. 
 A company that does boring things is almost as good as a company that has a boring name, and both together is terrific. Both together is guaranteed to keep the oxymorons away until finally the good news compels them to buy in, thus sending the stock price even higher. If a company with terrific earnings and a strong balance sheet also does dull things, it gives you a lot of time to purchase the stock at a discount. Then when it becomes trendy and overpriced, you can sell your shares to the trend-followers. 
 (3) I T D OES S OMETHING D ISAGREEABLE 
 Better than boring alone is a stock that’s boring and disgusting at the same time. Something that makes people shrug, retch, or turn away in disgust is ideal. Take Safety-Kleen. That’s a name with promise to begin with—any company that uses a k where there ought to be a c is worth investigating. The fact that Safety-Kleen was once related to Chicago Rawhide is also favorable (see “It’s a Spinoff” later in this chapter). 
 Safety-Kleen goes around to all the gas stations and provides them with a machine that washes greasy auto parts. This saves auto mechanics the time and trouble of scrubbing the parts by hand in a pail of gasoline, and gas stations gladly pay for the service. Periodically the Safety-Kleen people come around to remove the dirty sludge and oil from the machine, and they carry the sludge back to the refinery to be recycled. This goes on and on, and you’ll never see a miniseries about it on network TV. 
 Safety-Kleen hasn’t rested on the spoils of greasy auto parts. It has since branched out into restaurant grease traps and other sorts of messes. What analyst would want to write about this, and what portfolio manager would want to have Safety-Kleen on his buy list? There aren’t many, which is precisely what’s endearing about Safety-Kleen. Like Automatic Data Processing, this company has had an unbroken run of increased earnings. Profits have gone up every quarter, and so has the stock. 
 Or how about Envirodyne? This one was pointed out to me a few years ago by Thomas Sweeney, then Fidelity’s forest products analyst and now the manager of Fidelity Capital Appreciation Fund. Envirodyne passes the odd name test: it sounds like something you could bounce off the ozone layer, when actually it has to do with lunch. One of its subsidiaries, Clear Shield, makes plastic forks and straws, the perfect business that any idiot could run, but in reality it has topflight management with a large personal stake in the company. 
 Envirodyne is number two in plastic cutlery and number three in plastic straws, and being the lowest-cost producer gives it a big advantage in the industry. 
 In 1985, Envirodyne started negotiating to buy Viskase, a leading producer of intestinal byproducts, particularly the casings surrounding hot dogs and sausages. They got Viskase from Union Carbide at a bargain price. Then in 1986 they bought Filmco, the leading producer of the PVC film that’s used to wrap leftover food items. Plastic forks, hot-dog casings, plastic wrap—pretty soon they’ll take over the family picnic. 
 Largely as a result of these acquisitions, the earnings increased from 34 cents a share in 1985 to $2 a share in 1987—and should top $2.50 in 1988. The company has used its substantial cash flow to pay down its debt on the various acquisitions. I bought it for $3 a share in September, 1985. At the high in 1988 it sold for $36⅞. 
 (4) I T’S A S PINOFF 
 Spinoffs of divisions or parts of companies into separate, freestanding entities—such as Safety-Kleen out of Chicago Rawhide or Toys “R” Us out of Interstate Department Stores—often result in astoundingly lucrative investments. Dart & Kraft, which merged years ago, eventually separated so that Kraft could become a pure food company again. Dart (which owns Tupperware) was spun off as Premark International and has been a great investment on its own. So has Kraft, which was bought out by Philip Morris in 1988. 
 Large parent companies do not want to spin off divisions and then see those spinoffs get into trouble, because that would bring embarrassing publicity that would reflect back on the parents. Therefore, the spinoffs normally have strong balance sheets and are well-prepared to succeed as independent entities. And once these companies are granted their independence, the new management, free to run its own show, can cut costs and take creative measures that improve the near-term and long-term earnings. 
 Here is a list of some recent spinoffs that have done well, and a couple that haven’t done so well: 

 The literature sent to shareholders explaining the spinoff is usually hastily prepared, blasé, and understated, which makes it even better than the regular annual reports. Spinoff companies are often misunderstood and get little attention from Wall Street. Investors often are sent shares in the newly created company as a bonus or a dividend for owning the parent company, and institutions, especially, tend to dismiss these shares as pocket change or found money. These are favorable omens for the spinoff stocks. 
 This is a fertile area for the amateur shareholder, especially in the recent frenzy of mergers and acquisitions. Companies that are targets of hostile takeovers frequently fight off raiders by selling or spinning off divisions that then become publicly traded issues on their own. When a company is taken over, the parts are often sold off for cash, and they, too, become separate entities in which to invest. If you hear about a spinoff, or if you’re sent a few fractions of shares in some newly created company, begin an immediate investigation into buying more. A month or two after the spinoff is completed, you can check to see if there is heavy insider buying among the new officers and directors. This will confirm that they, too, believe in the company’s prospects. 
 The greatest spinoffs of all were the “Baby Bell” companies that were created in the breakup of ATT: Ameritech, Bell Atlantic, Bell South, Nynex, Pacific Telesis, Southwestern Bell, and US West. While the parent has been an uninspiring performer, the average gain from stock in the seven newly created companies was 114 percent from November, 1983, to October, 1988. Add in the dividends and the total return is more like 170 percent. This beats the market twice around, and it beats the majority of all known mutual funds, including the one run by yours truly. 
 Once liberated, the seven regional companies were able to increase earnings, cut costs, and enjoy higher profits. They got all the local and regional telephone business, the yellow pages, along with 50 cents for every $1 of long-distance business generated by ATT. It was a great niche. They had already gone through an earlier period of heavy spending on modern equipment, so they didn’t have to dilute shareholders’ equity by selling extra stock. And human nature being what it is, the seven Baby Bells set up a healthy competition amongst themselves, and also between themselves and their proud parent, Ma Bell. Ma, meanwhile, was losing its stranglehold on its highly profitable leased equipment business, and facing new competitors such as Sprint and MCI, and sustaining heavy losses in its computer operations. 
 Investors who owned the old ATT stock had eighteen months to decide what to do. They could sell ATT and be done with the whole complicated mess, they could keep ATT plus the shares and fractions of shares in the new Baby Bells that they received, or they could sell the parent and keep the Baby Bells. If they did their homework, they sold ATT, kept the Baby Bells, and added to their position with as many more shares as they could afford. 
 Pounds of material were sent out to the 2.96 million ATT shareholders explaining the Baby Bells’ plans. The new companies laid out exactly what they were going to do. A million employees of ATT and countless suppliers could have seen what was going on. So much for the amateur’s edge being restricted to a lucky few. For that matter, anyone who had a phone knew that there were big changes going on. I participated in the rally, but only in a modest way—I never dreamed that conservative companies such as these could do so well so quickly. 
 (5) T HE I NSTITUTIONS D ON’T O WN I T, AND THE A NALYSTS D ON’T F OLLOW I T 
 If you find a stock with little or no institutional ownership, you’ve found a potential winner. Find a company that no analyst has ever visited, or that no analyst would admit to knowing about, and you’ve got a double winner. When I talk to a company that tells me the last analyst showed up three years ago, I can hardly contain my enthusiasm. It frequently happens with banks, savings-and-loans, and insurance companies, since there are thousands of these and Wall Street only keeps up with fifty to one hundred. 
 I’m equally enthusiastic about once-popular stocks the professionals have abandoned, as many abandoned Chrysler at the bottom and Exxon at the bottom, just before both began to rebound. 
 Data on institutional ownership are available from the following sources: Vicker’s Institutional Holdings Guide, Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research, and the Spectrum Surveys, a publication of CDA Investment Technologies. Although these publications are not always easy to find, you can get similar information from the Value Line Investment Survey and from the S&P stock sheets, also called tear sheets. Both are routinely provided by regular stockbrokers. 
 (6) T HE R UMORS A BOUND: I T’S I NVOLVED WITH T OXIC W ASTE AND/OR THE M AFIA 
 It’s hard to think of a more perfect industry than waste management. If there’s anything that disturbs people more than animal casings, grease and dirty oil, it’s sewage and toxic waste dumps. That’s why I got very excited one day when the solid waste executives showed up in my office. They had come to town for a solid waste convention complete with booths and slides—imagine how attractive that must have been. Anyway, instead of the usual blue cotton button-down shirts that I see day after day, they were wearing polo shirts that said “Solid Waste.” Who would put on shirts like that, unless it was the Solid Waste bowling team? These are the kind of executives you dream about. 
 As you already know if you were fortunate enough to have bought some, Waste Management, Inc. is up about a hundredfold. 
 Waste Management is a better prospect even than Safety-Kleen because it has two unthinkables going for it: toxic waste itself, and also the Mafia. Everyone who fantasizes that the Mafia runs all the Italian restaurants, the newsstands, the dry cleaners, the construction sites, and the olive presses also probably thinks that the Mafia controls the garbage business. This fantastic assertion was a great advantage to the earliest buyers of shares in Waste Management, which as usual were underpriced relative to the actual opportunity. 
 Maybe the rumors of the Mafia in waste management kept away the same investors who worried about the Mafia in hotel/casino management. Remember the dreaded casino stocks that are now on everybody’s buy list? Respectable investors weren’t supposed to touch them because the casinos allegedly were all Mafia. Then the earnings exploded and the profits exploded, and the Mafia faded into the background. When Holiday Inn and Hilton got into the casino business, it suddenly was all right to own casino stocks. 
 (7) T HERE’S S OMETHING D EPRESSING ABOUT I T 
 In this category my favorite all-time pick is Service Corporation International (SCI), which also has a boring name. I got this pick from George Vanderheiden, the onetime Fidelity electronics analyst who’s done a great job running the Fidelity Destiny Fund. 
 Now, if there’s anything Wall Street would rather ignore besides toxic waste, it’s mortality. And SCI does burials. 
 For several years this Houston-based enterprise has been going around the country buying up local funeral homes from the mom-and-pop owners, just as Gannett did with the small-town newspapers. SCI has become a sort of McBurial. It has picked up the active funeral parlors that bury a dozen or more people a week, ignoring the smaller one-or two-burial parlors. 
 At last count the company owned 461 funeral parlors, 121 cemeteries, 76 flower shops, 21 funeral product-and-supply manufacturing centers, and 3 casket distribution centers, so they’re vertically integrated. They broke into the big-time when they buried Howard Hughes. 
 They also pioneered the pre-need policy, a layaway plan that’s been very popular. It enables you to pay off your funeral service and your casket right now while you can still afford it, so your family won’t have to pay for it later. Even if the cost has tripled by the time you require a funeral service, you’re locked in at the old prices. This is a great deal for the family of the deceased, and an even greater deal for the company. 
 SCI gets the money from its pre-need sales right away, and the cash just keeps on compounding. If they sell $50 million worth of these policies each year, it will add up to billions by the time they’ve had all the funerals. Lately they’ve gone beyond their own operations to offer the pre-need policies to other funeral homes. Over the past five years the sales of prearranged funerals have been climbing at 40 percent a year. 
 Once in a while a positive story is topped off by an extraordinary kicker, an unexpected valuable card that turns up. In SCI’s case it happened when the company struck a very lucrative bargain with another company (American General) that wanted to buy the real estate under one of SCI’s Houston locations. In return for the rights to this land, American General, which owned 20 percent of SCI’s stock, gave all their stock back to SCI. Not only did SCI retrieve 20 percent of its shares at no cost, but it was allowed to continue to operate the funeral home at the old location for two years, until it could open a new home at a different site in Houston. 
 The best thing about this company is that it was shunned by most professional investors for years. Despite an incredible record, the SCI executives had to go out on cavalcades to beg people to listen to their story. That meant that amateurs in the know could buy stock in a proven winner with a record of solid growth in earnings, and at much lower prices than they’d have to pay for a hot stock in a popular industry. Here was the perfect opportunity—everything was working, you could see it happening, the earnings kept increasing, there was rapid growth with almost no debt—and Wall Street turned the other way. 
 Only in 1986 did SCI develop a big following among the institutions, who now own over 50 percent of the shares, and more analysts started covering the company. Predictably the stock was a twentybagger before SCI got Wall Street’s full attention, but since then it has greatly underperformed the market. In addition to the burdens of high institutional ownership and broad coverage by brokers, the company has been hurt in the last few years by entering the casket business through two acquisitions that have not contributed to profits. Also, the price of buying quality funeral homes and cemeteries has risen sharply, and the growth in pre-need insurance has been less than expected. 
 (8) I T’S A N O- G ROWTH I NDUSTRY 
 Many people prefer to invest in a high-growth industry, where there’s a lot of sound and fury. Not me. I prefer to invest in a low-growth industry like plastic knives and forks, but only if I can’t find a no-growth industry like funerals. That’s where the biggest winners are developed. 
 There’s nothing thrilling about a thrilling high-growth industry, except watching the stocks go down. Carpets in the 1950s, electronics in the 1960s, computers in the 1980s, were all exciting high-growth industries, in which numerous major and minor companies unerringly failed to prosper for long. That’s because for every single product in a hot industry, there are a thousand MIT graduates trying to figure out how to make it cheaper in Taiwan. As soon as a computer company designs the best word-processor in the world, ten other competitors are spending $100 million to design a better one, and it will be on the market in eight months. This doesn’t happen with bottle caps, coupon-clipping services, oil-drum retrieval, or motel chains. 
 SCI was helped by the fact that there’s almost no growth in the funeral industry. Growth in the burial business in this country limps along at one percent a year, too slow for the action-seekers who’ve gone into computers. But it’s a steady business with as reliable a customer base as you could ever find. 
 In a no-growth industry, especially one that’s boring and upsets people, there’s no problem with competition. You don’t have to protect your flanks from potential rivals because nobody else is going to be interested. This gives you the leeway to continue to grow, to gain market share, as SCI has done with burials. SCI already owns 5 percent of the nation’s funeral homes, and there’s nothing stopping them from owning 10 percent or 15 percent. The graduating class of Wharton isn’t going to want to challenge SCI, and you can’t tell your friends in the investment banking firms that you’ve decided to specialize in picking up dirty oil from the gas stations. 
 (9) I T’S G OT A N ICHE 
 I’d much rather own a local rock pit than own Twentieth Century-Fox, because a movie company competes with other movie companies, and the rock pit has a niche. Twentieth Century-Fox understood that when it bought up Pebble Beach, and the rock pit with it. 
 Certainly, owning a rock pit is safer than owning a jewelry business. If you’re in the jewelry business, you’re competing with other jewelers from across town, across the state, and even abroad, since vacationers can buy jewelry anywhere and bring it home. But if you’ve got the only gravel pit in Brooklyn, you’ve got a virtual monopoly, plus the added protection of the unpopularity of rock pits. 
 The insiders call this the “aggregate” business, but even the exalted name doesn’t alter the fact that rocks, sand, and gravel are as close to inherently worthless as you can get. That’s the paradox: mixed together, the stuff probably sells for $3 a ton. For the price of a glass of orange juice, you can purchase a half ton of aggregate, which, if you’ve got a truck, you can take home and dump on your lawn. 
 What makes a rock pit valuable is that nobody else can compete with it. The nearest rival owner from two towns over isn’t going to haul his rocks into your territory because the trucking bills would eat up all his profit. No matter how good the rocks are in Chicago, no Chicago rock-pit owner can ever invade your territory in Brooklyn or Detroit. Due to the weight of rocks, aggregates are an exclusive franchise. You don’t have to pay a dozen lawyers to protect it. 
 There’s no way to overstate the value of exclusive franchises to a company or its shareholders. Inco is the world’s great producer of nickel today, and it will be the world’s great producer in fifty years. Once I was standing at the edge of the Bingham Pit copper mine in Utah, and looking down into that impressive cavern, it occurred to me that nobody in Japan or Korea can invent a Bingham pit. 
 Once you’ve got an exclusive franchise in anything, you can raise prices. In the case of rock pits you can raise prices to just below the point that the owner of the next rock pit might begin to think about competing with you. He’s figuring his prices via the same method. 
 To top it off, you get big tax breaks from depreciating your earth movers and rock crushers, plus you get a mineral depletion allowance, the same as Exxon and Atlantic Richfield get for their own oil and gas deposits. I can’t imagine anyone’s going bankrupt over a rock pit. So if you can’t run your own rock pit, the next best thing is buying shares in aggregate-producing companies such as Vulcan Materials, Calmat, Boston Sand & Gravel, Dravo, and Florida Rock. When larger companies such as Martin-Marietta, General Dynamics, or Ashland sell off various parts of their businesses, they always keep the rock pits. 
 I always look for niches. The perfect company would have to have one. Warren Buffett started out by acquiring a textile mill in New Bedford, Massachusetts, which he quickly realized was not a niche business. He did poorly in textiles but went on to make billions for his shareholders by investing in niches. He was one of the first to see the value in newspapers and TV stations that dominated major markets, beginning with the Washington Post. Thinking along the same lines, I bought as much stock as I could in Affiliated Publications, which owns the local Boston Globe. Since the Globe gets over 90 percent of the print ad revenues in Boston, how could the Globe lose? 
 The Globe has a niche, and the Times Mirror Company has several, including the Los Angeles Times, Newsday, the Hartford Courant, and the Baltimore Sun. Gannett owns 90 daily newspapers, and most of them are the only major dailies in town. Investors who discovered the advantages of exclusive newspaper and cable franchises in the early 1970s were rewarded with a number of tenbaggers as the cable stocks and media stocks got popular on Wall Street. 
 Any reporter, ad executive, or editor who worked at the Washington Post could have seen the profits and the earnings and understood the value of the niche. A newspaper company is a great business for a variety of reasons as well. 
 Drug companies and chemical companies have niches—products that no one else is allowed to make. It took years for SmithKline to get the patent for Tagamet. Once a patent is approved, all the rival companies with their billions in research dollars can’t invade the territory. They have to invent a different drug, prove it is different, and then go through three years of clinical trials before the government will let them sell it. They have to prove that it doesn’t kill rats, and most drugs, it seems, do kill rats. 
 Or perhaps rats aren’t as healthy as they used to be. Come to think of it, I once made money on a rat stock—Charles River Breeding Labs. There’s a business that turns people off. 
 Chemical companies have niches in pesticides and herbicides. It’s not any easier to get a poison approved than it is to get a cure approved. Once you have a patent and the federal go-ahead on a pesticide or a herbicide, you’ve got a money machine. Monsanto has several today. 
 Brand names such as Robitussin or Tylenol, Coca-Cola or Marlboro, are almost as good as niches. It costs a fortune to develop public confidence in a soft drink or a cough medicine. The whole process takes years. 
 (10) P EOPLE H AVE TO K EEP B UYING I T 
 I’d rather invest in a company that makes drugs, soft drinks, razor blades, or cigarettes than in a company that makes toys. In the toy industry somebody can make a wonderful doll that every child has to have, but every child gets only one each. Eight months later that product is taken off the shelves to make room for the newest doll the children have to have—manufactured by somebody else. 
 Why take chances on fickle purchases when there’s so much steady business around? 
 (11) I T’S A U SER OF T ECHNOLOGY 
 Instead of investing in computer companies that struggle to survive in an endless price war, why not invest in a company that benefits from the price war—such as Automatic Data Processing? As computers get cheaper, Automatic Data can do its job cheaper and thus increase its own profits. Or instead of investing in a company that makes automatic scanners, why not invest in the supermarkets that install the scanners? If a scanner helps a supermarket company cut costs just three percent, that alone might double the company’s earnings. 
 (12) T HE I NSIDERS A RE B UYERS 
 There’s no better tip-off to the probable success of a stock than that people in the company are putting their own money into it. In general, corporate insiders are net sellers, and they normally sell 2.3 shares to every one share that they buy. After the 1,000-point drop from August to October, 1987, it was reassuring to discover that there were four shares bought to every one share sold by insiders across the board. At least they hadn’t lost their faith. 
 When insiders are buying like crazy, you can be certain that, at a minimum, the company will not go bankrupt in the next six months. When insiders are buying, I’d bet there aren’t three companies in history that have gone bankrupt near term. 
 Long term, there’s another important benefit. When management owns stock, then rewarding the shareholders becomes a first priority, whereas when management simply collects a paycheck, then increasing salaries becomes a first priority. Since bigger companies tend to pay bigger salaries to executives, there’s a natural tendency for corporate wage-earners to expand the business at any cost, often to the detriment of shareholders. This happens less often when management is heavily invested in shares. 
 Although it’s a nice gesture for the CEO or the corporate president with the million-dollar salary to buy a few thousand shares of the company stock, it’s more significant when employees at the lower echelons add to their positions. If you see someone with a $45,000 annual salary buying $10,000 worth of stock, you can be sure it’s a meaningful vote of confidence. That’s why I’d rather find seven vice presidents buying 1,000 shares apiece than the president buying 5,000. 
 If the stock price drops after the insiders have bought, so that you have a chance to buy it cheaper than they did, so much the better for you. 
 It’s simple to keep track of insider purchases. Every time an officer or a director buys or sells shares, he or she has to declare it on Form 4 and send the form to the Securities and Exchange Commission advising them of the fact. Several newsletter services, including Vicker’s Weekly Insider Report and The Insiders, keep track of these filings. Barron’s , The Wall Street Journal, and Investor’s Daily also carry the information. Many local business newspapers report on insider trading on local companies—I know the Boston Business Journal has such a column. Your broker may also be able to provide the information, or you may find that your local library subscribes to the newsletters. There’s also a tabulation of insider buying and selling in the Value Line publication. 
