
* How well did Graham’s forecast pan out? At first blush, it seems, very
well: From the beginning of 1972 through the end of 1981, stocks earned
an annual average return of 6.5%. (Graham did not specify the time period
for his forecast, but it’s plausible to assume that he was thinking of a 10year time horizon.) However, inflation raged at 8.6% annually over this
period, eating up the entire gain that stocks produced. In this section of his
chapter, Graham is summarizing what is known as the “Gordon equation,”
which essentially holds that the stock market’s future return is the sum of the
current dividend yield plus expected earnings growth. With a dividend yield
of just under 2% in early 2003, and long-term earnings growth of around
2%, plus inflation at a bit over 2%, a future average annual return of roughly
6% is plausible. (See the commentary on Chapter 3.)

26

The Intelligent Investor

of the fact that the interest and principal payments on good bonds
are much better protected and therefore more certain than the dividends and price appreciation on stocks. Consequently we are
forced to the conclusion that now, toward the end of 1971, bond
investment appears clearly preferable to stock investment. If we
could be sure that this conclusion is right we would have to advise
the defensive investor to put all his money in bonds and none in
common stocks until the current yield relationship changes significantly in favor of stocks.
But of course we cannot be certain that bonds will work out better than stocks from today’s levels. The reader will immediately
think of the inflation factor as a potent reason on the other side. In
the next chapter we shall argue that our considerable experience
with inflation in the United States during this century would not
support the choice of stocks against bonds at present differentials
in yield. But there is always the possibility—though we consider it
remote—of an accelerating inflation, which in one way or another
would have to make stock equities preferable to bonds payable in a
fixed amount of dollars.* There is the alternative possibility—
which we also consider highly unlikely—that American business
will become so profitable, without stepped-up inflation, as to justify a large increase in common-stock values in the next few years.
Finally, there is the more familiar possibility that we shall witness
another great speculative rise in the stock market without a real
justification in the underlying values. Any of these reasons, and
perhaps others we haven’t thought of, might cause the investor to
regret a 100% concentration on bonds even at their more favorable
yield levels.
Hence, after this foreshortened discussion of the major considerations, we once again enunciate the same basic compromise policy

* Since 1997, when Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (or TIPS) were
introduced, stocks have no longer been the automatically superior choice
for investors who expect inflation to increase. TIPS, unlike other bonds, rise
in value if the Consumer Price Index goes up, effectively immunizing the
investor against losing money after inflation. Stocks carry no such guarantee
and, in fact, are a relatively poor hedge against high rates of inflation. (For
more details, see the commentary to Chapter 2.)

Investment versus Speculation

27

for defensive investors—namely that at all times they have a significant part of their funds in bond-type holdings and a significant
part also in equities. It is still true that they may choose between
maintaining a simple 50–50 division between the two components
or a ratio, dependent on their judgment, varying between a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 75% of either. We shall give our
more detailed view of these alternative policies in a later chapter.
Since at present the overall return envisaged from common stocks
is nearly the same as that from bonds, the presently expectable
return (including growth of stock values) for the investor would
change little regardless of how he divides his fund between the
two components. As calculated above, the aggregate return from
both parts should be about 7.8% before taxes or 5.5% on a tax-free
(or estimated tax-paid) basis. A return of this order is appreciably
higher than that realized by the typical conservative investor over
most of the long-term past. It may not seem attractive in relation to
the 14%, or so, return shown by common stocks during the 20
years of the predominantly bull market after 1949. But it should be
remembered that between 1949 and 1969 the price of the DJIA had
advanced more than fivefold while its earnings and dividends had
about doubled. Hence the greater part of the impressive market
record for that period was based on a change in investors’ and
speculators’ attitudes rather than in underlying corporate values.
To that extent it might well be called a “bootstrap operation.”
In discussing the common-stock portfolio of the defensive
investor, we have spoken only of leading issues of the type
included in the 30 components of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. We have done this for convenience, and not to imply that these
30 issues alone are suitable for purchase by him. Actually, there are
many other companies of quality equal to or excelling the average
of the Dow Jones list; these would include a host of public utilities
(which have a separate Dow Jones average to represent them).* But

* Today, the most widely available alternatives to the Dow Jones Industrial
Average are the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index (the “S & P”) and the
Wilshire 5000 index. The S & P focuses on 500 large, well-known companies that make up roughly 70% of the total value of the U.S. equity market.
The Wilshire 5000 follows the returns of nearly every significant, publicly

28

The Intelligent Investor

the major point here is that the defensive investor’s overall results
are not likely to be decisively different from one diversified or representative list than from another, or—more accurately—that neither he nor his advisers could predict with certainty whatever
differences would ultimately develop. It is true that the art of skillful or shrewd investment is supposed to lie particularly in the
selection of issues that will give better results than the general market. For reasons to be developed elsewhere we are skeptical of the
ability of defensive investors generally to get better than average
results—which in fact would mean to beat their own overall performance.* (Our skepticism extends to the management of large
funds by experts.)
Let us illustrate our point by an example that at first may seem
to prove the opposite. Between December 1960 and December 1970
the DJIA advanced from 616 to 839, or 36%. But in the same period
the much larger Standard & Poor’s weighted index of 500 stocks
rose from 58.11 to 92.15, or 58%. Obviously the second group had
proved a better “buy” than the first. But who would have been so
rash as to predict in 1960 that what seemed like a miscellaneous
assortment of all sorts of common stocks would definitely outperform the aristocratic “thirty tyrants” of the Dow? All this proves,
we insist, that only rarely can one make dependable predictions
about price changes, absolute or relative.
We shall repeat here without apology—for the warning cannot
be given too often—that the investor cannot hope for better than
average results by buying new offerings, or “hot” issues of any
sort, meaning thereby those recommended for a quick profit.† The
contrary is almost certain to be true in the long run. The defensive
investor must confine himself to the shares of important companies
with a long record of profitable operations and in strong financial
condition. (Any security analyst worth his salt could make up such

traded stock in America, roughly 6,700 in all; but, since the largest companies account for most of the total value of the index, the return of the
Wilshire 5000 is usually quite similar to that of the S & P 500. Several lowcost mutual funds enable investors to hold the stocks in these indexes as a
single, convenient portfolio. (See Chapter 9.)
* See pp. 363–366 and pp. 376–380.
† For greater detail, see Chapter 6.

Investment versus Speculation

29

a list.) Aggressive investors may buy other types of common
stocks, but they should be on a definitely attractive basis as established by intelligent analysis.
To conclude this section, let us mention briefly three supplementary concepts or practices for the defensive investor. The first is the
purchase of the shares of well-established investment funds as an
alternative to creating his own common-stock portfolio. He might
also utilize one of the “common trust funds,” or “commingled
funds,” operated by trust companies and banks in many states; or,
if his funds are substantial, use the services of a recognized investment-counsel firm. This will give him professional administration
of his investment program along standard lines. The third is the
device of “dollar-cost averaging,” which means simply that the
practitioner invests in common stocks the same number of dollars
each month or each quarter. In this way he buys more shares when
the market is low than when it is high, and he is likely to end up
with a satisfactory overall price for all his holdings. Strictly speaking, this method is an application of a broader approach known as
“formula investing.” The latter was already alluded to in our suggestion that the investor may vary his holdings of common stocks
between the 25% minimum and the 75% maximum, in inverse relationship to the action of the market. These ideas have merit for the
defensive investor, and they will be discussed more amply in later
chapters.*

Results to Be Expected by the Aggressive Investor
Our enterprising security buyer, of course, will desire and
expect to attain better overall results than his defensive or passive
companion. But first he must make sure that his results will not be
worse. It is no difficult trick to bring a great deal of energy, study,
and native ability into Wall Street and to end up with losses instead
of profits. These virtues, if channeled in the wrong directions,
become indistinguishable from handicaps. Thus it is most essential
that the enterprising investor start with a clear conception as to

* For more advice on “well-established investment funds,” see Chapter 9.
“Professional administration” by “a recognized investment-counsel firm” is
discussed in Chapter 10. “Dollar-cost averaging” is explained in Chapter 5.

30

The Intelligent Investor

which courses of action offer reasonable chances of success and
which do not.
First let us consider several ways in which investors and speculators generally have endeavored to obtain better than average
results. These include:
1. Trading in the market. This usually means buying stocks
when the market has been advancing and selling them after it has
turned downward. The stocks selected are likely to be among those
which have been “behaving” better than the market average. A
small number of professionals frequently engage in short selling.
Here they will sell issues they do not own but borrow through the
established mechanism of the stock exchanges. Their object is to
benefit from a subsequent decline in the price of these issues, by
buying them back at a price lower than they sold them for. (As our
quotation from the Wall Street Journal on p. 19 indicates, even
“small investors”—perish the term!—sometimes try their unskilled
hand at short selling.)
2. Short-term selectivity. This means buying stocks of companies which are reporting or expected to report increased earnings,
or for which some other favorable development is anticipated.
3. Long-term selectivity. Here the usual emphasis is on an
excellent record of past growth, which is considered likely to continue in the future. In some cases also the “investor” may choose
companies which have not yet shown impressive results, but are
expected to establish a high earning power later. (Such companies
belong frequently in some technological area—e.g., computers,
drugs, electronics—and they often are developing new processes
or products that are deemed to be especially promising.)
We have already expressed a negative view about the investor’s
overall chances of success in these areas of activity. The first we
have ruled out, on both theoretical and realistic grounds, from the
domain of investment. Stock trading is not an operation “which, on
thorough analysis, offers safety of principal and a satisfactory
return.” More will be said on stock trading in a later chapter.*

* See Chapter 8.

Investment versus Speculation

31

In his endeavor to select the most promising stocks either for the
near term or the longer future, the investor faces obstacles of two
kinds—the first stemming from human fallibility and the second
from the nature of his competition. He may be wrong in his estimate of the future; or even if he is right, the current market price
may already fully reflect what he is anticipating. In the area of
near-term selectivity, the current year’s results of the company are
generally common property on Wall Street; next year’s results, to
the extent they are predictable, are already being carefully considered. Hence the investor who selects issues chiefly on the basis of
this year’s superior results, or on what he is told he may expect for
next year, is likely to find that others have done the same thing for
the same reason.
In choosing stocks for their long-term prospects, the investor’s
handicaps are basically the same. The possibility of outright error
in the prediction—which we illustrated by our airlines example on
p. 6—is no doubt greater than when dealing with near-term earnings. Because the experts frequently go astray in such forecasts, it is
theoretically possible for an investor to benefit greatly by making
correct predictions when Wall Street as a whole is making incorrect
ones. But that is only theoretical. How many enterprising investors
could count on having the acumen or prophetic gift to beat the professional analysts at their favorite game of estimating long-term
future earnings?
We are thus led to the following logical if disconcerting conclusion: To enjoy a reasonable chance for continued better than average
results, the investor must follow policies which are (1) inherently
sound and promising, and (2) not popular on Wall Street.
Are there any such policies available for the enterprising
investor? In theory once again, the answer should be yes; and there
are broad reasons to think that the answer should be affirmative in
practice as well. Everyone knows that speculative stock movements are carried too far in both directions, frequently in the general market and at all times in at least some of the individual
issues. Furthermore, a common stock may be undervalued because
of lack of interest or unjustified popular prejudice. We can go further and assert that in an astonishingly large proportion of the
trading in common stocks, those engaged therein don’t appear to
know—in polite terms—one part of their anatomy from another. In
this book we shall point out numerous examples of (past) dis-

32

The Intelligent Investor

crepancies between price and value. Thus it seems that any intelligent person, with a good head for figures, should have a veritable
picnic on Wall Street, battening off other people’s foolishness. So it
seems, but somehow it doesn’t work out that simply. Buying a neglected and therefore undervalued issue for profit generally proves
a protracted and patience-trying experience. And selling short a
too popular and therefore overvalued issue is apt to be a test not
only of one’s courage and stamina but also of the depth of one’s
pocketbook.* The principle is sound, its successful application is
not impossible, but it is distinctly not an easy art to master.
There is also a fairly wide group of “special situations,” which
over many years could be counted on to bring a nice annual return
of 20% or better, with a minimum of overall risk to those who knew
their way around in this field. They include intersecurity arbitrages, payouts or workouts in liquidations, protected hedges of
certain kinds. The most typical case is a projected merger or acquisition which offers a substantially higher value for certain shares
than their price on the date of the announcement. The number of
such deals increased greatly in recent years, and it should have
been a highly profitable period for the cognoscenti. But with the
multiplication of merger announcements came a multiplication of
obstacles to mergers and of deals that didn’t go through; quite a
few individual losses were thus realized in these once-reliable
operations. Perhaps, too, the overall rate of profit was diminished
by too much competition.†

* In “selling short” (or “shorting”) a stock, you make a bet that its share
price will go down, not up. Shorting is a three-step process: First, you borrow shares from someone who owns them; then you immediately sell the
borrowed shares; finally, you replace them with shares you buy later. If the
stock drops, you will be able to buy your replacement shares at a lower
price. The difference between the price at which you sold your borrowed
shares and the price you paid for the replacement shares is your gross profit
(reduced by dividend or interest charges, along with brokerage costs). However, if the stock goes up in price instead of down, your potential loss is
unlimited—making short sales unacceptably speculative for most individual
investors.
† In the late 1980s, as hostile corporate takeovers and leveraged buyouts
multiplied, Wall Street set up institutional arbitrage desks to profit from any

Investment versus Speculation

33

The lessened profitability of these special situations appears one
manifestation of a kind of self-destructive process—akin to the law
of diminishing returns—which has developed during the lifetime
of this book. In 1949 we could present a study of stock-market fluctuations over the preceding 75 years, which supported a formula—
based on earnings and current interest rates—for determining a
level to buy the DJIA below its “central” or “intrinsic” value,
and to sell out above such value. It was an application of the governing maxim of the Rothschilds: “Buy cheap and sell dear.” * And
it had the advantage of running directly counter to the ingrained
and pernicious maxim of Wall Street that stocks should be bought
because they have gone up and sold because they have gone down.
Alas, after 1949 this formula no longer worked. A second illustration is provided by the famous “Dow Theory” of stock-market
movements, in a comparison of its indicated splendid results for
1897–1933 and its much more questionable performance since
1934.
A third and final example of the golden opportunities not
recently available: A good part of our own operations on Wall
Street had been concentrated on the purchase of bargain issues easily identified as such by the fact that they were selling at less than
their share in the net current assets (working capital) alone, not
counting the plant account and other assets, and after deducting all
liabilities ahead of the stock. It is clear that these issues were selling
at a price well below the value of the enterprise as a private business. No proprietor or majority holder would think of selling what
he owned at so ridiculously low a figure. Strangely enough, such

errors in pricing these complex deals. They became so good at it that the
easy profits disappeared and many of these desks have been closed down.
Although Graham does discuss it again (see pp. 174–175), this sort of trading is no longer feasible or appropriate for most people, since only multimillion-dollar trades are large enough to generate worthwhile profits.
Wealthy individuals and institutions can utilize this strategy through hedge
funds that specialize in merger or “event” arbitrage.
* The Rothschild family, led by Nathan Mayer Rothschild, was the dominant
power in European investment banking and brokerage in the nineteenth
century. For a brilliant history, see Niall Ferguson, The House of Rothschild:
Money’s Prophets, 1798–1848 (Viking, 1998).

34

The Intelligent Investor

anomalies were not hard to find. In 1957 a list was published showing nearly 200 issues of this type available in the market. In various
ways practically all these bargain issues turned out to be profitable,
and the average annual result proved much more remunerative
than most other investments. But they too virtually disappeared
from the stock market in the next decade, and with them a dependable area for shrewd and successful operation by the enterprising
investor. However, at the low prices of 1970 there again appeared a
considerable number of such “sub-working-capital” issues, and
despite the strong recovery of the market, enough of them
remained at the end of the year to make up a full-sized portfolio.
The enterprising investor under today’s conditions still has various possibilities of achieving better than average results. The huge
list of marketable securities must include a fair number that can be
identified as undervalued by logical and reasonably dependable
standards. These should yield more satisfactory results on the
average than will the DJIA or any similarly representative list. In
our view the search for these would not be worth the investor’s
effort unless he could hope to add, say, 5% before taxes to the average annual return from the stock portion of his portfolio. We shall
try to develop one or more such approaches to stock selection for
use by the active investor.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 1

All of human unhappiness comes from one single thing: not
knowing how to remain at rest in a room.
—Blaise Pascal

Why do you suppose the brokers on the floor of the New York Stock
Exchange always cheer at the sound of the closing bell—no matter
what the market did that day? Because whenever you trade, they
make money—whether you did or not. By speculating instead of investing, you lower your own odds of building wealth and raise someone
else’s.
Graham’s definition of investing could not be clearer: “An investment operation is one which, upon thorough analysis, promises safety
of principal and an adequate return.” 1 Note that investing, according to
Graham, consists equally of three elements:
•
•
•
