
extraordinary instrument was too preposterous for the wise age that believed in all the
absurdities of witchcraft.
When Harvey first proved the circulation of the blood, every tongue was let loose against
him. The thing was too obviously an imposition, and an attempt to deceive that public
who believed that a king's touch had power to cure the scrofula. That a dead criminal's
hand, rubbed against a wen, would cure it, was reasonable enough; but that the blood
flowed through the veins was beyond all probability.
In our own day, a similar fate awaited the beneficent discovery of Dr. Jenner. That
vaccination could abate the virulence of, or preserve from, the smallpox, was quite
incredible; none but a cheat and a quack could assert it: but that the introduction of the
vaccine matter into the human frame could endow men with the qualities of a cow, was
quite probable. Many of the poorer people actually dreaded that their children would
grow hairy and horned as cattle, if they suffered them to be vaccinated.
The Jesuit, Father Labat, the shrewd and learned traveller in South America, relates an
experiment which he made upon the credulity of some native Peruvians. Holding a
powerful lens in his hand, and concentrating the rays of the sun upon the naked arm of an
admiring savage, he soon made him roar with pain. All the tribe looked on, first with
wonder, and then with indignation and wonder both combined. In vain the philosopher
attempted to explain the cause of the phenomenon - in vain he offered to convince them
that there was nothing devilish in the experiment - he was thought to be in league with
the infernal gods to draw down the fire from Heaven, and was looked upon, himself, as
an awful and supernatural being. Many attempts were made to gain possession of the
lens, with the view of destroying it, and thereby robbing the Western stranger of the
means of bringing upon them the vengeance of his deities.
Very similar was the conduct of that inquiring Brahmin, which is related by Forbes in his
Oriental Memoirs. The Brahmin had a mind better cultivated than his fellows; he was
smitten with a love for the knowledge of Europe -- read English books -- pored over the
pages of the Encyclopedia, and profited by various philosophical instruments; but on
religious questions the Brahmin was firm to the faith of his caste and the doctrine of the
Metempsychosis. Lest he might sacrilegiously devour his progenitors, he abstained from
all animal food; and thinking that he ate nothing which enjoyed life, he supported
himself, like his brethren, upon fruits and vegetables. All the knowledge that did not run
counter to this belief, he sought after with avidity, and bade fair to become the wisest of
his race. In an evil hour, his English friend and instructor exhibited a very powerful solar
microscope, by means of which he showed him that every drop of water that he drank
teemed with life -- that every fruit was like a world, covered with innumerable
animalculae, each of which was fitted by its organization for the sphere in which it
moved, and had its wants, and the capability of supplying them as completely as visible
animals millions of times its bulk. The English philosopher expected that his Hindoo
friend would be enraptured at the vast field of knowledge thus suddenly opened out to
him, but he was deceived. The Brahmin from that time became an altered man -thoughtful, gloomy, reserved, and discontented. He applied repeatedly to his friend that

he would make him a present of the microscope; but as it was the only one of its kind in
India, and the owner set a value upon it for other reasons, he constantly refused the
request, but offered him the loan of it for any period he might require. But nothing short
of an unconditional gift of the instrument would satisfy the Brahmin, who became at last
so importunate that the patience of the Englishman was exhausted, and he gave it him. A
gleam of joy shot across the care-worn features of the Hindoo as he clutched it, and
bounding with an exulting leap into the garden, he seized a large stone, and dashed the
instrument into a thousand pieces. When called upon to explain his extraordinary
conduct, he said to his friend, "Oh that I had remained in that happy state of ignorance
wherein you first found me! Yet will I confess that, as my knowledge increased, so did
my pleasure, until I beheld the last wonders of the microscope; from that moment I have
been tormented by doubt and perplexed by mystery: my mind, overwhelmed by chaotic
confusion, knows not where to rest, nor how to extricate itself from such a maze. I am
miserable, and must continue to be so, until I enter on another stage of existence. I am a
solitary individual among fifty millions of people, all educated in the same belief with
myself -- all happy in their ignorance! So may they ever remain! I shall keep the secret
within my own bosom, where it will corrode my peace and break my rest. But I shall
have some satisfaction in knowing that I alone feel those pangs which, had I not
destroyed the instrument, might have been extensively communicated, and rendered
thousands miserable! Forgive me, my valuable friend! and oh, convey no more
implements of knowledge and destruction!"
Many a learned man may smile at the ignorance of the Peruvian and the Hindoo,
unconscious that he himself is just as ignorant and as prejudiced. Who does not
remember the outcry against the science of geology, which has hardly yet subsided? Its
professors were impiously and absurdly accused of designing to "hurl the Creator from
his throne." They were charged with sapping the foundations of religion, and of propping
atheism by the aid of a pretended science.
The very same principle which leads to the rejection of the true, leads to the
encouragement of the false. Thus we may account for the success which has attended
great impostors, at times when the truth, though not half so wondrous as their
impositions, has been disregarded. as extravagant and preposterous. The man who wishes
to cheat the people, must needs found his operations upon some prejudice or belief that
already exists. Thus the philosophic pretenders who told fortunes by the stars cured all
diseases by one nostrum, and preserved from evil by charms and amulets, ran with the
current of popular belief. Errors that were consecrated by time and long familiarity, they
heightened and embellished, and succeeded to their hearts' content; but the preacher of
truth had a foundation to make as well as a superstructure, a difficulty which did not exist
for the preacher of error. Columbus preached a new world, but was met with distrust and
incredulity; had he preached with as much zeal and earnestness the discovery of some
valley in the old one, where diamonds hung upon the trees, or a herb grew that cured all
the ills incidental to humanity, he would have found a warm and hearty welcome -- might
have sold dried cabbage leaves for his wonderful herb, and made his fortune.

In fact, it will be found in the history of every generation and race of men, that whenever
a choice of belief between the "Wondrously False" and the "Wondrously True" is given
to ignorance or prejudice, that their choice will be fixed upon the first, for the reason that
it is most akin to their own nature. The great majority of mankind, and even of the wisest
among us, are still in the condition of the sailor's mother -- believing and disbelieving on
the same grounds that she did -- protesting against the flying fish, but cherishing the
golden wheels. Thousands there are amongst us, who, rather than pin their faith in the one
fish, would believe not only in the wheel of go]d, but the chariot - not only in the chariot,
but in the horses and the driver.

POPULAR FOLLIES IN GREAT CITIES
La faridondaine -- la faridondon, Vive la faridondaine!
BERANGER.
The popular humours of a great city are a never-failing source of amusement to the man
whose sympathies are hospitable enough to embrace all his kind, and who, refined though
he may be himself, will not sneer at the humble wit or grotesque peculiarities of the
boozing mechanic, the squalid beggar, the vicious urchin, and all the motley group of the
idle, the reckless, and the imitative that swarm in the alleys and broadways of a
metropolis. He who walks through a great city to find subjects for weeping, may, God
knows, find plenty at every corner to wring his heart; but let such a man walk on his
course, and enjoy his grief alone -- we are not of those who would accompany him. The
miseries of us poor earthdwellers gain no alleviation from the sympathy of those who
merely hunt them out to be pathetic over them. The weeping philosopher too often
impairs his eyesight by his woe, and becomes unable from his tears to see the remedies
for the evils which he deplores. Thus it will often be found that the man of no tears is the
truest philanthropist, as he is the best physician who wears a cheerful face, even in the
worst of cases.
So many pens have been employed to point out the miseries, and so many to condemn the
crimes and vices, and more serious follies of the multitude, that our's shall not increase
the number, at least in this chapter. Our present task shall be less ungracious, and
wandering through the busy haunts of great cities, we shall seek only for amusement, and
note as we pass a few of the harmless follies and whimsies of the poor.
And, first of all, walk where we will, we cannot help hearing from every side a phrase
repeated with delight, and received with laughter, by men with hard hands and dirty faces
-- by saucy butcher lads and errand-boys -- by loose women -- by hackney coachmen,
cabriolet drivers, and idle fellows who loiter at the corners of streets. Not one utters this
phrase without producing a laugh from all within hearing. It seems applicable to every
circumstance, and is the universal answer to every question; in short, it is the favourite
slang phrase of the day, a phrase that, while its brief season of popularity lasts, throws a
dash of fun and frolicsomeness over the existence of squalid poverty and ill-requited
labour, and gives them reason to laugh as well as their more fortunate fellows in a higher
stage of society.
London is peculiarly fertile in this sort of phrases, which spring up suddenly, no one
knows exactly in what spot, and pervade the whole population in a few hours, no one
knows how. Many years ago the favourite phrase (for, though but a monosyllable, it was
a phrase in itself) was Quoz. This odd word took the fancy of the multitude in an
extraordinary degree, and very soon acquired an almost boundless meaning. When vulgar
wit wished to mark its incredulity and raise a laugh at the same time, there was no
resource so sure as this popular piece of slang. When a man was asked a favour which he
did not choose to grant, he marked his sense of the suitor's unparalleled presumption by
exclaiming Quoz! When a mischievous urchin wished to annoy a passenger, and create

mirth for his chums, he looked him in the face, and cried out Quoz! and the exclamation
never failed in its object. When a disputant was desirous of throwing a doubt upon the
veracity of his opponent, and getting summarily rid of an argument which he could not
overturn, he uttered the word Quoz, with a contemptuous curl of his lip and an impatient
shrug of his shoulders. The universal monosyllable conveyed all his meaning, and not
only told his opponent that he lied, but that he erred egregiously if he thought that any
one was such a nincompoop as to believe him. Every alehouse resounded with Quoz;
every street corner was noisy with it, and every wall for miles around was chalked with it.
But, like all other earthly things, Quoz had its season, and passed away as suddenly as it
arose, never again to be the pet and the idol of the populace. A new claimant drove it
from its place, and held undisputed sway till, in its turn, it was hurled from its preeminence, and a successor appointed in its stead.
"What a shocking bad hat!" was the phrase that was next in vogue. No sooner had it
become universal, than thousands of idle but sharp eyes were on the watch for the
passenger whose hat showed any signs, however slight, of ancient service. Immediately
the cry arose, and, like the what-whoop of the Indians, was repeated by a hundred
discordant throats. He was a wise man who, finding himself under these circumstances
"the observed of all observers," bore his honours meekly. He who showed symptoms of
ill-feeling at the imputations cast upon his hat, only brought upon himself redoubled
notice. The mob soon perceive whether a man is irritable, and, if of their own class, they
love to make sport of him. When such a man, and with such a hat, passed in those days
through a crowded neighbourhood, he might think himself fortunate if his annoyances
were confined to the shouts and cries of the populace. The obnoxious hat was often
snatched from his head, and thrown into the gutter by some practical joker, and then
raised, covered with mud, upon the end of a stick, for the admiration of the spectators,
who held their sides with laughter, and exclaimed in the pauses of their mirth, "Oh! what
a shocking bad hat! .... What a shocking bad hat!" Many a nervous, poor man, whose
purse could but ill spare the outlay, doubtless purchased a new hat before the time, in
order to avoid exposure in this manner.
The origin of this singular saying, which made fun for the metropolis for months, is not
involved in the same obscurity as that which shrouds the origin of Quoz and some others.
There had been a hotly-contested election for the borough of Southwark, and one of the
candidates was an eminent hatter. This gentleman, in canvassing the electors, adopted a
somewhat professional mode of conciliating their good-will, and of bribing them without
letting them perceive that they were bribed. Whenever he called upon or met a voter
whose hat was not of the best material, or, being so, had seen its best days, he invariably
said, "What a shocking bad hat you have got; call at my warehouse, and you shall have a
new one!" Upon the day of election this circumstance was remembered, and his
opponents made the most of it, by inciting the crowd to keep up an incessant cry of
"What a shocking bad hat!" all the time the honourable candidate was addressing them.
From Southwark the phrase spread over all London, and reigned, for a time, the supreme
slang of the season.

Hookey Walker, derived from the chorus of a popular ballad, was also high in favour at
one time, and served, like its predecessor, Quoz, to answer all questions. In the course of
time the latter word alone became the favourite, and was uttered with a peculiar drawl
upon the first syllable, and a sharp turn upon the last. If a lively servant girl was
importuned for a kiss by a fellow she did not care about, she cocked her little nose, and
cried "Walker!" If a dustman asked his friend for the loan of a shilling, and his friend was
either unable or unwilling to accommodate him, the probable answer he would receive
was "Walker!" If a drunken man was reeling along the streets, and a boy pulled his coattails, or a man knocked his hat over his eyes to make fun of him, the joke was always
accompanied by the same exclamation. This lasted for two or three months, and
"Walker!" walked off the stage, never more to be revived for the entertainment of that or
any future generation.
The next phrase was a most preposterous one. Who invented it, how it arose, or where it
was first heard, are alike unknown. Nothing about it is certain, but that for months it was
the slang par excellence of the Londoners, and afforded them a vast gratification. "There
he goes with his eye out!" or "There she goes with her eye out!" as the sex of the party
alluded to might be, was in the mouth of everybody who knew the town. The sober part
of the community were as much puzzled by this unaccountable saying as the vulgar were
delighted with it. The wise thought it very foolish, but the many thought it very funny,
and the idle amused themselves by chalking it upon walls, or scribbling it upon
monuments. But, "all that's bright must fade," even in slang. The people grew tired of
their hobby, and "There he goes with his eye out!" was heard no more in its accustomed
haunts.
Another very odd phrase came into repute in a brief space afterwards, in the form of the
impertinent and not universally apposite query, "Has your mother sold her mangle?" But
its popularity was not of that boisterous and cordial kind which ensures a long
continuance of favour. What tended to impede its progress was, that it could not be well
applied to the older portions of society. It consequently ran but a brief career, and then
sank into oblivion. Its successor enjoyed a more extended fame, and laid its foundations
so deep, that years and changing fashions have not sufficed to eradicate it. This phrase
was "Flare up!" and it is, even now, a colloquialism in common use. It took its rise in the
time of the Reform riots, when Bristol was nearly half burned by the infuriated populace.
The flames were said to have flared up in the devoted city. Whether there was anything
peculiarly captivating in the sound, or in the idea of these words, is hard to say; but
whatever was the reason, it tickled the mob-fancy mightily, and drove all other slang out
of the field before it. Nothing was to be heard all over London but "flare up!" It answered
all questions, settled all disputes, was applied to all persons, all things, and all
circumstances, and became suddenly the most comprehensive phrase in the English
language. The man who had overstepped the bounds of decorum in his speech was said to
have flared up; he who had paid visits too repeated to the gin-shop, and got damaged in
consequence, had flared up. To put one's-self into a passion; to stroll out on a nocturnal
frolic, and alarm a neighbourhood, or to create a disturbance in any shape, was to flare
up. A lovers' quarrel was a fare up; so was a boxing-match between two blackguards in
the streets, and the preachers of sedition and revolution recommended the English nation

to flare up, like the French. So great a favourite was the word, that people loved to repeat
it for its very sound. They delighted apparently in hearing their own organs articulate it;
and labouring men, when none who could respond to the call were within hearing, would
often startle the aristocratic echoes of the West by the well-known slang phrase of the
East. Even in the dead hours of the night, the ears of those who watched late, or who
could not sleep, were saluted with the same sound. The drunkard reeling home showed
that he was still a man and a citizen, by calling "flare up" in the pauses of his hiccough.
Drink had deprived him of the power of arranging all other ideas; his intellect was sunk
to the level of the brute's; but he clung to humanity by the one last link of the popular cry.
While he could vociferate that sound, he had rights as an Englishman, and would not
sleep in a gutter, like a dog! Onwards he went, disturbing quiet streets and comfortable
people by his whoop, till exhausted nature could support him no more, and he rolled
powerless into the road. When, in due time afterwards, the policeman stumbled upon him
as he lay, that guardian of the peace turned the full light of his lantern on his face, and
exclaimed, "Here's a poor devil who's been flaring up!" Then came the stretcher, on
which the victim of deep potations was carried to the watchhouse, and pitched into a dirty
cell, among a score of wretches about as far gone as himself, who saluted their new
comrade by a loud, long shout of flare up!
So universal was this phrase, and so enduring seemed its popularity, that a speculator,
who knew not the evanescence of slang, established a weekly newspaper under its name.
But he was like the man who built his house upon the sand; his foundation gave way
under him, and the phrase and the newspaper were washed into the mighty sea of the
things that were. The people grew at last weary of the monotony, and "flare up" became
vulgar even among them. Gradually it was left to little boys who did not know the world,
and in process of time sank altogether into neglect. It is now heard no more as a piece of
popular slang; but the words are still used to signify any sudden outburst either of fire,
disturbance, or ill-nature.
The next phrase that enjoyed the favour of the million was less concise, and seems to
have been originally aimed against precocious youths who gave themselves the airs of
manhood before their time. "Does your mother know you're out?" was the provoking
query addressed to young men of more than reasonable swagger, who smoked cigars in
the streets, and wore false whiskers to look irresistible. We have seen many a conceited
fellow who could not suffer a woman to pass him without staring her out of countenance,
reduced at once into his natural insignificance by the mere utterance of this phrase.
Apprentice lads and shopmen in their Sunday clothes held the words in abhorrence, and
looked fierce when they were applied to them. Altogether the phrase had a very salutary
effect, and in a thousand instances showed young Vanity, that it was not half so pretty
and engaging as it thought itself. What rendered it so provoking was the doubt it implied
as to the capability of self-guidance possessed by the individual to whom it was
addressed. "Does your mother know you're out?" was a query of mock concern and
solicitude, implying regret and concern that one so young and inexperienced in the ways
of a great city should be allowed to wander abroad without the guidance of a parent.
Hence the great wrath of those who verged on manhood, but had not reached it, whenever
they were made the subject of it. Even older heads did not like it; and the heir of a ducal

house, and inheritor of a warrior's name, to whom they were applied by a cabriolet driver,
who was ignorant of his rank, was so indignant at the affront, that he summoned the
offender before the magisterial bench. The fellow had wished to impose upon his
Lordship by asking double the fare he was entitled to, and when his Lordship resisted the
demand, he was insultingly asked "if his mother knew he was out?" All the drivers on the
stand joined in the query, and his Lordship was fain to escape their laughter by walking
away with as much haste as his dignity would allow. The man pleaded ignorance that his
customer was a Lord, but offended justice fined him for his mistake.
When this phrase had numbered its appointed days, it died away, like its predecessors,
and "Who are you?" reigned in its stead. This new favourite, like a mushroom, seems to
have sprung up in a night, or, like a frog in Cheapside, to have come down in a sudden
shower. One day it was unheard, unknown, uninvented; the next it pervaded London;
every alley resounded with it; every highway was musical with it,
"And street to street, and lane to lane flung back The one unvarying cry."
The phrase was uttered quickly, and with a sharp sound upon the first and last words,
leaving the middle one little more than an aspiration. Like all its compeers which had
been extensively popular, it was applicable to almost every variety of circumstance. The
lovers of a plain answer to a plain question did not like it at all. Insolence made use of it
to give offence; ignorance, to avoid exposing itself; and waggery, to create laughter.
Every new comer into an alehouse tap-room was asked unceremoniously, "Who are
you?" and if he looked foolish, scratched his head, and did not know what to reply, shouts
of boisterous merriment resounded on every side. An authoritative disputant was not
unfrequently put down, and presumption of every kind checked by the same query. When
its popularity was at its height, a gentleman, feeling the hand of a thief in his pocket,
turned suddenly round, and caught him in the act, exclaiming, "Who are you?" The mob
which gathered round applauded to the very echo, and thought it the most capital joke
they had ever heard -- the very acme of wit -- the very essence of humour. Another
circumstance, of a similar kind, gave an additional fillip to the phrase, and infused new
life and vigour into it, just as it was dying away. The scene occurred in the chief criminal
court of the kingdom. A prisoner stood at the bar; the offence with which he had been
charged was clearly proved against him; his counsel had been heard, not in his defence,
but in extenuation, insisting upon his previous good life and character, as reasons for the
lenity of the court. "And where are your witnesses?" inquired the learned judge who
presided. "Please you, my Lord, I knows the prisoner at the bar, and a more honester
feller never breathed," said a rough voice in the gallery. The officers of the court looked
aghast, and the strangers tittered with ill-suppressed laughter. "Who are you?" said the
Judge, looking suddenly up, but with imperturbable gravity. The court was convulsed; the
titter broke out into a laugh, and it was several minutes before silence and decorum could
be restored. When the Ushers recovered their self-possession, they made diligent search
for the profane transgressor; but he was not to be found. Nobody knew him; nobody had
seen him. After a while the business of the court again proceeded. The next prisoner
brought up for trial augured favourably of his prospects when he learned that the solemn
lips of the representative of justice had uttered the popular phrase as if he felt and
