
AU3772_book.fm Page 464 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

464

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

In the matter of getting in, i.e., making the original commitment, you
will feel, perhaps, that there is a conflict between acting on Support or
Resistance, and acting on either trendline action or a computed reaction of
40% to 50% after a previous move. At times there is such conflict, and it is
not possible to state any exact rule which will reconcile these three different
trading indications. However, in a great number of cases, you will be
delighted to observe that a reaction of about 45% will bring your stock to
the trendline, and will also bring it near to the Support or Resistance Level.
After a move to a new Minor Top, a stock may be expected to react: (1) about
40% to 50% of that move, (2) to the Basic Trendline, and (3) to the previous
supporting Minor Top. Your purchase, then, will be based on a consideration of all three factors. If you have bought “early,” on the basis of one
factor alone, you may expect the stock to react a bit further without spoiling
the triple indications to the extent of catching your stop. It would be best
to make your purchases on the basis of whichever factor indicates the
smallest reaction, and to place your stop beyond the greatest reaction
indicated by any of the three. Ordinarily, there will not be too much
difference between these three points. As usual, the method applies in
reverse to short sales.
Where you are buying after an Intermediate Decline, or selling after an
Intermediate Rally, you will lean somewhat more heavily on Support and
Resistance than on either a computed percentage for the Secondary Move
or a trendline. You will, of course, examine the history of the stock, preferably
on weekly or monthly charts first, to see its Major Trend, to locate important
Support or Resistance Areas, and to estimate roughly the extent of the Corrective Move, the termination of which you are trying to gauge. You will
then check these data in the more detailed picture you can get from your
daily charts. As the Intermediate Corrective Move approaches within 4% or
5% of the Support or Resistance Level, you may come to a day of extremely
heavy volume; and this day may also be a One-Day Reversal. If so, your
commitment should be made at once, protected, of course, by a stop. Otherwise, you may make your commitment whenever the chart begins to
hesitate or flatten out, or, lacking other indications, when it has come to
within 3% of the Support or Resistance.
Now in this case, your problem in taking profits is a bit more difficult
than in the case of Minor Moves. You are expecting a Reversal of the Intermediate Corrective Move and the establishment of a new Intermediate Trend
in the Primary Direction. You are at a point where the course of the market
is uncertain. You must realize that prices may stay at the Support (or Resistance) Level, forming a Line or Rectangle, and finally penetrate that level,
establishing Reversal of the Major Trend. Or they may be stopped and turned
at the Support or Resistance Level, only to make a small move away and
then return for another, and possibly successful, attempt at penetration. Or
(and this is what you hope, of course) a continuation of the Major Trend
may develop, with a sharp move on increased volume in the favorable
direction, to be followed, perhaps, by a Minor Corrective Move and another

AU3772_book.fm Page 465 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty:

Use of Support and Resistance

465

thrust in the Primary direction; perhaps a new series of Minor Moves carrying the entire Primary Trend into new ground.
Taking these cases one by one, if the stock remains at the Support or
Resistance Level for many days or several weeks, and then penetrates that
level, closing at a price that is clearly through it, get out at once. If the stock
makes a small move in the right direction and returns to the Support or
Resistance, prepare to get out if there is a definite penetration. If, however,
the move is in the right direction, watch for volume indications, and prepare
to set tight stops to take your profits as soon as heavy volume appears (except
on a day of breakout). Of course, once such a signal has appeared, you are
then justified in continuing to make new commitments on the following
Minor Correction, and the one following that, for you are again moving in
the Major Trend.
There is one other situation that should be mentioned here. Up to this
point, we have assumed that all of your commitments have been made to
take advantage of a move in the direction of the Major Trend. Let us suppose,
however, that a move which has carried a stock up to new high levels in a
series of Minor steps proceeds to form and then breaks out of a Reversal
Pattern. We must now look for a Secondary Move of Intermediate extent.
We may sell short on the rally to the Minor Resistance, and, if the move
continues down, we may make a second and even (more cautiously) a third
commitment against successive Minor Bottoms. But, in this case, we will be
looking for the decline to end somewhere in the vicinity of the last previous
Intermediate Top, which is now a Support Level. Similarly, following a
recognized Reversal Pattern and upward breakout on volume during a Bear
Market, we may expect an Intermediate Rally which can be used for trading
up to the previous Intermediate Bottom where strong Resistance is likely to
show up. A skillful trader can turn these Secondary Moves into profits during
periods when it is not possible to trade along the indicated Primary Trend;
but it should be remembered that, ordinarily, such moves cannot be expected
to go as far as will those in the Primary Direction.
We might close this chapter by reminding you again that, while Support
and Resistance action in the Minor Trend is shown clearly in daily charts,
the Intermediate and Major Supports and Resistances are most easily recognized on weekly or monthly charts.
EN9: It seems to this editor that Magee’s discussion here of the use of Support
and Resistance is really most pertinent to position building and pyramiding. Alternatively the method applies to an issue which has just caught the analyst’s attention,
and he has missed the breakout, which is usually obvious (at least in hindsight). I
feel strongly that the serious trader should not miss the original breakout. Chasing
moving trains is never a helathy activity. Does this appear an impossible occupation,
watch thousands of stocks? Impossible for your average analyst, but not for your
average computer. For example the computer may be programmed to alert you when
a stock is gapping on volume or trading at volumes which are suspiciously large.
And given the plethora of services and user groups the trader stands a good chance
of spotting an issue to put on his watch list before it takes off.

AU3772_book.fm Page 466 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

466

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Investors should, in theory, never miss a breakout, because they should be
watching a much more limited group of issues. In my opinion these are primarily
indices and ishares. Of course an investor’s portfolio might include a few well chosen
individual issues, but these would be of obvious visibility to the individual, e.g.,
biotechs for an investor with some knowledge of the area, or Internets for an engineer,
etc.
The unending effort to remove ambiguity from market interpretation extends
to identifying areas of support and resistance. Metastock (metastock.com), an excellent software package, has a number of value added packages. One of the more
interesting of these, Powerstrike™ by John Slauson of Adaptick, Inc. (adaptick.com)
attempts to mathematically define support and resistance zones. Slauson’s package
is interesting, and the reasoning and observation behind it are interesting. Market
analysis is rooted in one thing: the intelligent observation of the operation of the
market. Dow watched the markets for years and came to the understanding of waves
which led to Dow Theory. Schabacker and Edwards, equipped with these observations
and comments, collated and observed more data and recognized the persistent patterns which occurred over and over in the markets, and added Magee for his practical
engineer’s approach to solving the tactical and strategic questions. In the 1980s one
of my friends, a Chicago market maker in the options pit, noticed that there was a
90 second delay on data coming out of the futures pits to the options pit. He set up
a “human ticker” with a direct phone connection to his pit and enjoyed a 90 second
advantage over other market makers until the glitch was noticed and corrected.
Slauson (among others) noticed that important trading and support and resistance in optionable stocks tended to cluster around important option strike price
levels. In fact these levels influence stock prices and may be said to determine where
“important” buying and selling occur. Obviously support and resistance levels are
set by concentrated face offs between buyers and sellers. A battleground metaphor
is appropriate: Since the time of the Greeks battles have occurred time and again in
the same physical locations. The reason is obvious. You need physical space to deploy
an army. So commanders will be attracted to the plain or open ground for face offs,
and to the high ground for defensive purposes. Option strike prices have the same
attractiveness for traders that a good battleground has for a military commander. A
good place to test the enemy.
Powerstrike™ analyzes the instrument price and volume around the nearby
option strike prices and determines whether support or resistance is stronger. All
in all a clever application of number-driven analysis to the support and resistance
question. The chart analyst may supplement his analysis with a routine like this.

AU3772_book.fm Page 467 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-one

Not All in One Basket
EN: As diversification for the small investor is nowadays infinitely easier, an interesting endnote follows Magee’s text.
Diversification is important because technical patterns do not always
carry out their original promise. If all your capital is tied up in one stock, or
in a few stocks of the same group or line of business, you may be hurt by a
false move affecting only your holdings, even though the rest of the market
may continue to hold firm or even to move farther along the Primary Trend.
By diversifying, you are protected by the law of averages against all of your
holdings going the wrong way, except of course, in the case of some Reversal
that affects the entire market or a large segment of it.
Intelligent diversification calls for study of the costs of buying and selling
stocks, especially in small quantities. You might wish to have a portfolio of
stocks representing the entire Dow–Jones Averages, or a selection that
includes at least one stock of every major group. But if your capital is limited,
this might mean buying only a half-dozen shares of each stock, and the
minimum commission charges would make this an expensive operation,
entirely too costly for short-term trading. The short-term trader must always
think of these costs. They are more important to him than to the long-term
investor who may intend to hold the same stock for many months or years.
To you as a trader, a quarter point or a half point may mount up to serious
proportions when it is multiplied through a number of transactions.
Your broker can give you a schedule showing commission and tax costs,
and in case there are any important changes in the rates, you should study
them to see what effect they will have on your costs of trading in stocks at
various prices. EN: You may also evaluate these charges at gomez.com and by
checking websites of scottrade.com, etrade.com and tdameritrade.com. google.com is
as ever an important price checking resource, and Barron’s publishes a yearly edition
evaluating brokerage houses. In general this editor believes that the investor who
does it the “old-fashioned way,” i.e., by phone and human broker operates at a
disadvantage unless the broker’s value added can be quantified and proven.
You will find that your round-trip costs are a higher percentage of the
capital invested in low-priced stocks than in high-priced stocks. Also, that
the percentage costs will be higher on a smaller number of shares than on
a round lot, and increasing as the number of shares decreases. Also, that the
percentage costs rise as the total amount of capital used is less.
If your capital is, say $1000 or $2000, you might do well to divide it into
units of about $500 each and confine your trading to odd lots of stocks selling
467

AU3772_book.fm Page 468 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

468

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

at 40 or higher. With larger capital, you could use larger trading units and
extend the range of trading into somewhat lower-priced stock. In any case,
it is important to diversify your holdings. By dividing your capital and using
it in such a way as to avoid unnecessary penalties in high costs, you will
have greater protection against freak moves and sudden changes that might
affect a single stock very seriously.
On the other hand, if you have sufficient capital to secure plenty of
diversification (8 or 10 stocks should be a maximum for an active trading
account), you can increase the size of the trading units. The whole question
here is as to the minimum amounts to be invested in a single commitment,
and if these amounts were doubled or tripled, it would not increase costs,
but would, in many cases, reduce them.

EN: Diversification and Costs
In this original chapter, Magee discussed the necessity for considering costs while
striving for diversification. In present-day markets, diversification may be achieved
through the use of SPDRs and DIAMONDS and similar instruments at comparatively reasonable costs. Index funds and mutual funds also represent diversification
and cost control for the general investor. Mutual funds will not control costs and
expenses as efficiently as the Index Shares. This is because mutual funds create costs
that the Index Shares do not: management fees and expenses, slippage, the spread,
turnover, and taxes resulting from realized gains. These costs may be avoided by
the careful independent investor.
An internationally prominent trader has told me, on more than one occasion,
that his respectable trading fortune amounts to what brokers and specialists would
have made off him if he had been a member of the general public. The most important
weapon in his quiver was seats in Chicago, New York, and San Francisco.
The message is extremely clear. The general investor must control his costs. The
more frequently he trades the greater his chances of having his capital ground to
hamburger meat by brokers, specialists, floor traders, market makers, tax authorities,
Exchanges, etc. Etcetera, because there is undoubtedly another party out there taking
a chunk as the capital changes hands. The phone company maybe.
Trading costs are the last item brokerage firms want to focus on (see the book
Where are the Customer’s Yachts?). For years the Street firms and Exchanges
controlled commission costs, but entering the Internet Age a different ethos rules —
Cutthroat (and cutfees) competition, reluctantly brought to the old-line exchanges
by upstart competitors, and not suppressed by the SEC and CFTC.
It would be misleading to attempt to analyze costs in this book because of the
mercurial nature of cost figures as firms compete in the Internet Age.
The SEC, runs a mutual fund calculator for computing costs of mutual funds.
Mutual funds are among those that manage somehow to not be overly punctilious
in estimating (read, disclosing) their costs to investors. (See Resources, Appendix
D.) morningstar.com is also a good resource for researching mutual funds.
But let me emphasize once again that ishares and etfs have really made mutual
funds obsolete if the investor uses the simple procedures outlined in this book.

AU3772_book.fm Page 469 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-two

Measuring Implications
in Technical Chart Patterns
If you show one of your charts to a friend and tell him it looks Bullish, he
will reply immediately, “How far do you think it will go?” This is an automatic response; you can count on it.
The question is a good one. How far is this expected move likely to go?
You don’t know. Nobody knows. Very often you can say, with a fair degree
of assurance, “This stock, which has just made such-and-such an advance,
is likely to react to around such-and-such a price.” That you can estimate
fairly closely seven or eight times out of ten, by referring to the Basic
Trendline, the parallel projection of the top trendline, or the Support Level.
These rules work out fairly well as applied to reactions in the Bull Trend,
and similarly, we can estimate rallies in a Bear Trend. Not so with the move
in the direction of the trend itself. A Bullish Move may, and often does,
overrun the upper trendline by running up as far again as the move to the
trendline. A Bearish Move may exceed the downtrend, dropping apparently
without limit. (That is one reason we have protective stops — to prevent
disaster in case the trend suddenly reverses itself.) And that is why we prefer
the use of nearby progressive stops as a method of taking profits, rather than
using limit orders placed at a trendline, Resistance Level, or at some other
definite point. Very often, to be sure, a stock will check its advance at one of
these indicated points, but the cases where a move carries beyond its objectives are fairly common, and in such cases, no one can make even a reasonable guess as to what limit the stock will reach on the move.
This follows because the move itself is an unreasonable one. It is an
example of public participation, the surge of uncontrolled speculation (and
very often, it is the final surge of that particular trend).
In exactly the same way, and often more violently, the uncontrolled
falling out of trend in a downward move is an example of Panic, and being
completely beyond reason, it follows no rule and knows no predetermined
limits.
There are, however, certain patterns and certain situations where we can
make some estimate of the probable extent of a move in the Primary Direction — usually an estimate of its minimum extent. In these cases, we have
a guide to help us in making the decision as to whether the situation offers

469

AU3772_book.fm Page 470 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

470

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

enough potential gain to be worth the risks involved. Also, the indicated
measurement gives us at least a hint of about where we might reasonably
begin to look for the volume which will indicate the Top.
For example, a decisive breakout from a Symmetrical Triangle is likely
to carry at least as far as the height of the Triangle measured along its first
reaction. This is a conservative measurement. The move may go much farther. In fact, the trend implications of the Triangle would suggest a continuation equal to the move preceding the Triangle and leading into it, for if
the trend continues valid, the move should run up to the upper limit of the
channel. In the case of a Reversal, we would also use the height of the first
reaction as a minimum measure. With Right-Angle Triangles, we also can
take the long side (formed by the first reaction) as a rough measure of the
minimum expected move.
And with Rectangles, the minimum we may reasonably expect after a
breakout is a distance equal to the height of the Rectangle. The Head-andShoulders Pattern carries a good measuring stick. The height of the formation
from the extreme Top of the head down to the point directly beneath where
the neckline crosses represents the minimum probable move from the neckline down. Again, this is a matter of Trend Channels, and most emphatically
this is only a minimum move. Some Head-and-Shoulders Patterns, representing an implied move of no more than three or four points, have marked
the start of a decline eventually running to hundreds of points.
The rather unusual breakout which takes the form of an almost vertical
“mast” running up (or down) many points before arriving at a stopping
point, where some Consolidation Pattern is made, carries with it a most
explicit measuring rule, and one which works out with amazing accuracy.
The Flag or Pennant Consolidation will occur at the halfway point — “the
Flag flies at half mast.” The speculation move leading up to the Flag very
likely will be duplicated by another rise, at least equal to the first, in the
near future. Following this rise, there may be another Consolidation and
other rises, or there may not. After two surges of this sort, it is best to stand
back and let someone else carry the ball. If you keep enough charts, and for
a long enough time, you will see many perfect examples of this beautiful
formation. You will also see some imperfect examples, some failures. And
because the move is so spectacularly profitable when it works out, you will
be tempted to buy on every Consolidation Pattern formed after a sharp rise.
It would be best to wait until the example is clear — a nearly vertical, almost
unbelievable rise, followed by several days of congestion with practically
no volume. If the congestion continues or sags off for more than about
3 weeks, sell the stock; it is probably not the real thing.
Needless to say, this same pattern appears in reverse in downtrends and
can be traded on accordingly.
The questions relating to the measuring attributes of gaps have been
reviewed in detail in Chapter 12. The only type of gap which carries substantial implications as to the extent of the move to follow is the Runaway
or Continuation Gap. The appearance of such a gap during a rapid price

AU3772_book.fm Page 471 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-two:

Measuring Implications in Technical Chart Patterns

471

move is likely to mark approximately the halfway point; and two or more
such gaps can be weighed, in connection with volume and total extent of
the move, to estimate the probable mid-point of the move, and thus to predict
a probable ultimate objective.
Measuring properties have been ascribed to other patterns and occasionally work out according to plan. In general, however, the best measuring
devices are your trendlines, Support-and-Resistance Levels, and the allimportant signals of increased volume.
EN9: I have always been extremely chary of measuring moves. If the measurement does not lead the trader to indulge in expectations which distract him from
the crucial nature of the moment at hand it might be quite all right. So as an
off hand casual tool it might serve some use. Always better to observe closely what
the situation is when the price arrives at the measured point. Decisions should
always be made in the here and now, not in the I measured it then.
