
22

FUNDAMENTALS: The Market Driver

to stay in tune with the markets. Most futures brokerage firms also provide
special calendars that include the dates and times that most major economic
and agricultural reports are released.
Trading is not an easy venture, and one helpful bit of advice I would
emphasize is that you should always be aware of the day’s current events
and scheduled reports if you are in the markets. Not knowing what day or
time a report is released could be hazardous to your financial health. Knowing about a major report before it is released is often useful because you
have a chance to eliminate a surprise from an adverse market move. Even
if you are not a fundamental trader, you should, at the very least, be aware
of the main fundamental factors that might affect the markets you are trading and the impact reports and events may have on the market.

WHAT TO WATCH, WHAT IT MEANS
Here are some of the economic terms, events, and reports that U.S. traders
should know and watch, including a brief explanation of why they are important to investors. If you did not pay attention in your economics classes,
this section will bring you up to speed.
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) Meetings and Policy
Announcements The FOMC consists of seven governors of the Federal
Reserve Board and five Federal Reserve Bank presidents. The FOMC meets
eight times a year—roughly every six weeks—to determine the near-term
direction of monetary policy. Whether there is a change in rates or not, the
FOMC announces its decision immediately after FOMC meetings.
A few accompanying statements the Fed may make after announcing
any adjustments in interest rates may have as much influence on markets
as a change or no change in rates themselves. For example, the FOMC may
take a “neutral” stance on the outlook for the economy. Or it may point to
prospects for growth or suggest the potential for economic weakness or inflationary pressures. The FOMC actions or comments can have a powerful
impact on markets.
Treasury Bonds, Bills, and Notes The U.S. government issues several different kinds of bonds through the Bureau of the Public Debt, an
agency of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Treasury debt securities are
classified according to their maturities:
• Treasury bills have maturities of 1 year or less.
• Treasury notes have maturities of 2 to 10 years.
• Treasury bonds have maturities of more than 10 years.

What to Watch, What It Means

23

Treasury bonds, bills, and notes are all issued in face values of $1,000, though
there are different purchase minimums for each type of security.
Interest Rates, Financial Markets and Bonds U.S. Treasury
bonds, by virtually any definition, are simply a loan. The U.S. government
borrows the funds it needs to operate, including financing the federal
deficit. Ultimately, taxpayers will have to pay back the loan.
When a bond is issued, the price you pay is known as its face value.
Once you buy it, the government promises to pay you back on a specific day
known as the maturity date. It issues that instrument at a predetermined
rate of interest, called the coupon. For instance, if you buy a bond with a
$1,000 face value, a 6 percent coupon, and a 10-year maturity, you would
collect interest payments totaling $60 in each of those 10 years. When the
decade is up, you get back your $1,000.
If you buy a U.S. Treasury bond and hold it until maturity, you will know
exactly how much you’re going to get back. That’s why bonds are also known
as fixed-income investments—they guarantee you a continuous set income
backed by the U.S. government. What confuses most investors in bonds is
the concept of yield and price. Simply stated, when yield goes up, price goes
down, and vice versa.

Government Reports
Beige Book A combination of economic conditions from each of the 12
Federal Reserve regional districts, the Beige Book is aptly named because
of the color of its cover (really). This report is usually released two weeks
before the monetary policy meetings of the FOMC. The information on economic conditions is then used by the FOMC to set interest rate policy. If the
Beige Book portrays an overheating economy or inflationary pressures, the
Fed may be more inclined to raise interest rates to moderate the economic
pace. Conversely, if the Beige Book portrays economic difficulties or recession conditions, the Fed may see a need to lower interest rates to stimulate
activity.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) GDP is the broadest measure of aggregate economic activity and accounts for almost every sector of the economy. Analysts use this figure to track the economy’s overall performance
because it usually indicates how strong or weak the economy is and helps
to predict the potential profit margin for companies. It also helps analysts
determine whether economic growth is accelerating or slowing down. The
stock market likes to see healthy economic growth because that translates
to higher corporate profits and higher share values.

24

FUNDAMENTALS: The Market Driver

International Trade and Current Account Figures These numbers measure the difference between imports and exports of both goods
and services. Changes in the level of imports and exports are an important
tool for gauging economic trends, both domestically and overseas. These
reports can have a profound effect on the value of the dollar. That value, in
turn, can help or hurt multinational corporations whose profits overseas
can diminish when they convert their funds back to the United States, especially if the U.S. dollar is overvalued. Another valuable aspect of such reports is that imports can help to indicate U.S. demand for foreign goods, and
exports may show demand for U.S. goods in overseas countries.
Index of Leading Economic Indicators (LEI) This report is a composite index of 10 economic indicators that typically lead overall economic
activity. The LEI index helps to predict the health of the economy and may
be an early clue about the prospects for recession or economic expansion.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) The CPI measures the average price level
of goods and services purchased by consumers and is the most widely followed indicator of inflation in the United States. Monthly changes represent
the inflation rate that is quoted widely and influences a number of markets.
Inflation is a general increase in the price of goods and services. The relationship between inflation and interest rates is the key to understanding
how data such as the CPI influence the markets. Higher energy prices, manufacturing cost increases, medical costs, imbalances in global supply and
demand of raw materials, and prices of food products all weigh on this report. For example, if gas prices at the pump escalate and the cost to fill up
your car rises from, say, $30 a week to $50 or even $60 a week, you will have
less spending money for other items. It may not affect you immediately, but
a longer duration of higher prices will hit your pocketbook.
Even weather can be a factor for short-term changes in food prices. What
would be the cost of tomatoes at the grocery store after a damaging freeze
in California or in Georgia? Maybe $3 or $4 per pound? Any grocery shopper
can probably recall when such price spikes occurred. The restaurants that
serve salads lose revenue as well as the farmer whose crop is destroyed.
These factors all play a part in the CPI number. The core rate is the inflation number that excludes the volatile food and energy components. Economists track these numbers; you should, too.
Producer Price Index (PPI) Formerly known as the Wholesale Price
Index, the PPI is a measure of the average prices for a fixed basket of capital and consumer goods paid by producers. The PPI measures price changes
in the manufacturing sector. The inflation rate may depend on a general increase in the prices of goods and services.

What to Watch, What It Means

25

Institute of Supply Management (ISM) Index Formerly known as
the National Association of Purchasing Managers (NAPM) survey, the ISM
report provides a composite diffusion index of national manufacturing conditions. Readings above 50 percent indicate an expanding factory sector,
readings below 50 percent, a contracting sector. The ISM Index helps economists and analysts get a detailed look at the manufacturing sector of the
economy, a major source of economic strength that can have a bearing on
the nation’s employment situation, a key to economic health.
Durable Goods Orders This report (Manufacturers’ Shipments, Inventories, and Orders) reflects new orders placed with domestic manufacturers for immediate and future delivery of factory-made products. Orders
for durable goods show how busy factories will be in the months to come as
manufacturers work to fill those orders. The data not only provide insight
into demand for things like washers, dryers, and cars but also take the temperature of the strength of the economy going forward.
Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization These rates measure the physical output of the nation’s factories, mines, and utilities and reflect the usage level of available resources. Because the manufacturing
sector accounts for an estimated one-quarter of the economy, these reports
can sometimes have a big impact on stock and financial market movement.
The capacity utilization rate provides an estimate of how much factory capacity is in use. If the utilization rate gets too high (above 85 percent), it can
lead to inflationary pressures.
Factory Orders The dollar level of new orders for manufacturing
durable and nondurable goods shows the potential for factories to increase
or decrease activity based on the amount of orders they receive. This report
provides insight into the demand for not only hard goods such as refrigerators and cars, but also nondurable items such as cigarettes and apparel.
Business Inventories Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is said to be
among those who watch the report of business inventories, so you should
become familiar with it as well. This report shows the dollar amount of inventories held by manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers. The level of inventories in relation to sales is an important indicator for the future direction
of factory production.
Consumer Confidence If there is one area that has been watched
most carefully in recent years, it is consumer sentiment. Several surveys or
polls gauge consumer attitudes. Among the best known are those conducted
by The Conference Board and the University of Michigan. These surveys

26

FUNDAMENTALS: The Market Driver

reveal what consumers think about present conditions as well as what their
expectations are for future economic conditions.
The level of consumer confidence is generally assumed to be directly related to the strength or weakness for consumer spending, which accounts for
two-thirds of the U.S. economy. Generally speaking, the more confident consumers are about their own personal finances, the more likely they are to
spend. If they have money in the bank and feel confident that their job is secure, buying an extra gadget or splurging on a night out usually won’t be any
trouble. In contrast, if times are tough, then the purse strings get pulled in.
These indications from one month to the next give analysts an idea of the
potential for shifts in future spending habits that can help or hurt developments in the economy from durable goods sales to home or car purchases.
Employment Situation The key to consumer confidence often depends
on the status of jobs. The monthly unemployment rate measures the number of unemployed as a percentage of the nation’s workforce. Non-farmpayroll employment tallies the number of paid employees working part-time
and or full-time in the nation’s business and government sectors.
Several important components are included in this report, one being the
average hourly workweek that reflects the number of hours worked in the
nonfarm sector. Another component is average hourly earnings, which
shows the hourly rate employees are receiving.
There are two portions of this report, one a weekly report released
every Thursday morning and the other the more influential monthly figures
that are usually released on the first Friday of every month.
Employment Cost Index (ECI) The ECI provides a measure of total
employee compensation costs, including wages and salaries as well as benefits. It is the broadest measure of labor costs and helps analysts determine
trends in the cost that employers have from paying employees. This measure can give economists a clue as to whether inflation is perking up from
a cost of business standpoint. If a company needs to pay more to hire qualified workers, then the cost of doing business increases and profit margins
are reduced. Companies usually have to raise their prices to consumers as
their costs increase. That is when the inflation theme starts to play out.
Productivity and Costs Productivity measures the growth of labor
efficiency in producing the economy’s goods and services. Unit labor costs
reflect the labor costs of producing each unit of output. Both are followed
as indicators of future inflationary trends. Productivity growth is critical because it allows for higher wages and faster economic growth without inflationary consequences.

What to Watch, What It Means

27

Personal Income and Spending Personal income is the estimated
dollar amount of income received by Americans. Personal spending is the
estimated dollar amount that consumers use for purchases of durable and
nondurable goods and services. This economic number is important because if consumers are spending more than they make, the spending will
stop eventually, thus causing a downturn in the economy. Another aspect
to consider is that consumers who save may be investing in the markets,
and that activity can increase the value of stock prices. In addition, it can also
add liquidity to the banking system if the money goes to savings or money
market accounts.
Retail Sales Retail sales numbers measure the total sales at stores that
sell durable and nondurable goods. These figures can reveal the spending
habits of consumers, and the trend of those spending sprees, more often
than not, can influence analysts’ expectations for future developments in the
economy.
Housing Starts This report measures the number of residential units
that are about to be constructed, a backbone of the American economy.
When you purchase a new home, you are giving a boost to not only the raw
material suppliers, builders, and their industries, but also to the producers
of durable goods items such as refrigerators, washers, dryers, furniture, lawn
care products, and many other items related to making a home. This is
known as a ripple effect throughout the economy. Think of all the jobs produced from construction to factory and transportation and even communication and technology that go into the building, financing, and furnishing a
new home.
The economic impact is substantial, especially when there are a hundred thousand or more homes built in a month around the country. At the
very least, the data from housing starts can help project the price direction
for the sector of stocks involving home builders, mortgage bankers, and appliance companies. Lumber and copper futures prices used to be dramatically affected by the housing starts figure. However, since the development
of prefab and new construction materials, especially fiber optics and plastics
(PVC, polyvinyl chloride, used for plumbing rather than copper), these products are now less sensitive to building industry trends.
New Home Sales Like housing starts, the level of new home sales
(committed sales) indicates housing market trends. This information provides another gauge for not only the demand for housing but also economic
momentum. People have to be feeling pretty comfortable and confident in
their own financial position to buy a home. Furthermore, as previously

28

FUNDAMENTALS: The Market Driver

mentioned, this narrow piece of data has a powerful multiplier effect
throughout the economy and, therefore, across markets where you may have
your investments.
Existing Home Sales Existing home sales (the number of previously
constructed homes with a closed sale during the month, also known as home
resales) are a larger share of the market than new home sales and provide
another indication of housing market trends. This statistic also provides
clues to the demand for housing and for economic momentum based on the
ripple effect.
Mortgage Bankers Association Purchase Applications Index This
weekly index of purchase applications at mortgage lenders is a good leading
indicator for single family home sales and housing construction and is another gauge of housing demand and the resulting economic momentum.
Construction Spending This report goes beyond housing to show analysts the amount of new construction activity on residential and nonresidential building jobs. Commodities such as lumber are sensitive to housing
industry trends. In addition, business owners usually will put money into the
construction of a new facility or factory if they feel confident that business
is good enough to validate an expansion.
Consumer Credit One of the American consumers’ pastimes is to say
“Charge it” to purchase goods and services on their credit cards. Overall
changes in consumer credit can indicate the condition of individual consumer finances. On the one hand, economic activity is stimulated when consumers borrow within their means to buy cars and other major purchases. On
the other hand, if consumers pile up too much debt relative to their income
levels, they may have to stop spending on new goods and services just to pay
off old debts. That stoppage could put a big dent in future economic growth.
The demand for credit can also have a direct effect on interest rates. If
the demand to borrow money exceeds the supply of willing lenders, interest rates rise. If credit demand falls and many willing lenders are fighting
for customers, they may offer lower interest rates to attract business.

Other Reports and Information
The government isn’t the only source of information vital to the markets, of
course. Private research reports, company reports, and even anecdotal evidence gleaned from the news or from your neighborhood may provide
clues about the future of the economy and market prices.

What to Watch, What It Means

29

For example, you may be able to take the temperature of the economy
by watching travel reports. Are people going on vacations? Are they taking
two weeks or just three days? Staying close to home or going to exotic
places? Listening to your friends talking about their vacations and watching
airline traffic statistics may give you clues about travel that may be a good
guide for what’s happening to the economy that, in turn, may have a bearing
on what you are trading. In good times people tend to spend bigger money
on a vacation, where the number one activity is shopping, according to
Travel magazine. Lots of consumer spending says a lot about the vibrancy
of the economy and supports higher stock market prices. If you trade energy,
more travel means airline fuel consumption goes up, and that may trigger
an increase in energy prices.
Statistics and reports from a number of private sources can back up or
refute your observations. Reports from weather services may keep you
ahead of the crowd on crop developments or prospects for heating oil. The
National Oilseed Processors Association releases reports about the soybean
“crush” that can help you analyze the outlook for not only soybeans but the
feed component for livestock markets as well. The American Petroleum Institute releases weekly statistics on energy production and stocks. There
are many other similar sources of information, not to mention the dozens of
specialty newsletters providing information, insights, and advice on every
market.
Then, of course, there are the earnings reports and other information
released by thousands of public companies that drive the prices of individual stocks. Because there are many more equity traders in the investment
world than there are futures traders, you may be more familiar with these
reports. If the equity markets generate normal or even subnormal returns
based on a historical standard as some forecast for the next few years, then
the appetite for making money may attract individual investors to move
into futures products because of the leverage available in futures and options. And many futures traders will have to become more familiar with what
affects the prices of stocks as new demands and needs for products that
combine features of stocks and futures are introduced.
Futures and options activity will continue to expand and change as
both types of traders come to markets such as the popular e-mini S&P 500
index futures, which went from a daily volume of around 300,000 contracts
in February 2002 to as many as 1,000,000 contracts a day within a matter of
months. Those numbers offer proof that stock investors are flooding into the
futures markets. The debut of single stock futures in November 2002 gave
individual investors the unique opportunity to trade individual stocks with
the features and benefits of the futures markets and will send futures volume
in stocks-related markets even higher.

30

FUNDAMENTALS: The Market Driver

More participation from a wider variety of players may create more
volatility, making it more important than ever to know what to look for in
reports and how they may affect price behavior. When looking at company
numbers, it is vital to decipher what the actual financial strength of the
company is and to listen to what guidance is being given for that company’s
future. If a company president or CEO states that earnings were good based
on spending cuts rather than revenue growth and, in addition, indicates that
future sales may be slow, then that information would not bode well for that
stock’s price. Further, it might suggest that all companies in that sector might
be susceptible to a slow period or economic contraction.
Therefore, it is relevant to discuss earnings and other aspects of analyzing stock prices such as supply and demand and their perceived valuations
in addition to general economic numbers. The common and most popular
gauge of stock value is the price/earnings ratio (P/E). The calculation is simple: Just divide the stock price by the earnings. A stock priced at $60 and
earning $6 per share has a P/E ratio of 10. There are several other means of
analyzing a stock’s value: changes in sales figures, announced increases in
dividend payouts, amount of debt, new contracts that will generate more
revenue, takeover situations, stock buy-back plans, and so on.
The leader or largest capitalized company in a sector or industry group
may set the tone for that sector and help drive prices in either direction. So
it is important for stock index futures traders to follow the developments of
key stocks or sectors. Listening to the earnings reports or conference calls
may give you facts rather than brokers’ opinions on what was said and provides another form of fundamental analysis.
