
higher the volatility of a trading instrument, the more opportunities it presents.
Popular stocks tend to swing a lot. On the other hand, stocks of many utility companies that are quite liquid are very hard to trade because of low volatility—they tend
to stay in narrow ranges.
There are several ways to measure volatility, but a good practical tool is “beta.” It
compares any vehicle’s volatility to its benchmark, such as a broad index. If a stock’s
beta is 1, it means that its volatility is equal to that of the S&P 500. A beta of 2 means
that if the S&P rises 5%, the stock is likely to rally 10%, but it is also likely to drop
10% if the S&P falls by 5%. A beta of 0.5 means that the stock is likely to rise or fall
by half of the percentage of the S&P. It would be better for a beginner to focus on low
beta vehicles.You can find betas for most stocks on all key financial websites, starting
with Yahoo Finance. Betas are like trail markers on ski slopes: green for beginners,
blue for intermediate skiers, and black diamonds for experts.
Time Zonesâ•… Globalization has lured many people to trade far away from home. I
meet traders in Australia who trade U.S. stocks, and talk with traders in the United
States who wrestle with European indexes. Still, you should think twice before trading far away from your own time zone. Your data screen is connected to the world,
but your physical self is rooted in the area where you live. If you trade while sleepy,
you put yourself at a disadvantage. If your head is on the pillow while your trade is
open on the other side of the globe, you make it easier for your competitors to pick
your pockets.
Some time zones are easier to trade than others. For example, it is comfortable to
trade the U.S. markets from Western Europe, where the New York Stock Exchange
opens at 3:30 pm and closes at 10 pm. It is very hard to trade U.S. markets from Asia,
where the time difference is likely to be 12 hours. There are always exceptions to a
rule, and you may enjoy trading at night—but if you feel tired and sleepy, don’t push
yourself but find a local market.
Long or Shortâ•…

There’s more to trading than buying and waiting for prices to rise.
Markets are two-way streets: they go down as well as up. Beginners only buy, but
experienced traders are comfortable with selling short.
In a nutshell, to make money shorting you identify a vehicle that you expect to
drop, borrow it from your broker (giving him a deposit), and sell it. After it declines,
you buy it back at a cheaper price, return the borrowed shares to your broker, and
get your deposit back. Your profit is the difference between the higher selling and
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

42. STOCKS

175

lower buying prices. This is the same as in buying, only the process is reversed: sell
first, buy later. Of course, shorting is too complex a topic to cover in two paragraphs,
which is why I refer you to my latest book (prior to this one): The New Sell & Sell Short:
How to Take Profits, Cut Losses, and Benefit from Price Declines (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).

■■42. Stocks
A stock is a certificate of ownership of a business. If you buy 100 shares of a company
that had issued 100 million shares, you’ll own one-millionth of that firm. If other
people want to own that business, they’ll have to bid for your shares.
When masses of people start liking the prospects of a business, their orders for
its shares will push up the stock price. If they don’t like the outlook of that business,
they’ll start selling their shares, depressing prices. Public companies try to make their
shares more attractive in order to push up share prices because it helps them raise
more equity or issue debt. Top executives’ bonuses are often tied to stock prices.
Fundamental values, especially earnings, drive prices in the long run, but, as John
Maynard Keynes, the famous economist and a canny stock picker once retorted—
“In the long run we’re all dead.” Markets are full of cats and dogs, stocks of companies with feeble or nonexistent earnings that at some point fly through the roof,
defying gravity. Stocks of new sexy industries can levitate on expectations of future
earnings rather than any real profits. Stocks of solidly profitable, well-run companies
may drift sideways or down if the crowd isn’t excited about their outlook.
Warren Buffett is fond of saying that buying a stock makes you a partner of a
manic-depressive fellow he calls Mr. Market. Each day, Mr. Market runs up to you
and offers to buy you out or sell his shares to you. Most of the time, you should
ignore him because he’s crazy, but occasionally Mr. Market becomes so depressed
that he offers you his shares for a song—and that’s when you should buy. At other
times, he becomes so manic that he offers an insane price for your shares—and that’s
when you should sell.
Buffett’s idea is brilliant in its simplicity, but hard to implement. Mr. Market’s
mood is so contagious that it sweeps most of us off our feet. People want to sell when
Mr. Market is depressed and buy when he is manic. To be a successful trader, you
must stand apart from the crowd.You need to define objective criteria that will help
you decide how high is too high and how low is too low. Buffett makes his decisions
on the basis of fundamental analysis and a fantastic gut feel. Traders can use the tools
of technical analysis described in this book.
What stocks will you trade? There are more than 20,000 of them in the United
States, and even more abroad. Beginners tend to spread themselves too thin. Afraid to
miss an opportunity, they buy scanning software. A person who doesn’t have a clear
idea of how to trade a single stock will not be helped by tracking thousands. He’ll be
much better off focusing on a handful of stocks and following them every day.
We’ll return to the question of stock selection in Part 10 “Practical Details.” In
brief, it’s a good idea to limit your pool of trading candidates. That group can be
small or large, depending on your skills and available time. A Greek friend of mine

176

TRADING VEHICLES

calls his watch list of 200 stocks his harem. He’s owned every one of them in the
past; he reviews them on weekends, selecting fewer than ten that he may take for a
spin in the coming week.
I have two “pools” in which I fish for trading ideas. On weekends, I run the 500
component stocks of the S&P 500 through my divergence scanner and zoom in on
stocks flagged by that scan, selecting a handful that I’ll consider trading during the
coming week. Second, I review Spike picks on weekends, figuring that among a
dozen top traders submitting their favorite picks, there is bound to be at least one
that I’ll want to piggyback. The number of stocks I closely monitor during the week
is always in single digits. This is just my style; I have friends who monitor several
dozen stocks at any given time. Only you can tell what number is right for you, but
you should track only as many as you can focus on.

■■43. ETFs
An exchange-traded fund (ETF) is an investment vehicle that trades like a stock.
Different ETFs hold different types of assets, such as stocks, commodities, or bonds,
and they usually trade close to their net asset values. There are ETFs designed to
track indexes, sectors, countries, commodities, bonds, futures, and forex. The leveraged ETFs are designed to move double or triple the distance of the underlying
index. There are also inverse ETFs and leveraged inverse ETFs that trade opposite to
their underlying assets: when an index falls, its inverse ETF rises and vice versa. The
number of ETFs has reached thousands in recent years.
With so many choices, what’s there not to like about ETFs? Actually, quite a lot.
The industry keeps quiet about the fact that there are two ETF markets. The primary market is reserved for “authorized participants”—large broker-dealers who
have agreements with the ETF distributors to buy or sell large blocks, consisting of
tens of thousands of ETF shares. These middlemen buy at wholesale and then sell to
you at retail.You, as a private trader, always sit in the back of the bus—in the secondary market.
An active trader friend who reviewed this chapter added: “I believe that ‘authorized participants’ can also obtain ETF shares to short in large lots. My broker always
tells me there are none available, not even of broadly held ETFs, which I can’t imagine they don’t have lots of in inventory. When I ask them about this, they stonewall.
I wonder how such a shorting transaction by an authorized participant is accounted
for. I wonder if it somehow ends up as paired transactions (both an up-volume purchase and a down-volume sale, cancelling each other out). If so, the added selling
pressure would be hidden from view.”
Administrative expenses incurred by ETFs dampen investors’ returns. According to a study by Morgan Stanley, ETFs missed their 2009 targets by an average of
1.25%, which was double the size of their “miss” in 2008. Those percentages are
your “haircuts” for the privilege of trading ETFs rather than individual stocks. The
more exotic the index tracked by an ETF, the greater your “haircut.”
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

177

43. ETFS

Some ETFs lose value so fast that their issuers repeatedly perform reverse splits
in order to raise prices back into double digits. With the passage of time, those ETFs
sink back into single digits, and then their issuers perform another reverse split to
make their ETFs appeal to new suckers.
A friend of mine lost over a million dollars last year: he anticipated a market decline and bought an ETF of a volatility index (volatility rises when markets fall). Sure
enough, the market dropped 10% and volatility spiked—but his ETF went down
instead of up (Figure 43.1).
Many ETFs “track” their underlying indexes in a shabby manner. After giving commodity ETFs a try, I wouldn’t touch them with a ten-foot pole, having experienced
several days during which the underlying commodity went up, while my commodity
ETFs went down. I stopped trading country ETFs after running into several situations in which a country index would rise to a new high, while my ETF would stay
well below the breakout level (Figure 43.2).
The leveraged ETFs are more “futures-laden” than non-leveraged ETFs and have
much greater rollover losses each month. The disadvantages that retail investors suffer are magnified in the leveraged ETFs. They may track their underlying vehicles

$VIX

VXX

FIGURE 43.1â•… $VIX, the volatility index, and VXX, a volatility ETF, weekly. (Charts by Stockcharts.com)

Tracking Volatility: Reality and Fantasy
Can you believe that these two charts, covering the same period of time, are supposed to
track the same thing?
Volatility is a hugely important factor in market movements. Just as prices oscillate
between uptrends and downtrends, they oscillate between periods of low and high volatility. This is why many analysts and traders pay close attention to $VIX—the volatility index.
The chart on the left shows that during the past two years $VIX oscillated between the low
teens and mid-twenties (it briefly rallied above $80 during the 2008 bear market). Traders
have a saying: “when VIX is high, it’s safe to buy; when VIX is low, go slow.”
Since $VIX fluctuations appear fairly orderly, some traders attempt to trade it using
several ETFs, such as VXX, shown on the right. During the same time, VXX has steadily
declined, losing 90% of its value. How’s that for tracking volatility?

178

TRADING VEHICLES
Natural Gas

UNG

FIGURE 43.2â•… Natural Gas Spot and UNG, a natural gas ETF, monthly. (Charts by Stockcharts.com)

Natural Gas Market: Reality and Fantasy
The chart on the left shows prices of the natural gas spot market: it topped out near $13.5
in 2008 and began a bear market that ended with a double bottom. A false downside breakout near $2 in 2012 helped identify a buying opportunity. A futures chart (not shown) looks
very similar to the spot chart—but take a look at UNG, the natural gas ETF on the right. As
it slid interminably from above $500 to below $20, I lost count of the number of friends and
clients who complained of losing money trying to pick its bottom.

more or less correctly during a single trading session, but deviate widely with the
passage of time.
The only ETFs that trade more or less decently are broadly based ones, such
as SPY and QQQ. Overall, ETFs attract many unsophisticated retail clients, but
the pervasive haircuts and poor tracking of the underlying securities slant the field
against them. Remember an important principle: TANSTAFL—“there ain’t no such
thing as a free lunch.” â•›When it comes to ETFs: buyer beware.

■■44. Options
An option is a derivative instrument—a bet that another security, such as a stock, an
index, or a future will reach a certain price by a certain date. A call gives its holder
a right, but not an obligation, to buy a certain quantity of a specified security at a
specified price at a specified time. It is a bet on a price increase. A put is a right, but
not an obligation, to sell a certain quantity of a specified security at a specified price
at a specified time. It is a bet on a price drop. There are two parties in every options
trade: a buyer and a seller, also called a writer. Buyers buy options, while writers
create options and sell them to buyers.
The key point to keep in mind is that option buyers as a group lose money over
time, despite occasional lucky trades. At the other end of the table, options writers
as a group make steady money despite occasional losses.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

44. OPTIONS

179

Writers create options out of thin air to meet demand from option buyers. One
of my students, a market-maker on the floor of the American Stock Exchange, said to
me: “Options are a hope business.You can buy hope or sell hope. I am a professional—
I sell hope. I come to the floor in the morning and find what the public hopes for.Then
I price that hope and sell it to them.”
Each option has an exercise price (also called strike price). If a stock fails to reach
that price before the exercise date, the option expires worthless and the buyer loses
what he paid, while the writer keeps his loot, whose polite name is premium.
An option is at-the-money when the current price of the underlying security
equals the exercise price.
■■ A call is out-of-the-money when the current price of the underlying security
is below the exercise price. A put is out-of-the-money when the current price
of the underlying is above the exercise price. The farther out-of-the-money, the
cheaper the option.
■■ A call is in-the-money when the current price of the underlying security is
above the exercise price. A put is in-the-money when the current price of the
underlying is below the exercise price.
■■

An option can be at-the-money, out-of-the-money, or in-the-money at different
times in its life, as the price of the underlying security fluctuates. The price of every
option has two components—an intrinsic value and a time value.
An option’s intrinsic value rises above zero only when it’s in-the-money. If the
exercise price of a call is $80 and the underlying security rises to $83, the intrinsic
value of your call will be $3. If the security is at or below $80, the intrinsic value
of that call is zero.
■■ The other component of an option’s price is time value. If the stock trades at
$74 and people pay $2 for an $80 call, the entire $2 represents time value. If the
stock rises to $83, and the price of the call jumps to $4, $3 of that is intrinsic value
($83 – $80), while $1 is time value (the hope that this stock will rise even higher
during the remaining life of that option).
■■

Option prices depend on several factors:
The farther out-of-the-money the exercise price, the cheaper the option—the
underlying security must travel a longer distance to make the option worth anything before it expires.
■■ The closer the expiration day, the cheaper the option—it has less time to fulfill
the hope. The speed with which an option loses value is called “time decay,” which
doesn’t occur in a straight line but becomes steeper as the expiration nears.
■■ The less volatile the underlying security, the cheaper the option, because it has a
smaller chance of making a large move.
■■ Minor factors influencing option prices include the current level of interest rates
and the dividend rate of the underlying stock.
■■

180

TRADING VEHICLES

Different factors that impact option pricing may clash and partly cancel each
other out. For example, if a market drops sharply, reducing the value of calls, the
increased volatility will lift option values, and the calls may lose less than expected.
There are several mathematical models, such as Black-Scholes, widely described in
options literature, that are used to determine what is called a fair value of any option.

Buying Options
The simplest and easiest approach to options is to buy them. That’s exactly what
beginners do, and unless they learn quickly and change, their accounts are doomed.
This is the standard line of brokerage house propaganda: “Options offer leverage—an ability to control large positions with a small outlay of cash. The entire risk
of an option is limited to the price you pay for it. Options allow traders to make
money fast when they’re right, but if the market reverses, you can walk away and
owe nothing!” â•–They fail to mention that in order to profit from buying an option you
must be right in three ways. You must choose the right stock, predict the extent of
its move, and forecast how fast it’ll get there. If you’re wrong on even one of these
three choices, you’ll lose money.
Ever tried tossing a ball through three rings at an amusement park? This triple
complexity makes buying options a losing game.
A stock, an index, or a future can do one of three things: rise, fall, or stay flat.
When you buy a call, you can profit only if the market rises; you lose if it goes down
or stays flat. You can lose even if it rises, but not fast enough. When you buy a put,
you win only if the market falls fast enough. An option buyer makes money only if
the market goes his way at a good enough speed, but loses if it moves his way slowly,
stays flat, or goes against him.
An option buyer has one chance out of three to win—but the odds are two out of
three in favor of an option writer. No wonder the pros write options. A pro sells a
call, and if a stock drops, stays flat, or even rises slowly, that call will expire worthless, and he’ll keep the premium. He sells poor buyers hope—and as that hope turns
out to be worthless, he keeps their money.
Options attract hordes of small traders who can’t afford to buy stocks. To get a
bigger bang for their buck, they buy calls as if those were substitutes for stocks. This
doesn’t work because options move differently from stocks. Gullible amateurs buy
empty hopes, which the pros are delighted to sell to them.
Beginners, gamblers, and undercapitalized traders make up the majority of option
buyers. Just think of all the money those hapless folks lose in their eagerness to get
rich quick. Who gets all that money? Some of it goes for brokerage commissions,
but the bulk flows into the pockets of option writers. Well-capitalized professionals
write options rather than buy them. Option writing is a capital-intensive business:
you need hundreds of thousands of dollars at a minimum to do it right, and most successful writers operate with millions. Writing options is a serious game for knowledgeable, disciplined, and well-capitalized traders. If your account is too small for
option writing, wait until it grows bigger.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

44. OPTIONS

181

Markets are like pumps that suck money out of pockets of the poorly informed
majority and into the wallets of a savvy minority. Smart traders in any market look
for situations in which the majority does something one way, while a small, moneyed
minority does the opposite. Options are a great example of this rule.

Writing Options
There are two main types of option writing. Covered writers buy a stock and write
options against it. Naked writers write calls and puts on stocks they don’t own.
Covered writers own underlying securities. For example, a fund may hold a
large position in IBM stock and sell calls against it. If the stock doesn’t rise to the
exercise price during the life of those calls, the options will expire worthless. The
covered writer will add his premium to the fund and write a new call with a new
expiration date. If IBM does rise to the exercise price and “gets called,” they’ll deliver
their stock at its strike price, collect the money, and use the freed-up capital to buy
another stock and write calls against it.
Large funds tend to use computerized models for buying stocks and writing covered calls. Covered writing is a mathematically demanding, capital-intensive business. Most serious players spread their costs, including staff and equipment, across
a large capital base. A small trader doesn’t have much of an edge in this expensive
enterprise. Covered writing was very profitable in the early years of exchange-traded
options. By now the field is very crowded, and the returns have become thinner.
Naked writers sell options without owning their underlying securities; they back
up their writes with cash in their accounts. A naked writer collects his premium when
he opens a trade, but his risk is unlimited if that position goes against him. If you own
a stock, sell a covered call, and that stock rises to its exercise price and gets called,
you have something to deliver. If you sell a naked call and the stock rises to or above
its exercise price, you’ll have to pay. Imagine selling calls on a stock that becomes a
takeover play and opens $50 higher the next morning—you still have to deliver.
This combination of limited rewards with unlimited risks scares most traders
away from naked writing—but as usual, there’s a gap between perception and reality. A far-out-of-the-money option with a short time to the expiration is very likely
to expire worthless, meaning the writer will profit. The risk/reward ratio in naked
writing is better than it looks, and there are techniques for reducing the impact of a
rare adverse move.
Savvy naked writers tend to sell out-of-the-money calls and puts whose underlying stocks or futures are unlikely to reach their strike prices during the remaining life
of an option. They sell not just hopes but distant hopes. Good writers track volatility
to find how far a stock is likely to move and then sell options outside of that range.
This game goes into high gear during the week or two prior to option expiration,
when the floor mints money out of thin air, selling naked puts and calls that have
almost no chance of reaching their exercise price.
Cautious writers close their positions without waiting for the expiration dates.
If you write a call at 90 cents and it goes down to 10 cents, it makes sense to buy it
