
255

256

Part 2 • Convergence

(D ^rget
(§)

A

/ >

target

CD

<D
A

\/ \ / \ /

i®

target

/ V

Hag

<D
) \

\t

\ t

®
flagpole
\/

®

®

EXHIBIT 16.6. Swing Target

EXHIBIT 16.7. Bull Flag and Pennant

pennant

®

®

<D
/1

''

/ \/ \/ \

A ( A)

®

\

®

'

v ® target

target

EXHIBIT 16.8. Bear Flag and Pennant

a clearly defined sharp advance or decline. This congestion
band serves to relieve an overbought (in a rally) or oversold (in
a decline) condition. If, after this short-term correction, the market resumes its prior trend, we then have a flag or pennant pattern.
The difference between flags and pennants is that in a flag,
the "flag" portion is a horizontal box range. In a pennant pattern, the "flag" portion (i.e., the congestion band ) looks like a
pennant because it has lower highs and higher lows.
Exhibits 16.7 and 16.8 show the measurements of the bull and
bear flags and pennants. Their measuring implications are built
on the same concept as that of the swing target. For the flag or
pennant pattern, we use the vertical height of the initial
advance or decline nicknamed the "flagpole."
In Exhibit 16.7 we see bull flag and pennant's price targets
are derived by adding the height of the initial sharp advance
(the flagpole) from A to B onto the bottom end of the congestion
band (which is either a flag or pennant shape). The more tradi-

—

Chapter 16 • Measured Moves

tional method is adding this flagpole's height to the top of the
flag or pennant. I prefer to err on exiting too early rather than
missing the last few ticks. As such, my measurement starts
from the bottom of the flag or pennant rather than the top.
As shown in Exhibit 16.8, the bear flag or pennant objective
is forecasted by subtracting the flagpole (A-B) range from the
top of the congestion band. (Again, this is my subjective conservative target—others will use the more classic measurement
from the bottom of the congestion band.)
In Exhibit 16.9 there is an almost vertical rally from 1 to 2 that
took the stock from $22.50 to $27.50. The decline from 2 to A
was almost exactly a Fibonacci 61.8% correction of this rally.
(See Chapter 12 for discussions on retracements.) The stock
started its advance from A.
Using the 1 to 2 rally and the correction to A, we can obtain
a swing target by taking the $5 move from 1 to 2 and adding
that to the correction low of A at $ 24.50. This gives a potential
target to $29.50.
While measured moves do not only normally become resistance or support, in this example we see how a bearish engulf -

© CQG Inc. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 16.9. Cisco Systems Daily (Swing Target)

257

258

Part 2 • Convergence

ing pattern (at B) on February 1 and 2 emerged at this projected $29.50 price target.
In Exhibit 16.10 we see that after the ascent from A to B, the
stock took a breather for about a week. During this time the
market moved into a box range between $36.50 and $37.75. A
rising window opened on July 11 (after candle line C) and propelled the stock above the aforementioned lateral trading
range.
From a candlestick perspective, this rising window did two
things: First, it turns the trend north, and second, this window
now becomes potential support. While this window gives us a
positive bias, it does not provide an upside target. For this, we
shift to the Western technicals. Looking at the rally from A to B
and the correction to C, we have a bull flag pattern. Now we
can get a target by adding the "flagpole" portion (A to B) to the
bottom of the "flag" (at C). The A to B rally is about $ 5.50.
Putting this onto the low at C gives an upside target toward
$42. (As mentioned above, most books on Western technical
analysis will add this $5.50 to the top of the flag portion [near

I

42

It

41

40

t

39

. . B
38

rising
window

37

C

36

t

35

34

Jun
02

A
09

16

23

33

Jul
01

Aug

14

07

21

28

© CQG Inc. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 16.10. Transocean Sedco Forex Daily (Bull Flag)

01

11

Chapter 16 • Measured Moves
1050.00
1000.00

A

950.00

l
900.00

'

850.00

1

800.00
750.00
700.00

B

I

650.00
600.00

ifTi

550.00

id /

500.00

P

450.00
400.00
350.00
300.00

l3/1

"

13/6

3/13

I

15/20

13/27

4 /3

14/10

147TT

4/24

14/26

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBIT 16.11. Internet Index Daily (Bear Pennant)

$38], but I use the more conservative measurement of the bottom of the flag [$36.50] portion of a bull flag.)
As the stock approached our conservative $42 target, a shooting star arose overhead, making the target a resistance area. The
black candle after the shooting star completed the third line
needed for an evening star pattern. The descent from there
found support in late July near $37.75. This was a support area
defined by the rising window on July 14 with the inverted hammers. The rally that started the week of July 28 hesitated at the
high of the aforementioned evening star pattern at around $42.
As discussed with an evening star (and many other candle patterns), I normally look at resistance based on the close. Thus,
when the stock pushed above the evening star 's resistance
intraday, but failed to close above it, this resistance remained
intact.
Exhibit 16.11 highlights two shooting stars at A. This denotes
hesitation near the 925-950 area. The steep fall from A to B hesitated with a long-legged doji at B. From there, the index
ascended slightly. This helped mitigate what was an oversold

Day

259

260

Part 2 • Convergence

A

® tar9et

''®

®

®

-®

®

Ascending

V

Descending

i®
target

EXHIBIT 16.12. Ascending and Descending Triangles

condition. By looking at the A to B decline as a flagpole and the
triangular range at B and C as a pennant, we have a bear pennant formation.
Once the bottom end of the pennant was broken, we can
derive a target by taking the decline from A to B from the minor
correction high at C near 775. This gives a downside target
toward 525 which was exceeded.
A variation of a piercing pattern arose near 500 at P. It was a
variation because the white candle did not get more than
halfway into the black real body. However, since this was the
first white candle and higher close of the entire decline from C,
I would still view this variation as important as a classic piercing pattern. This outlook was validated the following week by
the successful defense of the piercing pattern's support.
There are many types of triangles in Western technicals: symmetrical triangles, wedges, and so on. As shown in Exhibit
16.12, there are ascending and descending triangles.
The ascending triangle has a horizontal resistance area tested
numerous times. Moves down from this resistance are at
sequentially higher lows. This exemplifies that, although there
is supply at the resistance line, demand is getting more aggressive as the market pulls back from this resistance area. If the
bulls can then push the market over the horizontal resistance,
we have an ascending triangle. The measurement is the height

Chapter 16 • Measured Moves

from the horizontal resistance area (A) to the widest part of the
triangles (at B) added to the just-broken resistance area.
The descending triangle is a pattern wherein a horizontal support area is successfully defended, but each rally from there
meets with successively lower highs. These lower highs reflect
how the bears are keeping the bulls well in check. With a penetration of support, we take the widest point of the descending
triangle and add that measurement from the prior support line.
Exhibit 16.13 displays a classic descending triangle. The horizontal line at 137 shows it was a clearly defined multitested
support. This was the bottom part of the descending triangle.
The upper part of the descending triangle was a downward
sloping resistance line.
Once the bears had the wherewithal to pull the market under
the 137 support area (at the arrow ), we now use the ascending
triangle projection. The highest point of the triangle is when it
began at 138.25. The bottom end of the triangle is 137. This provides us with a target toward 135.75.

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

EXHIBIT 16.13. S&P Depository Receipts—5 Minutes (Descending Triangle)

261

262

Part 2 • Convergence

One of the attractive aspects of the descending triangle is that
we can use the prior support area as new resistance (the change
of polarity). Consequently, once the bears pulled prices under
137 (at the arrow), we then know that 137 if the market is
indeed weak should become resistance.
Further corroboration of trouble with the move under 137
was the falling window the next session. Consequently, we
have a convergence of factors for resistance near 137: the prior
support and the falling window.

—

—

CHAPTER 17

THE BEST OF THE
EAST AND WEST:
THE POWER OF
CONVERGENCE
fflfrtD &itm
If heaven drops a fig , open your mouth.

chapter
;
Tprinciple convergence

illustrates a classic example of how I used the
of
to forecast significant trouble in
the NASDAQ.
Exhibits 17.1 and 17.1a reveal the techniques both Eastern
and Western that signaled a major high in the NASDAQ. It is
rare to get so many signals emerging near one area. As we will
see, while the converging of many candle and Western signals
increased the likelihood of a top reversal, these techniques did
not project the extent of correction after the market turned down.
is

—

—

263

264

Part 2 • Convergence

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission

5250.00
5200.00

3
5150.00

CD

0
j.

m9

. .

A

5100.00
5050.00
5000.00

TT

i'i ifl '

4950.00

t

4900.00

6

I

I

:

4850.00

4800.00
4750.00
4700.00

4650.00
4600.00
4550.00

4500.00

W

12:00

|3/8

12:00

|3/9

12:00

3/10

12:00

13/13

12:00

13/14

12:00 14 :00

60 min

© Aspen Graphics. Used by permission.

—

EXHIBITS 17.1 and 17.1a. NASDAQ Composite Daily (Convergence)

Let's look at these signals (and the chapters where these techniques were discussed ) individually. This discussion refers to
Exhibit 17.1 except for point 3, which uses Exhibit 17.1a.

Chapter 17 • The Best of the East and West : The Power of Convergence

1 . An ascending resistance line obtained by connecting the

highs from the week of February 14 to the highs in early
March (this technique is discussed in Chapter 11). Since the
NASDAQ was in uncharted territory, this rising resistance
line was a useful mechanism to obtain a potential supply
area as the market ascended.

2. A shooting star (Chapter 4) on March 10 was a candlestick
signal confirming the potential resistance at the rising resistance line discussed above.
3. See Exhibit 17.1a. This is an hourly chart that shows a bearish engulfing pattern (Chapter 4) on March 10 (at 3). This
bearish engulfing pattern emerged early the same day as the
shooting star of the daily chart (discussed in point 2 above).

4. Returning to Exhibit 17.1, at the time the NASDAQ made
new highs at the shooting star at 2, the oscillator (Chapter 14)
made a lower high. This was bearish divergence.

5. A very small falling window opened between the sessions of
March 10 and 13 (Chapter 7). This falling window is more
evident in Exhibit 17.1a on the hourly chart. Once this falling
window opened, it turned the trend southward. It then
becomes potential resistance. The decline from this falling
window found some stabilization at a hammer (Chapter 4)
on March 16. This hammer became support a few days later,
from where a rally ensued.
6. The rally that began on March 21 stalled at the window's
resistance (from point 5 above) with a high-wave candle

(Chapter 8). Although the upper shadow of the candle line at
6 moved over the window's resistance, the failure to close
above this window reinforced the major resistance area
between 5050 and 5150.

Based on the above, we have the major convergence of candle
signals, including the shooting star, bearish engulfing pattern,
falling window, and high-wave candle, with the Western signals
of a rising resistance line and bearish divergence. This cluster of
signals converging in the 5050-5150 area greatly strengthened
the prognosis that the NASDAQ had reached a ceiling.

265

CONC LUSIO N

Step after step the ladder is ascended .

JL fter spending some time with candles, I am sure that you

^^Vwill

not trade without the insights they offer. If a picture
is worth a thousand words, then a candle chart sends out volumes.
Candle charts are so popular and powerful that they are
replacing bar charts, but that does not mean I only use candle
indicators. While candles techniques are powerful, they are
more potent when joined with other charting tools. This is the
advantage of candle charts. With them you can use candle techniques, Western techniques, or a combination of both.
Experienced technicians will find that the union of Eastern and
Western techniques creates a wonderfully exciting synergy.

267

268

Part 2 • Convergence

Be flexible about chart reading. Where you stand in relation
to the overall technical evidence may be more important than
an individual candle pattern. For example, a bullish candle signal in a major bear market should not be used as a buy signal.
A bullish candle formation, especially when confirmed by
other technical signals in a bull market, would be a buying
point.
Also consider the risk / reward aspect of a potential trade.
Just because there is a candle signal does not mean one should
trade on it.
Candles, as all other charting methods, require subjectivity.
You are a doctor of the market. How you read and react to the
symptoms of the market's health through candles techniques
may not be the same as another candle practitioner. How you
trade with candles will depend on your trading philosophy,
your risk adversity, and your temperament. There are very
individual aspects.
May the candles light your trading path!

GLOSSARY A

CANDLESTICK
TERMS AND VISUAL
DICTIONARY
.

r

%

Tc

e descriptions and illustrations below explain and show
ideal examples of what the pattern should be like. These
"ideal" patterns rarely unfold; therefore, use this glossary as a
guidepost, since some subjectivity is required.

—

Abandoned baby A very rare top or bottom reversal signal. It is
comprised of a doji star that gaps away (including shadows)
from the prior and following sessions' candlesticks. This is
the same as a Western island top or bottom in which the
island session is also a doji.

—

Advance block A variation of the three white soldiers in which
the last two soldiers (i.e., white real bodies) display weakening upside drive. This weakness could be in the form of tall
upper shadows or progressively smaller real bodies. It signifies a diminution of buying force or an increase in selling
pressure.

•

Abandoned Baby

i* 0
Top

Bottom

Advance Block

0o

6

269

270

Glossary A • Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Bearish

Bullish

—

Bearish belt -hold See Belt -hold lines .

Belt-Hold Lines

i

Bearish engulfing pattern—See Engulfing patterns .

—

Belt -hold line There are bullish and bearish belt-holds. A bullish
belt -hold is a tall white candlestick that opens on, or near, its
low and closes well above the opening price. It is also called
a white opening shaven bottom. A bearish belt -hold is a long
black candlestick that opens on, or near, its high and closes
well off its open. Also referred to as a black opening shaven
head.

—

Box range The Japanese expression for a market in a horizontal trading range.

—

Bullish belt-hold See Belt -hold lines .

Candlestick

K

—

Line

Bullish engulfing pattern See Engulfing patterns .

Upper

Candlestick lines and charts—Traditional Japanese charts whose
individual lines look like candles, hence their name.
Candlestick charts are also called "candle charts." The candlestick line is comprised of a real body and shadows. See
Real body and Shadows .

/ Shadow
> Real Body
Lower
Shadow

Counterattack Lines
Bear- ±

Bullish

i*

—

Counterattack lines Following a black (white) candle in a
downtrend (uptrend ), the market gaps sharply lower (higher) on the opening and then closes unchanged from the prior
session's close. A pattern that reflects a stalemate between the
bulls and bears and thus lessens the force in place before the
emergence of the counterattack line.

—

Dark-Cloud Cover

Dark -cloud cover A bearish reversal signal. In an uptrend a
long white candlestick is followed by a black candlestick that
opens above the prior white candlestick's high (or close) and
then closes well into the white candlestick's real body
preferably more than halfway. The bullish counterpart of the
dark-cloud cover is the piercing pattern.

—

AI
-

—

Dead cross A bearish signal given when a short-term moving
average crosses under a longer-term moving average. Its
bullish counterpart is the golden cross.

—

Deliberation pattern See Stalled pattern .

—

Long-legged

Gravestone

Dragonfly

Doji A session in which the open and close are the same (or
almost the same). There are different varieties of doji lines
(see Gravestone , Dragonfly , and Long-legged doji) depending on

Glossary A • Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

where the opening and closing are in relation to the entire
range. Doji lines are among the most important individual
candlestick lines. They are also components of candlestick
patterns. Northern doji are doji that appear during a rally.
Southern doji are doji during declines.

271

Doji Star

hi

Doji star—A doji that gaps from a long white or black candle's
real body.

I+

+

—

Downside gap tasuki See Tasuki gaps .

Dragonfly doji
A doji with a long lower shadow and where
the open, high, and close are at the session's high. See the
illustration under Doji. The opposite version of this is the
gravestone doji.

—

Southern
doji

Dumpling Top

Dumpling tops—Similar to the Western rounding top. A window to the downside is needed to confirm this as a top. Its
bullish opposite is thefrypan bottom .

Engulfing patterns A bullish engulfing pattern is comprised of a
large white real body that engulfs a small black real body in
a downtrend. A bearish engulfing pattern occurs when selling
pressure overwhelms buying force as reflected by a long
black real body engulfing a small white real body in an
uptrend.

+

Northern
doji

Window

Engulfing Patterns

Bullish

Bearish

41

—

Evening doji star See Evening star .

—

Evening star A top reversal pattern formed by three candle
lines. The first is a tall white real body, the second is a small
real body (white or black) that gaps above the first real body
to form a star , and the third is a black candle that closes well
into the first session's white real body. If the middle portion
of this pattern is a doji instead of a spinning top, it is an
evening doji star. The opposite of the evening star is the morning star pattern.

Evening Star

M
Frypan Bottom

—

Falling three methods See Three methods .

|

—
Frypan bottom—Similar to a Western rounding bottom. A win-

Falling window See Windows .

dow to the upside confirms this pattern. It is the counterpart
of the dumpling top.

—

Gapping plays There are two kinds of gapping plays: 1. Highprice gapping play After a sharp advance, the market consol-

—

Window

|

I

Mil
Gapping Play
High

Price

[10lB\indow

Low
Price

I

* /A
D

Window

272

Glossary A • Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

idates via a series of small real bodies near the recent highs.
If prices gap above this consolidation area, it becomes a highprice gapping play. 2. Low- price gapping play After a sharp
price decline, the market consolidates via a series of small
real bodies near the recent lows. If prices gap under this consolidation, it is a sell signal.

—

—

Golden cross A bullish signal in which a shorter-term moving
average crosses above a longer-term moving average. It is the
opposite of the dead cross .

—

Gravestone doji A doji in which the opening and closing are at
the low of the session. It is a reversal signal at tops. See the
illustration under Doji . The opposite of this doji is the drag-

onfly doji .
Hammer

I

T
Hanging Man

T.

—

Hammer An important bottoming candlestick line. The hammer and the hanging man are both the same lines that are
generally called umbrella lines; that is, a small real body
(white or black) at the top of the session's range and a very
long lower shadow with little or no upper shadow. When
this line appears during a downtrend, it becomes a bullish
hammer. For a classic hammer, the lower shadow should be
at least twice the height of the real body.

Hanging man—A top reversal that requires confirmation. The
hanging man and the hammer are both the same type of candlestick line (i.e., a small real body [white or black], with little or no upper shadow, at the top of the session's range and
a very long lower shadow). But when this line appears during an uptrend, it becomes a bearish hanging man. It signals
the market has become vulnerable, but there should be bearish confirmation the next session with an open, and better is
a close, under the hanging man's real body. In principle, the
hanging man's lower shadow should be two or three times
the height of the real body.

Harami

5 * 1*

Harami—A two-candlestick pattern in which a small real body
holds within the prior session's unusually large real body.
The harami implies the immediately preceding trend is concluded, and the bulls and bears are now in a state of truce.
The color of the second real body can be white or black. Most
often the second real body is the opposite color of the first
real body.

Glossary A • Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

—

Harami cross A harami with a doji on the second session
instead of a small real body. An important top (bottom)
reversal signal especially after a tall white (black) candlestick
line. It is also called a petrifying pattern.
High- price gapping play—See Gapping plays .
High-wave candle A candle with very long upper and lower
shadows and a small real body. It shows that the market is
losing its direction bias that it had before this candle
appeared. If the real body is a doji instead of a small real
body it is a long-legged doji.
In-neck line A small white candlestick in a downtrend whose
close is slightly above the previous black candlestick's low of
the session. After this white candlestick's low is broken, the
downtrend should continue. Compare to on-neck line, thrust ing line, and piercing pattern.
Inverted hammer Following a downtrend, this is a candlestick
line that has a long upper shadow and a small real body at
the lower end of the session. There should be no, or very little, lower shadow. It has the same shape as the bearish shooting star, but when this line occurs in a downtrend, it is a
bullish bottom reversal signal with confirmation the next session (i.e., a candlestick with a higher open and especially a
higher close compared to the inverted hammer 's close).
Inverted three Buddha pattern See Three Buddha pattern.
Long-legged doji A doji with very long shadows. If the opening
and closing of a long-legged doji session are in the middle of
the session's range, the line is called a rickshaw man. See illustration under Doji.
Low- price gapping play See Gapping plays .
