
When did you begin trading again?
After a few months, I started trading AMEX stocks, but I found it amazingly slow. I missed the
leverage of the commodity markets. I didn't think I could successfully support myself trading
stocks.
Around that time, I ran into a friend who is a great options trader. I told him about my experiences
and he suggested that I join him. In my first week at his office he told me to buy Teledyne calls
right before expiration because he was sure they were going up. I followed his advice, and the calls
completely collapsed.
How much did you lose?
About $40,000.1 felt extremely hostile, but I didn't want to show it because he never promised me
any results. I was so upset that I walked out of the office and didn't come back for two days. He
tried reaching me during that time, but I didn't return his calls. Finally, he got a message to me
through a mutual friend.
Was he upset that he had given you bad advice?
When I came back to the office, he told me that he had done the exact opposite trade in another
account, and that the trade was mine. So I didn't really lose any money.
That sounds like an awfully odd type of practical joke.
It wasn't a practical joke. He was trying to teach me not to place blind trust in anyone—even him. It
was his way of teaching me the importance of self-reliance in being a good trader.
How did you do after that point?
I did pretty well. My friend was a phenomenal options trader. He knew everything about the market
and I learned a tremendous amount from him.
Did you trade options based on the methodologies he taught you?
Yes, combined with my own technical analysis.
Your friend didn't use technical analysis?
No, he didn't believe in it. He was a tape reader.
Has the fact that you have been extraordinarily successful as a 100 percent technical trader
changed his mind about technical analysis?
Not at all. He thinks technical analysis is just a crutch for me, and the real reason I make money is
experience. There was a point at which we separated for a few years. He came to my office one day
and watched me trade. He embraced me like a father and said, "You finally made it." I told him that
not only had I gained a lot of experience, but I had learned just about everything there was about
technical analysis, including certain things I had created myself. He said, "You never give up, do
you? It has nothing to do with technical analysis. You are trading that way because of experience."
Why did you and your option trading friend eventually separate?
There was a conflict in our trading styles. He was a great trader who was willing to take an
occasional large loss, because he knew he would more than make up for it with large gains and
come out way ahead in the long ran. However, I was uncomfortable trading that way. I preferred
trading for small profits and trying to eradicate losing trades. I wasn't willing to take the same type
of risk. Also, my approach was purely technical, whereas he was basically a tape reader. Anyway,
in 1980,1 decided to go off on my own. We got together again years later.
I know you once entered an options trading contest. Can you tell me about it?
It was originally organized by two traders on the СВОЕ floor. They got 47 traders together, each of
whom put up $5,000 in a winner-take-all contest. Each trader opened a $100,000 account with the
same clearing firm.
How long was the contest for?
Three months.
What were your results?
I turned the $100,000 into over $900,000 without any pyramiding [using profits to increase
160

leverage].
That's a rather phenomenal performance.
Yes, but the markets were very good at that time.
What did you trade when you went out on your own in 1980?
I traded everything. I continued to trade stock options. When stock index futures trading began in
the early 1980s, that became a primary market for me. I also traded the commodity markets. In fact,
during the last two years, my trading has shifted to nearly 90 percent commodities.
Do you remember your first soybean trade after the debacle in the 1970s?
For a long time, I avoided soybeans. But, as I began to find myself trading the commodity markets
effortlessly, I knew deep down that I would eventually get back the money I lost in soybeans. I
never forgot about it.
It sounds like you were looking for revenge.
Yes, exactly. Every time I looked at a commodity chart book, my eyes would edge over to the
soybean chart, then I would quickly flip the page. I watched the market peripherally for years
before doing anything. When soybeans went down to $4.75,1 knew they were near a low, but I
didn't want to buy them until I was sure I couldn't lose on the trade. I was like a Sicilian whose wife
had been murdered ten years earlier, waiting for the perfect moment for revenge. When my
technical analysis convinced me that the market had bottomed for real, I jumped in on the long
side.
Where did you buy the beans?
Around $6.18. [This was shortly before the 1988 drought caused prices to skyrocket.]
Where did you get out?
I got out of some at $7.25, and the rest at $9.92. [The high of the move was $10.46.]
How much did you make on that trade?
Let's just say I made my money back in spades.
The way you talk about it, it sounds like that trade was a great relief for you.
Yes, it was a total catharsis. I realized that there was a reason why I had lost the money in the first
place.
What was the reason?
Because I was inexperienced. I don't believe anyone ever gets wiped out in the market because of
bad luck; there is always some other reason for it. Either you were off when you did the trade, or
you didn't have the experience. There is always a mistake involved.
You mentioned earlier that one of the reasons you split with your former trading partner was
that your own trading style was geared to extremely low risk. Since 1980, what was the worst
percentage drawdown you have experienced?
I lose so infrequently that I don't really keep track of that type of number.
Well, let's put it this way: What was your worst single trading month?
I haven't had any losing months.
You have made money in every single month since 1980! ,
Yes. Of course, I could have made a lot more money if I wasn't so cautious, but that is the way I
trade.
Do you remember your worst losing week?
I haven't had any losing weeks during that time, but I have had some losing days.
That is an incredible statement. How can you be sure that you are not simply forgetting about
a few weeks when you lost money trading?
The reason I am sure is that I remember all my losses. For example, I have had three losing days in
the last two years. Out of the thousands of trades I made during that time, I had 17 losers, but nine
of them were because my quote machine was down, and when that happens I just get out of my
161

position.
Most traders would be happy winning on 50 percent of their trades, and a win ratio of 75
percent would be spectacular, yet you are implying that your win ratio is somewhere in the vicinity
of 99 percent—that is really hard to believe.
You can check with Leigh. I told him about hundreds of my trades during the past few years.
[Leigh Stevens is a mutual friend who introduced me to Weinstein.]
OK reader, I know what you are saying: '"No losing weeks, but I've had some losing days.' Give me
a break." Frankly, I admit Weinstein's statements sound preposterous. I could not verify his claims
by examining account statements because his partners are vigorous in maintaining the
confidentiality of the partnership's trading activity as it is a private trading firm, not open to the
public. In fact, a number of his partners were adamantly opposed to this interview and were nearly
successful in dissuading Weinstein from participating. The only account statement Weinstein was
willing, or able, to show me was his independent entry in the option trading contest, which did
indeed confirm that he multiplied a $ 100,000 account ninefold in three months with 100 percent
winning trades.
Still unsatisfied, I spoke to Leigh, who has known Weinstein for years and has spent many days
watching him trade. I have known Leigh for three years and can confidently describe him as honest,
low-keyed, and levelheaded. Leigh confirmed that of about 100 of Weinstein's trades he had
personally witnessed and several hundred more Weinstein told him about on the phone (right after
he put them on), he could remember only one that was a loser. Even if because of faulty memory (I
mean this literally, not as a euphemism for dishonesty), Weinstein's actual percentage winning rate
is somewhat lower than he implies, I still believe his win/loss ratio is incredibly high.
How can he do it? Weinstein's own response to this query follows, but to put it in perspective, I
thought some further elaboration would be helpful. Weinstein employs his own custom-designed
state-of-the-art computer systems to monitor constantly technical indicators designed to measure
changes in market momentum. Rather than use the standard values for these indicators, Weinstein
uses his own values, which he frequently adjusts for changing market conditions. He combines this
intensive real-time analysis with comprehensive chart analysis incorporating a variety of
methodologies, including cycles, Fibonacci retracements, and Elliott Wave analysis. Finally, add to
this one last essential ingredient: an uncanny sense of market timing. Only when nearly everything
lines up right and he feels the timing is virtually perfect does he put on a trade. He passes up many
trades that he believes have a high probability of working, but for which he lacks the same degree
of near absolute confidence. Because of the combination of a lifetime devotion to studying the
markets, intensive real-time analysis, innate market sense and incredibly rigorous trade selection,
virtually all of Weinstein's trades are at least marginally profitable at some point within twenty
minutes of entry. That is all Weinstein needs to assure a breakeven or better result.
It helps to understand that Weinstein usually plays for quick profits and covers his trades within
hours or even minutes. Even on position trades, Weinstein will usually take some profits quickly to
assure a net profitable outcome. He also trades markets in rotation, quickly shifting his profits from
market to market, always seeking the profit potential with the lowest perceived risk. Finally,
Weinstein enjoys the support of a floor network that often puts him on the right side of the bidasked spread.
Weinstein's comments may sound like boasting on the written page, but that belies their tone—
naiveté would be a much closer description. When Weinstein talks about trades, his comments are
peppered with phrases such as, "It's obvious the market is going lower," "This market is so easy." It
is clear he has no conception of how difficult trading is for the rest of us.
How do you explain your ability to win such a high percentage of the time?
Because I have a real fear of the markets. I have found that the greatest traders are the ones who are
most afraid of the markets. My fear of the markets has forced me to hone my timing with great
precision. When I am trading properly, it is like a pool player running racks. If my gut feel of
market conditions is not right, I don't trade. My timing is a combination of experience and my
nervous system. If my nervous system tells me to get out of the position, it is because the market
action triggers something in my knowledge and experience that I have seen before.
162

I also don't lose much on my trades, because I wait for the exact right moment. Most people will
not wait for the environment to tip itself off. They will walk into the forest when it is still dark,
while I wait until it gets light. Although the cheetah is the fastest animal in the world and can catch
any animal on the plains, it will wait until it is absolutely sure it can catch its prey. It may hide in
the bush for a week, waiting for just the right moment. It will wait for a baby antelope, and not just
any baby antelope, but preferably one that is also sick or lame. Only then, when there is no chance
it can lose its prey, does it attack. That, to me, is the epitome of professional trading.
When I trade at home, I often watch the sparrows in my garden. When I feed them bread, they take
just a little piece at a time and fly away. They keep on flying back and forth, taking small bits of
bread. They may have to make a hundred stabs at a piece of bread to get what a pigeon gets at one
time, but that is why a pigeon is a pigeon. You will never be able to shoot a sparrow, it is just too
fast. That is the way I day trade. For example, there are times during the day when I am sure that
the S&P is going up, but I don't try to pick the bottom, and I am out before it tops. I just take the
mid-range where the momentum is greatest. That, to me, is trading like a sparrow eats.
Am I paraphrasing you correctly? The cheetah is your analogy for position trading and the
sparrow is your analogy for day trading. The common denominator is that both animals wait
for can't-lose circumstances.
Exactly.
How do you pick your trades?
I use many different types of technical input: charts, Elliott Wave and Gann analysis, Fibonacci
numbers, cycles, sentiment, moving averages, and various oscillators. People think that technical
analysis is unreliable because they tend to pick the one thing they are comfortable with. The
problem is that no single technical approach works all the time. You have to know when to use
each method.
How do you do that?
It is experience and gut feel. I use all forms of technical analysis, but interpret them through gut
feel. I do not believe in mathematical systems that always approach markets in the same way.
Using myself as the "system," I constantly change the input to achieve the same output—profit!
Is there anything you can single out as the most important element in deciding to put on a
trade?
I am always looking for a market that is losing momentum, and then go the other way.
Having traded both the stock and commodity markets, would you say they behave
differently?
Absolutely. In contrast to the commodity markets, the stock market very rarely gives you the
opportunity to enjoy a meaningful trend.
Why is that?
Because when institutions and specialists sell out, they don't sell out at one price level, they scale
out as the market goes up. Similarly, when they buy, they scale in as the market goes down. This
leads to choppier price action and is the reason why many good commodity traders that I know lose
every time they go into the stock market.
But you win consistently in the stock market, as well. What are you doing differently?
I don't try to figure out where the market is going before the action; I let the market tell me where it
is going. Also, there is such a variety of technical input in the stock market (divergence,
advance/decline, sentiment, put/call ratios, and so on), that you will almost always get a signal
before the market is about to do something.
Is your method of technical analysis therefore different in the stock market than in the
commodity markets?
I look at the individual stocks; they all have their own personalities. For example, IBM and General
Motors will usually rally before a major market bottom and fail to rally before a major market top.
As another example, I have never seen a real good rally without the utilities leading the market.
163

The utilities go up when interest rates are expected to come down, and when interest rates come
down, portfolio managers jump into stocks. I have done extremely well trading the indexes,
because before I ever traded index futures, I had become a very experienced trader of stocks and
options.
What do you think is the public's biggest misconception about the markets?
That people who trade the markets gamble. I know floor traders that have made money for twenty
straight years. You can't call that gambling.
Another major misconception is that people always expect the market to react to news. For
example, when John F. Kennedy was assassinated, the market initially broke very sharply, but then
quickly rebounded to new highs. This price action baffled many people. Investors who sold on the
news only to watch the market reverse blamed the institutions for pushing the market higher. What
they failed to realize is that a market that is fundamentally and technically poised to move higher is
not going to reverse direction because of a news item—even a dramatic one.
Another item I would place under the category of misconceptions is the way the media reports the
reasons for the market being down. They are always saying that the market is down because of
profit taking. I think it would be wonderful if everybody was always taking profits. But, the truth is,
most people lose money, and the reason markets go down is because they take their losses. I know
educated people who watch the news and wonder why the hell they lost money when everyone else
is taking profits. The media owes it to the public to report that the market goes down not only on
profit taking, but on a lot of loss taking as well.
What are the trading rules you live by?
1. Always do your homework.
2. Don't be arrogant. When you get arrogant, you forsake risk control. The best traders are the most
humble.
3. Understand your limitations. Everyone has limitations—even the best traders.
4. Be your own person. Think against the herd, as they must lose in time. Don't trade until an
opportunity presents itself. Knowing when to stay out of the markets is as important as knowing
when to be in them.
5. Your strategy has to be flexible enough to change when the environment changes. The mistake
most people make is they keep the same strategy all the time. They say, "Damn, the market didn't
behave the way I thought it would." Why should it? Life and the markets just don't work that way.
6. Don't get too complacent once you have made profits. The toughest thing in the world is holding
on to profits. That is because once you have attained a goal, you then set a second goal that is
usually the same as the first one: to make more money. Consequently, for many people, attainment
of that second goal is not as rewarding. They may begin to question what they really want from
trading and trigger a self-destruct process in which they wind up losing.
Any final advice you have for the beginning trader?
You have to learn how to lose; it is more important than learning how to win. If you think you are
always going to be a winner, when you lose, you will develop feelings of hostility and end up
blaming the market instead of trying to learn why you lost.
Limit losses quickly. To paraphrase from Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, most traders hold on
to their losses too long because they hope the loss will not get larger. They take profits too soon,
because they fear the profit will diminish. Instead, traders should fear a larger loss and hope for a
larger profit.
Weinstein's most traumatic trading experience occurred when he let a material goal interfere with
his trading. This is a common theme that has surfaced in other interviews. It invariably seems to be
a mistake to translate the potential profit or loss of a trade into material terms.
The cornerstone of Weinstein's trading approach is to wait for those trades in which everything
appears to be lined up exactly right, and the odds of winning seem overwhelming. Even though
most of us can never expect to remotely approach Weinstein's confidence in the trades he selects,
the concept of waiting for only those trades one feels most confident about is sound advice that is
echoed by a number of traders in this book.
Although viewing markets as nonrandom over the long run, I have long believed that very short164

term market fluctuations (i.e., intraday price movements) were largely random. Weinstein has
shaken this belief.

165

Part IV-The View from the Floor

166

167

Brian Gelber-Broker Turned Trader
Brian Gelber began his career as a broker, managing a major brokerage firm's financial futures
operations on the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade. After successfully advising institutional
clients, he began trading for his own account. In the early days of T-bond futures trading, Gelber
enjoyed the dual distinction of being one of the most (if not the most) prominent brokers on the
floor and one of the largest local traders.
In January 1986, Gelber expanded his trading to include the direct management of customer
accounts. In addition to his own trading, Gelber supervises a group of traders in both cash and
futures in government securities and othermarkets. He is the president of a group of companies:
Gelber Group, Gelber Management, and Gelber Securities. These companies are involved in
clearing, brokerage, and money management.
Gelber's relaxed personality seemed almost out of place with his profession. Instead of the high
level of intensity expected of someone who trades and supervises trading in multimillion dollar
bond positions daily, I found a man who talks about his work as if he were describing a pleasant
vacation.
Although our meeting took place during trading hours, Gelber did not seem to be overly concerned
with the bond market. In fact, he seemed quite relaxed, despite leaving the trading desk for his
private office to conduct our interview. "I'll probably do better by staying here," he remarked,
obviously reflecting what he perceived to be a low-opportunity market at the time.
In response to a query regarding other traders I was interviewing, I mentioned that one, Tony
Saliba, had made the cover of the current issue of Success magazine. Gelber asked me if I had a
copy. I pulled out the magazine from my attache case and handed it to him. He smiled as he read
the bold headline describing Saliba's experience during the week of the October 19,1987, stock
market crash: "Victory! He Made $4 Million in Seventy-Two Hours." Jokingly, Gelber asked, "I
made $4 million in twenty minutes on that day; how come I'm not on a magazine cover?" It was not
meant to be boastful. It did, however, very specifically summarize a basic truth about great traders:
Many, if not most, maintain relatively low profiles and are therefore virtually unknown to the
public.
How did you get started in this industry?
After graduating from college in 1976,1 backpacked around the country. In Salt Lake City, I
answered an ad for a commodity broker position. I didn't have any idea what it was, but I figured it
was something like a stockbroker. I got my license while working for a guy who was basically
running a boiler room operation.
You really started out on the wrong side of the business.
When I walked in, there was a guy seated at the back end of a penny stock office. He spent his days
on the phone trying to convince people to give him $5,000 or $10,000 to speculate onhis charting
system. It was a real fly-by-night operation.
I was keeping his charts for him, while getting registered. I kept saying to myself, "This guy is
pretty much of a crook." I got my license and quit. Then I bummed around for another few months,
just working temporary jobs to pay the rent.
What kind of jobs?
Unloading railroad cars. Then one day I walked into a Thomson McKin-non office and said, "Hey,
I have a broker's license." The fellow there said he would pay me $800 a month. That was a large
amount of money for me at the time. All I had to do was go in and cold call; any accounts I opened
would be mine.
But you knew virtually nothing at all about markets at that time.
I had read a couple of books, and I knew something about charts—having kept them for the first
fellow I worked for.
What books did you read? There weren't too many around at that time.
The book I learned the most from was Technical Analysis of Stock Trends by Robert D. Edwards
and John Magee (John Magee, Inc., 109 State Street, Boston, MA).
168
