
7. Low Cost
When you trade the forex market, the only transaction cost you pay is the
spread. As discussed in Chapter 2, the spread is the difference between
the buy price and the sell price, and it is the only fee charged by the broker
for executing your trade.
In comparison, when equity traders execute a trade, both spread
and commission are incurred as fees. Due to the intense competition
from thousands of brokers worldwide, spreads have dropped dramatically in the last few years. That is good news for retail traders like you
and me.
Today, most brokers offer a spread of only 2 to 3 pips on the EUR/USD,
the most widely traded currency pair in the forex market.
Figure 4.1 shows a 2 pip spread for EUR/USD on FXPRIMUS.

c04.indd 76

06/12/12 2:24 PM

Why You Must Play the Game

FIGURE 4.1

77

EUR/USD Spread on FXPRIMUS Market Watch

Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

8. Absolute Convenience
As an OTC market, the forex market has no physical location; all trading is
done electronically. All you need is an Internet connection and your favorite device and you can execute a trade anywhere in the world.
With the explosion of technology, almost everyone is connected to
the Internet, and brokers have made it easy to access their platform via
laptops, mobile phones, iPhones, iPads, and BlackBerrys.
I know many forex traders who travel the world while staying connected to their business of making money online. This freedom is truly
something which the forex market can offer to anyone.

9. Practice Accounts
Every good broker offers a free practice or demo account. The practice
account means two things: You trade with virtual money but you see live
prices. Practice accounts allow new traders to get a taste of the forex market before jumping in with real funds.
Practice accounts are useful because they help both new and advanced
traders alike. For new traders, practice accounts help them to build
conﬁdence and familiarity. For advanced traders, practice accounts help
them to reﬁne or test new strategies before using those exact systems to
trade live.
Figure 4.2 shows a $50,000 demo account on FXPRIMUS.

c04.indd 77

06/12/12 2:24 PM

78

FIGURE 4.2

FOREX IS A GAME

$50,000 Demo Account on FXPRIMUS

Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

10. Market Transparency
Whenever governments, central bank chiefs, or ﬁnance ministers make
economic/monetary policies that affect currencies, the announcements
are readily available on almost every media imaginable within a few minutes. The bonus is that in most cases, warning signals or hints about future
actions are dropped in advance. Here’s an example:
On August 4, 2011, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) sold 4.5 trillion yen
to weaken its currency. This caused the USD/JPY to shoot up 300 pips in
one day.
On October 31, 2011, Japan intervened again, selling a record 8 trillion
yen. This move caused the yen to plunge more than 4% and caused the
USD/JPY to shoot up over 350 pips in just three hours.
The fact of the matter is this: Prior to the interventions, BOJ governor Masaaki Shirakawa and the two ﬁnance ministers who were in
charge at the time—Yoshihiko Noda on August 4 and Jun Azumi on
October 31, 2011—had been preparing the markets for the move weeks
before they acted.
They had dropped strong hints of an upcoming intervention to combat
one-sided speculative trades on the Japanese yen. The reason why they
were so transparent with their intentions was to signal the traders to stand
on the same side as them and collectively go long on USD/JPY.

c04.indd 78

06/12/12 2:24 PM

Why You Must Play the Game

79

When traders participate in a coordinated action, chances of a sustainable rally become higher, and the central bank does not have to spend as
much money to weaken the yen.
Market transparency in stocks or commodities, however, is a lot lower.
For example, no large institution will signal its intention to acquire a stock
at a certain price. If word gets out and traders take part in a similar coordinated action and start bidding up the stock price, the stock would become
more expensive for the institution to acquire.
As shown in this report:
“Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said that the yen is “strongly
overvalued” and made it clear he has been in touch with overseas
authorities on currency matters, fueling speculation the government
may act to stem the yen’s steady rise.”
Wall Street Journal, August 2, 2011

11. No One Can Corner the Market
Due to its sheer size, no single entity, not even a central bank, can control
the market price for an extended period. Take a look at Figure 4.3, which
shows the intervention by the BoJ on August 4, 2011. Within four days,
the price of USD/JPY had ﬂoated back down to the pre-intervention price.

Bank of Japan (BoJ) intervention
on 4 August 2011

FIGURE 4.3 USD/JPY Intervention Took Place
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

c04.indd 79

06/12/12 2:24 PM

80

FOREX IS A GAME

Bank of Japan (BoJ) intervention
on 4 August 2011

FIGURE 4.4

USDJPY coming back down to
pre-intervention price

USD/JPY Coming Back Down to Pre-Intervention Price

Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

This is one of the main reasons why central banks are becoming less and
less inclined to intervene and manipulate market prices.
Figure 4.4 shows a chart on USD/JPY coming back down to preintervention price in just ﬁve days.

12. Tools and Resources
Most forex brokers today provide a plethora of resources for traders to
access. These include breaking news, trade alerts, live webinars, videos, and tutorials just to name a few. Traders today have a wide range of
resources to get them up to speed to trade proﬁtably.
In my experience, to be consistently proﬁtable in the forex market,
you need:
1. The ability to decode breaking news
2. The skill to execute live trades
3. The mentorship of a coach

Some brokers offer resources that fulﬁll part or all three of these
requirements. This is great news for new and experienced traders alike
because getting a world-class education enables you to achieve consistent
proﬁts in the forex market.

c04.indd 80

06/12/12 2:24 PM

Why You Must Play the Game

81

Additionally, some brokers offer the ability to trade several asset
classes all on the same platform. As you mature as a trader, it is only natural that you become more aware of capital ﬂows and how they move into
gold, oil, and commodities. You will appreciate the convenience of monitoring several markets all on one platform provided by the broker.

13. No Middlemen
You don’t have to pick up a phone to tell someone on the other end
to execute or close a trade for you. Although you are trading through
your broker’s platform, you are in total control of the transaction the
entire time.
You decide when you would like to go long on the GBP/USD or short
on the NZD/USD. You have full control and autonomy over your account,
which puts you in the driver’s seat to achieve consistent proﬁts in the
forex market.

14. Low Start-up Cost
One of the biggest advantages of getting started in forex trading is the low
barrier to entry. Ten years ago, it was rare for someone to open a forex
trading account for under USD100,000. However, with the explosion of
forex brokers all over the world, you no longer have to lay out a lot of cash
when you start trading live. Today, some brokers offer you the opportunity
to open a real account with as little as USD100. Additionally, you won’t
incur any setup fees, monthly payments, or software rental fees.
The brokers provide the trading software for free, and it comes with
the practice account that we discussed earlier. Most forex brokers worldwide use the Meta Trader 4 platform, which is the most popular trading
software loved by traders all around the world.

15. Global Finance Decoded
I speak from personal experience when I say that I could never really
understand global ﬁnance until the day I started trading forex. As a trader,
understanding market sentiment is key and knowing when risk is on or off
helps me tremendously in my trading decisions.
Let’s take a look at an example. When you trade forex, you will be
privy to the interest rates attached to each currency. Generally the currencies with higher interest rates are categorized as the risk currencies while
those with lower interest rates are termed the safe haven currencies.

c04.indd 81

06/12/12 2:24 PM

82

FOREX IS A GAME

When risk appetite is strong in the markets, currencies with low
interest rates—the low yielders—will be sold off in preference for the
risk currencies, which give a better return. This trade is commonly
known as the carry trade.
Conversely, when risk is off, the opposite effect happens. Risk currencies are sold off, and money moves back to the low yielders. The
distinction is subtle but important: Currencies with high interest rates
do not climb all the time.
In times of fear and panic, risk is off and traders are more concerned
with parking their money in a safe place as opposed to earning a higher
return. Trading the forex market helps you to decode such sentiment.

16. Recession-Proof Income
One of my earliest mentors told me an important money lesson that I’ll
never forget: “Mario, if you want to be rich, you’ve got to get yourself on a
platform that is recession-proof.” Knowing what I know now, I believe that
trading the forex market is the best recession-proof platform to generate
consistent income.
Why is this true? There is always an opportunity to go long or short.
There is always an opportunity to make money. Forex traders are never
affected by recessions, market cycles, or downturns.

17. All for One, and One Forex
This last point is the most important. It also takes slightly longer to explain.
Trading the forex market gives you insights into other ﬁnancial markets,
such as stocks, oil, gold, commodities, and ﬁxed income securities like
bonds.
When you trade currencies, you are trading a unit of a country. This
gives you the ability to see global capital ﬂows.
Stocks Here’s an example of how forex helps in trading the stock
market. Let’s take an example of a trader who is based in Singapore but
decides to buy shares in global giant Apple, which is based in the United
States.
To do this, the trader needs to exchange Singapore dollars (SGD) to
U.S. dollars before using U.S. dollars to buy the Apple stock. In this regard,
the trader is already exposed to the forex market through the USD/SGD
exchange rate.
Fast forward three months. Our trader makes a 20% gain from the Apple
stock. To realize the proﬁt, the trader sells off the shares and converts the

c04.indd 82

06/12/12 2:24 PM

Why You Must Play the Game

83

U.S. dollars back into Singapore dollars. However, during the three months,
the Singapore dollar actually strengthened against the U.S. dollar.
Although our trader made 20% gains from Apple stock, the stronger
Singapore dollar would have eroded a portion of his cash. Knowledge of
the forex market could have induced the trader to take a short position
on the USD/SGD currency pair so that he would not be susceptible to the
wild swings of the USD/SGD exchange rate.
Commodities Three factors affect the price of commodities worldwide:
1. Demand and supply
2. Value of the U.S. dollar
3. Speculation on the futures market

The U.S. dollar is used in vast amounts in international trade, and
almost all global commodities are priced in U.S. dollars. Hence, understanding its role in the commodities arena is key. In general, the price of
commodities is inversely proportional to the value of the U.S. dollar. This
means that when the value of the U.S. dollar goes down, the price of commodities tend to rise.
There are two reasons for this. First, a weak dollar makes U.S. exports
cheaper for foreign countries, which boosts sales of commodities, such as
corn, wheat, and soybeans, and causes their prices to rise.
Understanding the nature of the U.S. dollar as a safe haven and a
reserve currency helps us with the second reason—when risk is on, fund
managers move money out of safe haven assets and into risk assets. This
causes the U.S. dollar to be sold off (causing it to fall in value) in favor of
risk assets, such as commodities. When speculation on commodities is rife
in the futures market, price tends to rise.
We discuss strategies for other commodities in Chapter 8.
Bonds The key driver of bond prices is the prevailing interest rate in the
country. Trading the forex market helps keep us abreast of the interest rate
environment because it’s one of the drivers of currency ﬂows.
It also helps us to be ahead of the curve. Here’s an example:
In Chapter 2, we discussed how high inﬂation normally brings about
expectations for higher interest rates. Forex traders are among the ﬁrst
to take advantage of any impending rate hikes because rate hikes tend to
strengthen the currency, and forex traders do not want to miss out on the
chance to go long.
Once interest rates are hiked, the natural path is for bond prices to
drop. Armed with this information ahead of time, forex traders can make

c04.indd 83

06/12/12 2:24 PM

84

FOREX IS A GAME

calculated decisions on the beneﬁts of owning a cheaper bond when
prices drop. This is how forex trading helps with the buying and selling
of bonds.

SUMMARY
With a daily trading volume in excess of USD4 trillion, the forex market
offers unparalleled advantages. Due to the sheer size of the forex market, its immense liquidity offers three advantages:
1. Buyers and sellers are able to execute any order size at any price.
2. Slippage is drastically reduced.
3. Hardly any insider trading occurs. The same cannot be said with other

asset classes, such as equities or commodities.
Another important aspect of the forex market is that it is the only ﬁnancial market in the world that is open 24 hours a day, ﬁve days a week.
International trade takes place continuously between countries, and the
ability to buy and sell currencies must be available.
As quotes are given in currency pairs, traders have the ability to go
long or short at any time, with absolutely no restrictions on going short.
Considered an OTC market, the forex market also enjoys the privilege of
not falling under the jurisdiction of any ﬁnancial exchange.
When instruments are traded on an exchange, rules and regulations of
both the country and the exchange apply. This sometimes can be more of a
hindrance than a help to retail traders.
High leverage is also another advantage when trading the forex market.
Leverage is provided by brokers. The higher the leverage employed, the
less margin needed to control one standard lot of currencies.
To date, the leverage available on the forex market far outweighs
the leverage available on either the equities or the futures market. Other
beneﬁts that brokers provide include low transaction costs, low account
start-ups, free practice accounts, and free tools and resources. As the retail
forex brokerage space becomes more and more competitive, brokers start
to compete with one another to offer the best products and services to
retail traders.
All this is good news for traders, who now have a wide array of choices
to consider when starting on a forex journey.
Today, the forex market continues to attract retail traders all over the
world at an unprecedented pace for three reasons:

c04.indd 84

06/12/12 2:24 PM

Why You Must Play the Game

85

1. The ability to go long and short anytime means that the forex market is

practically a recession-proof vehicle.
2. Traders can access the forex market with just an Internet connection

and an electronic device (e.g., laptop, tablet, or mobile phone).
3. Most important, forex trading gives traders an in-depth understanding of other asset classes, such as equities, bonds, and commodities
because currencies are truly the lowest common denominator in any
country. An understanding of forex gives traders a huge advantage in
decoding global ﬁnance and capital ﬂows.

c04.indd 85

06/12/12 2:24 PM

c04.indd 86

06/12/12 2:24 PM

CHAPTER 5

Play It Your Way
Understanding Your Profile

T

his chapter provides insight into the ﬁve different categories of forex
traders: scalpers, day traders, swing traders, position traders, and
mechanical traders. After reading it, you will understand the differences among the ﬁve and the three advantages of each category. This chapter also includes a test to help you determine which category you belong
to. Once you discover your category, you will learn how your personality
can help or affect your trading.
I have had the privilege to speak to large audiences all over the world.
The most common question thrown at me is “Should I buy now or sell
now?” Each time I hear the question, I can’t help but smile. After all, that
was my biggest question when I ﬁrst started trading forex. “Tell me what to
do now, and we’ll talk about trading later!”
My answer, as always, goes like this: “You can buy now if your trading
strategy tells you to buy now. You can also sell now if your trading strategy
tells you to do so.”
This answer always draws one of two responses: confused looks or
exasperated ones.
However, the answer is precisely that—you can buy or sell at anytime.
Let’s see why.
As shown in Figure 5.1, Trader A goes long at Point X and exits at
Point Y. Simultaneously, Trader B goes short at Point X but exits at Point Z.
In both cases, each trader ended up with a proﬁt.
In each case, both traders entered at exactly the same time and price.
The only reason why both traders ended up making a proﬁt is because
they had different exit prices. This example also tells us that both traders
executed their trades using different strategies.
You see, one of the key elements of successful trading is having a
speciﬁc strategy that tells you what to do. Human beings are emotional
87

c05.indd 87

03/12/12 9:55 AM

88

FIGURE 5.1

FOREX IS A GAME

Traders Making Profit at Different Exit Prices

Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

creatures. This is the reason why fear, greed, and hope are antithetical to
successful trading.
When you follow a concise strategy, nothing is left to emotional
triggers and everything boils down to following the rules of the strategy. The
sentence “When you fail to plan, you plan to fail” rings true in the trading
world as well as in life.
However, over the years as a trader and coach, I unearthed a disturbing
pattern that seemed to permeate the global trading community: Even with a
successful trading strategy, traders still seemed to suffer consistent losses
rather than consistent proﬁts.

THE EXPERIMENT
This ﬁnding led me to conduct an experiment at my forex academy. The
experiment involved two traders whom I shall call Mike and Amanda.
The test was simple. All Mike and Amanda had to do was to follow the
trading plan I gave them. The trading plan consisted of a trading strategy,
complete with speciﬁc rules on how to enter for a long trade and how to
enter for a short trade.
We even spent two days together to ensure that they fully understood
the rules of the trading plan. In fact, to ensure that I left no stone unturned,

c05.indd 88

03/12/12 9:55 AM

Play It Your Way

89

I sent both traders alerts via their mobile phones to watch for any
upcoming trade setup.
At the end of one month, their results were very different. Mike ended
up having a net return of 10% for his account; Amanda managed a return
of only 2%. This result was all the more interesting considering that both
Mike and Amanda:
1. Started with the same capital
2. Took exactly the same number of trades
3. Entered all the trades correctly
4. Faithfully called me after they entered every trade

How could this be?
After an in-depth study on their trades, I found that the biggest reason
for the difference in their accounts was that Amanda constantly meddled
with her trades. Although she executed the entries perfectly, she messed
up the exits. A common and truthful statement she shared with me was
“I was too impatient to wait for the trade to exit so I got out earlier.”
Mike, however, had no problems following through on trades after
he entered them. Essentially, he did not meddle with his trades after he
entered them but allowed them to hit either their stops or their targets.
In short, although both traders had the same strategy, Amanda’s personality caused her to exit some trades prematurely. Those actions caused
her account to have a different result from Mike’s, although both had access
to the same resources and the same trading strategy.
The result of that experiment became the driving force to write this
book. The message is simple: Having a successful strategy is only the
ﬁrst step. Pairing a successful strategy with your personality is far more
important.
In essence, there is no perfect strategy. The perfect strategy is the one
that perfectly suits you.

Sports Illustrated
Let’s look at an example in sports. If I were a sports coach and a budding
athlete came up to me and asked, “Hey, coach, which sport should I play so
that I can achieve mega success in the sporting world?”
As a coach, I would consider ﬁve options. Option 1 could be baseball.
One of its greats, Babe Ruth, has been named the greatest baseball
player of all time in various surveys and rankings. In 1998, the Sporting
News ranked him number one on the list of “Baseball’s 100 Greatest

c05.indd 89

03/12/12 9:55 AM

90

FOREX IS A GAME

Players.” In 1969, he was named baseball’s Greatest Player Ever in a ballot commemorating the hundredth anniversary of professional baseball.
In 1993, the Associated Press reported that Muhammad Ali was tied with
Babe Ruth as the most recognized athlete in America.
In his career, Ruth had an eye-popping batting average of 0.342 en route
to winning the World Series seven times.
Option 2 could be soccer. One of its greats, Lionel Messi, has numerous accolades. In 2010, France Football ranked him at the top of its list of
the world’s richest soccer players, ahead of David Beckham and Cristiano
Ronaldo, with £29.6 million in combined income from salaries, bonuses,
and off-ﬁeld earnings.
In 2011, Messi won the prestigious Fifa Ballon d’Or, making him the
ﬁrst player in the world to win three straight Fifa world player trophies.
In 2012, Messi made Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
Champions League history by becoming the ﬁrst player to score ﬁve goals
in one match.
The third option could be motor racing. The ofﬁcial Formula 1 website
states that Michael Schumacher is “statistically the greatest driver the sport
has ever seen.” He holds many of the sport’s records, including race victories, fastest laps, pole positions, points scored, and most races won in a
single season—13 in 2004.
In 2002, he became the only driver in Formula 1 history to ﬁnish in
the top three in every race of a season and then also broke the record for
most consecutive podium ﬁnishes. To date, he is the sport’s only 7-time
world champion.
Option 4 could be track and ﬁeld. Usain Bolt is a Jamaican sprinter
who has netted ﬁve gold medals in two World Championships and six gold
medals in two Olympics. At the time of this writing, he is the world record
and Olympic record holder in the 100 meters, the 200 meters, and (along
with his teammates) the 4×100 meter relay. He is also the reigning Olympic
champion in these three events.
In 2009, Bolt stunned the world in Berlin with a record-breaking effort
in the 100 meter ﬁnal, ﬁnishing in an astonishing 9.58 seconds.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal option could be boxing. Manny Pacquiao is boxing’s
ﬁrst 8-division world champion, having won six world titles. He is also
the ﬁrst ﬁghter to win the lineal championship in four different weight
classes. He was named “Fighter of the Decade” for the 2000s by the Boxing
Writers Association of America (BWAA). He is also a 3-time “The Ring”
and BWAA “Fighter of the Year,” winning the award in 2006, 2008 and 2009.
Today, Pacquiao is rated as the best pound-for-pound boxer in the world.
In all ﬁve of these examples, the athletes would be considered extremely
successful in their chosen sporting ﬁeld. Some even feature regularly in the
