
Risk Management

113

based on average loss, not maximum loss. This means that you may actually lose much more if the maximum loss is hit.
The idea of using the average loss works just fine in the context of
gambling because the maximum loss and the average loss are often the
same. You bet $2 on a nag and lose and the average loss and the maximum
loss are the same.
But trading is different. The average loss is usually less than half of the
maximum loss. So we can’t use Kelly as is. We need to modify it to take
into account this significant difference. We might otherwise find ourselves
in deep trouble. I would also suggest that it would be psychologically debilitating to take such large losses.
One of the keys to using Kelly is to realize that it is a way to rationally determine the relative value of differing trades. Suppose that Kelly
says you should risk 22 percent on this particular pair using this particular
technique and says you should risk 11 percent on a different pair using the
same technique. This clearly means that you should risk twice as much on
the first trade as the second trade.
Perhaps that means that you use Kelly to modify the fixed fractional.
In this case, perhaps you take 2 percent risk on the first trade and 1 percent
on the second.
I suggest that you do not use the pure Kelly but use what is called a
fractional Kelly. The most powerful fractional Kelly is a half-Kelly, which
is when you put on a position half of what is recommended by Kelly. By
doing this, it reduces your risk by 50 percent but only reduces your reward
by a few percent. Your risk-adjusted return actually goes up. Still, this may
mean that you are risking over 10 percent on a given trade.
Another way to modify Kelly is to use maximum loss in the calculation instead of the average loss. In other words, take the Kelly percent but
divide into the largest loss, not the average loss, and you will be much more
conservative.
So how should you use Kelly? Here’s what I do.
First, I keep very good records of all my trades. That way I can see
what the performance is of every technique and currency pair. That record
keeping is invaluable for me to continue to grow as a trader.
I don’t make any decisions on risk management until I have at least
30 trades. In addition, I really would prefer that I have 30 trades in different types of markets. How well does this technique/pair work in trending
markets or sideways markets? With 30 trades, I can start to make some
rational decisions.
Second, I use the Kelly weightings to change my fixed fractional trade
sizes. My basic size is to risk 0.5 percent on each technique/pair. But I then
adjust that by how big a proportion of my portfolio that Kelly says I should
use. I look at this from a relative point of view. So, if I am using three

114

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

different techniques for a given pair and the Kelly rankings are 5 percent,
10 percent, and 20 percent, then I will risk 0.5 percent for the middle technique/pair, half that for the first one, and double that for the last one.
The final way that I use Kelly is to take a small percentage of my portfolio, say 10 percent, and use the half-Kelly or the Kelly using the maximum
loss on just that portion of the portfolio. I find that I can easily double my
money on that portion and don’t have any psychological issues with the
potential losses.
Kelly is truly turbo-charging your returns. Using Kelly is the best way
to create the most amount of money in the shortest time. However, it is
also the scariest. I had a client who lost 97 percent of his portfolio in just
six weeks using Kelly. But he ended up doubling his money in just another
eight weeks. That shows the incredible power of Kelly, both good and bad.

TRADE YOUR EQUITY CURVE
You should also be thinking about the total risk in your portfolio. For example, while limiting the risk on any one position to 1 percent of the total
account value, limit the risk on the whole portfolio to less than 5 percent,
or perhaps even 3 percent. If every position were wiped out, you would be
out 5 percent of your total account value. Big deal. You could survive that.
The idea is that you need to make sure that if a catastrophe like 9/11
occurs you will be able to survive it if every one of your positions were
stopped out on one day.
I trade stocks and futures as well as forex. A lot of people have asked
me exactly what I trade. I tell that I trade my equity curve. All that matters
is that my equity is growing. The equity curve is simply a chart of the total
equity in your account plotted once a day.
I know that I am doing correct trading actions if my equity chart starts
in the lower left corner and is going to the upper right. That shows that
my equity is growing. Well, theoretically, a growing equity curve could also
mean that conditions are ripe for my methods of trading.
So what if my equity curve is declining? That means that either you
are not executing flawlessly or that market conditions are not ripe for your
method. In either case, you should be more cautious.
I suggest actually drawing a chart of your equity on a daily basis and
then applying some technical method such as trend analysis to the chart.
Take smaller positions or even stand aside if you see a downside breakout
in your equity curve.
Then keep trading the methods on paper but not in the real world
until your equity, on paper, has broken to a new high. This ensures that

Risk Management

115

your methods are in tune with the market again and that you are executing
flawlessly.
This method will ensure that you never have significant losses because
you will be standing aside or trading smaller if you start on a losing streak.

TAKE A TIME OUT
Another key risk management rule is to take time off if you go through a
losing streak. For example, perhaps you hit the 5 percent risk limit mentioned earlier. Take a break from trading. Clear your head. Go walk around
the block.
People are tremendously attracted to doing stupid things after they
have lost a good chunk of money. You won’t have any objectivity. You
won’t be calm, cool, and collected.
In any case, it is better to take a couple of days off and come back to
the markets with your head screwed on straight. Your mental state is the
most influential factor in creating investment profits. Do not take it lightly.
Here’s another related rule. Make sure that you do not lose more than
10 percent in one month. If you do, simply shut down trading and take a
longer vacation. You need to make sure that you do not have a catastrophic
month. This rule ensures that you will never have a disaster even if you are
bleeding somewhat. Let me suggest that you shut down trading for a day
whenever you suffer a 2 percent loss in one day. Take a day off. Take a
week off if you suffer a 5 percent loss, and shut down for the month if you
hit 10 percent.
I’ve used this rule when I’ve run professional trading desks and it
works. I see a trader losing money and I probably see a trader that is probably suffering psychologically and won’t be a good trader. I would send
them off the desk to at least walk around the block. I have even sent them
home for a week. We called it being put in the penalty box.
Now, some people would think that would be great. You lose money
and get a paid vacation. But it’s not that way with traders. They don’t work
for the salary but for the bonus. Taking time off reduces their ability to
make more money trading and therefore their bonus. It’s a punishment.

TURNING POOR SYSTEMS
INTO GOOD SYSTEMS
Here’s an interesting idea that I’ve never seen elsewhere. We can use good
risk management to improve the profitability of trading methods. Let me
show you how.

116

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Although there are many reasons why trading systems look bad during
testing, one common problem is that a system has shown a few huge losses
during the testing period. Here is how risk management concepts can help.
Make a histogram of all the losses, making the left axis the size of the
loss and the bottom axis the number of times that the loss occurred. What
you will find is that most of the losses are moderate but there are several
whopping losses. Simply look at the histogram to see where you could put
a money management stop that would cut out most of the major losers but
only account for a few trades.
For example, assume that you have 100 losses in your test. Ninety-five
of the losses are $1,000, which you can financially (and psychologically)
handle. However, there are five that are greater than $1,000, including a
couple that are greater than $5,000. Change the rules for exiting positions
to either the signal of the trading system or $1,000, whichever shows the
least loss. You will find that you will reduce the total losses typically by
20 percent to 40 percent.
Once in a blue moon, a trade will show a big open loss only to turn
around and move to a profit position. However, that outcome is so rare that
this simple technique can turn many losing systems into profitable systems.
In addition, it may significantly enhance nearly all systems.

HOW BIG A POSITION
SHOULD I TAKE?
Here’s what I recommend for weighting on each position. Why not start
with 0.5 percent for each method/pair? In other words, let’s say that you are
trading trend analysis, channel breakout, and the Conqueror. You would
risk a maximum total of 1.5 percent for each pair. That means that you will
risk 0.5 percent for each method. Note that you could, at any given time,
be risking zero, 0.5 percent, 1.0 percent, or 1.5 percent. Note that you will
get to the maximum risk in only a few rare circumstances. I’ll come back
to this in a minute.
I recommend 0.5 percent in each position not because it is the best
amount of risk to take but because it is a good starting point for traders.
This amount is usually a small amount to lose for anyone.
A beginning trader should likely start with 0.25 percent for each technique/instrument pair. That means that using four techniques on one given
pair will mean that the total risk could get as high as 1.0 percent (though
this is highly unlikely).
Then, start to increase the amount of risk as you feel more confident
about the techniques. Go to 0.3 percent, then 0.4 percent, and so on up to

Risk Management

117

the point that you feel comfortable. You probably don’t want to get to a
point where you have a total risk of over 5 percent in any given pair. But
the point is to develop the confidence to increase risk as you develop as
a trader.
Use the concept of changing the size from Kelly and apply to the fixed
fractional.

THE BOTTOM LINE: DIVERSIFY
THROUGH TIME
What is the bad news of using strict risk management? Not much.
First, you have to be much more disciplined in your trading. You have
to do a little more work to figure out your risk on each position and the
total portfolio risk. Frankly, this is no big task.
Second, your return may go down, though this is not a given. For most
people, their returns will skyrocket. Generally, traders with powerful risk
management rules will not have years that put them in the top 10 percent
every year. It is difficult to have 100 percent years using these rules. It takes
a lot of risk to make a ton of money.
However, the risk-adjusted return (the return in a portfolio divided by
the standard deviation of the monthly returns) will shoot higher. You will
be producing lower returns but with sharply reduced risk.
In addition, although you will not be number one in any given year,
you will be number one for any given five years. It was largely using this
technique that got me a top ranking for my Macro hedge fund and for my
stock-picking letter. I was never top ranked for any given year but always
ended up in the top 25 percent. After a few years of being in the top 25 percent, I ended up at or near the number one ranking. It was this pattern of
consistently high returns that did the trick.
This chapter has put you in a very elite group. You now know more
about risk management than probably 95 percent of investors. You now
know how to control risk at a level only the most sophisticated hedge funds
do. This is a huge advantage in the fight for forex profits.
Let me prove this. Most institutional investors are not allowed to have
less than 97 percent of their money under management to be in cash. They
certainly aren’t allowed to be short. This applies to mutual funds, segregated funds, and union funds. The manager would be fired if they were
to go 50 percent into cash! The basic concept is that the investor wants
to invest in, say, natural resources, and then they buy a natural resources
mutual fund. The manager is supposed to stay fully invested in natural resources stocks and not deviate from that mandate. So they have to stay

118

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

fully invested in natural resource stocks even in the midst of the bear
market.
Now, grab the next 100 retail investors on the street and ask them if
they use any risk management. The answer from only a few will be that
they use some protective stop orders. The rest will think you are nuts.
That leaves only some hedge funds that use proper money management. Welcome to the risk management elite!
Sharply controlling the risk in your portfolio can keep you in the game
and even beat the game. Use the fixed fractional or Kelly method to calculate how large your position should be, use some type of portfolio risk
management to control the total risk in your portfolio, and make sure that
you have the right attitude to keep trading. If you follow these rules, you
will find a sharp increase in both your profits and your confidence.

CHAPTER 8

Slingshot

ne of the keys to making money in forex is the ability to filter out
bad trades. I’ve shown you the ADX filter in Chapter 2, which can
eliminate a lot of bad trades but only a few good trades. I’ve shown
you the Bishop and rejection rule in Chapters 2 and 3, which allow you to
get out of trades with small losses before they turn into big losses or take
profits as the trend changes.
The slingshot is an interesting extension of the basic concepts behind
trend analysis. However, the extensions demonstrate some key concepts
that can significantly enhance profitability and reduce risk.
The slingshot uses these critical concepts to create a method that
contains some different ways of looking at the market. For example, I
will show you a unique method of creating profits in the market, maximum excursion analysis (MEA). The basic concept behind this analysis came from Kent Calhoun but I have taken his ideas and made a
general principle behind them. This is a method never revealed since
Kent stopped providing information to the market. I don’t use the same
method as Kent but show you an adaptive way of achieving the same
thing.
I will also use the slingshot to show you the importance of using confirmations as a method of reducing risk.

O

119

120

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

THE IMPORTANCE OF
MINIMIZING LOSSES
Reducing the number of bad trades can dramatically enhance the profitability of a method even though we have strictly limited the size of the potential losses. A typical trend following system, which I prefer, will only make
money on about 45 percent of trades but the winning trades will be about
2.5 times the size of the average loss. Let’s assume, for simplicity sake, that
each loser is $1 and each winner is $2.50. That means that you should have
a profit of $57 (45 times $2.50 minus 55 times $1.00) after 100 trades.
Reducing the number of losing trades by 10, or about 20 percent, improves the profitability dramatically. The percent of the 100 trades that are
now winners increases to 55 and the number of losing trades drops to 45.
Now the profit is $92.50 (55 times $2.50 minus 45 times $1.00). That is a
dramatic increase in profit of 62 percent! A small change in the ratio of winners to losers can create a dramatic change in the profitability of a method.
This suggests that we must be always searching for ways to decrease the
number of losers compared to the number of winners in order to boost
profitability.
Note that the rejection rule and last bar method increase the number of
losing trades significantly but the total dollars lost declines. We have substituted a larger number of small losses instead of a fewer number of large
losses (or kept the size of the losers constant but dramatically boosted the
size of our winners). These changes sharply enhance our profits.
It is profitable for you to keep track of these kinds of statistics for your
own trading. Then you can concentrate on fixing that part of the equation
that you really need to work on. Is it cutting losses? Increasing the size of
your winners?
I mainly focus on eliminating losses or minimizing the size of losses.
The reason is that this enhances my psychological ability to trade. I’ll talk
more about that in a later chapter but let me mention a few things here.
One of the most difficult things for traders to do is to suffer through a
string of losses. Most people will stop trading a method if they have three
losing trades in a row. They will say that the system is flawed or they are
flawed and stop trading. So it is particularly important to attack the inevitable losses that come with trading. Reducing losses in a method by
several a year could mean the difference between my psychologically continuing to trade, or stopping.
Psychologically, a small or miniscule loss may be the same as no loss
so it is also important for me to strive to reduce the size of losses. My goal
is always to reduce the size of my losses to a level that I won’t remember
tomorrow if I had a loss today. I am not likely to have any psychological
bad effects from a trade that I can’t remember!

Slingshot

121

BEWARE OF TAKING PROFITS
TOO EARLY
“You can’t go broke taking a profit” is something I’ve heard many times
over the last 30 years. But what I’ve found is that you can go broke taking
a profit.
Every method has a certain number of losses and a certain number of gains. That is the nature of every method. There can be variances
around that number for short periods of time but not over the long run.
Let’s go back to our example of losing $1.00 on each losing trade and
making $2.50 on each winning trade and 45 percent of our trades are
winners.
We know through simple math that this is a winning method. But what
if we took profits every time we had a $1.00 profit? That would make this a
money-losing method immediately. We are losing on more trades than we
are winning so making/losing equal amounts of money on each trade is a
surefire way to lose money.
Realistically, though, taking quick profits will likely boost the number
of winning trades to losing trades. This may be enough to make this a profitable system. However, we would have to boost the number of winning
trades compared to the losing trades by a large amount to equal the profits
of the original ratio.
All methods have losing trades. That is the price of playing the game.
We need a certain number of winning trades of a certain size to pay for
those losses. The winning trades that are beyond that level create the profit
for us.
Every method has a natural profile of winning and losing trades, their
size and frequency. Let’s assume that you are using a winning method.
Cutting the size of the winners will usually cause a higher number of
winners but at a much smaller size. I may cut the size of the winner from
$2.50 to $1.00. The average size of my winner is now just 40 percent of
the previous size. That means that I must have 150 percent more winners
than I did before to equal the dollars that I had made before in my trading.
Remember that I was making only 45 percent of my trades as profits with
the remainder being losses. Adding 150 percent of the 45 percent winners
would mean that I would have to have more winners than I have trades to
equal the profits of the original method. That’s impossible.
Basically, the base method lost on slightly more than 50 percent of
the trades but the winning trades were 2.5 times the size of the losing
trades. It is impossible to make as much money as this method if I cut
the profits to only 1 times the size of the losing trades because I would
have to have more winning trades than I have trades to make that much
money.

122

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

It comes back to the old trading adage of letting your profits run and
cutting your losses.
We need to be careful when we take profits too early. Most of the
techniques in this book are trend-following techniques. That means that
we want to follow the trend as long as it is trending. Generally, we have
no idea of how far a trend will go. So we want to give that method
as much room as possible to let the trend make us as much money as
possible.
Basically, we let the trend run until we are stopped out. I have said
that protective stops should have two attributes. First, they should filter
out random noise. We don’t want to be stopped out because of some blip
in the market, only because something significant has happened. Second,
we only want to be stopped out when we are wrong.
In the case of a trend-following technique, we only want to be stopped
out when the trend is no longer our friend and the market has turned neutral or bearish. So why would we ever want to take profits before getting
stopped out? There are two reasons: psychological profits and confirmations. We’ll explore both in the pages that follow.

PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFITS
Most beginning traders are stunned when I tell them that most of my trades
are losers. They think that it is impossible to make money when most of
your trades are losers. They think that a master trader should win most,
maybe nearly all, of their trades. In fact, I doubt if any of the top ten traders
in the world win on most of their trades.
Trading profits generally follow the 80/20 Principle, or the Pareto Principle. It states that 80 percent of your profits will come from 20 percent of
your trades. While this may not literally be true, the theory holds. Most of
your profits will come from a small minority of your trades.
This can be psychologically difficult. You may go months without really
seeing a big-profit trade. We are only trading five major pairs so we do not
have the luxury of a diversified portfolio. That means that we can easily go
months of little winners and little losers.
Naturally, there will come a time when we see several or more losing
trades in a row. If you follow my directions in this book then none of these
will be big losers. Each one will be trivial. But the cumulative effect of this
string of paper cuts will begin to wear on your emotions. You may become
frustrated or bored with the action or lack of action. You may begin to
doubt the value of the method, or worse, the value of yourself as a trader.
