
Tactical trading considerations in EUR/USD
I’ve looked at the major trading attributes of EUR/USD and now its time to look at how those
elements translate into real-life trading tactics. After all, that’s where the real money is made and
lost.

Deciding whether it’s a U.S. dollar move or a euro move
Earlier in this chapter, I note that EUR/USD routinely acts as the primary vehicle for forex markets
to express their view on the USD. At the same time, I also indicated that EUR/USD will also react
to euro-centric news and data. So for traders approaching EUR/USD on any given day, it helps to
understand whether the driving force at work is dollar-based or euro-based. Are they bearish on
the USD, or are they bullish on the EUR? Or is it some combination of the two?

Having a sense of which currency is driving EUR/USD at any given moment is important so you
can better adapt to incoming data and news. If it’s a EUR-based move higher, for instance, and
surprisingly positive USD news or data is released later in the day, guess what? You’ve got
countertrend information hitting the market, which could spark a reversal lower in EUR/USD (in
favor of the dollar). By the same token, if that U.S. data comes out weaker than expected, it’s
likely to spur further EUR/USD gains, because EUR-buying interest is now combined with USDselling interest.

Being patient in EUR/USD
Earlier in this chapter I explore why EUR/USD can spend hours trading in relatively narrow
ranges or testing technical levels. The key in such markets is to remain patient based on your
directional view and your technical analysis. You should be able to identify short-term support
that keeps an upside test alive or resistance that keeps a down-move going. If those levels fail, the
move is stalling at the minimum and may even be reversing.

Taking advantage of backing and filling
Because EUR/USD tends to retrace more of its short-term movements, you can usually enter a
position in your desired direction by leaving an order to buy or sell at slightly better rates than
current market prices may allow. If the post–08:30 ET U.S. data price action sees EUR/USD move
lower, and you think getting short is the way to go, you can leave an offer slightly (roughly 5 to 10
pips) above the current market level and use it to get short, instead of reaching out and hitting the
bid on a downtick.
If your order is executed, you’ve got your desired position at a better rate than if you went to
market, and you’re probably in a better position rhythm-wise with the market (having sold on an
up-tick).

Allowing for a margin of error on technical levels
When it comes to determining whether EUR/USD has broken a technical level, I like to use
a 10- to 15-pip margin of error. (Shorter-term traders may want to use a smaller margin of
error.) Some very short-term traders and technical purists like to pinpoint an exact price
level as support or resistance. If the market trades above or below their level, they’ll call it a
break and that’s that. But the spot forex market rarely trades with such respect for technical
levels to make such a clear and pinpointed distinction. And given the amount of interest in
EUR/USD, it’s especially prone to hazy technical lines in the sand.

The key point to take away from this is that all sorts of interest emerges around technical

levels, and it’s still going through the market even though the pinpointed level might have
been breached. And this is where my margin of error comes in. Again, it’s not a hard and fast
rule, but generally speaking, EUR/USD will have chewed through most of the market interest
around a technical level within about 10 to 15 points beyond the level.

East Meets West: USD/JPY
USD/JPY is one of the more challenging currency pairs among the majors, and trading in it
requires a higher degree of discipline and patience. Where other currency pairs typically display
routine market fluctuations and relatively steady, active trading interest, USD/JPY seems to have
an on/off switch. It can spend hours and even days in relatively narrow ranges and then rapidly
adjust to a new price level.
USD/JPY can offer some of the clearest trade setups among the major pairs. When you’re right in
USD/JPY, the returns can be astonishingly quick. When you’re wrong in USD/JPY, you’ll also
know it pretty quickly. The key to developing a successful trading game plan in USD/JPY is to
understand what drives the pair and the how price action behaves.

Trading fundamentals of USD/JPY
The Japanese yen is the third major international currency after the U.S. dollar and the European
single currency, the euro. USD/JPY accounts for 14 percent of daily global trading volume,
according to the 2010 BIS survey of foreign exchange markets. Japan stands as the third largest
national economy after the United States and China in terms of GDP, and the JPY represents the
third major currency group after the USD and the EUR groupings.

Trading USD/JPY by the numbers
Standard market convention is to quote USD/JPY in terms of the number of JPY per USD. For
example, a USD/JPY rate of 85.30 means that it takes ¥85.30 to buy $1.
USD/JPY trades in the same direction as the overall value of the USD, and inversely to the value
of the JPY. If the USD is strengthening and the JPY is weakening, the USD/JPY rate will move
higher. If the USD is weakening and the JPY is strengthening, the USD/JPY rate will move lower.
USD/JPY has the U.S. dollar as the base currency and the JPY as the secondary or counter
currency. This means:
USD/JPY is traded in amounts denominated in USD. In online currency trading
platforms, standard lot sizes are $100,000, and minilot sizes are $10,000.

The pip value, or minimum price fluctuation, is denominated in JPY.
Profit and loss accrues in JPY. For one standard lot position size, each pip is worth
¥1000; for one minilot position size, each pip is worth ¥100. To convert those amounts to
USD, divide the JPY amount by the USD/JPY rate. Using 85.30 as the rate, ¥1,000 =
$11.72 and ¥100 = $1.17
Margin calculations are typically calculated in USD. So it’s a straightforward
calculation using the leverage rate to see how much margin is required to hold a position
in USD/JPY. At 50:1 leverage, $200 of available margin is needed to open a minilot
position of 10,000 USD/JPY.

USD/JPY is heavily influenced by U.S. interest rates
If I had to identify the main driver of USD/JPY, it would easily be the movements in U.S. interest
rates. The main reason for this is the massive amount of U.S. government debt held by the Japanese
government and Japanese investors. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) alone holds nearly $900 billion
worth of U.S. Treasury debt. If U.S. interest rates begin to fall, the prices of U.S. government
bonds rise, increasing the USD-value of Japan’s U.S. debt holdings. To offset, or hedge, their
larger USD-long currency exposure, Japanese reserve managers need to sell more USD. This
causes USD/JPY to closely track U.S. Treasury yields, as seen in Figure 8-2 which shows the
USD/JPY rate and the yield on two-year U.S. Treasury notes on a monthly basis over ten years.

Long-term traders can take advantage of U.S. interest rate cycles via USD/JPY, buying the
pair when U.S. rates are set to rise and selling when rates have peaked and begin to decline.

It’s politically sensitive to trade
USD/JPY is the most politically sensitive currency pair among the majors. Japan remains a
heavily export-oriented economy, accounting for more than 40 percent of overall economic
activity. This means the JPY is a critical policy lever for Japanese officials to stimulate and
manage the Japanese economy — and they aren’t afraid to get involved in the market to keep the
JPY from strengthening beyond desired levels.

A weak currency makes a nation’s exports cheaper to foreigners and, all other things being
equal, creates a competitive advantage to gain market share. On the flip side, a JPY that’s too
strong makes Japanese exports more expensive and may hurt the export sector and squeeze
corporate profitability. That’s one reason Japanese stock markets typically decline when the
JPY strengthens sharply (USD/JPY lower).

Figure 8-2:

USD/JPY
exchange rate
and yields on
two-year U.S.
Treasury
notes over ten
years on a
monthly basis.
USD/JPY
closely
follows the
track of U.S.
Treasury
yields due to
asset manager
hedging
operations.

Source: Bloomberg, FOREX.com

The Ministry of Finance is routinely involved in the forex market
Currency intervention is usually a last resort for most major national governments. Instead, the
Japanese Ministry of Finance (MOF) engages in routine verbal intervention to influence the level
of the JPY. The chief spokesman on currencies is, of course, the Minister of Finance, but the Vice
Finance Minister for International Affairs is the more frequent commentator on forex market
developments.
As I mention earlier, the Japanese government has a history of intervening to prevent excessive or
run-away JPY strength, usually on a unilateral basis (see Chapter 3 for more on official
intervention). Typically, the JPY needs to be appreciating quite substantially and quickly before
intervention, and MOF rhetoric will usually heat up in advance. The MOF orders intervention, and
the BOJ executes as the government’s agent in the market. Most recently in March 2011, in the
wake of the earthquake/tsunami/nuclear disaster in Japan, the Japanese government asked the G7
to support them in preventing further JPY appreciation. The G7 agreed and undertook coordinated
intervention for the first time in more than a decade, weakening the JPY after it surged to new alltime highs below 80.00 against the USD. The JPY had been gaining on speculation Japanese
insurers and investors would bring money home by selling foreign assets and buying JPY, a
process called repatriation.

As an alternative to direct market intervention, the MOF has been known to utilize covert
intervention through sizeable market orders by the pension fund of the Japanese Postal
Savings Bank, known as Kampo. This is sometimes referred to as semiofficial intervention in
various market commentaries and can provide valuable trading information.

Japanese asset management trends
Due to historically high saving rates, Japanese asset managers and investors control
trillions of dollars’ worth of assets, mostly invested in bonds. With exceptionally low rates
available in Japan, Japanese assets are frequently looking abroad for better yielding returns.
When the risk environment is calm (see Chapter 5 for more on risk sentiment), they tend to be
regular sellers of JPY against most other currencies. But if the risk environment deteriorates
suddenly, those JPY are quickly bought back and JPY-crosses can collapse.
Japanese financial institutions also tend to pursue a highly collegial approach to investment
strategies. The result for forex markets is that Japanese asset managers frequently pursue similar
investment strategies at the same time, resulting in tremendous asset flows hitting the market over a
relatively short period of time. This situation has important implications for USD/JPY price action
(see the next section).

Important Japanese data reports
Keep in mind that government officials’ (MOF) comments are quite frequent and can shift market
sentiment and direction as much as, or more than, the fundamental data. The key data reports to
focus on coming out of Japan are
Bank of Japan policy decisions, monthly economic assessments, and Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) member speeches
Tankan Report (a quarterly sentiment survey of Japanese firms by the BOJ — the key is
often planned capital expenditures)
Industrial production
Machine orders
Trade balance and current account
All-Industry Index and Tertiary Industry (service sector) Index

Price action behavior of USD/JPY
Earlier in this chapter, I note that USD/JPY seems to have an on/off switch when compared to the
other major currency pairs. Add to that the fact that USD/JPY liquidity can be similarly fickle.
Sometimes, hundreds of millions of USD/JPY can be bought or sold without moving the market
noticeably; other times, liquidity can be extremely scarce.
This phenomenon is particularly acute in USD/JPY owing to the large presence of Japanese asset

managers. As I mentioned earlier, the Japanese investment community tends to move en masse into
and out of positions. Of course, they’re not the only ones involved in USD/JPY, but they do tend to
play the fox while the rest of the market is busy playing the hounds.

Prone to short-term trends, followed by sideways consolidations
The result of this concentration of Japanese corporate interest is a strong tendency for USD/JPY to
display short-term trends (several hours to several days) in price movements, as investors pile in
on the prevailing directional move. This tendency is amplified by the use of standing market
orders from Japanese asset managers.
For example, if a Japanese pension fund manager is looking to establish a long position in
USD/JPY, he’s likely to leave orders at several fixed levels below the current market to try to buy
dollars on dips. If the current market is at 83.00, he may buy a piece of the total position there, but
then leave orders to buy the remaining amounts at staggered levels below, such as 82.75, 82.50,
82.25, and 82.00. If other investors are of the same view, then they’ll be bidding below the market
as well.
If the market begins to move higher, the asset managers may become nervous that they won’t be
able to buy on weakness and raise their orders to higher levels, or buy at the market. Either way,
buying interest is moving up with the price action, creating a potentially accelerating price
movement. Any countertrend move is met by solid buying interest and quickly reversed.
Such price shifts tend to reach their conclusion when everyone is onboard — most of the buyers
who wanted to buy are now long. At this point, no more fresh buying is coming into the market,
and the directional move begins to stall and move sideways. The early buyers may be capping the
market with profit-taking orders to sell above, while laggard buyers are still buying on dips. This
leads to the development of a consolidation range, which can be as narrow as 40 to 50 pips.

Short-term traders can usually find trading opportunities in such consolidation ranges, but
medium and longer-term traders may want to step back and wait for a breakout of the
consolidation and a fresh directional movement.

Technical levels are critical in USD/JPY
So if you’re a regular trader or investor and you don’t work at a Japanese bank, how can
you know where the orders are? Simple: Focus on the technical levels.
Perhaps no other currency pair is as beholden to technical support and resistance as USD/JPY. In
large part, this has to do with the prevalence of substantial orders, where the order level is based
on technical analysis. USD/JPY displays a number of other important trading characteristics when

it comes to technical trading levels:
USD/JPY tends to respect technical levels with far fewer false breaks. This situation
is typically due to the presence of substantial order interest at the technical level. If trendline analysis or daily price lows indicate major support at 82.20, for example, sizeable
buying orders are likely to be located around there. The bank traders watching the order
may buy in front of it, preventing the level from ever being touched, or tested. If the selling
interest is not sufficient to fill the buying order, the level will hold. On the other hand, if
the technical level is breached, it’s a clear indication the selling interest is far greater and
is likely to continue.
USD/JPY’s price action are usually highly directional (one-way traffic) on breaks of
technical support and resistance. When technical support or resistance is overcome,
price movements tend to be sharp and one-sided, with minimal pullbacks or backing and
filling (prices coming back to test the breakout level). This situation is the result of strong
market interest overcoming any standing orders, as well as likely stop-loss orders beyond
the technical level.
Spike reversals (sharp — 20 to 50 pip — price movements in the opposite
direction of the prior move) from technical levels are important signals. Spike reversals
are evidence of a significant amount of market interest in the opposite direction and
frequently define key highs and lows. They’re also evidence that the directional move that
was underway has probably ended. If the extreme point of the spike reversal is later
exceeded, the prior directional move is likely resuming.
Japanese traders focus on Ichimoku levels and candlestick charts. They’re not alone
as those approaches are increasingly popular with traders globally. Be aware of Ichimoku
price levels for key support and resistance and if any prominent candlestick patterns are
evident. (See Chapter 11 for more.)
Orders frequently define intraday highs and lows and reversal points. Japanese
institutional orders also tend to be left at round-number prices, such as 84.00, 84.25,
84.50, and so on. When you look at charts involving JPY, always note tops/bottoms close
to round-number price levels because there could be significant orders there.

Tactical trading considerations in USD/JPY
Earlier, I note USD/JPY’s tendency to either be active directionally or consolidating — the on/off
switch. As such, I like to approach USD/JPY on a more strategic, hit-and-run basis — getting in
when I think a directional move is happening and standing aside when I don’t. I look for breaks of
trend lines, Ichimoku levels, spike reversals and candlestick patterns, as my primary clues for
spotting a potential directional move.

On the tactical level, USD/JPY is generally a cleaner trading market than most of the other majors,
so I like to approach it with generally tighter trading rules. The idea is that if I’m right, I’ll be
along for the ride. But if I’m wrong, I jump off the bus at the next stop.

Actively trading trend-line and price-level breakouts
One of my trigger points for jumping into USD/JPY is breaks of trend lines and key price levels,
such as hourly, daily or weekly highs/lows. I note earlier that it usually takes a significant amount
of market interest to break key technical levels. I look at the actual breaks as concrete evidence of
sizeable interest, rather than normal back-and-forth price action.

Jumping on spike reversals
After USD/JPY has seen a relatively quick (usually within two to three hours) move of
more than 70 to 80 pips in one direction, I’m on alert for any sharp reversals in price. Spike
reversals of 30 to 40 pips that occur in very short timeframes (5 to 20 minutes) are relatively
common in USD/JPY. I look at them as an indication that the prior move has ended and it’s
now time to exit. Spike reversals are short-term phenomena and, if you can’t be in front of
your trading screen, using a 30 to 40 point trailing stop loss order is one way to guard against
rapid reversals. Take a look at Figure 8-3 to see how spike reversals can frequently indicate
significant turning points.

Figure 8-3:
Hourly
USD/JPY
chart
highlighting
spike
reversals
(circled
areas). Quick
20 to 30 point
reversals can
be an
important
signal that a
directional
move has
ended and
may be
reversing.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Monitoring EUR/JPY and other JPY crosses
USD/JPY is heavily influenced by cross flows and can frequently take a back seat to them
on any given day. In evaluating USD/JPY, I always keep an eye on the JPY crosses and their
technical levels as well. A break of important support in GBP/JPY, for instance, could
unleash a flood of short-term USD/JPY selling, because GBP/JPY is mostly traded through
the dollar pairs.
EUR/JPY is the most actively traded JPY cross and its movements routinely drive USD/JPY on an
intraday basis. Be alert for when significant technical levels in the two pairs coincide, such as
when both USD/JPY and EUR/JPY are testing a series of recent daily highs or lows. A break by
either can easily spill into the other and provoke follow-through buying/selling in both.

The Other Majors: Sterling and Swissy
The other two major currency pairs are GBP/USD (affectionately known as sterling or cable) and
USD/CHF (called Swissy by market traders). These two are counted as major currency pairs, but
their trading volume and liquidity are significantly less than EUR/USD or USD/JPY. As a result,
their trading characteristics have many elements in common. In this section, I look at their
individual trading fundamentals separately and then discuss their trading behavior and tactical
trading considerations together.

The British pound: GBP/USD
Trading in cable presents its own set of challenges, because the pair is prone to sharp price
movements and seemingly chaotic price action. But it’s exactly this type of price behavior that
keeps the speculators coming back — when you’re right, you’ll know very quickly, and the shortterm results can be significant. A good rule of thumb to remember comes from a former chief
dealer of mine, a Brit no less: “The cable trader makes the most money and loses the most money.”

Trading fundamentals of GBP/USD
The UK economy is the second largest national economy in Europe, after Germany, and the pound
is heavily influenced by cross-border trade and mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity between
the United Kingdom and continental Europe. Upwards of two-thirds of UK foreign trade is
conducted with EU member states, making the EUR/GBP cross one of the most important tradedriven cross rates.
The 2010 BIS survey of foreign exchange turnover showed that GBP/USD accounted for 9 percent

of global daily trading volume, making cable the third most active pairing in the majors. But you
may not believe that when you start trading cable, where liquidity seems always to be at a
premium. Relatively lower liquidity is most evident in the wider bid-offer spreads, which are
usually 3 to 5 pips compared to 2 to 3 pips in EUR/USD and USD/JPY.

Trading sterling by the numbers
GBP/USD is quoted in terms of the number of dollars it takes to buy a pound, so a rate of 1.5515
means it costs $1.5515 to buy £1. The GBP is the primary currency in the pair and the USD is the
secondary currency. That means
GBP/USD is traded in amounts denominated in GBP. In online currency trading
platforms, standard lot sizes are £100,000, and minilot sizes are £10,000.
The pip value, or minimum price fluctuation, is denominated in USD.
Profit and loss accrues in USD. For one standard lot position size, each pip is worth
$10; for one minilot position size, each pip is worth $1.
Margin calculations are typically calculated in USD in online trading platforms.
Because of its high relative value to the USD, trading in GBP pairs requires the greatest
amount of margin on a per-lot basis. At a GBP/USD rate of 1.5500, to trade a one minilot
position worth £10,000, it’ll take $310 in available margin (based on 50:1 leverage). That
calculation will change over time, of course, based on the level of the GBP/USD exchange
rate. A higher GBP/USD rate will require more USD in available margin collateral, and a
lower GBP/USD rate will need less USD in margin.
