
c08.indd 172

11/2/07 12:25:14 PM

E Pluribus Unum

173

or beat the street. The following list of criteria highlights some of the
more common news items that bear further consideration:
• Legal news
• Added to or removed from index
• Earnings hit or miss
• Split announcement
• Insider trading
• Partnerships and alliances
• New market expansion
Legal News

Legal news is always a price driver. Having an awareness of what’s
going on with the company in question is crucial before you scan for
legal news. For example, you may be watching a company that has
been involved in a patent infringement battle. A useful screen would
be to look for keywords such as settlement or damages. It pays to use
your judgment and experience here to decide on which keywords
are most likely to appear in a news report that would affect your
position. Drug and biotech companies are especially vulnerable to
legal news, especially when their product line is subject to approval
from a group like the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. These
companies can see their stock prices double or halve on an approval
or rejection announcement.
Added to or Removed from Index

When the news reaches traders that a stock will be added to a major
index, the volume will invariably rise and the price will often become
more volatile. When a stock is dropped from an index, volume will
again rise for a short time. This occurs because all of the index
funds that held that stock must now liquidate their position to maintain their tracking of the index. After all of the index positions are
sold, the volume in a dropped stock will start to dry up as traders
move away from the discarded stock.
Earnings Hit or Miss

We’ve talked about earnings at various times throughout this chapter. Earnings are one of those news events that draws in more rumor
and news traders than any other we’ve seen. Companies are expected

c08.indd 173

11/2/07 12:25:14 PM

174

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

to give guidance to investors as the earnings announcement date
approaches. The reason for this is the age-old adage that Wall Street
hates surprises. In truth, Wall Street loves surprises as long as they’re
not the ones getting surprised. Also, there is a whisper number that
is not the official company earnings but rather a consensus among
analysts or individual investors regarding the earnings. The stock will
often trade in response to the whisper number and then adjust as
the official earnings number is released. The funny thing about the
whisper number is that the plethora of blogs and market-reporting
sites makes for some creative whisper numbers. Add to that the fact
that the very venues that generate the whisper numbers also promote their use and you have to wonder why it’s still even called the
“whisper” number. Who is left to whisper it to?
Split Announcement

A split announcement is something to watch out for when a stock
price reaches levels that the company deems is counterproductive
for investors. Interestingly, this can be too high or too low. In most
instances, a traditional stock split is announced when the per-share
stock price is so high that it discourages trading and investing by
smaller investors. A stock that is trading at $300 per share may go
through a three-for-one stock split. An investor with 100 shares at
$300 per share would end up with 300 shares at $100 per share after
the split. The total value of positions held and the company’s total
market value remains the same. However, a stock split is taken by
the market as a sign that the company believes in the ability of the
stock to continue rising, so it draws in more buyers and often pushes
the price higher. Again, though, if there is speculation around a
stock split, it is not unusual to see the stock rally on the rumor, only
to sell off after the split is announced. This is a classic case of buying the rumor and selling the news. On the flip side, a stock that
has seen its price hammered to very low levels may go through a
reverse stock split. For example, a company may announce a onefor-three reverse split for their stock if it’s trading at $3 per share.
If you have 300 shares at $3 before the split, you’ll have 100 shares
at $9 per share after the split. Companies will often announce a
reverse stock split when they believe that their stock price is too low
to attract investors and traders.

c08.indd 174

11/2/07 12:25:14 PM

E Pluribus Unum

175

Insider Trading

Insider trading is a term that most investors have heard and usually associate with illegal conduct. While the illegal activity gets all the press, the
term actually includes both legal and illegal trading. The legal version
is when corporate insiders—officers, directors, and employees—buy
and sell stock in their own companies. When corporate insiders trade
in their own securities, they must report their trades to the Securities and Exchange Commission. These trades are readily available to
anyone through a simple corporate financial overview site. We tend
to pay more attention to insider buying rather than selling. Insiders will often sell company stock in order to diversify their portfolio.
Corporate officers and others often receive a large portion of their
compensation in company stock. If they continue to accumulate
the company stock, they could very quickly find themselves with a
high concentration of company stock in their portfolio. Even though
they may believe in the strength of their own company, prudence
requires that they sell large blocks of their own company stock in
order to spread their investment risk. A stronger measure of insider
activity for us is when the insiders are buying. This is especially true
if the insiders are buying on the open market rather than exercising
stock option grants. When insiders are willing to go to the same marketplace as you and I and purchase their stock, we look at that as a
vote of confidence in the strength of the company.
Partnerships and New Markets

Once again, we round out our list with a couple of miscellaneous
screening ideas that may be used for news scans. Events that could
move a stock price may include new partnerships or alliances, new
product announcements, or entering new countries or markets. The
key here is to have your finger on the pulse of the company and then
use keywords in your news search that may give you some clues about
upcoming events.

“When You Come to a Fork in the Road, Take It”
We suppose not all decisions are as straightforward and obvious as
the famous quote by Yogi Berra. But if you don’t have a way to funnel the myriad stocks and other trading instruments down into a
usable pool, you’ll be as lost as the sailor in the fog, which opened

c08.indd 175

11/2/07 12:25:14 PM

176

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

this chapter. This is one area of trading that lets you test the waters.
Try a screen and see what comes out. If you don’t like the results,
tweak it or discard it and start from scratch. Look at some of the
predefined screens that are included in most trading web sites and
software platforms. Use the canned screens as your base and build
or adjust from there. You’ll never make the trade if the choices leave
you paralyzed.
And by the way, have fun while you’re at it.

c08.indd 176

11/2/07 12:25:15 PM

III
P O I N T

WAIT FOR THE PIVOT POINT
Strike with the Buyers

c09.indd 177

11/2/07 12:45:06 PM

c09.indd 178

11/2/07 12:45:06 PM

9

C H A P T E R

Going with the Flow
DON ’ T J UMP IN TOO EAR LY

H

elio Gracie was the youngest son of Gastao and Cesalina Gracie.
Helio was always a very physically frail child. He would run up a
flight of stairs and have fainting spells. For two years, he would sit
on the sidelines while his brother Carlos taught classes in a new
martial arts style he was developing. One day when he was 16 years
old, a student showed up for class and Carlos was not around. Helio,
who had memorized all the moves and words of his older brother,
offered to start the class. When the class was over, Carlos showed up
very apologetic for his delay. The student didn’t mind and, in fact,
requested that further lessons be given by Helio. Carlos agreed, and
Helio became an instructor.
He soon realized that some of the techniques he had memorized
from watching Carlos teach were not very easy for him to execute.
After all, he was only 140 pounds and not particularly strong. He
then started to adapt those moves to his frail body’s abilities, improving the leverage in the execution of some of those techniques. He
drifted from the traditional jiu-jitsu his brothers had learned and
continued to refine the skillful use of his opponent’s momentum.
From this beginning, Brazilian Gracie Jiu-Jitsu was born.
In 1951, Helio met Masahiko Kimura in a match watched by tens
of thousands. Kimura was considered the greatest judo fighter of all
time, and he also outweighed Helio by over 50 pounds. The match was
so imbalanced that Kimura announced prior to the fight that if Helio
could last three minutes in the ring, Helio should consider himself
179

c09.indd 179

11/2/07 12:45:07 PM

180

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

the victor. Helio fought with masterful skill, using his opponent’s
weight and momentum against him. The techniques he perfected in
Brazil served him well in that title bout. Helio lasted 13 minutes before
the fight was called when Kimura placed Helio in an arm lock. Helio
later admitted in a 1994 interview that he had in fact been choked
unconscious during the match but had revived and continued fighting. This was the ultimate testimony to the power of leverage and
momentum over raw strength.

Jiu-Jitsu Trading—Knowing When to Tap
Maneuvering within the markets is not at all unlike the match we
described above. When we approach the market, we’re the 140-pound
small guy going up against the much larger opponent. For that reason,
it’s important that we move with the market and use it to our advantage
rather than fight a losing battle. If you try to buy a falling stock, you may
as well be pushing up against a 400-pound judo champion who is lying
across your chest. During the match with Kimura, Helio felt his opponent begin to launch his trademark shoulder throw. Helio knew there
was no way he could resist against such a large opponent, so he went
limp and flowed with the throw, allowing him to continue the match.
When the stock you’re trading sets up for a strong move against you,
it is fruitless—even reckless—to position yourself against the move.
Rather, you should prepare to move with the action.
Sometimes, despite all of your training and maneuvering, you
find yourself in a position from which you can’t recover. The smart
jiu-jitsu practitioner will tap out. Tapping out is just what it implies:
The fighter taps his opponent several times to indicate that he’s conceding the match. Tapping out stops the pain and injury and allows
you to fight another day. If you stubbornly refuse to tap out, the pain
and injury will continue and may cause enough damage to prevent
you from fighting again.
If you ever get the chance to watch a jiu-jitsu match, one of the
key differences between a novice fighter and an experienced practitioner is the patience displayed by the more experienced fighter.
The novice will constantly squirm, scrap, and push as he tries to
reach in for an attack. He’s so focused on making something happen that he misses opportunities as they present themselves. The
novice assumes that being in the ring means that you must always
be moving. More often than not, his careless aggression leaves him

c09.indd 180

11/2/07 12:45:07 PM

Going with the Flow

181

exposed to the skillful counterattack of the veteran. You see, while
the novice is a whirlwind of activity, the veteran will patiently defend
against any attack until the right opportunity arises. You might even
say that he’s managing risk until he’s ready to advance. It’s almost
boring at times to watch the veteran do nothing more than sit and
position himself. Having saved his resources, though, he is ready to
bring them to bear at any time against his opponent for the advantage. The veteran knows that while activity may be entertaining, his
greatest profit comes from watching his opponent and moving at
just the right time. Ultimately, he wins the match after having spent
less energy and resources.
Do you see the picture we’re drawing? You cannot defeat the
market by scrapping and pushing against it. What you can do is move
with the market and use momentum and leverage to your advantage.
However, you will often find yourself in a situation from which you
cannot recover. Your smartest move here is to tap out and protect
your principal for future trades. Close the position, limit your losses,
and look for the next opportunity to enter the ring.

Identifying the Pivot Point
The concept of the pivot point is about how we move with the market. It is the early signal of what move the market is about to take,
and we flow with that move as it progresses. Notice here that we’re
not anticipating the move before it occurs. That will often leave us
struggling against the much larger opponent. Our goal is to recognize the move as early as possible and apply our trading action in the
direction of the move. Simply put, when the stock begins to rally, we
identify the uptrend and buy with the buyers.
The pivot point takes the form of a “ V ” in an uptrend or an
inverse “ V ” in a downtrend. We use it in conjunction with the role
reversal we discussed in Chapter 6. Figure 9.1 illustrates the pivot
point from a role reversal in an uptrend. The first part of the setup
occurs at the line marked by the “R.” This is the price level at which
the stock meets resistance. As is often the case, this level is tested
more than once, indicating the strength with which the sellers are
able to push the buyers back into a retreat. The curved line in the
chart is the 200-day simple moving average (SMA). This line will usually act as a strong resistance level when the stock is trading below
it. The stock rallies above the 200-day SMA at the point at which

c09.indd 181

11/2/07 12:45:07 PM

182

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 9.1 The Pivot Point in an Uptrend

it meets the role reversal line. In other words, the price level that
acted as resistance at “R” is the same price level where the stock rallied through the 200-day SMA. This can be considered quite bullish
when two strong resistance levels are breached. A short-term rally
follows the break above resistance. Then the stock falls back and
creates the role reversal line by showing support at the “S.” It is here
that we’re watching for the pivot point to form. We’ve included an
expanded view of the two distinct pivot points that formed above the
role reversal line. Notice how both assume the “V” shape as the stock
rises off the role reversal support level.
Even though we may anticipate the bounce off this support line,
we don’t enter the trade on the left leg of the “ V.” Entering this
trade too early before the buyers complete the right leg of the “ V ” is
akin to the fighter who presses for the advantage against the weight
of a greater opponent. It is always possible that the move may yield
a favorable outcome, but the smarter fighter displays patience until
the opponent has begun to move in the desired direction. One
point to note in Figure 9.1 is that the first pivot point failed to rally
and led to the second pivot point. That’s okay. You would protect
yourself with a stop sell order placed below the role reversal support
line. In this example, the role reversal support was not broken and
you would have remained in the trade for the subsequent rally.
The same type of scenario occurs in a downtrend. Once again,
in Figure 9.2, we start with identifying the role reversal line. In
this example, we must first find a price level that acts as support.

c09.indd 182

11/2/07 12:45:07 PM

Going with the Flow

183

Figure 9.2 The Pivot Point in a Downtrend

This is highlighted by the three points marked with the letter “S.”
About three fourths of the way along the role reversal line, we see
this support level broken as the stock falls. Shortly after breaking
support, the stock rallies and is pushed back down from the same
price level as the previous support. This established the role reversal
line, and we now watch for the formation of a pivot point. We have
clearly marked the inverted “V” shape of the pivot point in this
example. Notice how the stock failed off the role reversal line and
then dropped to the 200-day SMA. It spent several days testing the
support of the 200-day SMA before finally dropping below. Once
it dropped below, the fall accelerated before finding a short-term
base. At the time of capturing this chart, it appears that another
clear pivot point has formed below the 200-day SMA. We’ll return to
the writing of this chapter after we go enter our short trade.
Let’s take a quick look at an example of what is more likely to
happen if we jump the gun and enter a trade without a pivot point.
Figure 9.3 shows a stock that is in a steady uptrend. We are able to
strike a clean support line by connecting the lows in the uptrend.
The stock has a history of dropping right down to the support line
and obediently rising from there. If we look at a trend like this, it
would be easy to convince ourselves that we can be lax about our
requirement for waiting for the pivot point. After all, why leave
money on the table when we can buy this stock right at the support
line and grab the extra profit? The reason is given to us at the right
side of the chart when the stock fails to form a pivot point after

c09.indd 183

11/2/07 12:45:07 PM

184

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 9.3 A Stock in an Uptrend without a Pivot Point

reaching the support line. The long black candle shows us that the
stock gapped down below support, briefly made an attempt to
rise above the line, but then closed down heavily on high volume.
We would not have been in this trade if we followed the rule of buying only on up days after the pivot point has been established. The
last three candles before the big drop were all black candles, which
tells us that the sellers are clearly in control. Money is flowing out of
this stock, and until we see evidence that money has started moving
back into the stock, we don’t want to be buyers.

The Pineapple Principle
It’s often been said that the way to make money in the stock market
is to buy low and sell high. The only problem with this approach is
that we get the picture in our minds that we need to be able to identify the lowest point on a trend and somehow manage to also pick
out the top of the trend. In all our years of working with traders
around the world, we’ve yet to identify the first trader who can consistently pick the bottoms and tops. That said, we’d highly recommend against your attempt to be the first. A better slogan to adopt
when trading trends is this: “Buy high and sell higher.” Do you see
how the picture changes in your mind? Now you’re not conditioning yourself to buy against the downtrend in anticipation of finding
the lowest point on the chart. You are executing the point of this
chapter—namely, following the money trail.

c09.indd 184

11/2/07 12:45:08 PM

Going with the Flow

185

When you wait for the pivot point in your trading, you are not
going to be buying the low. The pivot point is formed when the low
has been left behind. Very likely, you won’t be selling at the highest
point, either. That’s fine to leave some money behind you and in
front of you. Your goal is to find high-confidence trades and move
in to take a bite out of the middle.
We want to encourage you to think about your trading like a
pineapple, and we’ll refer to this as the Pineapple Principle. (Our
cursory literature search failed to uncover any widespread use of this
term, so we’ll be happy to take credit for introducing this to the
financial world. Our guess is that this credit won’t be accompanied
by any significant monetary reward.) The idea is simple, yet useful.
When you prepare a fresh pineapple, the first two steps are:
1. Choose a good pineapple.
2. Remove the top and bottom.
This is an appropriate analogy for the trader. The first objective
is to choose a good trade, based on the criteria that we’re outlining
in this book. You want to identify the trend and follow the money
trail. That’s the good pineapple. Beyond that, though, is the idea
of cutting off the top and bottom of the pineapple. Even though
you’ve identified a good trend, you don’t attempt to eat the whole
thing. That is, don’t waste your time looking for the top and bottom.
The best trading in a trend is when you can jump into an established trend, ride it for a time for a profit, and then jump off. The
trend may very well continue, but don’t look back and lament the
fact that you’re out of the trade. Congratulate yourself for following
your rules and making a profitable trade. According to the Pineapple Principle, trying to profit from the entire trend, however good
the trend may be, is a bit like trying to eat the entire pineapple. The
sweetest spot is in the middle.

Pivot Point Patterns
As you can see, the concept of the pivot point is not a difficult one.
Nor is it tough to recognize the pivot point when you see an example
before you. The one aspect of trading with the pivot point that is subject
to interpretation and causes the most questions for traders is exactly
when the pivot point is considered complete. In other words, how

c09.indd 185

11/2/07 12:45:08 PM

186

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

much does the stock need to rally off the support level before you
can consider the right leg of the “V” to be established well enough to
say, “Here is the entry point?”
The Market Guys like to have simple rules that take the guesswork out of trading as much as possible. To that end, we’ll spend
the following pages reviewing some of our favorite candlestick chart
patterns that we look for when we’re waiting for a pivot point to
form. The first section contains bullish pivot point patterns. These
patterns occur in a long-term uptrend after the stock has had a brief
pullback. The second section contains bearish pivot point patterns.
On the flip side from the bullish patterns, these occur in an overall
downtrend after the stock has experienced a short-term rally.
