
easily taught. His colleague Richard Dennis differed and believed that trading could be
taught. They called their students Turtles. Not all of the Turtles succeeded even though
they were all taught exactly the same. Why did some of the Turtles succeed and continue till today compounding money? Simple answer, how they thought!
William Eckhardt and Richard Dennis raised a generation of trend followers.Today
the offspring of those trend followers are making a mark for themselves. The entire
training of the Turtle program was two weeks long. There was very little in the secret
sauce learning. Most of the learning was how to think and how to deal with the psychology of trading. Sadly, this is the least interesting to most beginning traders but the
most important.

■ Make It Second Nature

139
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

How to think like a successful trend follower hopefully will be ingrained in you.
One of my mentors learned under Ed Seykota and Van Tharp. He would constantly
remind me of many of their statements and how to think. As well, one of my mentors
is a big admirer of Mark Douglas, who is well known in the trading psychology field.
Mark Douglas left a big impression on him and I was constantly reminded of many of
Mark Douglas’s thoughts in our countless conversations. Imagine 18 years of speaking
to someone virtually every day, the correct trading mentality resonated.
There are the greed and fear aspects you will learn to overcome.When trading, these
two emotions are constantly present: greed and fear. If your trade goes well, a possible
natural inclination will be to trade even more, opening yourself up to significant loss.
And if your trade goes wrong, fear will torture you. Fear of loss or fear of a further loss
makes traders scared. Greed and fear are destructive emotions, and all traders are influenced by them; they’re a natural part of every trader’s psychology. Greed and fear can
make traders act irrationally: they may know what they should do, but they simply can’t
do it. The bottom line: If you’re scared or greedy, and you can’t control your emotions
when day trading, then you’ll have a very difficult time being profitable.
You will learn it is not about being smart or trying to prove something to anyone.
There will be no need to try to pick tops and bottoms. You will learn to accept the
truth when the trade did not work and there is no need to hold on.
Do not allow yourself to get caught up in positive or negative emotions. Understand the psychology behind trading and not just know that no trade is guaranteed
but also internalize the fact. Work on your mental state. If a trade goes wrong, try to
work out why it did and learn from it. Executing a trading method with discipline is
the only way to overcome destructive emotions. Whether you’re a day trader or an
investor, and whether you trade in commodities, stocks, or currencies, the fact is that
your trading psychology WILL influence your results. If you miss a trade, another one
will be just around the corner. Practice patience and discipline.

You need to control your emotions by having a specific plan to follow. Having the
correct trading psychology is just as important as having a robust trading strategy.
The more you are prepared mentally for trading, the better you will trade.
You will learn to negate impulsive behavior in which you might buy or sell without
following a plan or thinking that you need one. Impatience or boredom is another pillar of failure. There are those who are seeking action or simply adrenaline.
It all boils down to—Do you really want to succeed?
If you truly want to succeed—you need a well‐thought‐out plan and
you need to follow it exactly!
I am giving you my plan that I use every day when I trade. You can use
it exactly as I do or use pieces of it that match your personality.
I know people that are overweight, yet they have been on a diet for years. They will
drink the Diet Cokes and not eat cakes in front of others; however, in their kitchens
they will devour the whole cake. The fact is, these people want to be slim, yet they are
overweight for years and nothing changes.
Amazon lists thousands of books on “Weight Loss” as well as thousands of books on
“Exercising and Fitness.” There is always this fad diet and that fad diet.
I like to keep things simple . . . KISS. I had a discussion with one of the executives
of Reuters/Metastock who is an avid sports enthusiast regarding triathlons and dieting.
We concurred that if one wrote a book on weight loss, it would be very, very short:

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

140

■

Eat less.

■

Exercise more.

Come on, it’s simple: We all know that we can lose weight if we just follow those
two rules. We reduce our calorie intake and we do some aerobic exercises at least
three times a week for a minimum of 30 minutes.
The sad reality is no one wants “simple.”
The more complicated, the better!
Simple works! Robust ideas on trend following work over time!
As in trading, the more complicated, the so‐called better!
Why do people keep buying these books and magazines that promise a new diet or
a new way to lose weight? In my opinion it is a lack of discipline.
It is almost how beginning traders buy new courses or constantly seek gurus. They
believe there is a holy grail or someone knows something more than they do. Either
they were never taught robust trend following ideas or they went through an inevitable
drawdown and thought to find another method. They gave up on their patience and
discipline.
I am not a therapist but it would seem that the short‐term pleasure outweighs
the long‐term benefit of healthy eating. This is exactly like traders who want to be
successful, yet they keep on making mistakes in the markets. They are impulsive

or they simply do not follow their plan. They are seeking short‐term pleasures or
profits. They do not have the patience when the trade works. They seek to ring the
cash register.
There are millions of books on dieting, yet people are overweight. There are millions of books and courses on trading, yet most people are not successful and lose
money. I want to instill in you the methodologies I have used every day for the last 18
years and how to deal with your mind.
I will give you the knowledge, but you have to have the motivation.
They blame the plan: “It’s too hard,” “It’s impossible,” “It doesn’t work.” This isn’t
true. The ideas I am sharing with you are simple and robust. These beginning traders
didn’t succeed because they were simply too lazy, or they didn’t have the discipline to
execute the plan. But instead of working on the true problem—the execution—they
think can change the plan itself, hoping that there’s an easier way. Successful traders
realize that their problem doesn’t lie in the plan, but in the execution.
Here’s what you can do in order to ensure your own motivation and discipline
when it comes to executing the plan:
It’s important to focus on the big picture.
Your money will be made over a series of many trades.
No single trade means anything.
No month or any year means anything.

■ Trend Following and Trading Is Not

Retirement in a Box!

The average person wants to be told exactly which stock to buy or sell. They want a
little bit of excitement or fun. The average person does not really want to work. The
average person will risk hard‐earned savings on stock tips with less thought than what
to eat for dinner. This is why most fail in the investment world.
You need to be self‐reliant and believe in yourself.
When you believe in yourself, you are in the right direction of success.

THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

Thinking in these terms will help you greatly execute the plan.
The concept that trading is easy is very dangerous to the financial stability of a
trader.
When beginners make money on a trade, they feel like a genius and
invincible. Then they can take wild risks and lose everything.
Many beginner traders delude themselves and fall for advertisements promising
“You will get rich by day trading,” “Earn unlimited income,” or “Forget about your day
job and trade for a living.”

141

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

142

Nothing ever changes in the markets.
Fear and greed never subside.
Jesse Livermore, a market wizard from the beginning of the last century, stated,
“Wall Street never changes, the pockets change, the suckers change, the stocks change,
but Wall Street never changes because human nature never changes.”
If you truly want to change your reality when trading, I am here to
help you!
The answer is within you!
You have to learn to think like a successful trader. I will help you but cannot
guarantee your success. It is all about you. I will give you all the tools that I have
used on a daily basis for the last 18 years! You will have to internalize what I am
teaching you, use it as part of your mental framework when trading, and not quit
when you hit a drawdown or rough patch. What I guarantee you is that you will
go through an ugly drawdown and your worst drawdown is always ahead of you.
There will be no surprises from what I teach you and when you actually trend follow under my plan.
Successful trend followers are simply playing the game to win and to compound
their way to wealth. And they are enjoying every moment of it. Successful trend followers are humble and low key. They do not need to impress others.
There only exists a small group of consistently successful trend followers and traders. Most traders experience varying degrees of frustration in various degrees including extreme exasperation, wondering why they can’t create consistent success. Many
look for the holy grail and all types of magical indicators. Successful trend followers
do not waste their time in searching for the holy grail.
Hopefully I will instill this in you!
I joined a brokerage in order to learn firsthand who was making money and who
wasn’t. I was told about the most successful client in the firm. My first reaction was
that this “successful client” was one who was “in the know” or maybe a financial professional like someone from Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley.
When I was told he was a dentist, I thought he was kidding!
The dentist started in 1979 and has been compounding money ever since.
He started with $200,000, understandably a lot of money in 1979, but today he
has a $5,000,000 trading account, plus accounts for his kids, and he has taken
$12,000,000 out of the markets. He is an example of one who has compounded his
way to wealth. As you read on further you will realize this is not a get rich quick
or an instant millionaire trader story. Rather it is one where you compound your
way to wealth over many long years full of steep and drawn‐out periods of losses.
The dentist had countless losses. He strived to keep them small and he had the discipline, patience, and focus to get through all the inevitable losses he encountered
and draw downs to stay in the marathon of trend following. You can also do this if
you truly want it!

■ What Makes a Successful Trend Follower?

143
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

Is it intelligence or simply that successful trend followers work harder? Do successful
trend followers have better trading systems or computers? Why do the vast majority of
beginning traders fail? One has to take into account that most beginning traders are successful in their own right. Many unsuccessful traders include professionals such as pilots,
engineers, doctors, and wealthy retirees. More interesting is that most analysts are also
not profitable traders. In short, intelligence is not the only answer to successful trading. Actually a greater intelligence can be detrimental. Too often an intelligent person
wants to know why a market did whatever it did. There are always a myriad of possible
reasons but the simple answer is that it does not matter WHY. The market moved, that
is it, and we have a choice to figure out why or try to ride the trend and hopefully make
some money. Intelligent people try to analyze things much more than the general populace. I have a colleague who has a sign on his door, Don’t think, It will cost you MONEY!
In trading there is a lot of merit to this statement. One needs to react and follow one’s
plan. This is what makes trading so hard. This is a dichotomy from our human existence.
We are taught not to be rash or too quick to make a decision. In trading we have to be as
we are in the thick of it and postponing a decision such as an entry or exit can be costly.
Reacting in trading means following your plan explicitly.
Your plan needs to be meticulously developed in order that you are not being rash
but rather decisive.
This really sums up having confidence and the realization that it is not about being
smart. It is about being disciplined and having faith in one’s actions.
The reality is that the markets will do whatever they want. There is really no easy
way or any way to figure them out. The markets do the unpredictable. A stock goes
down with a positive earnings report. Bernanke speaks, which would seem would be
positive news, and the markets sell off in a rage. There can be a statement from an official that can set in motion a major bear market. After a speech by Treasury Secretary
Jim Baker in 1987, investors began to fear that the weak U.S. dollar would cause further inflation. The Dow dropped about 200 points or 9 percent in the first hour and
a half. Prior to the waterfall drop the stock market had been doing great for the first
nine months of 1987. It was up more than 30 percent, hitting new highs. The prior two
consecutive years had had gains of 20 percent+.
One can rationalize or try to find the reasons why the market sold off. Intelligent
people live for reason. If they cannot find a reason, they invest a great deal of emotional
energy in analyzing. There is no reason to analyze. Markets do whatever they want. Our
job is to follow (trend follow) without wasting time looking for reasons. The intelligent
populace wanted a reason for the 1987 stock market crash. Maybe the market needed a
rest. Maybe investors panicked. For whatever reason, which does not matter, fortunes
were lost and some fortunes were made. Traders that were trend followers made fortunes. One of these traders was Marty Schwartz. His exploits during 1987 are a great

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

144

lesson to trend followers. Schwartz uses very simple indicators such as a 10‐period moving average. In his book Pit Bull, Marty states that one needs to be consistent and trade
within one’s means. Even with the stock market crash in 1987, that was one of the most
profitable years for Marty Schwartz. At the onset of the crash he lost $315,000. He did
not sulk or try to figure out why. The “why” is the normal or human reaction. Trying to
figure out the “why” instead of reacting can be lethal to one’s trading account. Schwartz
did not try to figure out the “why”; he followed his plan and took his loss without any
hesitation. As he later said, if you did not take the $315,000 loss it could have morphed
into a $5,000,000 loss. Compare Schwartz to other traders who were frozen or thought
the market would come back. Schwartz was a Marine. His Marine training came into
play.They taught him never to freeze when under attack. One of the tactics in the Marine
Corps officer’s manual is either go forward or backward. Don’t just sit there if you are
getting the hell beat out of you. Even retreating is offensive, because you are still doing something. It is the same thing in the market. The most important thing is to keep
enough powder to make your comeback. Let Marty Schwartz’s experience serve as a
lesson on how to be a trader. No opinions, follow the plan, cut losses immediately, and
realize that if you run out of money, you cannot keep on trading. Very powerful lessons
that I hope you internalize. I was lucky to have met Marty at a dinner in Boca and was
very impressed by him as a person. I suggest you pick up a copy of his book, Pit Bull.
The answer regarding intelligence and reasons why markets move, however, is
much closer at hand.
Internalize this statement by William Eckhardt: “I haven’t seen much correlation
between good trading and intelligence. Average intelligence is enough. Beyond that,
emotional makeup is more important.”
The way one thinks when trend following is critical to one’s success.
It all boils down to attitude. We as trend followers are faced with the dilemma of
how to be and remain confident in spite of adverse conditions such as drawdowns and
extended periods when we do not make money. If you really think about it, when a
trade does not work, we are wrong, and to make matters worse we lose hard‐earned
money. Clearly trading is risky.
No trade ever has a guaranteed outcome regardless of all the analysis or anything.
On every trade one stands the definite risk of losing money.
The funny thing I learned over the years was that most traders truly believe that the
trade has to work. They believe they are not taking a risk. They do not fully internalize
that they can lose money.
Contrarily, when I put on a trade I ask myself how much this is going to cost me
to see if it works. Losses do not cause me any anguish or emotional discomfort. The
markets will at times inflict pain or cause frustration. This is the reality of trading.
The only way to avoid this pain or frustration is not trade. Our job as traders is to
take both the pain and frustration in stride. The markets do not care about you or
me. The markets are going to do whatever they will do. You cannot avoid losses or
avoid the pain. You need to accept it as a reality of trading. What you need to do is

■ Sweet Simplicity
My goal is to get you into this mindset. Learning the proper attitudes and mindset are
critical for successful trend following. When I put on a trade, all that I can expect is
that something will happen. There are only four possibilities.
■

A big loss.

■

A small loss.

■

A big profit.

■

A small profit.

