
81

82
1981 the public sold bonds heavily, giving up a 15 percent return for thirty years because they couldn't
resist 21 percent short-term yields. They weren't thinking about the long term. Now, because money market
rates are only 4.5 percent, the same poor public is back buying bonds, effectively lending money at 7.5
percent for thirty years to a government that's running $400 billion deficits.
The current situation is Just the inverse of 1981. In 1981 the public should have seen Volcker's jacking up
of short-term rates to 21 percent as a very positive move, which would bring down long-term inflation and
push up bond and stock prices. Instead, they were lured by the high short-term yields. In contrast, now with
the economy in decline, the deficit ballooning, and the administration and the Fed in a state of panic, the
public should be wary about the risk in holding long-term bonds. Instead, the same people who sold their
bonds in 1981 at 15 percent rates are now buying them back at 7.5 percent because they don't have
anything better to do with their money. Once again, they're not focusing on the long term.
==== Your long-term performance has far surpassed the industry average. To what do you attribute your
superior track record? ====
George Soros has a philosophy that I have also adopted: The way to build long-term returns is through
preservation of capital and home runs. You can be far more aggressive when you're making good profits.
Many managers, once they're up 30 or 40 percent, will book their year [i.e., trade very cautiously for the
remainder of the year so as not to jeopardize the very good return that has already been realized]. The way
to attain tmly superior long-term returns is to grind it out until you're up 30 or 40 percent, and then if you
have the convictions, go for a 100 percent year. If you can put together a few near-100 percent years and
avoid down years, then you can achieve really outstanding long-term returns.
==== What else have you learned from Soros? ====
I've learned many things from him, but perhaps the most significant is that it's not whether you're right or
wrong that's important, but how much money you make when you're right and how much you lose when
you're wrong. The few times that Soros has ever criticized me was when I was really right on a market and
didn't maximize the opportunity.
As an example, shortly after I had started working for Soros, I was very bearish on the dollar and put on a
large short position against the Deutsche mark. The position had started going in my favor, and I felt rather
proud of myself. Soros came into my office, and we talked about the trade.
"How big a position do you have?" he asked.
"One billion dollars," I answered.
"You call that a position?" he said dismissingly. He encouraged me to double my position. I did, and the
trade went dramatically further in our favor.
Soros has taught me that when you have tremendous conviction on a trade, you have to go for the
jugular. It takes courage to be a pig. It takes courage to ride a profit with huge leverage. As far as Soros is
concerned, when you're right on something, you can't own enough.
Although I was not at Soros Management at the time, I've heard that prior to the Plaza Accord meeting in
the fall of 1985, other traders in the office had been piggybacking George and hence were long the yen going
into the meeting. When the yen opened 800 points higher on Monday morning, these traders couldn't believe
the size of their gains and anxiously started taking profits. Supposedly, George came bolting out of the door,
directing the other traders to stop selling the yen, telling them that he would assume their position. While
these other traders were congratulating themselves for having taken the biggest profit in their lives, Soros
was looking at the big picture: The government had just told him that the dollar was going to go down for the
next year, so why shouldn't he be a pig and buy more [yen]?
Soros is also the best loss taker I've ever seen. He doesn't care whether he wins or loses on a trade. If a
trade doesn't work, he's confident enough about his ability to win on other trades that he can easily walk
away from the position. There are a lot of shoes on the shelf; wear only the ones that fit. If you're extremely
confident, taking a loss doesn't bother you.
==== How do you handle the pressure of managing a multifrt'ffion dollar portfolio? ====
I'm a lot less nervous about it now than I was a few years ago. The wonderful thing about our business is
that it's liquid, and you can wipe the slate clean on any day. As long as I'm in control of the situation- that is,
as long as I can cover my positions-there's no reason to be nervous.
According to Druckenmiller, superior performance requires two key elements: preservation of capital and
home runs. The first principle has been quite well publicized, but the second is far less appreciated. From a
portfolio perspective, Druckenmiller is saying that in order to really excel, you must take full advantage of the
situations when you are well ahead and running a hot hand. Those are the times to really press, not rest on
your laurels. Great track records are made by avoiding losing years and managing to score a few highdouble-digit- or triple-digit-gain years. On an individual trade basis, going for home runs means really
applying leverage in those infrequent circumstances when you have tremendous confidence. As Druckenmiller
puts it, "It takes courage to be a pig,".
Another important lesson to be drawn from this interview is that if you make a mistake, respond
immediately! Druckenmiller made the incredible error of shifting from short to 130 percent long on the very
day before the massive October 19, 1987, stock crash, yet he finished the month with a net gain. How? When
he realized he was dead wrong, he liquidated his entire long position during the first hour of trading on
October 19 and actually went short. Had he been less open-minded, defending his original position when
confronted with contrary evidence, or had he procrastinated to see if the market would recover, he would
have suffered a tremendous loss. Instead, he actually made a small profit. The ability to accept unpleasant

82

83
truths (i.e., market action or events counter to one's position) and respond decisively and without
hesitation is the mark of a great trader.
Although Druckenmiller employs valuation analysis and believes it is important in gauging the extent of a
potential future price move once the current market trend reverses, he emphasizes that this approach cannot
be used for timing. The key tools Druckenmiller applies to timing the broad market are liquidity analysis and
technical analysis.
In evaluating individual stocks, Druckenmiller recalls the advice of his first boss, who made him realize
that the initial step in any analysis is determining the factors that make a particular stock go up or down. The
specifics will vary for each market sector, and sometimes even within each sector.
Druckenmiller's entire trading style runs counter to the orthodoxy of fund management. There is no logical
reason why an investor (or fund manager) should be nearly fully invested in equities at all times. If an
investor's analysis points to the probability of an impending bear market, he or she should move entirely to
cash and possibly even a net short position. Recall Druckenmiller's frustration at being extremely bearish in
mid-1981, absolutely correct in his forecast, and still losing money, because at the time, he was still wedded
to the idea that a stock manager had to be net long at all times. There is little question that Druckenmiller''s
long-term gains would have been dramatically lower and his equity drawdowns significantly wider if he
restricted himself to the long side of the stock market. The flexibility of Druckenmilter's style-going short as
well as long and also diversifying into other major global markets (e.g., bonds and currencies)-is obviously a
key element of his success. The queen in chess, which can move in all directions, is a far more powerful piece
than the pawn, which can only move forward.
One basic market truth (or, perhaps more accurately, one basic truth about human nature) is that you
can't win if you have to win. Druckenmiller's plunge into T-bill futures in a desperate attempt to save his firm
from financial ruin provides a classic example. Even though he bought T-bill futures within one week of their
all-time low (you can't pick a trade much better than that), he lost all his money. The very need to win
poisoned the trade-m this instance, through grossly excessive leverage and a lack of planning. The market is
a stem master that seldom tolerates the carelessness associated with trades born of desperation.

83

84
Richard Driehaus: The Art of Bottom-Up

Investing

Richard H. Driehaus got hooked on the stock market as a kid, and JAJlis enthusiasm for the market has
never flagged since. While still in his early teens, Driehaus discovered the folly of following the recommendations of financial columnists. As a result, he decided to educate himself by devouring all the stock
newsletters and financial magazines he could find at the local branch library. It was during those childhood
years that he began to develop me basic market philosophy that would serve as the core of his approach in
his later years as a securities analyst and portfolio manager.
Upon college graduation, Driehaus set out to find a market-related job and landed a slot as a research
analyst. Although he liked the job, he was frustrated by seeing his best recommendations ignored by the
sales force. Driehaus got his first chance to manage money in 1970 while working in the institutional trading
department at A. G. Becker. To his pleasant surprise, Driehaus discovered that his trading ideas were even
better in practice than he dared to believe. In his three years as a manager at A. G. Becker, he was rated in
the top 1 percent of all portfolio managers surveyed by Becker's Fund Evaluation Service, the largest fund
rating service at the time.
After leaving A. G. Becker, Driehaus worked as a director of research for Mullaney, Wells and Company,
and then Jessup and Lam-ount, before starting his own firm in 1980. For the twelve-year period since 1980,
Driehaus averaged an annual return in excess of 30 percent (net of brokerage and management fees), nearly
double the S&P 500 return of 16.7 percent during the same period. The S&P 500, however, is not the
appropriate benchmark, as Driehaus focuses on small cap (capitalization) stocks. In case you think that
Driehaus's superior performance is related to the better performance of the low cap stocks, note that the
Russell 2000 index, which tracks the performance of the 1,001st through 3,000th largest U.S. companies (a
group representative of the stocks in Driehaus's portfolio), was up only 13.5 percent, compounded annually,
during the same twelve-year period. One dollar invested in the Russell index in 1980 would have been worth
$4.56 at the end of 1991; one dollar invested in Driehaus's Small Cap Fund would have grown to $24.65
during the same time frame.
Although Driehaus's flagship investment vehicle has been small cap stocks, he has broadened his scope to
include other types of funds as well. He is particularly fond of the concept mat underlies his Bull and Bear
Partnership Fund. This fund seeks to remove the impact of the general stock market trend by approximately
balancing long and short positions on an ongoing basis. In other words, the fund's market directional
exposure is near zero at all times, with performance entirely dependent on individual stock selection. In its
first two years of operation, 1990 and 1991, this fund realized back-to-back annual returns of 67 percent and
62 percent (before a 20 percent profit incentive fee payout), with only three out of twenty-four months
registering a loss (the largest being a mere 4 percent).
Over the years, philanthropy has become an increasingly important force in Driehaus's life. In 1984, he
started the Richard H. Driehaus Foundation with a $1 million contribution of TCBY (The Country's Best Yogurt,
originally This Can't Be Yogurt) stock. He manages the foundation's funds, distributing 5 percent of the total
equity annually to a variety of charities. By the end of 1991, the foundation's capitalization had grown to
approximately $20 million.
I met Driehaus on one of his periodic jaunts to New York City for an art auction. The interview was
conducted over a leisurely breakfast (apparently far too leisurely as far as the staff was concerned) in the
cavernous dining room of a midtown hotel. Eventually, we moved on to continue the interview at a quiet
lounge at a nearby hotel, where the dark, floor-to-ceiling wood-paneled walls and antique fixtures provided a
century-old atmosphere.
==== When did you first become interested in the stock market? ====
When I was thirteen years old I decided to invest $ 1,000 saved up from my newspaper route in the stock
market. My early investments, which were guided by financial columnist and broker recommendations, fared
poorly. I had thought that if I followed the advice of professionals, I would make money. I found the
experience very disheartening.
I decided to try to figure out what made stock prices move. I started going down to the local library on a
regular basis and reading a variety of financial periodicals and newsletters. One letter that had a particularly
strong impact on me was John Herold's America's Fastest Growing Companies.
==== What appealed to you about that letter? ====
It was my favorite letter for two reasons. First, it showed me the success that could be achieved by buying
growth stocks. Herold had stocks in his newsletter that he had recommended ten years earlier that were up
tenfold and twentyfold. These were incredible moves to me. Second, Herold's approach of focusing on
earnings growth made a lot of sense to me. It seemed logical that if a company's earnings were growing over
a long period of time, its stock price had to go in the same direction. In his newsletter, Herold displayed
charts that superimposed a stock's price and its earnings over a ten-year period, with both graphs showing
dramatic growth. These charts, which basically demonstrated that a stock's price was in harmony with its
long-term earnings growth, became a very powerful image to me.
==== Was your first job market related? ====
Yes. After college, I landed a job as a securities analyst for a small Midwestern brokerage firm. To my
dismay, I discovered that many of my recommendations were never implemented in the customers'
portfolios.
==== Why was that? ====

84

85
Because the P/E multiples [the ratios of prices to earnings] were too high. Many of the best growth
stocks have high multiples and are psychologically difficult to buy. If the brokers weren't turned off by the
high P/Es, their clients were. Also, I realized that many brokers weren't portfolio managers but were primarily
sales oriented. I found it very discouraging that many of my best recommendations were not being utilized.
After about two years, I left this company to join the institutional trading department of A. G. Becker,
which at the time was a very strong force in the Midwestern brokerage business. I published my own inhouse recommendation letter for the customers of that department. The company management began to
notice that my recommendations were significantly outperforming the stocks in their other portfolios, as well
as their own research recommendations. At the beginning of 1970, they gave me approximately $400,000 of
the A. G. Becker Profit-Sharing Fund to personally manage. This was my first opportunity to implement my
investment philosophy. I was elated.
==== Did you find that there were differences between actually managing money and simply making
recommendations? ====
No, not really. However, the period when I started managing this account coincided with a bear market in
stocks. Consequently, I had to suffer through some early, large losses. This is a good example of why you
have to have faith in your approach in order to succeed. For example, one of the first stocks 1 bought was
Bandag, which I purchased at $37. The stock first went down to $22, but then in the ensuing 1971-72 bull
market, it went up tenfold.
==== Did you hold on to the stock for that entire move? ====
No, unfortunately, I didn't. About a year later, I was on a business trip and I called my office to check on
my stocks. I found out that Bandag was up $5 that day, reaching a new high of $47- I decided to take my
profits, with the idea of buying the stock back later. Bandag then proceeded to continue to go straight up to a
high of $240 over the next year. That experience taught me that it's not that easy to buy back a good stock
once you've sold it. It reinforced the idea that there's great advantage and comfort to being a long-term
investor.
==== Yet I understand that your average holding period tends to be significantly shorter than that of most
other money managers. Why is that? ====
Although many of the equities in our portfolios are held for a very long period if they're doing well, you
have to be willing to turn over your portfolio more frequently than the conventional norm to get superior
performance. I always look for the best potential performance at the current time. Even if I think that a stock
I hold will go higher, if I believe another stock will do significantly better in the interim, I'll switch.
==== In other words, you want the fastest horse, even if your first horse is still trotting in the right
direction. ====
Yes, but even more importantly, I want to make sure I get off the horse if it starts heading in the wrong
direction. Most people believe high turnover is risky, but I think just the opposite. High turnover reduces risk
when it's the result of taking a series of small losses in order to avoid larger losses. I don't hold on to stocks
with deteriorating fundamentals or price patterns. For me, this kind of turnover makes sense. It reduces risk;
it doesn't increase it.
==== How long did you stay with A. G. Becker? ====
I left in the fall of 1973 to become the research director for Mullaney, Wells and Company, a small
regional brokerage firm.
==== Did they give you money to manage? ====
No, but A. G. Becker let me continue to manage the account I had traded for them. In addition to that, the
woman who reconciled the trades in the A. G. Becker office had seen that I was good at picking stocks. She
gave me $104,000 of her own money to manage, which constituted most of her liquid assets.
==== As I recall, late 1973 would have been a particularly poor time to start a stock account. ====
That's right. The 1973-74 bear market was the worst decline since the 1930s.
==== Were you fully invested? ====
Yes. Then I assume the account must have taken a fairly large hit At the worst point, I believe the
$104,000 went down to under $60,000.
==== Did your client's confidence ever flag? ====
That's the beauty of it. Her confidence never wavered. She had the strength to stay in. In fact, she's still
with me today. I'll always be grateful to her for sticking with me when I was young and unproven.
==== What is her account worth today? ====
The account is now up to $5.8 million-and that's after taxes. This stuff really works!
==== Any trades stand out in your long trading history? ====
My largest position ever was Home Shopping Network [HSN], which I purchased in 1986. I heard about
the stock from one of my analysts whom I had sent to a cable television conference several weeks before the
company went public. As you probably know. Home Shopping Network sells low-priced merchandise-clothes,
jewelry, and so on-over cable television. They had started this venture about a year before the offering, and
in their first six months they had sold $64 million in merchandise and earned $7 million fully taxed. These
were about the best results I had ever seen for a new company. Even better, the company still had incredible
potential. At the time of the offering, they were reaching only a limited number of subscribers but were
adding new

85

86
subscribers very quickly. The cable systems liked the service because they got part of the profits, so it
was easy for HSN to get picked up by new cable networks.
==== Did you buy the stock on the initial offering? ====
I wish I could have, but it was very hard to get stock on the deal. I believe we got only one hundred
shares. The offering price was $18 per share and the first trade was in the low $40s. I bought most of my
position in a range between the low $40s and low $50s.
==== Wasn`t it hard to buy the stock when it was up so much? ====
No, because the growth was tremendous, the company was making lots of money, and the potential at
the time seemed open-ended. I actually felt very good buying stock at those levels. Within five months, the
stock was at $100. During this time, the company continued to build its subscriber base and even purchased
television stations to reach more viewers. The revenues and earnings remained very strong.
==== How long did you hold the stock? ====
By early 1987, the stock had reached $200.I sent my analyst down to Florida to an investor meeting
hosted by the company. Although the management was very optimistic, at the meeting they admitted that
almost aU the growth was coming from new subscribers and that the growth in order rates from customers
on existing cable systems was not that great. About this time, the stock had also started to break down
technically. That was all I needed. I sold the stock aggressively and eliminated my entire position over the
next few weeks.
==== Any other examples of stock picks that exemplify your investment style? ====
A recent example is U.S. Surgical [USSj. Although by now USS has become an institutional favorite, I was
fortunate to uncover this story in late 1989, before it really took off. At that time, USS didn't yet have the
great stock characteristics that it later showed in 1990 and 1991 accelerating sales and earnings, high
relative strength, and institutional sponsorship. But it did have a very powerful, fundamental story. It had
developed the best pipeline of noninvasive surgical products-an innovative sector that I thought would
become the fastest growing medical market of the nineties. USS is probably a good example of what I try to
do because the key to buying this stock was early recognition of the noninvasive surgery market. This new
procedure was not heavily covered by Wall Street back in 1989. It didn1! have that much to do with what I
call "left brain" (micro) factors, which would be growth rates, multiples, margins, and so on. This stock was a
"right brain" (macro) story. You had to appreciate the potential of this market before the numbers came
through so powerfully.
Danek Group [DNKG], a manufacturer of spinal implants, is another good example. I started buying DNKG
as soon as it went public in May 1991. It had everything I look for in a growth stock: accelerating revenues
and earnings and proprietary products in a rapidly expanding market. Even better, from a trading point of
view, DNKG was a strong medical products company at a time when the market couldn't wait to buy such
issues. Anything healthcare-related was moving in 1991, and DNKG forcefully participated in this move,
exploding from $19 to $43 during its first three months after going public. But then a rumor began circulating
mat DNKG was going to run into some trouble at the PDA. Although this news was unsubstantiated, the stock
cracked from $43 to $34 in just a couple of days. This was my second largest position. Usually, I sell a
portion of my position when there's a problem-and trouble at the FDA certainly qualifies as a big problem.
But in this case, I just didn't believe the rumors, and medical stocks were in strong demand in the
marketplace, so I stayed with my full position. This proved to be the right decision, as DNKG not only recovered but went on to hit new highs, exceeding $60 by the end of 1991.
In this instance, the key to making money in the stock was trading the position properly. Some portfolio
management decisions are investment oriented and some are trading oriented. This was a trading decision.
Also, I might have made a different decision if other factors were different. For example, if the market
weren't strong, or if the medical products group had been weakening, then I might have sold the entire
position. There are a lot of different inputs that can affect a decision, and there are no universal decision
rules.
==== Any other illustrative case histories? ====
Another interesting company was Blockbuster Entertainment [BVj, which operates and franchises video
rental stores. This is a franchise expansion story. I first learned of this company from a very bullish research
report issued by a Texas brokerage firm. The estimated revenues and earnings growth rates left me a little
skeptical at first, but the technical indicators were improving and the concept was unbelievable. The story
had good credibility because the company was being launched by Wayne Huizenga, who was already a
successful businessman. He was one of the founders and former chairman of Waste Management, another
company in which I was an early investor after the company went public in the early 1970s.
The Blockbuster story started to appeal to me even more when the company made its next quarterly
earnings announcement. The growth rates were impressive and made me believe that the street estimate I
had frowned upon earlier was not only achievable but maybe even conservative. I instructed one of my
analysts to increase his research efforts. Huizenga planned to continue opening company-owned and
franchised video rental stores under the Blockbuster name. I learned that these were superstores that
stocked thousands of videocassettes. I felt the concept would work because VCR sales were still growing
quite substantially and Blockbuster's main competition came from mom-and-pop video retailers that had a
much smaller selection of videocassettes. We continued to increase our position in the stock over the next
few months and made a lot of money, as the stock more than doubled.
==== In any these examples, it sounds like you bought the stock and the stock took off. Can you think of a
