
Reversal block
appears if the
high of the
previous three
low blocks are
penetrated.

Basic Technical Analysis

83

Figure 5.19 Three-Line Break Chart Showing Bearish Reversal

A new black column is
added when the price
moves beyond the
previous three lows.

Price break charts may seem simplistic because they result from a simple
set of rules, but they unleash a great deal of technical analysis. From the perspective of sentiment analysis, by registering only the occurrences when a price
is establishing a new high or a new low, the chart is in effect visualizing the persistence of sentiment. The price’s ability to persist in setting new highs or new
lows provides a way to quantify trends other than by using traditional trend
analysis. It goes beyond the simple criterion of having higher highs and higher
lows, or lower highs and lower lows. When we say a trend is in place, don’t we
mean that there is a persistence of sentiment? Viewing it from the perspective
of persistence, the trader can begin to quantify how serious a trend is, when
it is weakening, and when it has reversed. Price break charts measure this persistence in an unambiguous way. Using price break charts, the trader cannot
dispute the facts of the price action; either the price has succeeded in persisting
higher or lower, or it has not. The trader also knows in advance where a price
break chart would be considered strong enough to break the trend.

84

Trading Binary Options

Pattern of Block Sequences
The presence of block sequences is a key visual clue. If there is a long series of
blocks, the trend direction is strong but can in fact be entering an end phase.
A good idea is to look for very small sized blocks. This shows hesitation and
presents the trader with a clue to an impending breakout (Figure 5.20). The
trader’s task is to evaluate when a long series is in fact in its end stage. There
is no definitive, preset rule regarding how many consecutive blocks represent
an entry into an overextended area. Block sequences will vary by instrument
and by time interval. A good idea is for the trader to scan the sequences that
have appeared over the previous week and determine how many consecutive
blocks have actually appeared. This approach ensures that the sentiment of
the immediate environment is captured, rather than a predefined view that
eight or 10 consecutive blocks represent a series that is about to end. If, for
example, a trader using a five-minute price break chart determines that there
have not been more than 21 consecutive black or white blocks, the trader
can assume that if a series is in place that is approaching 21 blocks, there is
a high probability that a reversal is about to occur. This kind of perusal of
block sequences works very well. A more precise quantification is not difficult
to achieve for the diligent, more mathematically inclined trader. In fact, one
can generate a bell curve or standard deviation analysis of block sequences. It
is also not an accident that Fibonacci resistance lines, when applied to price
break chart blocks, often coincide with projected reversal points.
Figure 5.20 Small Block Reveals Tired Trend

Basic Technical Analysis

85

We need to state strongly that price break charts do not predict the coming of a reversal. They do tell us where such a reversal would be considered
significant. Price break charts actually and precisely define and project where,
not when, such a price reversal will appear. By definition, a reversal block will
appear if the price gives back or retraces a given number of previous highs or
lows! The trader knows in advance where a reversal will be powerful enough
to generate a confirming new reversal color.

Is a Reversal Serious?
Very often, the binary option trader will confront a reversal in price direction
in the candlestick chart. To determine the best strategy in the context of this
kind of reversal, the question that needs to be answered is: Is it serious? This
is where three-line break charts really help. A three-line break chart will very
often not show a reversal, while a candlestick chart does. When this happens, the trader needs to question the conclusion that a reversal has occurred.
Reversals can be short-lived, especially if they are occurring on an intraday
time frame. A three-line break reversal, once detected, is not necessarily
permanent. The trader should wait for another new high or low to feel more
confident. It’s important to answer the questions:
• Is the reversal near a Fibonacci resistance line?
• Is the reversal in the direction of the larger trend?
• Is the reversal consistent with the existing ratio of the number of consecutive highs to lows?
Figure 5.21 shows a scenario in which the price reversed right at a
61.8 percent Fibonacci resistance line. This is an ideal condition!
Getting familiar with three-line break charts will benefit the binary
option trader because it will provide an unambiguous tool for evaluating the
trend conditions in the market. By using three-line break charts, the trader
will accomplish four important analytical objectives:
1. Determine the strength of the trend in place.
2. Determine whether the trend is tiring.
3. Determine if a reversal has occurred and whether it is serious.
4. Select binary option strike prices.
Traders can learn more about the three-line break at www.learn4x
.com/3Line.

86

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.21 Three-Line Break Charts and Fibonacci

High
(100.00%)

61.8%
Fib
Entry 2

(61.80%)
(50.00%)

Entry 1
(38.20%)
(23.60%)

(0.00%)

Low

Examples of Three-Line Break Charts for Underlying Markets
Let’s look at examples using price break with an underlying market and apply
the analysis to illustrate the kind of thinking a binary option trade involves.
A trader looking at the AUD/USD three-line break chart (Figure 5.22) sees
that the Aussie had a sequence of consecutive new-day highs, followed by a
reversal of two consecutive new lows, and then followed by another reversal
up. The trader could, looking at this pattern conclude that the pattern is very
weak bullish. Any weak news on global growth could cause a reversal and the
binary option strike price below the previous low would be a target.
Let’s look at oil. The West Texas oil three-line break chart (Figure 5.23) shows
the dramatic reversal of oil prices in February 2011 was followed by seven consecutive new-day highs. Then came a big reversal down. This was followed by a reversal up. When a reversal is followed by another reversal, it is a very strong signal that
the resumption of the direction is strong. At the end of the chart is a big reversal
down, followed by a smaller new-day low, followed by a much smaller new-day
low. This is showing that bearish sentiment in oil was still there but getting tired.

Basic Technical Analysis
Figure 5.22 AUD/USD Three-Line Break Chart

Figure 5.23 West Texas Crude Three-Line Break Chart

87

88

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.24 GBP/JPY Three-Line Break Chart

The binary option trader seeing this chart could justify an at-the-money
binary option contract at 100. This would play a bounce back.
The GBP/JPY cross pair represents a very good example of a wave pattern detected by the three-line break chart (Figure 5.24). This pair shows
a sequence of alternating sequences of new highs and then back to lows.
It is a great example of the power of a three-line break. Notice that when
a reversal occurs, it’s very rare to have the reversal brick followed immediately by another reversal. This provides an excellent clue as to where to locate
the binary option strike price that offers maximum support or resistance. A
buyer would locate the strike price that is below the point of the most recent
upward break at 130.00.

Key Patterns for Trading Analysis

We are not yet done with basic technical analysis. Trend analysis, and support
and resistance analysis, is an excellent foundation. However, the next building block to establish stronger trading skills is to understand the key patterns.

Basic Technical Analysis

89

Figure 5.25 USD/JPY Three-Line Break Chart

Once the underlying market is chosen, it’s time to conduct a pattern
analysis. The first choice is the time interval for the charts. The four-hour
time interval represents an effective middle ground. One can gain a sense of
the big picture, as well as of the near-term changes in sentiment. For those
trading intra-day, the 30-minute time frame can be used.
While there are many patterns that are formed by price action, the ones
that all traders should know are the triangle, channel, parabolic, and Bollinger
Bands. Let’s look at some examples.

Triangles
Notice the formation of the triangle: price action starting at a wide range
between the low and high and developing incrementally smaller ranges leading to almost no difference between the low and high. The market is telling
the trader that a breakout is about to happen. Triangles come in a variety
of forms (Figure 5.26). There are ascending triangles, descending triangles,
and equilateral triangles. Triangles are classic visualizations of a cluster of
sentiment. The triangle is a compression of the range between highs and lows.

90

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.26 Symmetrical, Descending, and Ascending Triangles

Symmetrical
Triangle

Descending
Triangle

Ascending
Triangle

This means the battle between bullish and bearish sentiment is coming to a
breakout point. Triangles can be considered preludes to breakouts. The binary
option trader, when seeing a triangle, should locate the strike prices outside of
the triangle and play a breakout. This is usually an out-of-the-money strategy.
It can also be a deep-out-of-the-money strategy.
The triangle can be considered a barometer of emotions and indicates
that the buyers and the sellers are lacking enough energy to dominate each
other. The distance between the highs and the lows in the triangle are getting
smaller until it goes to an apex, or point. When the trader sees a triangle, it
means that there is likely to be a breakout.
The challenge for the trader is to recognize that there is a triangle forming
and then prepare to trade. The trader prepares to trade the triangles with a
breakout trade. An ascending triangle is likely to break out to the upside and
resume its trend direction that was up. A descending triangle is likely to break
out to the downside and then resume its trend direction, which was down.
Lastly, a symmetrical triangle is likely to break out in either direction.

Hesitation or Consolidation Patterns: The Triangle and the Doji
Often in viewing price movements, it looks like prices move chaotically. But
closer monitoring of price movements will often reveal patterns. One of the
most important kinds of patterns is seen after a big move. After a big move,
which is perhaps a response to news, the market goes into a period where it’s

Basic Technical Analysis

91

digesting new information and is hesitating. Hesitation means that it is ranging, but it also means that the market is preparing to make a decision. You know
this by noticing that the range is getting narrower. The difference between the
highs and lows becomes smaller because the buyers and sellers are giving up
and have no strong sentiment to keep the range that has existed. Hesitation is
a prelude to a shift to a new direction or a confirmation that the prior direction before the hesitation should be resumed. Several hesitation patterns have
become useful in trading. You can trade on the bounce of the price, or you can
wait for a break but wait further for the price to come back into the sideways
channel. This would provide confirmation that the pattern is still in force.
The most famous set of hesitation patterns is this class of doji candles
(Figure 5.27). These candles reflect the emotional status of indecision. The
opening and closing of a price is exactly the same. If during any period of
Figure 5.27 Doji Candle Types

Doji

92

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.28 Doji Shows Hesitation

Long-Legged
Doji Shows Hesitation

Dragonfly
Doji Shows Hesitation

Gravestone
Doji Shows Hesitation

Four-Price
Doji Shows Hesitation

time the opening and closing is the same, it means the buyers and sellers are
in equilibrium and therefore the sentiment is hesitating. When a doji appears,
it doesn’t necessarily mean a reversal is coming (Figure 5.28). But what happens after the doji is important.
Channels are the signature of stability and consistency. Their wave-like visuals underscore the predictive cycle, like oscillations of price swings from highs
to lows (Figure 5.29). When detecting a channel, the trader is detecting the fact
that the market sentiment is continuing. The trader therefore should go with the
trend, and in-the-money strategies work with these conditions. Seeing a channel
pattern is a welcome event for traders because it provides multiple opportunities
Figure 5.29 Channels

Sell on bounce
off top

Buy on bounce
off bottom

Basic Technical Analysis

93

Figure 5.30 Parabolic Pattern

Parabolic
Curve

to trade. Traders can trade in either direction as long as the price is bouncing off
the sides. We see in the following chart a representation of a downward channel.
Notice that the bounce points are in both directions. This is what makes a channel important. It allows a trader more opportunity to trade in either direction.
The parabolic pattern is a reflection of strong momentum and is powered
by crowd mania, particularly when it is forming an apex (Figure 5.30). This
is a reversal signal. However, if the parabolic is in its early stages, joining the
crowd with ATM strategies would be a ride on the momentum.
This pattern is called a parabolic because it actually follows the shape of a
curved path known as a parabolic path. What is most important about it is that
once a trader sees this pattern, it is a very strong indicator that the price is at an
extreme. The parabolic pattern occurs because there is a rush of buying or selling. This rush of buying or selling shows crowd behavior. It starts because traders
see an opportunity to make a profit, and other traders watching this start buy
because they fear they will miss the opportunity. The emotion is self-fulfilling
until the shape of the candles reaches an angle of nearly 90 degrees. This kind
of shape cannot last long and it shows the sentiment is at its maximum. When
a trader sees a parabolic pattern, it is a leading indicator that the price move will
end, pause, and often reverse. This pattern appears in all time frames.

94

Trading Binary Options

Fibonacci Resistance Lines

In her book Fibonacci Analysis, author Constance Brown said, “To understand market expansion and contraction, you need to understand the difference between ratios, means, and proportion,” (Brown 2008, 16).
The trader should at all times apply the standard Fibonacci resistance tool to
the price action of the underlying market. Fibonacci ratios are a key pattern and
apply to all price patterns. These ratios have been the subject of many books and
studies. No experienced trader ignores Fibonacci lines. If you don’t know them,
it’s important to become familiar with their application. We really don’t know
why traders use Fibonacci lines, but part of the reason is that it is a self-fulfilling
prophecy. As traders deem Fibonacci lines as important, they become important.
Stops and limits and puts and calls are placed near them. They essentially work
because traders believe they work. In any case, Fibonacci lines do not predict where
the market will be. But they provide powerful markers as to where resistance and
support will be. For binary option trading, the weekly or daily, and four-hour
time price charts will be an effective time frame to use.
For binary option trading decisions, Fibonacci lines are an important tool.
When markets move in response to event risks, they often move in Fibonacci
ratios. Here are the three steps involved for using Fibonacci lines with binary
option trading:
1. Locate on the weekly or daily chart the appropriate Fibonacci line.
2. After applying the Fibonacci line, determine where the price is in
relationship to the key Fibonacci ratios.
3. Once you choose the binary option strike price you want to trade,
determine which Fibonacci line the binary option strike price is near.
The results of overlaying the Fibonacci lines on the underlying market can
be very valuable to the trader. The relationship between binary option strike
prices and Fibonacci lines are important because they can confirm whether
the intended strike price is the best one to use for a trade. If, for example, a
trader goes long a binary option strike price, but that strike price is just above
a key 61.8 Fib line, it means that there is likely to be great resistance encountered. The trade success is less likely, or requires a lot more momentum than
anticipated. Fib lines can confirm a choice of a binary option strike price. If
the spot market has just probed above a 61.8 percent Fib line and the trade
wants to go with an in-the-money strategy, choosing the strike price right
below the fib line makes sense.
The most important Fibonacci ratios used in trading are 38.2 percent,
50 percent, and 61.8 percent. Fibonacci resistance lines on the day chart are the

95

Basic Technical Analysis
TABLe 5.1 EUR/USD Strike Prices

Market

Expiration Date

Bid

Offer

EUR/USD > 1.4625

3-Jun-11

17.5

22.5

EUR/USD > 1.4575

3-Jun-11

18

22.5

EUR/USD > 1.4525

3-Jun-11

24.5

29.5

EUR/USD > 1.4475

3-Jun-11

31.5

37

EUR/USD > 1.4425

3-Jun-11

39.5

45

EUR/USD > 1.4375

3-Jun-11

47.5

54

EUR/USD > 1.4325

3-Jun-11

56

62

EUR/USD > 1.4275

3-Jun-11

64.5

70

EUR/USD > 1.4225

3-Jun-11

72

77

most important. Many underlying markets often have prices probing near the key
day fib lines. EUR/USD provides such an example. First we locate the EUR/USD
chart and notice a significant high was formed about May 9. The price action followed with a decline and formed a low. The Fibonacci tool connects the high to
the low and generates the Fibonacci ratios. At the same time, viewing the EUR/
USD weekly binary option strike prices (Table 5.1) showed that the 1.4675 strike
price was the closest to the actual 61.8 percent Fib line, which was at 1.4572
(Figure 5.31). This is almost an exact overlay of a key Fibonacci line and a binary
option strike price. The result is a confluence of confirmation that a trader loves
to see from more than one technical condition. The trader looking to go long the
EUR/USD would realize that a strong move was necessary to break through.
TIP
The binary option trade will face more resistance than usual when a strike price
is near a key Fibonacci price point. It is a good idea to always check for the presence of Fibonacci patterns.

This chapter has shown that a basic form of technical analysis for the binary
option trader starts when the trader identifies patterns in the price action. Those
patterns reflect the shape of market sentiment and the stability of the pattern
is directly related to the stability of the sentiment. Since binary option trading
is focused on direction, the trader should apply pattern analysis, and initially
focus on trend analysis, to increase confidence about the trading decision he or
she is about to make and improve the probability of profitable results.

96

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.31 Fibonacci Lines and Binary Option Strike Price Location
100.0%

1.4940
1.4895
1.4850
1.4800
1.4755
1.4710
1.4665

1.4575 Weekly Binary

1.4620

61.8%

1.4575
1.4530

50.0%

1.4485
1.4440
1.4395

38.2%

1.4350
1.4305
1.4260
1.4215
1.4170
1.4125
1.4080
1.4035

0.0% 0.0 1.3990

References
Brown, Constance. 2008. Fibonacci Analysis. New York: Bloomberg Press.
Nison, Steve. 1994. Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques Revealed. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 6

Advanced Technical
Analysis: Volatility Tools

Beyond basic technical analysis of chart trend direction and chart patterns,
there remains one more significant category of technical analysis that can give
binary option traders an edge. It is the category of volatility tools. There are
many of them. Let’s take a closer look.
Defining Volatility

Let’s first clarify what volatility is before delving into its technical aspects for
trading. Simply put, if prices stayed stable and within a small range over any
period of time, then volatility would be minimal. Volatility is a measure of
the swings in price action and the rate of change of those swings. The trader
detects volatility by seeing the market become increasingly anxious. Market
anxiety can be observed first in headlines as well as the emergence of wider
price swings. This is in contrast to the experience of a calm market with very
little price action. Ignoring the volatility conditions of the underlying market
is a recipe for misapplying binary option strategies. High volatility conditions,
if ignored, will lead to applying inappropriate trading strategies. High volatility conditions are associated with larger swings in prices and therefore wider
ranges. These conditions are excellent for successful application of out-of-themoney (OTM) and deep-out-of-the-money (DOTM) trades. They are more
likely to work out when volatility is higher because price swings are more
likely. However, extremely high volatility conditions are often used by traders
as reversal signals. The reasoning is that extreme volatility reflects transient
97

98

Trading Binary Options

conditions and the underlying market will return to average ranges of volatility.
This is also known as regression to the mean. In contrast, low volatility conditions reflect a market that is clustered and is often a prelude to a breakout.
There are many technical analysis tools available to the trader to monitor volatility conditions. Let’s review some basic ones that ought to be applied.
bollinger bands

Bollinger Bands are a good first approach to mapping price volatility. They
enable every trader to view volatility conditions. Bollinger Band charts have
three parts. The first part is a curved line in the middle. This is a moving average
line. The second part is a lower band, and the third part is an upper band. The
bands are called Bollinger Bands because John Bollinger devised them. The
upper and lower Bollinger Bands are a statistical curve that is placed around
the price. In other words, they represent a special kind of boundary. The
upper and lower bands actually represent a standard deviation around a moving average. The concept of standard deviation is a statistical concept used to
summarize data. It’s seen in most applications as a bell curve. Let’s see how it
can be applied to the world of trading.
A common setting of the bands is (20, 2). This means that the moving
average in the middle of the bands is a 20-period moving average. It also means
that the upper and lower bands are two standard deviations from the moving
average. This setting translates, in simpler terms, that the price is 96 percent of
the time between the two bands! If the setting was (20, 3) the Bollinger Band
chart would still have a 20-period moving average in the middle, but the upper
and lower band would be three standard deviations, or 99 percent from the
middle. The default setting used by traders is accepted as (20, 2).
