Harmonic Trading: Volume Two
Advanced Strategies for Profiting from the
Natural Order of the Financial Markets

Scott M. Carney

Vice President, Publisher: Tim Moore
Associate Publisher and Director of Marketing: Amy Neidlinger
Executive Editor: Jim Boyd
Editorial Assistant: Pamela Boland
Operations Manager: Gina Kanouse
Senior Marketing Manager: Julie Phifer
Publicity Manager: Laura Czaja
Assistant Marketing Manager: Megan Colvin
Cover Designer: Chuti Prasertsith
Managing Editor: Kristy Hart
Project Editor: Betsy Harris
Copy Editor: Geneil Breeze
Proofreader: Water Crest Publishing, Inc.
Senior Indexer: Cheryl Lenser
Senior Compositor: Gloria Schurick
Manufacturing Buyer: Dan Uhrig
© 2010 by HarmonicTrader.com LLC
Published by Pearson Education, Inc.
Publishing as FT Press
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458
This book is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting,
or other professional services or advice by publishing this book. Each individual situation is unique. Thus, if legal or
financial advice or other expert assistance is required in a specific situation, the services of a competent professional should
be sought to ensure that the situation has been evaluated carefully and appropriately. The author and the publisher disclaim
any liability, loss, or risk resulting directly or indirectly, from the use or application of any of the contents of this book.
FT Press offers excellent discounts on this book when ordered in quantity for bulk purchases or special sales. For more information,
please contact U.S. Corporate and Government Sales, 1-800-382-3419, corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com. For sales outside the
U.S., please contact International Sales at international@pearson.com.
Company and product names mentioned herein are the trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing May 2010
ISBN-10: 0-13-705151-4
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-705151-9
Pearson Education LTD.
Pearson Education Australia PTY, Limited.
Pearson Education Singapore, Pte. Ltd.
Pearson Education North Asia, Ltd.
Pearson Education Canada, Ltd.
Pearson Educatión de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Pearson Education—Japan
Pearson Education Malaysia, Pte. Ltd.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Carney, Scott M., 1969Harmonic trading / Scott M. Carney.
v. cm.
Contents: v. 2. Profiting from the natural order of the financial —
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-7051519-2 (v. 2 : pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-13-705151-4 (v. 2 : pbk.)
1. Investment analysis. 2. Investments. 3. Portfolio management. I. Title.
HG4529.C368 2010
332.63’2042—dc22
2009051044

This book is dedicated to Jacob Carney.
This book represents the endless possibility of the future.
Don’t ever forget that you are capable of anything in this life.
I love you, buddy, and I will always be there for you.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Chapter 1

Contemporary Market Case Studies from a
Harmonic Trading Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11

Chapter 2

Harmonic Impulse Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55

Chapter 3

New Harmonic Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73

Chapter 4

Harmonic Patterns Relative to the Trend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .111

Chapter 5

BAMM Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .141

Chapter 6

RSI BAMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .161
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .271
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .273
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .275

Acknowledgments
I want to thank my family. They have been there for me through it all. I am truly grateful for their
love, support, and encouragement.
I would like to thank Tracy Knudsen of Lowry Report for her professional insights and
friendship. In a competitive industry such as ours, you have always gone out of your way to
make me feel accepted. This has meant a great deal to me. Thank you, Tracy.
I would like to thank Peter B. Mauthe of Rhoads Lucca Capital Management. I truly appreciate
your interest in new trading ideas and, more importantly, knowing me as a person. Your
encouragement has meant a great deal to me. Thanks, Peter.
I would like to thank Veronique Lashinski. It means a great deal that you would show an interest
in these new ideas and get to know me personally. Thanks, Veronique.
I would like to thank Jim Kane of KaneTrading.com. More than anything, our friendship is what
means the most to me. I miss our dinner meetings at La Indita but know that with one phone
call, we can always pick up right where we left off. Thanks, Jimmy.
I would like to thank Guy Cohen of OptionEasy.com for taking the time to show an interest in
these new ideas and generously helping to realize the publication of both books.
I would like to thank the special friends that I have in my life—you know who you are without
being named, but here you go anyway: Michael and Tania, Wolf, Jav and Missy, John and
Carla, Laure, Hans and Dania, Paul and Carmen, Christy, Gus and Maha, Troy and Lauren
(Magee Alums), Scott and Christie, Heather, Jon and Jen, Stephen (Quad Connection),
Brownie, Rich and Rosaria, Bob, Lisa and Molly, Tom and Danielle, David and Leyla, Bill and
Marla, Paul, John, Max and Kim, Larry and Gina, OPCs ’87. Although we might not see each
other frequently, you are important people in my life, and I think of you often.
A special thanks to Stephanie Kramer. I appreciate your effort with this endeavor and look
forward to your continued contribution to Harmonic Trading.
I would like to thank the members of the American Association of Professional Technical
Analysis (A.A.P.T.A.) who generously promote the field of Technical Analysis so others may
prosper.
Finally, I would like to thank all of those individuals whom I have had the pleasure of getting to
know as a result of the Harmonic Trading methodology. I am honored to have this approach be
embraced by so many people. Since we are all students of the market, I truly hope that this
material facilitates your technical studies. I believe that the Harmonic Trading methodology will
dramatically improve your trading results and ultimately benefit your life. It is my purist desire
that this material be received as a positive contribution to those in search of answers to the
financial markets.

About the Author
Scott M. Carney is President and Founder of HarmonicTrader.com, and the originator of the
Harmonic Trading approach. He personally defined this unprecedented methodology that
employs a unique system of price pattern recognition and Fibonacci measurement techniques
to define opportunities in the financial markets. Among his many discoveries, Scott has defined
most of the harmonic patterns, including the Bat, the ideal Gartley, and the Crab. He has been
recognized for other contributions to Technical Analysis, including the concept of the Potential
Reversal Zone (PRZ), the 0.886 retracement, and the 38.2% trailer. Carney has been a
columnist for StockCharts.com, TradingMarkets.com, and eSignal.com, and he has been
featured on CNN. He is a full member of the Market Technicians Association (www.mta.org)
and the American Association of Professional Technical Analysts (www.aapta.us).

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction

After years of research, Harmonic Trading has evolved into a distinct and comprehensive
methodology that effectively analyzes the financial markets. The basic tenets of pattern
recognition as quantified by harmonic ratios define a system that provides immensely pertinent
technical information and identifies trading opportunities unlike any other methodology. It is
important to consider the substantial advancement of Harmonic Trading since its inception.
The release of my first book, The Harmonic Trader, marked the beginning of the entire
methodology. The new measurement techniques presented in this book quantified price action
in a unique manner. These new ideas created the framework of an unprecedented Fibonacci
measurement and price pattern recognition system that consistently defined profitable trading
opportunities. Although it was not my intention to formulate such a system, these strategies
were the result of extensive research to discover the most effective relationships that were
encompassed by these measurement tools. Through it all, I precisely refined many general
concepts and publicly divulged many “secret” strategies that comprised the fundamentals of the
Harmonic Trading approach.
The unprecedented combinations of specific ratios that differentiated similar price structures
as exact patterns defined an effective trading methodology, yielding relevant technical
information in an unprecedented fashion. Although others years before me have utilized
Fibonacci ratios within the realm of Technical Analysis, the concept of exact ratio alignments
presented a new means to define M-type and W-type price structures. These precise patterns
offered greater accuracy in the often vague discipline of pattern recognition for many traders.
Although the rules that define harmonic patterns seem to be common knowledge today, it
wasn’t too long ago that these strategies were practically considered avant-garde within the
field of Technical Analysis. This new application of Fibonacci ratios created a system of rules
that defined price patterns in an unprecedented fashion. For example, the common definition
for the Gartley pattern—requiring a 0.618 retracement and a 0.786 retracement at the B and D
points, respectively—which was originally outlined in The Harmonic Trader, has become the
standard within the technical community.
These strategies have proven themselves effective through the years, but this success has
engendered many Harmonic Trading-related systems that have skewed the basic tenets of the
approach. These outfits have espoused the mystical charm of Fibonacci ratios to present more
1

2

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

of a “secret code” to the financial markets than a proven system of measurement strategies
within the discipline of Technical Analysis. Although I will address the problem of misinformation
and unscrupulous “gurus” a little later in this Introduction, there are two critical concepts to be
mindful of while studying this material:
• Harmonic Trading is more than Fibonacci. Anyone somewhat familiar with this
methodology understands that Harmonic Trading is much more than general Fibonacci
analysis. The entire Harmonic Trading approach comprises a variety of tools that include
more than simple Fibonacci measurement techniques and integrates a complex system
of execution and management strategies. Moreover, the new ideas presented in this
book incorporate an even wider gamut of unprecedented trading tools.
• Harmonic Trading is still evolving. In my first book, I presented a number of technical
measurement strategies that quantified price patterns with respect to their alignment of
Fibonacci ratios. The Harmonic Trader was unprecedented in that it was the first
material to emphasize the importance of exact alignments and to employ specific ratio
combinations that differentiated a variety of patterns. Although The Harmonic Trader
outlined the framework of this methodology, Harmonic Trading: Volume One
represented a substantial advancement to the basic approach. Those two books
represent more than 500 pages of some of the most comprehensive pattern strategies
within the field of Technical Analysis and dedicate a considerable portion of the material
to identification techniques, outlining the strict rules that validate structures as patterns.
This book builds upon that foundation and improves upon the entire methodology to
outline effective trading strategies from start to finish.
Since its release in 1999, many have tried to lay claim to the ideas that were first espoused
in The Harmonic Trader. Despite other interpretations, Harmonic Trading: Volume One truly
distinguished this approach from the often misguided and misappropriated use of basic
Fibonacci strategies. Meanwhile, this book advances the basic tenets of Harmonic Trading
offering greater “standardization” of pattern structures and improved confirmation strategies
that optimize trading decisions.
As these strategies evolve, there will continue to be a need for more thorough statistical
validation to improve the application of these methods and to enhance the overall accuracy of
the approach. In fact, this is a driving principle behind the entire Harmonic Trading system—
always improve upon what works. Although this may challenge the old adage: “If it ain’t broke,
don’t fix it,” the effectiveness of this approach (and of any trading methodology) depends upon
continual improvement. I offer comprehensive case studies throughout this material. I will
continue to compile research to validate the effectiveness of the Harmonic Trading approach.
Furthermore, new concepts such as the RSI BAMM and the 5-0 pattern represent substantial
improvements upon the initial foundation of this methodology.

New Ideas in Harmonic Trading
The strategies outlined in this book are entirely new concepts that build upon the prior material
presented within the Harmonic Trading approach. Many new topics will be presented with
particular emphasis on the Harmonic Impulse Waves, patterns within established trends, and

Introduction

3

BAMM Theory. In particular, the entire RSI BAMM strategy will be outlined. I will present new
patterns such as the 5-0, the Reciprocal AB=CD, and the Alternate Bat. Although Volume Two
references many of the basic tenets of the Harmonic Trading approach, this material consists
of mostly new ideas and trading strategies. The new patterns and expanded measurement
techniques significantly advance the primary identification tools established within this
approach. For example, the 5-0, the Alternate Bat, and the Reciprocal AB=CD are important
new structures within the existing array of harmonic patterns. Furthermore, these new
structures also comprise the basic framework of more advanced techniques. Hence, Volume
Two represents a significant evolutionary step and an essential new direction that enhances the
existing methodology immensely.
The most significant concept presented in this book and the most profound advancement of
the entire Harmonic Trading methodology is outlined in the RSI BAMM methodology. This new
complex system incorporates a standard technical indicator—the Relative Strength Indicator
(RSI)—with advanced Harmonic Trading measurement techniques. The RSI BAMM employs
precise ratio measurements and exact structural pattern specification to identify critical
technical price levels. All of the material in Volume Two—especially the RSI BAMM—offers
unprecedented strategies that identify the areas where overall trend divergence and harmonic
pattern completions define the most critical technical levels. In addition, the new ideas
presented in this material advance the basic theory of price pattern recognition by requiring
other technical conditions to exist to validate potential opportunities with improved accuracy.
Specifically, the advancement of the RSI BAMM separates the minor reactive moves from the
more substantial trading opportunities and provides extensive technical information regarding
the future potential direction of the price action. Although this material will take some time to
digest, I believe these advanced concepts dramatically enhance the entire Harmonic Trading
system, furthering its efficacy in pinpointing the best trading opportunities.

Technical Entities Continued…
In Harmonic Trading: Volume One, I discussed the importance of specific pattern alignments as
defined “technical entities.” It is important to note that the prescribed set of harmonic ratios that
define these structural entities has been differentiated, analyzed, and refined to develop
pattern-specific strategies for each situation. Although I covered it extensively in Volume One,
it is important to remember that “The Great Gartley Controversy” emphasized the necessity
of pattern differentiation and underscored the essential argument that not all patterns (Gartleys)
are the same. New “technical entities” in the form of unprecedented harmonic price patterns
outlined in this book, such as the 5-0, the Alternate Bat, and the Reciprocal AB=CD, further
the basic identification strategies of M-type and W-type price structures. These new patterns
adhere to the primary principle of defining specific technical situations based upon their
respective ratio alignments. Clearly, the material presented in Volume Two furthers the
specification of the Harmonic Trading methodology by offering a new level of strategic analysis.
The improved measuring techniques enhance the precision and the overall accuracy of this
approach in its ability to define the most critical turning points in the financial markets.

4

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Harmonic Trading: Volume One was a major advancement of the principles of the primary
pattern identification theory. The addition of unprecedented measurement techniques such as
new harmonic ratios, new patterns, and other comprehensive strategies, expanded the existing
array of effective trading tools and substantially bolstered the overall Harmonic Trading
discipline. Volume One presented a step-by-step approach with effective strategies for the
entire trading process. From initial identification to trade execution to money management, a
comprehensive plan was presented with each aspect thoroughly considered. In this regard, I
have been pleased that this material provides a solid decision-making framework of probable
answers for all possible questions that might arise during the trading process. From pattern
identification to the eventual execution of a trade, all possible actions have been outlined to
facilitate decisions, especially when unexpected real-time considerations can affect the
outcome.
The material in The Harmonic Trader and Harmonic Trading: Volume One effectively defined
this system. However, through the years, I have continually strived to improve the Harmonic
Trading approach and build upon this foundation. Hence, I present Volume Two. It is important
to note that the material within this book takes Harmonic Trading into new territory. Most of the
ideas outlined in Harmonic Trading: Volume Two are unprecedented, and they have not been
released previously in any other material. Volume Two advances the comprehensive
methodology of pattern identification presented in Volume One to incorporate new technical
measures that refine and filter the best trading opportunities. Advanced techniques, such as
the RSI BAMM, represent my most sophisticated trading techniques to date. It is my desire to
distinguish Harmonic Trading as a serious discipline within the field of Technical Analysis. Such
distinction has become increasingly important to me in recent years, as certain individuals have
attempted to capitalize on the burgeoning popularity of Fibonacci-related trading strategies,
while tarnishing the inherent principles of Harmonic Trading.

Imitators and Agitators
I am compelled to discuss the importance of ethical and accurate reference information
regarding these techniques and for that matter, much of the educational material regarding
trading the financial markets available today. I have been disappointed with the misinformation
and blatant misuse of the concepts first espoused within the Harmonic Trading approach. I’m
willing to accept this risk in exchange for the advancement of trading knowledge and for the
positive contribution to help others in search of the answers to the financial markets.
When I first began discussing Harmonic Trading on various websites in the 1990s, I was
admittedly naive. I openly shared strategies that advanced the basic Fibonacci trading mantra
of that era. It was my desire to share with others in the hope that they would provide feedback
ultimately furthering this discipline. Although I received a fantastic response from an
overwhelming number of traders, I realized that other Fibonacci-related “educators” were
picking up on the ideas, as well. I welcomed their response and actively sought to “talk shop”
with these traders. Unfortunately, I quickly learned that most of these so-called educators were

Introduction

5

just teaching basic and somewhat vague Fibonacci strategies. These people promoted their
products by making absurd and controversial statements of phenomenal success. In fact, most
of these outfits were only in the business of selling products and not really trading. In some
instances, certain research of mine was presented as their own. I realized that I needed to
exercise greater discretion and to strive to establish Harmonic Trading as a distinct
methodology apart from basic Fibonacci analysis.
Harmonic Trading is a distinct approach to the financial markets within the field of Technical
Analysis. The main problem relates more to the misinformation or blatant manipulation of the
intrigue and mystery that anything related to Fibonacci ratios inherently possesses. With the
recent popularity of books such as The Da Vinci Code, the subject of mystical conspiracy-type
stories that possess a secret order based upon the “golden proportions” of divine numbers has
opened a Pandora’s box of P. T. Barnums in the investment industry. Their ability to flourish and
to attract the general public’s attention proves that the inherent curiosity regarding this subject
matter can be an easy sell. It seems apparent that harmonic-related trading strategies have
become an increasingly popular marketing slogan. Again, I must emphasize that the entire
“harmonic concept” of pattern recognition based upon exact Fibonacci ratio alignments did not
exist until The Harmonic Trader was released in the late 1990s. In addition, the entire subject of
Fibonacci was a minor niche within the field of Technical Analysis. Harmonic Trading techniques
have impacted the technical community and contributed to this recent popularity while others
have jumped on the coattails of this approach.
For me, the degree of misinformation spewed to the public with catch phrases such as
“market-harmonics, trading in harmony, harmonic secrets” have lumped a great deal of lessthan-credible information with the strategies that truly work. It is important for me to take a little
time to show some of the troublesome examples that have been offered to the public. I strongly
urge people to be cautious regarding outrageous claims of the effectiveness of any system that
will make “quick riches” in the financial market, whether it is Fibonacci ratios or fundamentals.
The problem with such claims, especially when the subject of Fibonacci is involved, is that
it is simply exploited for its marketing value. In this business, marketing is the key to selling
your financial products, as I have unfortunately realized. Unlike many of the financial product
vendors, I am not dependent on book sales to make my living. I do this because I am
passionate about trading the financial markets and the strategies that unlock its secrets.
I strongly recommend that you perform thorough due diligence before signing up for
seminars, purchasing software, or spending substantial money for educational products and
services that make outlandish claims. Believe me, Harmonic Trading possesses some of the
most effective trading strategies available, but success still depends upon diligent and
dedicated work to turn patterns into profits.
