
TABLE C.2 Trading Day per GMT(To adjust to GMT, add 5 hours to EST. That is, Tokyo would begin at 12:00 midnight, London at
8:00 a.m.,New York at 12:00 noon, etc.)

THREE MAJOR TRADING SESSIONS AND WHY
THEY MATTER
There are three major sessions each day: Asian, London/European, and U.S. The timing of these is
important because the best times to trade are when two of the sessions overlap. When they do, the
increased liquidity means you get the fairest prices due to the abundance of those willing to take the
other side of your trade. These are:
The second most liquid time: 1 to 3 a.m. EST combines the top Asian and European sessions. The
most liquid time is 8 to 11 a.m. EST, which combines the most liquid European markets with those of
the United States.
Asian: Relatively quiet, lower liquidity, though the JPY may trade heavily if a major financial
event has just happened and Asian markets are reacting to it. It is centered near Tokyo.
European/London: Has the highest trading volume; most active currencies are the USD, EUR, and
GBP. Heavily centered around London, the traditional center of forex markets.
U.S.: The second-heaviest volume; most active currencies are the USD, EUR, JPY, GBP, and
AUD. Centered around New York, although includes other U.S. trading centers like Boston,
Philadelphia, and (mostly) Chicago.
The most liquid, and thus best hours for trading are when London and the U.S. sessions overlap. You

usually get the most participants, and hence strongest price moves and fairest trade execution.
However, don't make the mistake of thinking that each currency trades heaviest in its local time
zones. Instead, they trade most heavily in the most liquid markets, during the London and New York
sessions.

MARKETS TEND TO FOLLOW EACH OTHER
In all financial markets, not just forex, one session tends to take its cues from the one before it. For
example:
If the U.S. markets are bullish or showing risk appetite, Asia will open the same way and continue
to do so until whatever news or sentiment that drive the U.S. markets is priced in.
If Asia closes strongly bullish or bearish, expect Europe, centered on London, to open the same
way.
If Europe is still rocking higher when the U.S. session opens, expect the United States to open
higher, favoring risk assets and risk currencies.
Similarly, if one session reverses the prior session's moves, chances are good that the next session
will open in that same direction.

WHAT STOPS THE FOLLOW-THROUGH?
Obviously markets don't continue in one direction for long stretches on a daily basis. What breaks the
cycle of follow-through from one session to the next? The two most common forces that change
market direction are:

1. News or How It's Interpreted
Major news events or reports are what tend to drive these changes. For example, the United States
could close very bullishly, but if during the Asian session some significant bearish news comes, like
evidence of China, the biggest Asian economy, slowing down, that could cause Asia to reverse lower.
New interpretations of news events can have the same effect. For example, there are occasions
when a major event occurs late Friday in the U.S. session (like U.S. monthly jobs reports) and
markets don't have enough time to digest them before the weekend. In such cases, final judgment isn't
rendered until the Asian session begins the following week.

2. Technical Resistance: The News Is Already Priced In
Trend exhaustion from technical resistance can also break the cycle of follow-through from one
session to the next. In other words, at some point a rally or pullback hits enough technical resistance
to halt the current trend unless there is new news to fuel a continuation of the move. Otherwise, all
news is already “priced in,” and price either remains locked in a range or reverses as participants
take profits or open short positions.

The Prior Session Is Most Influential

Asia tends to lag the New York trading session because Asia is closed when U.S. news comes out, so
major U.S. news provides hints about how Asia will open. The European session reacts to early U.S.
news but misses later news, and its open is influenced by what happened in Asia. For example, if
great news comes from the United States, but then there's bad news in Asia, Europe's opening will
reflect how traders are responding to the combination of news from both sessions.
Likewise, the U.S. opening tends to take into account the news of both Asia and Europe.
In sum, short-term moves are heavily influenced by the region that most recently finished its trading
day, news, and whether that news justifies moves up to or past the next technical levels. As mentioned
earlier, short-term money flows from big players (either from big speculators or simply commercial
traders funding normal multinational business operations) can also start short-term price moves.

Beware Holiday Catch-Up Sessions

If Tokyo, London, or New York are closed for a holiday and the other two were open, then you'd
expect a catch-up session when markets reopen for that region. For example, if the United States
shows strongly improving monthly employment reports on a Friday (during the last session of the last
trading day of the week), and closes sharply higher, expect Asia to open strongly to price in that news
at the start of the following week.

APPENDIX D
More on Leverage and Margin
As the retail forex industry has developed and expanded since its beginnings in the mid-1990s, so too
have regulatory controls, as governments seek to protect the unwary from unscrupulous or what they
deem excessively risky leverage limits. Leverage limits vary with time and place.
For example, as of October 18, 2010, U.S. retail forex brokers are limited to 50:1 (2 percent
margin) leverage for the most liquid currencies, the majors, and the more liquid crosses, and 20:1 for
the exotics. While this may seem positively sedate compared to the 200:1 to 400:1 offered in many
places outside the United States, compared to the 2:1 (∼50 percent) margin offered by most equities
brokers, the greater risk and reward offered U.S. forex traders is still substantial, and still demands
careful RAMM practices.
Note, however, there is a loophole that allows SEC/FINRA-regulated brokers (like Citi,
Deutschebank, etc.) to keep offering higher leverage to retail forex trading regardless of these
regulations, therefore becoming potentially more attractive to forex traders than CFTC forex brokers
(like FXCM, IBFX, etc.).1
There is some confusion surrounding the classification of “majors.” In common Forex jargon, the
majors are only the seven pairs mentioned in Chapter 2. However, as far as the new rules go, the
majors are all pairs which include any two of the following currencies:
U.S. Dollar (USD)
British Pound (GBP)
Swiss Franc (CHF)
Canadian Dollar (CAD)
Japanese Yen (JPY)
Euro (EUR)
Australian Dollar (AUD)
New Zealand Dollar (NZD)
Swedish Krona (SEK)
Norwegian Krone (NOK)
Danish Krone (DKK)
This means that a wide range of pairs which are normally considered crosses fall under the majors
designation for the purposes of this rule and can be traded at 50:1 leverage (2 percent margin
deposit). Trading any other currency pair will demand a margin of 5 percent or 20:1 leverage. The
rest can be traded at 20:1 leverage (5 percent margin).
These rules are subject to change, because the new regulations charge the National Futures
Association (NFA) with defining which currencies are ‘‘major currencies,” and require at least an
annual review of these designations to potentially adjust them as necessary in light of changes in the
volatility of currencies and other economic and market factors.

In Japan, maximum leverage was reduced to 1:25 in August 2011, after it had been reduced to 1:50
a year earlier, as per rules set by Japan's Financial Services Agency in 2009. 2 Other nations, like
Israel, had already cut leverage to 1:25 a year earlier.

Notes
1. “New Forex Margin Rules Start Today” (October 2010), Fxmadness.com,
http://fxmadness.com/2010/10/17/general/new-forex-margin-rules-start-today/.
2. Adil Siddiqui, “Japan Further Reduces Leverage” (August 2011),
http://forexmagnates.com/japan-further-reduces-leverage/.

APPENDIX E
How the Mathematics of Loss Demands Keeping
Losses Per Trade Low
As noted at the start of Chapter 5, losses hurt you more than gains help you. This is true from both a
financial and psychological perspective.
First let's look at the financial side. Losses do disproportionately greater financial damage because
in order to recover your losses you need to earn higher returns with a smaller capital base.
For example, let's say you started the year with $100,000 and lost 20 percent, or $20,000, over the
course of the year. You now have $80,000 left. To recoup that $20,000 or 20 percent that you lost
from your remaining $80,000, you have to make 25 percent on that $80,000. However, if you'd gained
just 10 percent over the course of the first year, you would only need a 9 percent return over the
coming year on that $110,000 to add another $10,000 to your account.
Which of the two possibilities is more likely? A 10 percent gainer earning 9 percent or a 20 percent
loser gaining 25 percent?
Do you see how losses hurt you more than gains help you?
I recommend not risking more than 1 percent to 3 percent per trade. In other words, if you start with
a $20,000 account, your stop loss should be close enough to your entry point so that if hit, your loss
won't exceed $200 to $600. Assume you follow my advice and risk 2 percent on average.
Here is a more detailed illustration of the difference between risking that 2 percent of your capital
and risking 10 percent.
Imagine two traders each starting with a $20,000 account. One risks 2 percent/trade, the other risks
10 percent. Both slide into a losing streak. Look what happens in Table E.1.
TABLE E.1 Difference in Drawdown When Trader Risks 2 Percent versus10 Percent on Each Trade

After just seven trades, trader B has lost nearly half his capital, and needs to nearly double his
money just to break even on the year. Trader A has almost 80 percent of his capital left. Trader A has
a realistic chance of recovering if he's smart and takes a break, goes back to a demo account until he
believes he's fixed the problem, and then returns to trading smaller positions, ideally with even
smaller amounts risked.
Trader B is unlikely to recover without adding additional capital to his account. Remember from
Chapter 5 that the more capital you have, the more trade opportunities you're able to take while still
only risking 1 to 3 percent of your capital. Trader B can now only afford stop losses that are half the
distance from the entry point as those of Trader A. Trader A has more opportunities to make money,
because he can afford wider, more realistic stop losses that allow a greater margin of error. Trader B
must be very right, very often. Given his past, that's not likely to happen.
In sum, allowing only small losses allows you to survive and recover from the inevitable
drawndowns.
To make the point more vividly, Table E.2 shows the damage done from each 10 percent loss.
TABLE E.2 Losses Hurt More Than Gains Help: PercentGain Needed to Recover after Each 10 percent Loss
Trader B Loss of Capital % Return on Capital Required to Reach Breakeven of $20,000
10%

11%

20%

25%

30%

43%

40%

67%

50%

100%

60%

150%

70%

233%

80%

400%

90%

900%

Get the point? Losses hurt you more than gains help you. Until you have a very strong track record,
trade defensively. Focus more on surviving losses than scoring fast gains.
Losses also do disproportionate damage on a psychological level. Researchers have found that the
pain of losing money is twice as strong as the joy of gaining the same amount of money.1
This pain leads to a psychological bias called Loss Aversion. It manifests itself in the variety of
mistakes traders make to avoid admitting they were wrong. These include:
Adding money to losing positions to lower their cost basis
Staying in a trade after their stop loss has been hit
Prematurely exiting trades before price hits likely resistance in order to “lock in” profits
We began Chapter 5 with quotes from two of the most accomplished market players of their era,
one a trader, one a longer-term investor. After all their successes, they continued to focus on keeping
losses low.
How can we be any less cautious?

Note
1. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D., “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference Dependent
Model” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, (1991),
http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Kfir_Eliaz/LossAversionRisklessChoice.pdf.

APPENDIX F
Choosing a Forex Broker
As with evaluating any vendor, do your homework.
To maintain maximum objectivity, I will neither recommendbrokers nor specific reviews or
websites that provide them.
To speed your search, however, I offer the following guidance.

SUGGESTED SEARCH TERMS TO FIND BROKER
REVIEWS
Search for reviews using the obvious combinations of keywords like:
“Forex brokers” AND (reviews OR comparisons)
“Forex trading” AND “recommended brokers”
“Online forex trading” AND “broker reviews”
If you're curious about a specific broker, try searching for specific reviews about them. For
example,
FXCM AND reviews
GFT AND “compared to other brokers”

Criteria to Consider
Once you've seen some reviews and have a list of possible brokers, consider how they compare on
the following criteria.
A few must-mentions include:
1. Overall good reviews. While there are many forums you can find online, anyone can post
anything to many of these, making them great spots for any loser seeking to vent frustration at a
broker. Unhappy customers are more likely to post than satisfied ones. You may well do better
sticking to websites like DailyForex.com that do their own independent reviews. When visiting
these sites, look for evidence credibility. Does the site reveal weaknesses as well as strengths, or
do the reviews sound like they were written by the broker's marketing writers? Also, take note if
the same brokers that get top reviews are running advertisements or have links on the site to open
an account, which create potential conflicts of interest. Check other sites and forums and try to
pick up the overall level of satisfaction. ForexMagnates.com is a site dedicated to industry news
and can also be a source of who's doing well and who's in trouble.
Look for what traders and reviewers say in regard to information about:
Transaction costs: commissions (if any), spreads, rollover rates, quality of execution.

Trading platforms: Many offer a choice, from simple platforms to more advanced and
complex ones.
Where are they located and who regulates them?
Customer service and trading support.
2. Overall feel of the site: If the site lacks a professional look and feel, if it feels cheap, is hard to
navigate, or behaves poorly, there's no reason to expect that your impression will improve with
time. Does it look more like a gambling site (gaudy animation, loaded with promises of returns
that seem too good to be true, etc.) than a serious investing site?
3. Check out the “About” page. The longer the company has been in business, and the more
impressive the management team (their profiles are often available at LinkedIn.com), the more
likely they have a reputation and investment to protect.
4. Clear Links to Quality Analysis and Training: As detailed in Chapter 5, content quality is key,
and an excellent way to tell who the quality brokers are. Brokers that don't offer a variety of
quality analysis and training that actually helps you find and execute trades (versus just having
generic news items) either don't have the financial resources and stability to help you, or don't
care enough to do so. These sites are probably run by gambling-site types. Their business
model is to offer minimal content, just for show, while investing heavily in marketing
campaigns to provide a needed steady supply of new suckers, gambler sheep, to be fleeced and
slaughtered within a matter of months. Remember, unless they're providing useful guidance
that helps you survive and succeed, they're probably assuming you'll fail quickly. Move on.
Note: Often a broker will have a content site separate from the main site. As long as the content
site is easy to access from the main site's homepage and offers quality content, that's fine. That
content should ideally include:
Analysis that guides you to successful long- and short-term trades.
Big picture fundamental and technical analysis over long and short terms (daily, weekly, and,
ideally, quarterly outlooks).
Trader training: on the full gamut of topics covered in this book, aimed at a variety of levels.
If the material is superficial, then it's more likely serving as a way to fool the gullible into
thinking they're ready to succeed, when instead they're just ready to be exploited.
5. Range of assets offered to trade: The wider the variety, the greater your chances of finding a
reliable trend in one or more of them.

APPENDIX G
Low Correlations to Other Markets via Social Trading
Means There's Always a Bull Market Somewhere*
Global asset markets tend to move in the same direction. More precisely, in times of optimism most
risk assets rise and safe haven assets fall. In times of pessimism, the opposite occurs. This
phenomenon creates a problem for investors. In good times, the price of risk assets gets bid up as
cash floods into risk assets, lowering returns and raising risks that you'll be paying too much and may
be buying at the top. In bad times, the same thing occurs, only it's safe haven assets that quickly
become expensive.
Through skilled forex trading, it's very possible to achieve market-beating returns that don't
correlate closely with other markets. That means it's possible to make exceptional returns even when
other risk or safe haven assets are too expensive.
However, the problem for most people is that they aren't skilled forex traders, nor do they have the
large sums needed to invest with a top forex account manager, even if they are able to find one.
It is not a problem. Locating top traders is relatively easy via social trading networks. Skilled forex
traders are able to achieve returns that are not correlated to other markets. That means, in essence,
that they're able to create bull-market returns regardless of what's actually happening in most other
markets.
For proof, Currensee.com has kindly consented to let me reprint the following article detailing how
its Trade Leaders' results are not correlated to other markets.

TRADE LEADER NONCORRELATIONS TO THE
MARKETS
A little while ago I did a basic correlation study. It looked at the markets as well as at the Trade
Leaders over the June 2010 to September 2011 time frame. In this post I'll share with you the results.

MARKET CORRELATIONS
Let me first start with the correlations between some of the major market asset classes. They include
stocks, fixed income, and gold, which together represent the biggest fraction of the asset allocation for
most investors these days. Here's what those cross-market correlations were over that full period.

TLT is the leading long-term Treasury securities ETF and HQD is an ETF that focuses on highgrade corporate bonds. GLD is the gold-tracking ETF. I opted to use these ETFs to avoid any kind of
issues that using cash bonds or futures might have caused in determining period-over-period returns.
These correlations are based on weekly figures.
There probably won't be much surprise in the numbers. Stocks and the bond ETFs are negatively
correlated, indicating that stocks and interest rates were generally moving in the same direction.
Stocks and the dollar were also negatively correlated, but not hugely so (+1 means totally positively
correlated, −1 means totally negatively correlated). The negative correlation between the dollar and
GLD is also no surprise.
These aggregate figures mask the reality of the markets, though. Correlations are not static things as
the chart in Figure G.1 shows.
FIGURE G.1 S&P 500 Correlations
Source: Currensee, Inc.

Here we have the rolling three-month correlation of the fixed-income ETFs, gold, and the USD
Index against the S&P 500. Notice how they have moved up and down and all around. For example,
the USD Index was mostly negatively correlated to stocks, but for a while there it went to positive.
Likewise, gold was mostly positively correlated to stocks, but in the latter part of the covered time it
went negative.

LOOKING AT THE TRADE LEADERS
Now let me turn the attention to the Trade Leaders. Here are the figures for how they correlated
against the five markets shown in the studies previously mentioned.

Notice how small these figures are. The Trade Leaders were modestly negatively correlated to the
dollar, but otherwise their returns were essentially not correlated against the other markets. Again,
we're talking about a comparison of weekly returns here. I used an equal weight average return for the
Trade Leader which incorporated all those that were active during a given week.
To see what this looks like, Figure G.2 is a chart which shows a week-by-week comparison of the
Trade Leaders and the S&P 500.
FIGURE G.2 Trade Leaders vs. S&P 500
Source: Currensee Inc.

The S&P 500 weekly returns are indicated by the bars while the line represents the Trade Leaders.
It's pretty easy to see how unrelated the returns of the two are in this graph. The directions of the plots
are frequently different and the amplitudes are almost never the same. That's basically the definition
of uncorrelated.

DIVERSIFICATION OF APPROACH

What we're seeing with the Trade Leaders' correlations is the impact of diversification of trading
approach. The index and ETF returns work on the basis of buy-and-hold while the Trade Leaders are
employing much more active strategies. Those strategies are somewhat correlated to the direction of
the dollar, which will be no real surprise given how much of a focus EUR/USD gets in forex trading,
but even that isn't a close relationship. This tends to indicate that Trade Leader performance is mainly
a function of skill, not market performance overall.
* Copyright Currensee Inc., www.currensee.com. Used with permission.

About the Author
Cliff Wachtel, CPA, is the Chief Analyst of Anyoption.com, a leading binary options broker, and
Director of Market Research, New Media, and Training for Caesartrade.com, a fast-growing forex
and CFD broker.
He is also publisher of TheSensibleGuidetoForex.com, a website uniquely dedicated to providing
safer, simpler ways for active traders and passive long-term income investors to exploit forex
markets for lower currency risk and better returns. When the Great Financial Crisis began in 2007,
Cliff was among the first financial writers to focus on stocks that provide steady, currency diversified
high-yield income for insurance against losses from currency devaluation. He focuses on top income
stocks for exposure to multiple quality currencies on safer, simpler, less demanding types of longerterm forex trades than commonly covered on other forex sites, on the macro view of global markets
for formulating longer-term strategies, and on trader training. He also posts these via
Globalmarkets.anyoption.com, Globalmarkets.com, TheSensibleGuidetoForex.com, and others. Most
can also be found at leading financial websites like SeekingAlpha.com, businessinsider.com, on forex
sites like ForexFactory.com, and occasionally in print media like The Forex Journal. Many of these
are translated into numerous languages, including Spanish, French, Italian, Turkish, Arabic, Swedish,
German, Japanese, Chinese, and Russian.
Prior to his current positions, he was Chief Analyst at avafx.com, and a 30-year financial market
veteran as investor, trader, writer, and adviser to private clients and institutions.
He is married with five children and lives in Jerusalem, Israel, where he can follow Asian markets
in the early morning, Europe through the workday, and the United States at night.
