
so the same objective could be achieved in the market by observing the price
action.

In Fig. 1-3, the price has been advancing in a series of waves, with each
peak and trough reaching higher than its predecessors. Then, for the first
time, a rally fails to move to a new high, and the subsequent reaction pushes
it below the previous trough. This occurs at point X and gives a signal that
the trend has reversed. Figure 1-4 shows a similar situation, but this time
the trend reversal is from a downtrend to an uptrend.

The idea of the interruption of a series of peaks and troughs is the basic
building block for both Dow theory (see Chapter 3) and price pattern analy-
sis (see Chapter 5).

Chart 1-1 Moody's AAA bond yields and peak-and-trough analysis. The solid line above the
yield corresponds to the primary bull and bear markets. The series of rising cyclical peaks and
troughs extended from the end of World War II until 1981. This was a long period, even by
secular standards. In 1981 the yield peaked and a new, downward secular trend began.
Confirmation was given in 1985 as the series of rising peaks and troughs was reversed. The
signal simply indicated a change in trend, but gave no indication as to magnitude. (From
Intermarket Review.)

16- Moody's AAA Bond Yields

105

shisso "ised 78S fis se isso Sad

21
The Market Cycle Model.

Figure 1-3 Reversal of rising peaks and troughs.

_ Series of declining
a pegks and troughs f
High is sicke 7a
jous:
es fhe fret time

‘ pes

For example, if it takes 2 to 3 weeks to complete each eet eRe &
rallies and reactions, the trend reversal will be an fecremen tt
intermediate price movements consist of a series of short-term ( Aint
fh ctuations. Similarly, the interruption of a series of falling in bec
catia and troughs by a rising one signals a reversal from a primary

a primary bull market.



as S aS ii

22 Part |: Trend-Determining Techniques

A Peak-and-Trough Dilemma

Occasionally, peak-and-trough progression becomes more complicated than
the examples shown in Figs. 1-3 and 1-4. In Fig. 1-5(a), the market has been
advancing in a series of rising peaks and troughs, but following the highest
peak, the price declines at point X to a level that is below the previous low.
At this juncture, the series of rising troughs has been broken, but not the
series of rising peaks. In other words, at point X, only half a signal has been
generated. The complete signal of a reversal of both rising peaks and
troughs arises at point Y, when the price slips below the level previously
reached at point X.

At point X, there is quite a dilemma because the trend should still be clas-
sified as positive, and yet the very fact that the series of rising troughs has
been interrupted indicates underlying technical weakness. On the one
hand, we are presented with half a bearish signal, while on the other hand,

waiting for point Y would mean giving up a substantial amount of the prof-
its earned during the bull market.

Figure 1-5 Half-signal reversals.

The Market Cycle Model 23

The dilemma is probably best dealt with by referring back to the fepond
half of the definition of technical analysis given at the beginning of this
chapter, “and riding that trend until the weight of the evidence shows or proves

i n reversed.” ese CONC
Pca sa if the “weight of the evidence” from other technical indica-
tors, such as moving averages (MAs), volume, momentum, and breadth (dis-
cussed in later chapters), overwhelmingly indicates a trend reversal, it ns
probably safe to anticipate a change in trend, even though sap acaeatit
progression has not completely confirmed the situation. It is still a wise po ‘
icy, though, to view this signal with some degree of. skepticism until the corn
sal is confirmed by an interruption in both series of rising peaks as well as

hs

Tigure 1-5(4) shows this type of situation for a reversal from a bear to fat
trend. The same principles of interpretation apply at point X, as in '.
1-5(a). Occasionally, the determination of what constitutes a rally oon reac-
tion becomes a subjective process. One way around this problem is to nin
an objective measure such as categorizing rallies greater than, say, 5 ai
This can be a tedious process, but some software Programs (suc =
MetaStock with its zigzag tool) enable the user to establish such benchmar!
almost instantly in a graphic format.

What Constitutes a Legitimate
Peak and Trough?

the time, the various rallies and reactions are self-evident, so it is
corerarand that these turning points are legitimate peaks and troughs.
Technical lore has it that a reaction to the prevailing trend should retrace
one-third to two-thirds of the previous move. Thus, in Fig. 1-6 the first rally
from the trough low to the subsequent peak is 100 percent. The wagher
reaction appears to be just over a half or a 50 percent retracement o
previous move. Occasionally, the retracement can reach 100 Beep
Technical analysis is far from precise, but if a retracement move Is a goo
deal Jess than the minimum one-third, then the peak or trough in question
is held to be suspect. :

You can se a that a line is a fairly controlled period i! Cass su
ing or digestion of losses. The depth of the trading range can fall s! ne c
the minimum “approximate one-third retracement requirement and, in
such instances, the correction qualifies more on the basis of time than mag-
nitude. A rule of thumb might be for the correction to last at least one-third
to two-thirds of the time taken to achieve the previous advance or decline.
In Fig. 1-7 the time distance between the low and the high for the move



24 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

-Tepresents 100 percent. The consolidation prior to the breakout should con-
stitute at least one-third to two-thirds of the time taken to achieve the
advance, ample time to consolidate gains, and move on to a new high. It’s
possible for the consolidation to constitute more than 100 percent of the
preceding price movement. In fact, the larger the consolidation, the greater

the hustle between buyers and sellers and the more signi
and lower boundaries become. aie aces

os +———Retracement should be about one-third

to two-thirds of the previous move
100% of the advance

Figure 1-6 Identifying peaks and troughs (magnitude).

Retracement is far

less than one-third ———————_»
to two-thirds of the
Previous rally

One-third or more
of the time is taken
to form the rally

Figure 1-7 Identifying peaks and troughs (time).

The Market Cycle Model 25

These are only rough guidelines, and in the final analysis it is ajudgment
call based on experience, common sense, a bit of intuition, and, perhaps
most important of all, a review of other factors such as volume, support, resis-
tance principles, and so on. We have mainly been studying these concepts
in a rising trend. However, the principles work exactly the same in a declin-
ing trend in that rallies should retrace one-third to two-thirds of the previ-
ous decline. Also, lines or consolidations should take at least one-third of
the duration of the previous decline.

It is also important to categorize which kind of trend is being monitored.
Obviously, a reversal derived from a series of rallies and reactions each last-
ing, say, 2 to 3 weeks would be an intermediate reversal. This is because the
swings would be short term in nature. On the other hand, peak-and-trough
reversals that develop in intraday charts are likely to have significance over
a much shorter period. How short would depend on whether the swings
were a reflection of hourly or, say, 5-minute bars.

Summary

¢ Anumber of different trends simultaneously influence the price level of
any security.

© The three most important trends are primary, intermediate, and short
term.

© The principles of technical analysis apply to intraday trends, but since they
are more random in nature, the analysis is generally less reliable than for
longer-term trends.

* Very long term, or secular, trends influence the magnitude of primary bull
and bear trends. a

© Peak-and-trough progression is the most basic trend-identification tech-
nique and is a basic building block of technical analysis.

Asa general rule, in order to qualify as a new legitimate peak or trough,
the price should retrace between one-third and two-thirds of the previ-
ous move.

* Lines or consolidations also qualify as peaks and troughs where they form
between one-third and two-thirds of the time taken to produce the pre-
vious advance or decline.



BEE RCS BES Aaa

Financial
Markets and the
Business Cycle

Introduction

ane basic concer of this book is the technical approach, but it is also impor-
n 2 understand that primary trends of stocks, bonds, and commodities
are letermined by the attitude of investors toward unfolding events in the
usiness cycle. Each market has a tendency to peak and trough at different
points during the business cycle in a consistent, chronological manner. ‘An
understanding of the interrelationship of debt, equity, and commodity

markets provide: i ifyi j
marke’ Pp 's a useful framework for identifying major reversals in each

The Discounting Mechanism
of Financial Markets

The trend of all financial markets is essentially
leh eens of movements in the economy, the effect those changes are
rand eave on the Price of the asset in which a specific financial market
“ fe ange Beye ological attitude of investors toward these fundamen-
finan y a et participants typically anticipate future economic and

€velopments and take action by buying or selling the appropri-

determined by investors’

26

gn

Financial Markets and the Business Cycle 27

ate assets, with the result that a market normally reaches a major turning
point well ahead of the actual development.

An expanding level of economic activity is usually favorable for stock
prices, a weak economy is bullish for bond prices, and a tight economy is
favorable for industrial commodity prices. These three markets often move
in different directions simultaneously because they are discounting differ-
ent things.

An economy is rarely stable; generally, it is either expanding or con-
tracting. As a result, financial markets are also in a continual state of flux.
A hypothetical economy, as shown in Fig. 2-1, revolves around a point of bal-
ance known as equilibrium. Roughly speaking, equilibrium can be thought
of as a period of zero growth in which the economy is neither expanding
nor contracting. In practice, this state of affairs is rarely, if ever, attained,
since an economy as a whole possesses tremendous momentum in either
the expansionary or the contractionary phase, so that the turnaround rarely
occurs at an equilibrium level.

In any event, the “economy” consists of a host of individual sectors, many
of which are operating in different directions at the same time. Thus, at the
beginning of the business cycle, leading economic indicators, such as hous-
ing starts, might be rising, while lagging indicators, such as capital spend-
ing or employment levels, could be falling. Investors in financial markets
are not concerned with periods of extended stability or equilibrium, for such
periods do not produce volatile price swings and opportunities to make
quick profits. The ever-changing character of the economic cycle creates
tremendous opportunities for investors and traders because it means that
different industries are experiencing different economic conditions simul-
taneously. Since housing leads the economy, housing stocks do well at the
start of the recovery, when capital intensive stocks such as steel are still under
pressure. Later in the cycle, the tables are turned and it’s housing that peaks

Economy is growing

Lo

Economy is contracting
Figure 2-1 The idealized business cycle.



Mi@MEBREBBREBRE ZZ & &

28 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

first. This situation gives rise to the group rotation process, which is dis-
cussed at length in Chapter 19.

Since the financial markets lead the economy, it follows that the greatest
profits can be made just before the point of maximum economic distortion,
or disequilibrium. Once investors realize that an economy is changing direc-
tion and returning toward the equilibrium level, they discount this devel-
opment by buying or selling the appropriate asset. Obviously, the more
dislocated and volatile an economy becomes, the greater is the potential for
a return toward the equilibrium level, and also for a strong swing well
beyond it to the other extreme. The risks are also greater if you are too early.
Under such conditions, the possibilities for making money in financial mar-

kets are greater because they too will normally become subject to wider price
fluctuations.

Market Movements and
the Business Cycle

The major movements of interest rates, equities, and commodity prices are
related to changes in the level of business activity. Please note that the term
commodity prices refers to industrial prices that are sensitive to business con-
ditions, as opposed to weatherdriven commodities such as the grains,
Figure 2-2 represents a business cycle, which ranges from 8 to 5 years
between troughs. The horizontal line reflects a level of zero growth, above
which are periods of expansion, and below which are periods of contrac-
tion. After the peak is experienced, the economy continues to grow, but at
a declining rate, until the line crosses below the equilibrium level and con-
traction in economic activity takes place. The arrows in Fig. 2-2 show the
idealized peaks and troughs of the financial markets as they relate to the
business cycle.

Periods of expansion generally last longer than periods of contraction,
because it takes longer to build something up than to tear it down. For this
Treason, bull markets for equities generally last longer than bear markets.
The same could be said for interest rates and commodities, but in this case
the magnitude and duration of a primary trend depend on the direction of
the secular trend, as discussed in Chapter 1.

Figure 2-3 shows how the three markets of short-term interest rates, com-
modities, and equities also relate to the typical business cycle. In the exam-
ple, interest rates have been plotted inversely to correspond with bond
prices. A bull market for bonds is marked by a rising line and a bear mar-
ket by a descending one.

Financial Markets and the Business Cycle 29

L0\_ YN

Figure 2-2 The idealized business cycle and financial market turning points. (B = Bonds;
S = Stocks; C = Commodities)

Bonds
| Commodities

Figure 2-3 Idealized sine curves for three markets.

Referring back to Fig. 2-2, we can see that the bond market is the first
financial market to begin a bull phase. This usually occurs after the growth
rate in the economy has slowed down considerably from its peak rate and
quite often is delayed until the initial stages of the recession. Generally
speaking, the sharper the economic contraction, the greater the potential
for a rise in bond prices (that is, a fall in interest rates). Alternatively, the
stronger the period of expansion, the smaller the amount of economic and
financial slack, and the greater the potential for a decline in bond prices
(and a rise in interest rates).



a a

30 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Following the bear market low in bond prices, economic activity begins
to contract more sharply. At this point, participants in the equity market are
able to “look through” the valley in corporate profits, which are now declin-
ing sharply because of the recession, and begin accumulating stocks.
Generally speaking, the longer the lead between the low in bonds and that
of stocks, the greater the potential for the stock market to rally. This is
because the lag implies a Particularly weak recession in which extreme cor-
porate belt tightening is able to drop break-even levels to a very low level.
During the recovery, increases in revenue are therefore able to quickly move
to the bottom line.

After the recovery has been under way for some time, capacity starts to
tighten, resource-based companies feel some pricing power return, and
commodity prices bottom. Occasionally after a commodity boom of unusual
magnitude, industrial commodity prices reach their actual bottom during
the recession due to severe margin liquidation on behalf of speculators.
However, this bottom is often subsequently tested; a sustainable rally only
begins after the recovery has been under way for a few months. At this point,
all three financial markets are in a rising trend.

Gradually, the economic and financial slack, which developed as a result
of the recession, is substantially absorbed, putting upward pressure on the
price of credit, that is, interest rates. Since rising interest rates mean falling
bond prices, the bond market peaks out and begins its bear phase. Because
Some excess plant and labor capacity still exists, rising business activity results
in improved productivity and a continued positive outlook. The stock mar-
ket discounts trends in corporate profits, so it remains in an uptrend until
investors sense that the €conomy is becoming overheated and the potential
for an improvement in profits is very low. At this point, there is less reason
to hold equities, and they in turn enter into a bear phase. Later, the rise in
interest rates takes its toll on the economy and commodity prices begin to
slip.

Once this juncture has been reached, all three financial markets begin
to fall. They will continue to decline until the credit markets bottom out.
This final stage, which develops around the same time as the beginning of
the recession, is usually associated with a free fall in Prices in at least one of
the financial markets. If a panic is to develop, this is one of the most likely
points for it to take place.

Introducing the Six Stages

Since there are three financial markets and each has two turning points, it
follows that there are conceptually six turning points in a typical cycle. I call

Financial Markets and the Business Cycle 31

these the six stages and they can be used as reference points for determin-
ing the current phase of the business cycle; The six stages are indicated in
Fig. 24. : ’
When identifying a stage, it is important to look at the long-term techni-
cal position of all three markets so that they can act as a cross-check on each
other. The stages are also useful in that specific groups do well at particu-
lar times. For example, liquidity-driven or early-cycle leaders tend to out-
perform the market in Stages 1 and 2 when bond prices are rising and
interest rates falling. On the other hand, earnings-driven or late-cycle lead-
ers perform well in Stages 4 and 5 when commodity prices are rallying.
These aspects are covered more fully in Chapter 19 on group rotation.

Longer Cycles

Some expansions encompass much longer periods, and they usually include
at least one slowdown in the growth rate followed by a second round of eco-
nomic expansion. This has the effect of splitting the overall expansion into
two or three parts, each: of which results in a complete cycle in the finan-
cial markets. I call this a double cycle. An example of this phenomenon is illus-
trated in Fig. 2-5.

Idealized Business Cycle for the Six Stages of the Business Cycle

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 _ Stage 5 Stage 6

Stocks
\ Recovery

ae me

Stocks

Commodities

Commodities

Figure 2-4 The six stages of a typical business cycle.



a |

oe eee

|

lo!

32 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

\/!

ef

s

Figure 2-5 Financial market peaks and troughs in a double cycle.

AN SA,

A double cycle developed in the 1980s and another in the 1990s. In the
mid-1980s, for example, commodity and industrial parts of the country were
very badly affected, but the east and west coasts continued their expansions
unabated. The strong areas more than offset the weaker ones and so the
country as a whole avoided a recession. It is certainly true that the six-stage
concept works well in many cycles, but it must be noted that there are excep-
tions. I believe, therefore, that it is best used as a conceptual framework
rather than an ironclad discipline. For example, some of the worst excep-
tions in over 200 years of recorded history occurred in the 1990s when the
U.S. equity market was experiencing an unprecedented equity rally, which
fatally distorted the normal chronological sequence.

The Role of Technical Analysis

Technical analysis comes into play by helping to determine when the var-
ious markets have turned in a primary-sense way. This is achieved by apply-
ing the various techniques outlined in subsequent chapters, moving average
crossovers, changes in the direction of long-term momentum, and so
forth. Each market can then be used as a cross-check against the other two.
For example, if the weight of the technical evidence suggests that bonds
have bottomed but commodity prices remain in a bear market, the next

thing to do would be to look for technical signs pointing to a stock mar-
ket bottom.

Financial Markets and the Business Cycle 33

Market Experience, 1966-2001

Chart 2-1 shows how peaks and troughs developed for the various markets
between 1966 and 1977. Please note that inversely plotted short-term inter-
est rates have been substituted for bond prices. This is because there is a
much closer link between equity prices and short-term rates than with
longer-term rates, due in part to the fact that corporations do more of their
borrowing in the money markets than the bond markets. Also, market par
ticipants buy stocks on margin, the cost of which is determined by the leve'
of short-term rates. Short-term rates are also more volatile than those at the
ield spectrum.
othe ponies and troughs in Chart 2-1 turned out very much as expected.
Although the chronological sequence was more or less perfect, the leads
and lags in each cycle varied considerably, because of the different charac
teristics in each cycle. In 1966, for instance, bonds and stocks bottome
more or less simultaneously, whereas the lag for the commodity market bot-
well over a year. .

Chart 2-2 shows the same markets, but this time we are looking at the
1980s. The two small, upward-pointing arrows in 1982 and 1990 reflect reces-
sions. The series of three bottoms that developed between 1984 and 1986
reflects the mid-1980s growth recession. Generally speaking, the chrono-
logical sequence works satisfactorily until we get to the late 1980s where the
