
The Bearish Long Black Candle
The long black candle is a direct counterpart of the long white candle discussed earlier in this chapter. It’s a long candlestick compared to other
candlesticks on the same chart, and most or all of it is made up by a solid
candle.
The long black candle is as bearish as it gets. To see one of these candles
means that sellers take over at the beginning of the day and push prices lower
and lower until the end of the day. Typically, these sellers are just selling to
get out, and their price sensitivity is low. Seeing this type of enthusiastic selling should give you confidence that the bears will be in control for a few more
days after the long black candle appears, and you can capitalize on that.

Figure 5-13:
A dragonfly
doji not
working out
too well.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 85

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Understanding long black candles
A long black candle is created when the bears seize control at the start of a
day and push until the day’s end. Figure 5-14 is a picture of a typical long
black candle.

Figure 5-14:
A long
black candle.

For some quick insight on the numbers involved, have a look at Figure 5-15,
which is an intraday chart of price action that creates a long black candle.
Keep in mind that the figure is just one example, and that there are several
other intraday patterns that can produce a long black candle on a daily chart.
Basically, any pattern that begins near the high of the day and ends near the
low of the day results in a long black candle, even if the action that got the
price to the low occurred in just a couple of the 30-minute bars. The potential
intraday action is limitless; the important thing is to know the bears pushed
hard and down, and the bulls weren’t able to hold up the price.
The most important thing to bear in mind (pardon the pun) is that the long
black candle indicates that the bears were in charge for the majority of a
day. The day begins with the bears controlling the activity, and it ends the
same way.

85

10_178089 ch05.qxp

86

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 86

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 5-15:
A 30-minute
chart that
produces a
long black
candle on a
daily chart.

A useful rule of thumb for the long black candle is that the candle section
should cover at least 90 percent of the candlestick. The wicks should be
barely visible or completely missing.
The long black candle also usually indicates that many price levels have been
covered over the course of one day. A reversal is very possible in the short
term, but the long black candle shows the bears are being aggressive and
suggests that this aggression will continue.

Identifying black marubozus
Like the long white candles described earlier in this chapter, there are
marubozu versions of the long black candle, which are cleverly called black
marubozus. The black marubozu features an open equal to the high and a
low equal to the close. Figure 5-16 is a black marubozu, or as my toddler son
would say, a black rectangle.
Just like their bullish counterparts, there are three variations of the black
marubozu. Figure 5-16 is the first variation, which is a marubozu that opens
on its high and closes on its low. The second is the closing black marubozu.
You can spot a closing black marubozu by recognizing that there’s no wick on
the candlestick at the bottom or closing end of the candlestick. The close is
equal to the low, while the open is a little bit lower than the high for the day.
Figure 5-17 is a closing black marubozu.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 87

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Figure 5-16:
A black
marubozu.

Figure 5-17:
A closing
black
marubozu.

The third variation is the opening black marubozu. This pattern is created
when the open is equal to the high of a day, and the close is just above
the day’s low. A small wick appears only on the bottom of this candlestick.
Figure 5-18 is an example of a typical opening black marubozu. The appearance of a small wick on the bottom of this candlestick indicates the possibility of some late-day buying or that the low price of the day enticed some
buyers. This source of speculation leads some to regard the opening black
marubozu as the least reliable of the three black marubozu variations.

87

10_178089 ch05.qxp

88

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 88

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 5-18:
An opening
black
marubozu.

Trading based on long black candles
Now it’s time to see how you can trade using long black candles in the real
world. Figure 5-19 is near and dear to my heart because it represents a trade
I actually executed while writing this book. This is a chart of the November
soybean futures contract that trades at the Chicago Board of Trade. At the
time, I wanted to take a short position in the soybean contract, but was waiting for a confirming trading signal or bearish chart pattern before I executed
my position. The long black candle highlighted in Figure 5-19 provided the
short signal I sought.

Getting a good bearish signal from a long black candle
I’ve noticed in the past that long white or black candlesticks are generally
followed by continuations of their up or down moves more often with commodities than with stocks. Futures on commodities tend to have strong
trends. This tendency makes me quicker to initiate a position in futures than
in stocks. And by the same token, I’m usually quicker to concede that I’m
wrong on a futures trade than on a stock trade. Keep these differences in
mind and use them to your advantage. (Chapter 11 covers trends in more
detail.)
Back to my soybean trade. For fundamental reasons, I was looking for a signal
that told me to short the soybean futures contract. When I saw the long black
candlestick on a particular day, I put on a short near the close of that day. I
was quickly rewarded the next day, as another very bearish day followed.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 89

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Figure 5-19:
A long black
candle that
provides a
nice sell
signal.

If things hadn’t worked out as I’d planned, I still wouldn’t have suffered big
losses, because I also entered a protective order called a buy stop, which
is the opposite of the sell stop mentioned earlier in this chapter (see
“Understanding long white candles”). My buy stop level was the high of the
long black candle — the resistance level that if broken, would negate the sell
signal given by the long black candle.
Keep in mind that resistance levels are where chartists believe sellers will be
brought into the market and keep prices from going higher. In candlestick
charting, resistance is generally the highest level of one of the candlesticks
that created a sell signal. After this resistance level is broken, the signal isn’t
considered valid anymore.
Luckily, that level was never reached, and the trade turned out to be a profitable one. I continued to monitor the short position from day to day and
exited on the day indicated on the chart. The pattern for that day is a regular
doji, which often signals the reversal of a trend. I cover regular dojis in more
detail in Chapter 6.

89

10_178089 ch05.qxp

90

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 90

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
A long black candle failing as a short signal
As with long white candles, and any candlestick patterns for that matter, long
black candles don’t always work out perfectly. Long black candles do fail, as
you can see in Figure 5-20. In fact, this figure includes two instances of long
black candle failures!
Figure 5-20 contains a chart of the futures contract trading on crude oil from
the summer of 2007. If you were involved with any oil or other energy-related
commodity trading during that time, you’ll remember that shorting was a
hard row to hoe then.
Two long black candles appear in Figure 5-20. Both fail. One crashes and
burns after a few days, and the other follows suit the very next day. For clarity’s sake, I labeled them #1 and #2:
 Long black candle #1 was followed by an up day, but this up day didn’t
break resistance or the high of the signal candle. It managed to stay
below resistance for a few days before breaking out and then trading
higher for several days in a row. Note that if you didn’t get out of a short
position on the day that resistance was broken, you never had a shot to
get out at that level again. Without a protective buy stop at the failure
level, your losses would’ve continued to pile up.
 Long black candle #2 doesn’t work out too well either, but at least it
failed quickly. The possibility for a successful trade was clearly over at
that point, and if you were involved, you could’ve moved on to the next
trade. The trait that #2 shares with #1 is that if you didn’t exit when the
resistance level was violated, you basically didn’t have a chance to get
out at a lower level to limit your losses. Your losing trade would’ve just
gotten worse. Getting out of trades quickly is just as important as finding
and executing winning trades.

The Bearish Gravestone Doji
The doji is one of the most significant candlestick formations and is created
when the open and close for a day are equal. It doesn’t matter where this
occurs on a wick for a candlestick to be classified as a doji, but the location
dictates what kind of doji it is.

Identifying the gravestone doji
When the open and close are both equal to the low of the day, the result is
the most bearish of doji: the gravestone doji. Figure 5-21 is a good example
of a bearish gravestone doji.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 91

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Figure 5-20:
A long black
candle as a
failing sell
signal.

Figure 5-21:
A bearish
gravestone
doji.

The price activity that creates a gravestone doji begins and ends at the low of
a day. The progression for the day includes the following:
1. A security opens and trades up during the day, as the bulls dominate
the activity.
2. Higher prices attract sellers, and the selling becomes strong enough to
overwhelm the bulls.
3. As the bears take over, the price is moved back down to the open,
which was also the low of the day.

91

10_178089 ch05.qxp

92

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 92

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Closing at this level after trading up during a day doesn’t bode well for the
bulls in the near term. Figure 5-22 provides an example of such a day, which
would be a fearful one for the bulls.

Trading based on gravestone dojis
Take a look in this section at a couple of examples of gravestone dojis that
have popped up in the real world and what happened afterward. The two
examples I provide are for stocks, not commodities. The first example, which
you can see clearly in Figure 5-23, is a gravestone doji that offered a useful
sell signal followed by lower prices.
I included several days of price action to show a combination of interesting
factors:
 First, notice that this gravestone doji signals the beginning of a pretty
prolonged downtrend in the stock.
 Second, notice that during the downtrend, there are a couple of smaller
gravestone dojis. If you’d shorted on the first gravestone doji and kept
on the short position, you would’ve been pretty happy with the results.
The appearance of a couple more bearish formations would’ve given you
the confidence to maintain your short position.

Figure 5-22:
A 30-minute
chart of a
day that
creates a
gravestone
doji on a
daily chart.

10_178089 ch05.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 93

Chapter 5: Working with Straightforward Single-Stick Patterns

Figure 5-23:
A great
example
of the
gravestone
doji working
as a sell
signal.

 Finally, there’s a fourth gravestone doji toward the end of the downtrend.
Notice that it fails fairly quickly, as the following day has a high equal to
the original gravestone doji’s high. If you’d ridden the stock price down
to this level and seen a sell signal fail, it would’ve been time to buy the
stock back, take your profit, and move on to the next trade. That would
be a profitable outcome for you.
The next example shows what can happen if you’re not as fortunate.
Figure 5-24 is a chart of Apple Computer’s stock (AAPL). A gravestone doji
appears in the middle of the chart and during an uptrend. Dojis are often
associated with a trend change, and seeing the bearish doji in an uptrend
may be a signal of a trend change to the down side. Unfortunately for anyone
trading this sell signal, things don’t work out so well.
The gravestone doji is initially followed by a couple of down days, and it does
appear that the trend may be changing. However, a couple of positive days
put this trend change in doubt. A couple of days later resistance is tested and
broken, and the uptrend continues. The sell signal failed, but a nimble trader
would’ve placed a buy stop to limit the losses on this failure.

93

10_178089 ch05.qxp

94

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 94

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 5-24:
The
gravestone
doji failing
on a chart
of AAPL.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 95

Chapter 6

Single-Stick Patterns That
Depend on Market Context
In This Chapter
 Identifying market environments
 Digging into doji details
 Understanding spinning tops
 Encountering belt hold basics
 Taking a look at hanging men and hammers

I

n Chapter 5, I cover a few of the more basic and easily defined single-stick
candlestick patterns, which are either bullish or bearish indicators regardless of their location on a chart. For those patterns, the price action that
occurs during the previous few days just isn’t that significant.
But not all single-stick patterns are that straightforward. Some extremely
useful single-stick patterns rely heavily on their location on a chart. Making
yourself familiar with these patterns and how to identify and trade based on
them is another way that you can add a versatile weapon to your trading
arsenal. That’s what this chapter is all about. Also, context is essential to the
single-stick patterns that are covered in this chapter. This isn’t always the
case, but for this chapter, you need to know the market environment before
deciding if a signal or pattern is valid.
A variety of single-stick patterns can provide some terrific trading opportunities if you can spot them in the right market environment. I begin this chapter
by quickly touching on how you can define a market environment, and then I
cover some of the most significant single-stick patterns that you can exploit
for profitable trading.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

96

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 96

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Understanding Market Environments
In order to take full advantage of single-stick patterns that rely heavily on the
market context in which they appear, you first need to know how to quickly
and effectively determine the market environment. Being aware of the current
market environment is key to properly using most candlestick patterns in
general, but especially for the ones I describe in the rest of this chapter.

The three market states
A market or stock is usually defined as being in one of three states:
 Bullish: Price behavior trending up
 Bearish: Price behavior trending down
 Range bound: No discernable trend
Deciding which of the three states a market is in can be as easy as looking
back a few weeks on a chart and spotting a general direction or drawing a
line that shows the market’s trend. It may also be as complicated as using a
technical indicator to reveal the direction of the market. These indicators are
covered extensively in Chapter 11, but for this chapter, I use examples where
the market trend is easy to decipher.

Identifying the market trend
For a quick visual representation of what an uptrend or downtrend looks like
on a chart, check out these figures; it doesn’t get much clearer. Figure 6-1
shows an uptrend.
Figure 6-2, conversely, shows a downtrend.
At times, the market environment may not be completely apparent or obvious. Either different people may see the trend or lack of trend in a different
way or the time frames participants are using may cause different traders to
have differing views of the trend or lack of trend. If that’s the case, then pass
on any trades you’re considering. The uncertainty is just too high, and there
will always be another trading opportunity in the future.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 97

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-1:
A chart
with a nice
uptrend.

Figure 6-2:
A chart
with a nice
downtrend.

97

11_178089 ch06.qxp

98

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 98

Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Delving Into Dojis
A doji is a single-stick pattern in which the open and close for a day are equal
(see Chapter 5 for more discussion on dojis). This level of exactness is a
rarity, though, and some candlestick chartists are flexible and say that if the
open and close are very near each other, it’s still considered a doji. I agree,
although I do think that they need to be the same in the case of the dragonfly
and gravestone — two dojis that are indisputably bullish and bearish, respectively. But there are other varieties of dojis for which the market context is
critical, and I cover a few of the significant ones in this section.
Dojis are often associated with the reversal of a trend and can serve as outstanding reversal indicators. If a doji appears in an uptrend, it could very well
indicate that the trend may be changing to a downtrend soon, especially if the
doji is a gravestone doji. Likewise, if a doji (especially a dragonfly doji) appears
during a downtrend, there’s a good chance that things will look up soon.

The long legged doji
In addition to the dragonfly and gravestone dojis (covered in Chapter 5), one
last doji is significant enough to merit a specific name. This one is cleverly
called the long legged doji.
A long legged doji is considered a reversal signal when appearing in an uptrend
or downtrend. This doji indicates that there has been much uncertainty in the
market after a period of directional certainty. This change of conviction often
results in a change in trend.

Identifying long legged dojis
The long legged doji has a fitting name: It features a small stick with very long
wicks (or legs) on each end. The small candle on a long legged doji is normally
located very close to the center of the candlestick. Check out Figure 6-3 for a
classic example of a long legged doji.
In addition to its unique appearance, the long legged doji is singled out due
to the unusual price action that causes the formation of this candlestick pattern on a daily chart. Figure 6-4 provides a look at a 30-minute chart that
translates into a long legged doji.
Figure 6-4 just looks like a roller coaster ride. Imagine trying to trade during a
day like that and ending up where you started. You can really lose (or win)
big on such a day.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 99

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-3:
A long
legged doji.

Figure 6-4:
A 30-minute
chart that
creates a
long legged
doji on a
daily chart.

99

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 100

100 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
If you’ve just started trading or don’t feel quite comfortable with your trading
abilities yet, it’s probably best for you to steer clear of day trading on
extremely volatile days. I’ve been trading for years, and I have taught myself
to lay off the day trading when things are particularly hairy.

Using long legged dojis as buy signals
As I mentioned earlier in this section, the long legged doji may be a buy or sell
signal depending on prior price action. In a downtrend, the signal can forecast
a change to an uptrend and act as a buy signal, and in an uptrending market,
the long legged doji can indicate that the uptrend is coming to an end and
serve as a sell signal. I provide a couple of examples where a long legged doji
is a good buy signal and then demonstrate where it doesn’t work out too well.

The long legged doji giving a good buy signal
Figure 6-5 is a long legged doji that occurred in late 2002 on the futures contract of the Canadian dollar. It occurred after three very bearish days in a row
and was followed by a very nice uptrend. This example shows how a long
legged doji works when it signals the end of a down move. Unfortunately, I
didn’t trade this particular scenario, but I definitely will if I see the same
pattern in the future!

Figure 6-5:
Canadian
dollar
futures
contract
with a nice
buy signal
from a long
legged doji.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 101

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context
Notice that the doji buy signal in Figure 6-5 works almost immediately —
what’s expected of a trend changing signal. If the signal doesn’t seem to be
working very quickly, beware.
Trading against a trend is a very dangerous prospect. You need to be sure
you’re prepared to take a loss and move on quickly to the next trade if things
go sour.

A failing long legged doji
Now on to the bullish long legged doji that didn’t work too well. In all honesty,
it was difficult to find a good real-world example. The long legged doji is fairly
rare, and when it shows up during a trend, it usually does signal an impending
trend change. It does happen, though, and Figure 6-6 is an example of a long
legged doji that didn’t signal a change in trend.
Figure 6-6 features price action for a stock with a long legged doji showing up
after a few downtrending days. The price trends up for the next day or two
and things look fine, but then the long legged doji’s low is broken, and the
signal is no longer valid. If you were trading this stock and didn’t get out at
that critical point, where a stop order should’ve been placed or an exit trade
should’ve been executed, you would’ve endured some pretty painful losses.

Figure 6-6:
A long
legged doji
buy signal
that fails
quickly.

101

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 102

102 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Be sure you’re prepared to get out of a trade immediately after the signal
you’re trading goes bad. Use that as a rule, and follow that rule regardless of
how much it may hurt. To help me remember the importance of these rules,
I taped the following quote from Zen in the Markets by Edward A. Toppel to
the monitor on my trading desk: “You can break the rules and get away with
it. Eventually the rules break you for not respecting them.”
