
Figure 15.6 also shows both the Parabolic and Directional
Movement systems. The Parabolic is clearly a more sensitive sys-

04/21/97 ("SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/18/98

Daily Bar Chart Hy [ 1080

a m1 v1 hk s o Nv > “be. id W

om: ae 7

Figure 15.6 The Directional Movement lines along the bottom of the
chart can be used as a filter on Parabolics (upper chart). When the +DI line
is above the -DI line (far left and far right of chart), all Parabolic sell signals
can be ignored. That would have eliminated several whipsaws during the
rally phases.


386 Chapter 15

tem, meaning that more frequent and earlier signals are given.
However, by using the Directional Movement as a filter, several of
the bad signals in the Parabolic could be avoided by following
only those signals in the same direction as the Directional
Movement lines. It appears then that the Parabolic and
Directional Movement systems should be used together, with
Directional Movement acting as a screen or filter on the more sen-
sitive Parabolic.

The best time to use a trending system is when the ADX line
is rising. (See Figures 15.7 and 15.8.) Be forewarned, however, that
when the ADX line starts to drop from above the 40 level, that is
an early sign that the trend is weakening. A rise back above the 20
level is often a sign of the start of a new trend. (The ADX line is
essentially a smoothed difference between the +DI and —D] lines.)

3/17/95 ("DWU) Dow Utilities 03/20/98
200,
Weekly Bar Chart |
Hf att bro
it ln Es
250
i 20
mr Fa, wl a0
f y \ i "l wt i Lit 220
al tiyut Hil Hy {hy ny i 210
ili pay 00
tt [190
8s
ZN 14 Week ADX les
t
nN T owe i ww a _

Figure 15.7 The 14 week ADX line peaked in early 1996 from well over
40, and initiated an 18 month trading range in utilities. The ADX upturn
during the summer of 1997 from below 20 signaled that utilities were start-
ing to trend.


Computers and Trading Systems 387

02/28/85 (*XOl) Amex Oil Index 03/31/98
+500
Monthly Bar Chart
}4s0
40 tine CM

.
I [x f
4 Month ADX
i ["*
q J 300
20 line an wth al
|

St ni hea fr “
| i

‘es. 0 et ee cA 7 es, ee, Mid t

wi jag

Figure 15.8 An ADX line overlaid over a monthly chart of the AMEX
Oil Index (XOI). The ADX peaked above 40 in 1990, ending the oil stock
rally. The upturn in the ADX line from below 20 at the start of 1995 sig-
naled the end of a 4 year trading range in oil stocks, and correctly spotted the
start of a new upleg.

PROS AND CONS OF
SYSTEM TRADING

Advantages of Mechanical Systems

1. Human emotion is eliminated.

Greater discipline is achieved.

More consistency is possible.

Trades are taken in the direction of the trend.

Participation is virtually guaranteed in the direction of
every important trend.

Profits are allowed to run.
Losses are minimized.

Pwr

No


388 Chapter 15

Disadvantages of Mechanical Systems

1. Most mechanical systems are trend-following.

2. Trend-following systems rely on major trends in order to be
profitable.

3. Trend-following systems are generally nonprofitable when
markets are not trending.

4. There are long periods of time when markets are not
trending and, therefore, not suitable for a trending
approach.

The major problem is the failure of the system to recognize
when the market is not trending and its inability to turn itself off.
The measure of a good system is not only its ability to make
money in trending markets, but its ability to preserve capital dur-
ing nontrending periods. It is this inability of the system to mon-
itor itself that is its greatest weakness. This is where some overrid-
ing filtering device, such as Welles Wilder’s Directional Movement
system or the ADX line could prove especially useful by allowing
the trader to determine which markets are most suitable for a
trending system.

Another drawback is that no allowance is generally made
for anticipating market reversals. Trend-following systems ride
with the trend until it turns. They don’t recognize when a mar-
ket has reached a long term support or resistance level, when
oscillator divergences are being given, or when an Elliott Wave
fifth pattern is clearly visible. Most traders would get more
defensive at that point, and begin taking some profits. The sys-
tem, however, will stay with the position until well after the
market has changed direction. Therefore, it’s up to the trader to
determine how best to employ the system. That is to say,
whether it should be followed blindly or whether it should be
incorporated into a trading plan with other technical factors.
That brings us to our next section on how a mechanical system
can be used as just another technical input into the forecasting
and trading process.


Computers and Trading Systems 389

Using System Signals as a
Disciplining Device

The system signals can be used simply as a mechanical confirma-
tion along with other technical factors. Even if the system is not
being traded mechanically, and other technical factors are being
employed, the signals could be used as a disciplined way to keep
the trader on the right side of the major trend. No short positions
would be taken as long as the computer trend was up. No longs
would be taken in a computer downtrend. (This would be a sim-
ple way for fundamentally oriented traders to use a technical
device as a filter or trigger on their own trading ideas.) Trend
direction can be a matter of judgment. The computer signals
relieve the trader of some degree of uncertainty. They can prevent
him or her from falling into the trap of “top and bottom picking.”

Using Signals as Alerts

System signals can also be used as an excellent screening device to
alert the trader to recent trend changes. The trader can simply
glance at the trend signals and instantly has several trading can-
didates. The same information could be found by studying all of
the charts. The computer just makes that task quicker, easier, and
more authoritative. The ability of the computer to automate sys-
tem signals and then alert the trader when signals are triggered is
an enormous asset, especially when the universe of financial mar-
kets has grown so large.

NEED EXPERT HELP?

One of the products offered by Omega Research called
TradeStation offers a variety of Expert Features (Omega Research,
Miami, FL 33174, (305) 551-9991). You can call up its Expert
Commentary, which interprets indicators for you based on cur-
rent market conditions. Omega’s Expert Analyst will determine


390 Chapter 15

which indicators should work best in the current market and
interpret them for you. In addition, it has two Expert Tools. The
Trendlines Automatic Indicator actually draws trendlines for you.
The Candlestick Patterns Indicator reads the more common can-
dlestick chart patterns.

TEST SYSTEMS OR CREATE
YOUR OWN

Omega Research also includes a library of the most popular trad-
ing systems used by traders. You can test them, change them, or
create your own if you wish. All of Omega’s charting tools, indi-
cators, and trading systems are written in a relatively simple lan-
guage called EasyLanguage. EasyLanguage takes trading ideas that
you have described in plain language and converts them into the
machine code needed to run the program. It’s hard to overesti-
mate the value of being able to develop, test, optimize if you wish,
and then automate your own trading ideas—without being a
computer programmer. The computer will even generate the
appropriate trading orders for you and alert you via your alphanu-
meric pager that signals have been triggered. (In Appendix C,
we’ll use Omega Research’s EasyLanguage and TradeStation to
show you how to go about creating a trading system of your own.)

CONCLUSION

This chapter introduced a couple more of Welles Wilder’s systems
to you—Parabolics and Directional Movement (DMI). Parabolics
can generate useful trading signals, but probably shouldn’t be
used alone. The two DI lines can be used as a filter on Parabolics
or any other sensitive trend-following trading system. The ADX
line, which is part of the DMI system, provides one way to deter-
mine which type of market you’re dealing with—a trending or a
trading market. A rising ADX line suggests a trend and favors
moving averages. A falling ADX line suggests a trading range and
favors oscillators. We also used the Parabolic examples to show


Computers and Trading Systems 391

the good and bad sides of most trend-following systems. They
work well when a trend is present. They’re useless during a trad-
ing range. You have to be able to tell the difference. We also
touched on the merits of mechanical trading systems. These sys-
tems remove human emotion and can be very helpful in the right
market climate. They can also be used as technical alerts and used
in conjunction with fundamental analysis. (See Appendix C for
more on system trading.)

There’s no question that the computer has revolutionized
financial market analysis and trading. While our interest is pri-
marily in technical analysis, software programs also allow you to
blend fundamental analysis with the technical. When the first
edition of this book was published in 1986, it cost about $5,000
to outfit yourself with the necessary computer hardware to per-
form serious technical analysis. The leading software package of
the day cost close to $2,000. How things have changed. You can
now obtain incredibly powerful computers for less than $2,000.
Most software packages can be had for less than $300. The better
ones provide you with up to 20 years of historical price data on a
CD-Rom disk at little or no additional cost.

Another big benefit is the amount of educational help that
you can obtain with those software packages. The user manuals
alone are the size of a book and include technical formulas and all
kinds of useful explanations. The screening and alert capabilities
of today’s computer are especially helpful to those monitoring
global bond and stock markets and thousands of individual com-
mon stocks, not to mention mutual funds. In Chapter 17, we'll
talk about an even more sophisticated use of computer technolo-
gy for developing neural networks. But the message to you is clear.
If you are serious about investing or trading financial markets, get
a computer and learn how to use it. You'll be glad you did.




Money Management and

Trading Tactics

INTRODUCTION

The previous chapters presented the major technical methods
used to forecast and trade financial markets. In this chapter, we'll
round out the trading process by adding to the task of market fore-
casting the crucial elements of trading tactics (or timing) and the
often overlooked aspect of money management. No trading pro-
gram can be complete without all three elements.

THE THREE ELEMENTS OF
SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Any successful trading program must take into account three impor-
tant factors: price forecasting, timing, and money management.

393


394 Chapter 16

1. Price forecasting indicates which way a market is expected to
trend. It is the crucial first step in the trading decision. The
forecasting process determines whether the trader is bullish or
bearish. It provides the answer to the basic question of
whether to enter the market from the long or short side. If the
price forecast is wrong, nothing else that follows will work.

2. Trading tactics, or timing, determines specific entry and exit
points. Timing is especially crucial in futures trading.
Because of the low margin requirements and the resulting
high leverage, there isn’t much room for error. It’s quite pos-
sible to be correct on the direction of the market, but still
lose money on a trade if the timing is off. Timing is almost
entirely technical in nature. Therefore, even if the trader is
fundamentally oriented, technical tools must be empioyed
at this point to determine specific entry and exit points.

3. Money management covers the allocation of funds. It
includes such areas as portfolio makeup, diversification,
how much money to invest or risk in any one market, the
use of stops, reward-to-risk ratios, what to do after periods
of success or adversity, and whether to trade conservatively
or aggressively.

The simplest way to summarize the three different ele-
ments is that price forecasting tells the trader what to do (buy or
sell), timing helps decide when to do it, and money management
determines how much to commit to the trade. The subject of price
forecasting has been covered in the previous chapters. We’ll deal
with the other two aspects here. We’ll discuss money manage-
ment first because that subject should be taken into consideration
when deciding on the appropriate trading tactics.

MONEY MANAGEMENT

After having spent many years in the research department of a
major brokerage firm, I made the inevitable switch to managing
money: I quickly discovered the major difference between recom-
mending trading strategies to others and implementing them


Money Management and Trading Tactics 395

myself. What surprised me was that the most difficult part of the
transition had little to do with market strategies. The way I went
about analyzing the markets and determining entry and exit
points didn’t change much. What did change was my perception
of the importance of money management. I was amazed at the
impact such things as the size of the account, the portfolio mix,
and the amount of money committed to each trade could have on
the final results.

Needless to say, I am a believer in the importance of money
management. The industry is full of advisors and advisory services
telling clients what to buy or sell and when to do it. Very little is
said about how much of one’s capital to commit to each trade.

Some traders believe that money management is the most
important ingredient in a trading program, even more crucial
than the trading approach itself. I’m not sure I’d go that far, but I
don’t think it’s possible to survive for long without it. Money
management deals with the question of survival. It tells the trad-
er how to handle his or her money. Any good trader should win
in the long run. Money management increases the odds that the
trader will survive to reach the long run.

Some General Money
Management Guidelines

Admittedly, the question of portfolio management can get very
complicated, requiring the use of advanced statistical measures.
We'll approach it here on a relatively simple level. The following
are some general guidelines that can be helpful in allocating one’s
funds and in determining the size of one’s trading commitments.
These guidelines refer primarily to futures trading.

1. Total invested funds should be limited to 50% of total capital.
The balance is placed in Treasury Bills. This means that at
any one time, no more than half of the trader's capital
should be committed to the markets. The other half acts as
a reserve during periods of adversity and drawdown. If, for
example, the size of the account is $100,000, only $50,000
would be available for trading purposes.


396 Chapter 16

2. Total commitment in any one market should be limited to 10-
15% of total equity. Therefore, in a $100,000 account, only
$10,000 to $15,000 would be available for margin deposit
in any one market. This should prevent the trader from
placing too much capital in any one trade.

3. The total amount risked in any one market should be limited to
5% of total equity. This 5% refers to how much the trader is
willing to lose if the trade doesn’t work. This is an impor-
tant consideration in deciding how many contracts to trade
and how far away a protective stop should be placed. A
$100,000 account, therefore, should not risk more than
$5,000 on a single trade.

4. Total margin in any market group should be limited to 20-25%
of total equity. The purpose of this criteria is to protect
against getting too heavily involved in any one market
group. Markets within groups tend to move together. Gold
and silver are part of the precious metals group and usual-
ly trend in the same direction. Putting on full positions in
each market in the same group would frustrate the princi-
ple of diversification. Market commitments in the same
group should be controlled.

These guidelines are fairly standard in the futures industry,
but can be modified to the trader’s needs. Some traders are more
aggressive than others and take bigger positions. Others are more
conservative. The important consideration is that some form of
diversification be employed that allows for preservation of capital
and some measure of protection during losing periods. (Although
these guidelines relate to futures trading, the general principles of
money management and asset allocation can be applied to all
forms of investing.)

Diversification Versus Concentration

While diversification is one way to limit risk exposure, it can be
overdone. If a trader has trading commitments in too many mar-
kets at the same time, a few profitable trades may be diluted by a
larger number of losing trades. A tradeoff exists and the proper


Money Management and Trading Tactics 397

balance must be found. Some successful traders concentrate their
trading in a handful of markets. That’s fine as long as those mar-
kets are the ones that are trending at that time. The more nega-
tive correlation between the markets, the more diversification is
achieved. Holding long positions in four foreign currency markets
at the same time would not be a good example of diversification,
since foreign currencies usually trend in the same direction
against the U.S. dollar.

Using Protective Stops

I strongly recommend the use of protective stops. Stop placement,
however, is an art. The trader must combine technical factors on
the price chart with money management considerations. We’ll
show how this is done later in the chapter in the section on tac-
tics. The trader must consider the volatility of the market. The
more volatile the market is, the looser the stop that must be
employed. Here again, a tradeoff exists. The trader wants the pro-
tective stop to be close enough so that losing trades are as small
as possible. Protective stops placed too close, however, may result
in unwanted liquidation on short term market swings (or
“noise”). Protective stops placed too far away may avoid the noise
factor, but will result in larger losses. The trick is to find the right
middle ground.

REWARD TO RISK RATIOS

The best futures traders make money on only 40% of their trades.
That's right. Most trades wind up being losers. How then do
traders make money if they’re wrong most of the time? Because
futures contracts require so little margin, even a slight move in
the wrong direction results in forced liquidation. Therefore, it
may be necessary for a trader to probe a market several times
before catching the move he or she is looking for.

This brings us to the question of reward-to-risk ratios.
Because most trades are losers, the only way to come out ahead is
to ensure that the dollar amount of the winning trades is greater


398 Chapter 16

than that of the losing trades. To accomplish this, most traders use
a reward-to-risk ratio. For each potential trade, a profit objective is
determined. That profit objective (the reward) is then balanced
against the potential loss if the trade goes wrong (the risk). A com-
monly used yardstick is a 3 to 1 reward-to-risk ratio. The profit
potential must be at least three times the possible loss if a trade is
to be considered.

“Letting profits run and cutting losses short” is one of the
oldest maxims of trading. Large profits in trading are achieved by
staying with persistent trends. Because only a relative handful of
trades during the course of a year will generate large profits, it’s
necessary to maximize those few big winners. Letting profits run
is the way that is done. The other side of the coin is to keep los-
ing trades as small as possible. You’d be surprised how many
traders do just the opposite.

TRADING MULTIPLE POSITIONS:
TRENDING VERSUS
TRADING UNITS

Letting profits run isn’t as easy as it sounds. Picture a situation
where a market starts to trend, producing large profits in a rela-
tively short period of time. Suddenly, the trend stalls, the oscilla-
tors show an overbought situation and there’s some resistance vis-
ible on the chart. What to do? You believe the market has much
higher potential, but you’re worried about losing your paper prof-
its if the market should fail. Do you take profits or ride out a pos-
sible correction?

One way to resolve that problem is to always trade in mul-
tiple units. Those units can be divided into trading and trending
positions. The trending portion of the position is held for the long
pull. Loose protective stops are employed and the market is given
plenty of room to consolidate or correct itself. These are the posi-
tions that produce the largest profits in the long run.

The trading portion of the portfolio is earmarked for short-
er term in-and-out trading. If the market reaches a first objective,


Money Management and Trading Tactics 399

is near resistance and overbought, some profits could be taken or
a tight protective stop utilized. The purpose is to lock up or pro-
tect profits. If the trend then resumes, any liquidated positions
can be reinstated. It’s best to avoid trading only one unit at a time.
The increased flexibility that is achieved from trading multiple
units makes a big difference in overall trading results.

WHAT TO DO AFTER PERIODS OF
SUCCESS AND ADVERSITY

What does a trader do after a losing or a winning streak? Suppose
your trading equity is down by 50%. Do you change your style of
trading? If you've already lost half of your money, you now have
to double what you have remaining just to get back to where you
were in the first place. Do you get more selective choosing trades,
or keep doing the same things you were doing before? If you
become more conservative, it will be that much harder to win
back your losses.

A more pleasant dilemma occurs after a winning streak.
What do you do with your winnings? Suppose you’ve doubled
your money. One alternative is to put your money to maximum
use by doubling the size of your positions. If you do that, howev-
er, what will happen during the inevitable losing period that’s
sure to follow? Instead of giving back 50% of your winnings,
you'll wind up giving it all back. So the answers to these two ques-
tions aren’t as simple or obvious as they might first appear.

Every trader’s track record is a series of peaks and troughs,
much like a price chart. The trend of the equity chart should be
pointing upward if the trader is making money on balance. The
worst time to increase the size of one’s commitments is after a
winning streak. That’s much like buying into an overbought mar-
ket in an uptrend. The wiser thing to do (which goes against
basic human nature) is to begin increasing one’s commitments
after a dip in equity. This increases the odds that the heavier
commitments will be made near the equity troughs instead of
the peaks.

