
know.
Was plywood the only market exceeding its price freeze level?
Yes. Anyway, nothing happened. I think the market closed somewhere over $110 that day. The
next day it opened at about $110.80.1 used the following reasoning: If they let it trade over $110
today, they might let it trade anywhere. So I bought one contract. Well, ultimately, plywood went
to $200. After I bought that first contract, and prices rose, it was just a matter of pyramiding and
riding the position.
Was that your first really big trade after you had been wiped out in the corn market?
Yes.
Did the cash plywood market stay at $110?
The futures market functioned as a supply of last resort to users who couldn't get supplies
elsewhere.
Basically, it created a two-tiered market, a sort of legal black market?
Yes. Those who were frozen out because they didn't have any longstanding relationships with
producers could get their plywood at a higher price in the futures market. The producers were
fuming at the thought that they had to sell at the legal price ceiling.
Why didn't producers just sell futures and deliver against the contract as opposed to selling
in the cash market at the price control level?
The smarter ones were learning that, but it was the infancy of futures trading in plywood and most
producers weren't that sophisticated. Some producers probably weren't sure that it was legal to do
that. Even if they thought it was, their lawyers might have told them, "Maybe people can buy
plywood at any price in the futures market, but we better not sell and deliver above the legal
ceiling." There were a lot of questions.
Did the government ever try to interfere with the futures markets?
Well not exactly, but I will get back to that. In just a few months, $700 had grown into $12,000
trading plywood.
Was this the only trade you had on?
Yes. Then I got the bright idea that the same shortage situation was going to occur in lumber. I bet
everything on one trade just as I had on the corn/wheat trade, expecting that lumber would also go
through the ceiling price.
What was lumber doing at this time?
It did nothing. It just watched plywood go from $110 to $200. Since they were both wood products,
and lumber was also in short supply, I reasoned that lumber could go way up—and it should have.
However, after I bought lumber at around $130, the government finally woke up to what had
happened in plywood, and they were determined not to let the same thing happen in lumber.
The day after I went long, some government official came out with an announcement that they
were going to crack down on speculators in lumber who were trying to ran up the market like they
had ply wood. The lumber market crashed just on that statement. I was down to the point where I
was close to being wiped out again. There was a two-week period during which they kept issuing
these statements. The market stabilized at a level just above where I would have been wiped out. I
had just enough money left to hang on to my position.
The market was at $130 when you bought it. Where was it at this time?
About$117.
So even though the magnitude of this decline was much smaller than the price rise in
plywood, you lost almost as much money because you had a much larger position in lumber
than you had in plywood.
Right. During those two weeks, I was constantly on the verge of being wiped out. It was the worst
two weeks in my whole life. I went to the office each day just about ready to give up.
Giving up just to stop the pain, or so that you would at least have something left?
17

Both. I was so upset that I couldn't stop my hands from shaking.
How close did you come to being wiped out again?
Well, my $12,000 had shrunk to under $4,000.
Did you say to yourself, "I can't believe I have done this again"?
Yes, and I never did it again. That was the last time I bet everything on one trade.
What eventually happened?
I managed to hold on, and the market finally turned around. There was a shortage, and the
government didn't seem to have the will to stop the futures market.
Was it insight or courage that gave you the willpower to hold on?
Desperation, mainly, although there was a support point on the charts that the market couldn't seem
to take out. So, I held on. At the end of that year, the $700, which I had ran up to over $ 12,000 and
back to under $4,000, was now worth $24,000. After that scary experience, I never really
overtraded again.
The next year, 1973, the government began lifting the price controls. Because the price controls had
created numerous artificial shortages, when they were lifted, there was a tremendous run-up in
many commodities. Just about everything went up. Prices doubled in many markets, and I was able
to take advantage of the tremendous leverage offered by low futures margins. The lessons I had
learned from Seykota about staying in markets with major trends really paid off. In 1973, my
account grew from $24,000 to $64,000.
At that time, we were seeing something completely new. I remember those markets. Even
after prices had gone up only 10 percent of their eventual advance, historically, it seemed like
a very large price move. What made you realize that prices could go so much further?
At the time, I was politically right wing and that fit with being an inflation-alarmist. The theory that
the evil government was constantly debasing the currency provided the perfect perspective for
trading the inflationary markets of the mid-1970s.
It was the right theory for the right time.
Right. The markets were so fertile for trading then that I could make plenty of mistakes and still do
well.
Trading strictly on the long side?
Yes. Everything was going up. Although I was doing very well, I did make one terrible mistake.
During the great soybean bull market, the one that went from $3.25 to nearly $12,1 impulsively
took my profits and got out of everything. I was trying to be fancy instead of staying with the trend.
Ed Seykota never would get out of anything unless the trend changed. So Ed was in, while I was
out, and I watched in agony as soybeans went limit-up for twelve consecutive days. I was real
competitive, and every day I would come into the office knowing he was in and I was out. I
dreaded going to work, because I knew soybeans would be bid limit again and I couldn't get in.
Was this experience of not being in a runaway market as aggravating as actually losing
money?
Yes, more so. It was so aggravating that one day I felt I couldn't take it anymore and I tried
tranquilizers to dull the mental anguish. When that didn't work, somebody said, "Why don't you
take something stronger, called thorazine?"
I remember taking this thorazine at home and then getting on the subway to go to work. The
subway doors started to close as I was getting on and I started to fall down. At first, I didn't connect
it with the thorazine. Anyway, I wandered back home and just fell through the doorway—it was
that strong. It knocked me out and I missed work that day. That was the low point in my trading
career.
You never threw in the towel and just went back into soybeans at some point?
No, I was afraid of losing.
Despite that mistake, you mentioned before that you built your account up to $64,000 by
year-end. What happened next?
18

Around that time, I would occasionally have to go over to the Cotton Exchange. I would have an
adrenalin rush when I heard the traders yelling and screaming. It seemed like the most exciting
place in the world. But I learned that I needed to show $100,000 net worth to get in. Since I had
virtually no assets outside of my commodity account, I couldn't qualify. I continued to make money
in the markets, and after several months, I had surpassed the $100,000 mark. Around that same
time, Ed Seykota recommended that I go long coffee. So I did, but I put a close stop in under the
market just in case it went down. The market turned down and I was stopped out quickly. Ed,
however, because he was a major trend follower, had no stop in and ended up being locked in a
limit-down market for several days in succession.
Each day, Seykota was locked in a losing position while I was out of the market. That was the exact
opposite situation of the soybean trade, when he was in a winning trade and I was out. I couldn't
help it, but I felt a sense of joy. I asked myself, "What kind of a place is this that one's greatest joy
is to be found when somebody else is getting screwed?" That was the point I realized that what I
was doing was too competitive, and I decided to become a floor trader at the New York Cotton
Exchange
It sounds like the floor would have been even more competitive.
Well, maybe, but it wasn't.
Did you have any concern about being a floor trader—the fact that you were now reducing
your field of opportunity down to one market?
I was a little concerned about it. As it turned out, I should have been very worried. However, the
thought of trading in the ring was very exciting to me. The truth of the matter was that while I was
very good at picking trades, I was a total bust at the execution part. I was very shy, and I was too
timid to yell loud enough to make myself heard on the floor. I ended up slipping my orders to a
floor trader friend of mine, who handled them for me. That went on for a few months until I
realized what I was doing.
Were you still approaching the markets as a position trader even though you were on the
floor?
Yes, but it was just out of timidity.
So, I assume that many days you weren't even trading.
Right.
Was there any advantage to being on the floor?
No, not for me. But I did learn a lot from the experience, and I would recommend it to anybody
who wants to become a better trader. I used what I learned there for years.
What type of things did you learn?
You develop an almost subconscious sense of the market on the floor. You learn to gauge price
movement by the intensity of the voices in the ring. For example, when the market is active and
moving, and then gets quiet, that is often a sign that it is not going to go much further. Also,
sometimes when the ring is moderately loud and suddenly gets very loud, instead of being a sign
that the market is ready to blast off, as you might think, it actually indicates that the market is
running into a greater amount of opposing orders.
But how do you use that type of information once you are off the floor? You said that the
things you learned on the floor helped you later on.
I learned the importance of intraday chart points, such as earlier daily highs. At key intraday chart
points, I could take much larger positions than I could afford to hold, and if it didn't work
immediately, I would get out quickly. For example, at a critical intraday point, I would take a
twenty-contract position, instead of the three to five contracts I could afford to hold, using an
extremely close stop. The market either took off and ran, or I was out. Sometimes I would make
300,400 points or more, with only a 10-point risk. That was because, by being on the floor, I had
become familiar with how the market responded to those intraday points. My trading in those days
was a little bit like being a surfer. I was trying to hit the crest of the wave just at the right moment.
But if it didn't work, I just got out. I was getting a shot at making several hundred points and hardly
19

risking anything. I later used that surfing technique as a desk trader. Although that approach
worked real well then, I don't think it would work as well in today's markets.
Is that because the markets have become choppier?
Right. In those days, if the market reached an intraday chart point, it might penetrate that point,
take off, and never look back. Now it often comes back.
So what is the answer?
I think the secret is cutting down the number of trades you make. The best trades are the ones in
which you have all three things going for you: fundamentals, technicals, and market tone. First, the
fundamentals should suggest that there is an imbalance of supply and demand, which could result
in a major move. Second, the chart must show that the market is moving in the direction that the
fundamentals suggest. Third, when news comes out, the market should act in a way that reflects the
right psychological tone. For example, a bull market should shrug off bearish news and respond
vigorously to bullish news. If you can restrict your activity to only those types of trades, you have
to make money, in any market, under any circumstances.
Is that more restrictive trading style the approach you eventually adopted?
No, because basically I enjoyed the game too much. I knew that I should only be in those optimum
trades, but trading was a release and hobby for me. It replaced a lot of other things in my life. I
placed the fun of the action ahead of my own criteria. However, the thing that saved me was that
when a trade met all my criteria, I would enter five to six times the position size I was doing on the
other trades.
Were all your profits coming from the trades that met the criteria?
Yes.
Were the other trades breaking even?
The other trades broke even and kept me amused.
Did you keep track of which were which so you knew what was going on?
Just mentally. My goal on the other trades was just to break even. I knew that the big money was
going to be made on the trades that met my criteria. There will always be trades that meet those
requirements, but there may be fewer of them, so you have to be much more patient.
Why are there fewer such trades? Has the marketplace gotten more sophisticated?
Yes. There are many more professional traders than in my early days. In those years, I had an edge
just by knowing the angles that Ed Seykota and Amos Hosteller laught me. Now everybody knows
those principles. You have trading rooms filled with bright people and computers.
In those days, you watched the board, and you would buy corn when it moved above a key chart
point An hour later the grain elevator operator would gel a call from his broker and he mighl buy.
The nexl day, Ihe brokerage house would recommend the trade, pushing the market up some more.
On the third day, we would get short covering from the people that were wrong, and then some
fresh buying from the dentists of the world, who finally got the word that il was the right time lo
buy. Al that lime, I was one of the first ones lo buy because I was one of the few professional
traders playing the game. I would wind up selling out lo the dentists several days later.
You're talking about short-term trades. Weren't you trading for the major moves?
I traded some major moves, but many times I would make my profits in two or three days in jusl
that kind of trade.
When did you get back in the market?
Well, the dentisls weren'l going to keep their positions, since they were buying at the wrong time.
So when the market would fall back, I would go back in. Nowadays, the moment the market breaks
a key chart point, it is perceived by a whole universe of traders.
So the lagged follow-up trades are no longer there?
Right, the grain elevator operator has already bet. The dentists don't count because their level of
trading participation is infinitesimal.
20

Is that because they now have their money invested with fund managers instead of trading by
themselves?
Right, and even if the dentists are still there, they are trading one-lots, which is a meaningless
position when the fund managers are trading a thousand at a clip. Now you almost have to be
contrary. You have to ask, "Isn't it true that all my fellow professional traders are already in, so who
is left to buy?" You didn't have to worry about that before, because there was always somebody left
to buy—the people who were getting the information or reacting slower. Now, everybody is just as
decisive, just as fast.
Are the markets more prone to false breakouts now?
Yes, much more.
Are trend-following systems then doomed to mediocrity?
I believe so. I believe that the era of trend following is over until and unless there is a particular
imbalance in a market that overrides everything else. [The 1988 drought in the grain belt, which
developed shortly after this interview, provides aperfect example of the type of exception Marcus is
describing.] Another exception would be if we were to enter a major inflationary or deflationary
environment.
In other words, unless there is some very powerful force that can overwhelm everything else.
Yes.
Have the markets changed during the past five to ten years because professional money
managers now account for a much greater proportion of speculative trading activity, as
opposed to the small speculators who tend to make all the mistakes?
The markets have changed. The proof is that Richard Dennis, who has done well for many years,
lost over 50 percent on the funds he was managing in 1988. The trend-following systems approach
doesn't work anymore. The problem is that once you have defined a trend and taken a position,
everyone else has taken a position as well. Since there is no one left to buy, the market swings
around in the other direction and gets you out.
One reason we don't have many good trends anymore is that the central banks are preventing
currency moves from getting out of hand by taking the other side of the trend.
Haven't they always done that?
I don't think so. If you look at a chart of treasury debt held by foreign central banks, you will see
that it has risen astronomically during the last few years. The foreign banks seem to be taking over
from private foreign investors in financing our trade debts.
What do you think that means in terms of trading, and has your own trading style changed
because of it?
At one time, I traded heavily in currencies. For example, in the years after Reagan was first elected
and the dollar was very strong, I would take positions as large as 600 million Deutsche marks
between my own account and the company account. At the time, that was about $300 million
worth. That was a pretty good line. I was probably one of the bigger currency traders in the world,
including the banks.
It was very exhausting because it was a twenty-four-hour market. When I went to sleep, I would
have to wake up almost every two hours to check the markets. I would tune in every major center
as it opened: Australia, Hong Kong, Zurich, and London. It killed my marriage. Nowadays, I try to
avoid the currencies, because I feel it is a totally political situation; you have to determine what the
central banks are going to do.
When you were trading the currencies actively, were you getting up through the night
because you were worried about getting caught on the wrong side of a major move before the
markets opened in the U.S.?
Yes.
Did you always trade that way, or did you get caught enough times so that you started
21

trading around the clock?
It happened enough times to make me leery.
There would be a big gap move that you could have avoided by trading overseas?
That is right. For example, I remember one time, during late 1978, the dollar was getting battered,
falling to new lows every day. This was during a period when I was cooperating and trading as a
colleague with Brace Kovner. We used to talk hours every day. One day, we noticed that the dollar
got mysteriously strong. There was an intense price movement that couldn't be explained by any
known information. We just bailed out of our long currency positions like crazy. That weekend,
President Carter announced a dollar support program. If we had waited until the next U.S. trading
session, we would have been annihilated.
That situation illustrates one of the principles we believed in— namely, that the big players,
including the governments, would always tip their hand. If we saw a surprise price move against us
that we didn't understand, we often got out and looked for the reason later.
I remember that market well. The currency futures markets were locked limit-down for
several days in a row after that announcement. You must have gotten out right near the top
of that market.
We made a great exit on that trade. Anyway, my point is that I believe, as a courtesy, the European
central banks are notified about major changes we are going to make, and they often act ahead of
U.S. policy announcements. Consequently, the price move shows up in Europe first, even if it is
because of something we initiate. If it's an action initiated by the Europeans, the price move is
certainly going to occur there first. I think the best hours to trade are often in Europe. If I had a
period in which I was going to devote my life to trading, I would want to live in Europe.
Let's go back and fill in some of your trading history. Where did you go after you decided to
give up on being a floor trader?
I got a call from Amos Hostetter, who had befriended me at Shearson. At the time, he was also
trading some money for Commodities Corporation. Amos told me that I would be well advised to
consider joining Commodities Corporation as a trader.
At the time, their theory was that they were going to hire all these great econometricians to be
traders. They had people like Paul Samuel-son on the board. They brought up the idea of hiring me
at a meeting. The first question was, "What articles has he written; in what journals has he been
published?" I had a B. A. in liberal arts and that was it. The punch line was, "He just trades."
Everybody thought that was very funny.
But weren't they in business to make money trading?
They didn't think it was possible to really make money unless you had a Ph.D. But Amos
convinced them to give me a chance. I believe I was the first non-Ph.D. trader they had ever hired.
They started me out with $30,000 in August 1974. After about ten years, I had turned that account
into $80 million. Those were some very good years.
Did you multiply the original $30,000 into $80 million, or did they add money along the way?
After the first few years, they gave me another $100,000 to trade. After that time, they were always
taking money out. In those years, they were in an expansionary phase, and they taxed the traders 30
percent a year to pay for their expenses.
So you had to make 30 percent a year to keep your account level. You must have had some
incredible return years, given the growth of your account—particularly under that handicap.
I was making at least 100 percent a year for years and years.
What was your best year?
My best year must have been 1979. It was an incredible year. I caught gold when it went up to over
$800.
You caught the whole move?
I was in and out, but I remember catching big chunks of it—$100 per ounce at a time. It was a wild
time. In those days, I would buy gold in Australia, Hong Kong would push it up $10 higher, it
22
