to unlearn the “fact” that stocks are the “best investment.” As high valuations
reappear in subsequent peaks, they will relearn this “fact” again. Much of
this is not learning at all, but a process of reassessing intuitive ideas about the
future based on recent experience, as part of a bubble feedback.
A similar process of investor “learning” appears also to have been going
on in connection with other markets besides just the stock market. People
spent the aftermath of the 2001 crash “learning” that investments in homes
are really not risky, that homes are the “best” investment, as we saw in Figure
5.2. The perception that the public has just learned some important facts lends
support to massive market price increases by encouraging the belief that they
may be permanent.
The sense that we are all suddenly learning important facts and have
arrived at a new enlightenment has appeared so many times in history that it
may be regarded as a predictable component of irrational exuberance. We must
consider how to deal with the change in thinking that leads people to think
we have entered a new enlightenment, changes that, through their effects on
market prices, impinge on all our lives.
We have to consider what we as individuals and as a society should be
doing to offset some of the ill effects of this exuberance. Let us turn to this
in the final chapter.

Part Five

A Call to Action

Thirteen

Speculative Volatility in a Free Society

T

he high valuations that the U.S. and
other stock markets attained at the peak
in 2000, the relatively high valuations that it showed again in 2007 and once
more in 2014, came about for no good reasons. The high valuations that the
prices of homes attained in many markets by the opening years of the twentyfirst century, peaking around 2006, and then again in many countries after
the financial crisis, came about for no better reasons.
The high stock market levels did not, as so many imagine, represent the
consensus judgment of experts who have carefully weighed the long‑term
evidence. The markets have been high because of the combined effect of
indifferent thinking by millions of people, very few of whom have felt the
need to perform careful research on long‑term investment value, and who
are motivated substantially by their own emotions, random attentions, and
perceptions of conventional wisdom. Their all‑too‑human behavior has been
heavily influenced by news media that are interested in attracting viewers
or readers, with limited incentive to discipline their viewers or readers with
the type of quantitative analysis that might give them a correct impression
of fundamental value.
The housing market levels we saw at the 2006 peak were not, as so many
imagined, the outcome only of fundamental forces affecting the rational
demand for and supply of housing. Of course, home prices are set by the
forces of supply and demand, as homebuyers so often say. The prices have
to clear the market. But the factors influencing supply and demand include
a lot of social and emotional factors, notably attention to the price increases
225

226

A C ALL T O AC TION

themselves, a public impression that the experts know they will continue, and
a predisposition to believe that they will continue. These factors will change
with our changing culture.
Understanding how social forces cause speculative market moves has
been the major theme of this book. It is so difficult for most of us to figure out
which moves are caused by sensible good reasons and expert opinions and
which are caused by human imagination and social psychology. I hope that
the argument to this point has made it clear that, as these major markets go,
it is often largely the latter that drives prices.
In both the stock market and the housing market, people have only the
fuzziest idea what these investments are really worth, what their prices ought
to be. They may be able to judge whether one stock is overpriced relative to
another, or whether one house is overpriced relative to another, but they just
do not know how to judge the overall level of prices. Much more salient in
their minds is the rate of increase of the prices, something that they talk and
hear about a lot in a time of rapid price change, and that has subtle effects on
their demand for speculative assets.
As the price increase during a bubble goes on through time, people constantly reassess their opinions. People who thought there was a bubble, and
that prices were too high, find themselves questioning their own earlier
judgments, and start to wonder whether fundamentals are indeed driving
the price increase. Many people seem to think that if the price increase goes
on for years after some experts have called the price increase a bubble, then
maybe the experts were wrong. And they then feel that there is no alternative
to thinking that it is really fundamentals that are driving the increase, and that
these fundamentals will go on forever. These are the phases that individuals
who watch these markets go through—different individuals at different times.
The feedback theory that price increases excite investors and lead them to
cause more price increases has always been on some people’s minds, and most
people have at least vaguely heard of the idea, but we have seen that public
attention to this theory is on the whole quite weak. The feedback theory stands
dimly in the background as a sort of folklore. There are regular newspaper
articles that resurrect this theory, but they are not convincing to most people.
People seem to be reassured by the widely cited once-presumed “fact” that
there has never been a thirty-year period when stock prices underperformed
bonds, and by the “fact” that there has never been a major price decline in
homes that has not been quickly reversed. These factoids were part of the
psychology that drove bubbles, at least for a while. This psychology has in
the past caused dramatic and unsustainable price increases, and it may well
continue to do so in the future.
When prices stop increasing for a long while, there is a gradually in­creasing
discontent with this view. This gradually increasing discontent may cause

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

227

stagnant or declining markets even when fundamentals are increasing.
Markets may disappoint for stretches of years or even decades, as the postbubble dynamics gradually play themselves out.
As of this writing in 2014, we are going through another stock market boom
in the United States. This might quite plausibly be followed by another major
downward correction, though there is no way to be sure. Historical evidence
suggests that stock market prices might also go up a great deal more.
We now have, after the financial crisis, new government agencies to deal
with systemic risk, such as the Financial Stability Board created by the G-20
nations in 2009, the Financial Stability Oversight Council created by the
Dodd-Frank Act in the United States in 2010, and the European Systemic Risk
Board created by the European Parliament in 2010. Still, the problems posed
by potential new bubbles and financial crises are not automatically solved by
these new agencies. The problems are difficult. Bureaucratic organizations may
find it hard to muster the courage and conviction to deal with them. Indeed,
even before the recent crisis, every major country of the world had a central
bank whose function generally included some form of stabilization mandate,
yet they did not prevent the crisis from happening.1
When we see any bubble events happening, what should be done about
it? Watching bubbles in the stock market, in the housing market, in the oil
market, or in any speculative market is like watching an automobile accident
happening in slow motion. It sometimes seems that there is nothing at all that
can be done. Actually, there are quite a number of things to do.
It is a serious mistake for public figures to acquiesce in the ups and downs
of market valuations, to remain silent about the implications of valuations,
and to leave all commentary to the market analysts who specialize in the
nearly impossible task of forecasting the market over the short term and who
may share interests with investment banks, broker-dealers, home builders,
or realtors.
Some think that professionals should not talk about the possible over­pricing
or underpricing of speculative markets, or ever try to predict the markets,
since they cannot predict reliably. But that way lies madness, for the efficient
markets theory itself, to the extent that it has validity, depends on the aggregate of investors responding to reasoned opinion, and that opinion must be
publicly stated if many of them are to hear it. Indeed, it is this kind of madness
that probably contributed to the overpricing of the markets at the end of the
Millennium Boom, when efficient markets theory was at its highest tide ever.
The valuation of the markets is an important national—indeed, inter­
national—issue. All of our plans for the future, as individuals and as a society,
hinge on our perceived wealth, and plans can be thrown into disarray if much
of that wealth evaporates tomorrow. The tendency for speculative bubbles to
grow and then contract can make for a very uneven distribution of wealth.

228

A C ALL T O AC TION

It may even cause many of us, at times, to question the very viability of our
capitalist and free market institutions, as many did after the global financial
crisis of 2007–9 and as was manifested a little later in the “Occupy Wall Street”
movements of 2011–12 and their variants. It is for such reasons that we must
be clear on the prospect for such contractions and on what our individual and
national policy regarding this prospect should be.
The trouble with the exercise of moral authority by opinion leaders is that,
although views that the market is either very overpriced or very underpriced
may become commonplace among some experts, such views are never universally held. The leaders who state such views find themselves doing so
based on personal opinion: an intuitive judgment about the state of market
fundamentals and psychology, a judgment that is so hard to prove that they
probably feel it is an act of courage to make such a statement in the first place.
Of course public figures incur a substantial risk of embarrassment if they
go on record saying that stock market or housing market returns might be
low or negative in coming years. We have seen in this book that although the
markets appear to have substantial long‑term forecastability when they are
very overpriced, or, alternatively, when they are very underpriced, there is
always considerable uncertainty about their outlook. But an observer who
remains silent about public over-reliance on the market and overconfidence in
future returns because he or she could be wrong about the outlook is no better
than a doctor who, having diagnosed high blood pressure in a patient, says
nothing because he thinks the patient might be lucky and show no ill effects.

Monetary Policy Should Gently Lean against Bubbles
There have been occasions on which tightened monetary policy was associated
with the bursting of stock market bubbles. For example, on February 14, 1929,
the Federal Reserve raised the rediscount rate from 5% to 6% for the ostensible
purpose of checking speculation. In the early 1930s, the Fed continued the
tight monetary policy and saw the initial stock market downturn evolve into
the deepest stock market decline ever, and a recession evolve into the most
serious U.S. depression ever.
In Japan, at the peak of the Japanese stock market between May 1989 and
August 1990, the Bank of Japan raised the discount rate from 2.5% to 6%,
seemingly to stabilize financial markets (which were thought to have become
overpriced because of easy monetary policy) and also to stabilize the yen. It is
hard to dismiss the possibility that this action by the bank played some role
in the stock market crash and severe recession that followed.2
Although the precise causal links are hard to disentangle even in these
dramatic episodes, one thing we do know about interest rate policy is
that it affects the entire economy in fundamental ways, and that it is not

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

229

focused exclusively on the speculative bubble it might be used to correct. It is
whole‑body irradiation, not a surgical laser. Moreover, the genesis of a speculative bubble is a long, slow process, involving gradual changes in people’s
thinking. Small changes in interest rates will not have any predictable effect
on such thinking—big changes might, but only because they have the potential
to exert a devastating impact on the economy as a whole.
The onset of the Great Depression of the 1930s was in fact substantially
due to monetary authorities’ trying to stabilize speculative markets through
interest rate policies, although the markets they were focusing on most were
not the stock markets but the markets for their own currencies. Countries
attempted to preserve the fixed exchange rate system, represented by the gold
standard, against attacks. The countries that gave up earliest and abandoned
their efforts to defend their currencies were the ones to emerge from the
depression the soonest.3
A small, but symbolic, increase in interest rates by monetary authorities
at a time when markets are perceived by them to be overpriced is a useful
step, if the increase is accompanied by a public statement that it is intended to
restrain speculation. But authorities should not generally try to burst a bubble
through aggressive tightening of monetary policy.
At the time of this writing, in 2014, central bankers may find themselves in
a dilemma. After the financial crisis, economies in many places are still weak,
calling for low interest rates and more stimulus. However, these low interest
rates may continue to support excessively high valuations in these markets.
Such dilemmas will surely occur again in the future.

Opinion Leaders Should Offer Stabilizing Opinions
A time‑honored way of restraining speculation in financial markets is for
intellectual and moral leaders to try to call the attention of the public to over‑
and underpricing errors when they occur. This method is purely verbal, and
does not require aggressive monetary or fiscal expansion or contraction. This
approach has been used repeatedly in the history of our financial markets,
albeit with a degree of success that is not always impressive.
During the 1907 stock market crash, which coincided with a banking panic
in October, national financial leaders made public statements expressing their
confidence in the markets and stating that they would risk their own wealth in
them. John D. Rockefeller said, “Personally, I have absolute faith in the future
of the value of our securities and the soundness of underlying conditions.” He
and J. P. Morgan set up a bankers’ pool to lend money to support the banks.
On Black Thursday, October 24, 1929, five of the country’s most influential
bankers met at the late J. P. Morgan’s company and issued a statement that they
believed “the foundations of the market to be sound.”4 Although they did not

230

A C ALL T O AC TION

announce specific plans to buy stocks, their statement was interpreted as suggesting they would. This attempt at stabilizing the market was not successful.
The stock market crash of October 28–29, 1929, occurred just a few days later.
On the way to each of the three major market peaks identified here that follow the founding of the Federal Reserve—that is, the peaks of 1929, 1966, and
2000—the head of the Federal Reserve System issued warnings that the stock
market was overpriced. The 1929 interest rate increase, discussed earlier, was
announced as being directed against speculation. The 1966 peak of the U.S.
stock market coincided roughly with a statement by Federal Reserve Chair
William McChesney Martin in 1965 that he found “disquieting similarities”
between the economy then and the economy during the 1920s prelude to the
Great Depression. He listed, as one of the similarities, the spreading conviction
among the public that “a new economic era” had begun.5 A statement warning against stock market excesses by a Federal Reserve Chair was not made
again until Alan Greenspan’s “irrational exuberance” speech in December
1996, that is, until the beginning of the next period of very high market levels.
It appears that Fed Chairs reserve public statements about market pricing for
periods of extreme mispricing. There is no way to judge the success of such
rare statements in calming the markets, and we do not know how volatile
they would have been otherwise.
There probably is a role for such actions by monetary authorities, though
it is only a minor one. If they are genuinely disinterested in their pronouncements and are perceived as true moral leaders, their pronouncements should
have a small stabilizing effect on the market.

Institutions Should Encourage Constructive Trading
An often-tried method for reducing market volatility has been to shut down
markets in times of rapid price change. The “circuit breakers” adopted by the
stock exchanges are examples of this approach. Under the New York Stock
Exchange’s Rule 80B, whenever the Dow drops by 7% from the previous daily
close before 3:25 p.m., the market is to be shut down for fifteen minutes; by
13% before 3:25 p.m., for fifteen minutes again; and by 20% at any time of day,
for the rest of the day. Such market closings might have the effect of giving
investors a chance to unwind, to allow them to find time for reflection, and
thereby stemming panic. But it is not clear that these relatively short closings
do very much to restrain one‑day price changes. After all, the two biggest
stock market crashes in history, the crashes of October 1929 and October 1987,
occurred on Mondays, after the large price declines of the previous trading
day had been interrupted by an entire weekend.
These circuit breakers do not directly address the longer‑term price
movements—movements that take place over years—that represent the

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

231

really big stock price shifts. It is plausible that by concealing a large short‑term
price change from the public eye, we can head off public overreaction to
that price change, and so prevent a longer‑term price trend from developing
in response to the vivid memory of a really large one‑day change. Dramatic
one‑day changes are attention grabbers, are given tremendous hype by the
media, and are remembered long afterward, especially if they set some kind
of record. However, we really have very little information about the effects
of a policy of closing markets for short periods of time on longer‑term price
changes. What if an especially large price change is corrected soon after by
the market itself, as was the October 1987 price change? Perhaps the public’s
experience of seeing a crash followed by a correction would have a more
stabilizing effect than the experience of having a potential crash concealed
from it by a market closing.
Another example of a deliberate restraint of trade to prevent bubbles and
their bursting are rules regarding short sales. Allowing short sales permits
those with negative opinions to express them in the market, thus pre­sumably
helping prevent bubbles from ever starting, but such investors also can
hasten the collapse of bubbles as they try to short in a falling market. The
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has long required of exchanges
that short sales be allowed only on an uptick, that is, only if the preceding
trade was on an increasing price. The uptick rule in the U.S. was eliminated
in 2007, on the eve of the financial crisis, then partially reinstated in 2010.
Other countries have had complicated histories about the legality of short
sales. We have already noted that a number of countries imposed temporary
short-sale restrictions on stocks in 2008 and 2009 to try to dampen the falls
in their stock markets. China did not allow short sales at all, making its stock
markets especially vulnerable to incipient bubbles, until some short selling
began to be allowed in 2010.
In the interest of longer‑run economic stability, it may be that the best
stabilizing influence on markets is to broaden them to allow as many people
as possible to trade as often as possible. This will broaden the scope of risks
traded on markets.
Given that speculative bubbles are heavily influenced by word‑of‑mouth
effects, by locally perceived values and information, and by patriotic feeling,
foreign investors are generally less likely to go along with a bubble than are
local investors, and they may even trade in a way that would tend to offset
it. For example, in 1989, when the Japanese Nikkei index was at its peak, our
questionnaire surveys found that the average Japanese institutional investor
expected a 9.5% increase in the Nikkei in the following year, while U.S. institutional investors expected a 7.7% decrease in the Nikkei. Something about
living in Japan encouraged very different feelings about the market. Had U.S.
investors, or other foreign investors, been more prominent in Japanese markets

232

A C ALL T O AC TION

all along, the Japanese stock market overpricing might never have happened.6
Thus, more generally, broadening of markets by encouraging global participation in them should often have the effect of averaging over these disparate
expectations and producing more stable market prices.
We should not assume that any policy that stabilizes markets from day to
day is a good policy. Sudden price changes are probably not as bad, in terms
of their impact on economic welfare, as long‑term continuation of mispricing
or, even worse, as the development of a speculative bubble that results in a
worse crash in the future.
Given that speculative bubbles tend to occur, their eventual bursting may
indeed be on balance a good thing. The Asian financial crisis of 1997–98,
sparked by the withdrawal of world investors from Asian markets, may be
viewed not as a crisis in the long‑term sense but as a sanity check that prevented what might have turned out to be a more disastrous speculative bubble
from ever developing. To the extent that this crisis encouraged Asian peoples
to rethink their businesses and their economies in light of the criticism they
received from abroad, the crisis may have been helpful for the countries.
The expansion of markets can, if done correctly, add salience to information
about fundamentals, that is, encourage public attention to long‑run fundamentals and deflect attention away from short‑run speculation.
Karl Case and I have created home price indices that could be the basis
of trade in futures markets. In 2006, Standard & Poor’s, working with David
Stiff and Linda Ladner at Fiserv, Inc., improved and adopted these as the S&P/
Case-Shiller Home Price Indices; and in 2006, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME Group) started futures markets in these indices for ten U.S. cities and for
the United States as a whole (see John Dolan’s homepricefutures.com). These
markets continue today, now with the collaboration of CoreLogic, Inc. Trade
in these markets should allow skeptics of home price bubbles to express their
views in the markets, and this might tend to stabilize home prices, or at least
to prevent the strong momentum we see in these markets. However, as of this
date, there has been a disappointing volume of trade in these futures markets.
Michael Brennan has proposed that new markets should be set up for
“S&P 500 Strips,” that is, a market for the future annual total dividends of
the aggregate S&P 500 firms for each year in the future up to some distant
horizon. There should thus be, for example, in the year 2005, a market for the
2006 aggregate S&P dividends, another market for the 2007 aggregate S&P
