
For weeks, the local bottlers kept trying to reassure the public that Coca-Cola products were safe. But then it
turned out that maybe they weren’t. The company admitted it had found mold and chemical contaminants in
the bottling plants. But it insisted these were aberrations, surely not serious enough to sicken children. Buffett
was horrified. The arrogant response played right into Coca-Cola’s vainglorious image. Ivester had already
had difficulty dealing with the European Union. Coca-Cola’s über-American style and the company’s
strategy of seeking exclusive marketing deals had earned it a reputation for extraordinary hubris. Over and
over, European government officials slapped around Coca-Cola representatives in a Punch and Judy show.
All over the world, headlines blared, and customers’ trust in their beloved product dwindled.24
Weeks later, Ivester showed up in Europe and apologized in finely crafted legalese that never actually said,
“We’re sorry.” The headlines died, and the Coke machines were plugged back in all over the continent. But
the incident cost more than a hundred million dollars and impossible-to-measure damage to Coke’s
reputation. Buffett stewed.
Herbert Allen was stewing as well. Closer to the day-to-day management of the company, he questioned
whether Coca-Cola was running off the rails. Despite the declining sales, at least 3,500 new employees had
marched into Coca-Cola Plaza in Atlanta in the last two years. Allen looked at the burgeoning payroll and
saw “a cancerous growth on the company.”25 The company’s strategy of adding on the periphery, growing
by acquisition, and hiring thousands of new staff was not working. Quarter after quarter, Ivester promised to
improve growth rates; quarter after quarter, Coca-Cola fell short. One day in Ivester’s office, Allen asked
him, What are you going to do? And Ivester said he didn’t know; had no solution.26 “It had just overwhelmed
him. Everything together had overwhelmed him. He did not know what to do,” Allen says.
Floating above it all like the Goodyear blimp was Coca-Cola’s millennially named Project Infinity. This “was
one of those projects where everybody’s computer would be linked up to the men’s room so they’d know
how much soap they were taking out of the dispensers,” says Allen. Even the name, Project Infinity, seemed
to refer to out-of-control spending in pursuit of ever-diminishing returns.27 It drove Allen nuts. He wanted to
know what Coca-Cola was getting for its billion dollars. How was Infinity going to solve the company’s basic
problems?
Buffett was displeased but resigned to being displeased. He had encountered this on some scale at almost
every company where he sat on the board. Therefore, he sighed to himself, “They all do it. The people who
run information-technology departments always want the latest and greatest whiz-bang thing. No matter
how smart you are, no matter how much you know, who can challenge them?
“We probably aren’t going to sell any more Coca-Cola because of some computer project, and we will add
more people instead of cutting jobs. The vendors have it rigged to make us update the software and
hardware every couple of years or the system will stop working. So it isn’t even a onetime expense.
“Controlling technology spending is one of the toughest problems in management. And it’s particularly
hard at Coca-Cola because a successful company is like a rich family. When you’re prosperous it’s very
hard to instill discipline.” Buffett, of course, did not run his own company—or his own rich family—that
way.
And there was more disturbing news, via Don Keough, who remained the bottlers’ best friend at Coca-Cola.
He was now retired from the company and had become chairman of Allen & Co.—but Goizueta had kept
him on as an adviser to the board. Keough was almost as much a part of Coca-Cola as he ever had been.
Through Keough, Buffett heard that Ivester had been dictating terms to the bottlers in an unheard-of way.
This troubled him, because so much of the good results produced by Ivester had come from reengineering the
relationship between the bottlers and Coca-Cola. Now Ivester was pushing that same lever so hard that the
century-long partnership between the company and the bottlers had broken down.28 Don Keough had
become a sort of “father confessor to the disaffected” among the bottlers.29 They were in open revolt.
Meanwhile, Ivester had snatched away Keough’s official role, a dumb move since Ivester needed Keough on
his side. He might be King Arthur, but Keough was Coca-Cola’s Merlin and must be paid due respect.

This squeezing of the bottlers reiterated the question of whether Ivester really knew what to do about
Coca-Cola’s slowing sales growth. The philosophy at Coca-Cola had always been that it was all about the
relationship with the customer. Ivester favored a continuation of the accounting solutions to business
problems, troweling more makeup on Coke when the CEO’s main job—as Keough and Allen and Buffett
perceived it—was to make the Coke brand more popular around the world.
Since Goizueta had been engineering the company’s earnings before he died, and Ivester was the engineer
and reaped the rewards for doing so, why should he behave any differently now that he was CEO? As one
board member put it, “The finance committee was the center of everything,” which was odd for a marketing
company like Coca-Cola. In the end, the mistake was not Ivester’s. The board had deferred to Goizueta even
after his death, when it followed his wishes and made the head of the financial engineering department the
new CEO of Coke.
Still, Buffett was pretty sure that the problem so obvious to him was not so obvious to the whole board. As he
ticked off marks against Ivester, Buffett spent the whole fall in a wrung-out state of anxiety. By
Thanksgiving, the paralyzing limitations of his role as a board member, given the travails of Coca-Cola, had
almost reached a breaking point.30
Then Fortune magazine, which had labeled Ivester “the 21st-century CEO” not two years earlier, published a
highly critical piece blaming him for the company’s problems.31 That was a bad sign. Fortune rarely smiled
on CEOs whom Fortune smacked around this way, especially if the CEO had previously been featured in a
flattering profile on the cover of the magazine. Being knocked off one’s pedestal in public this way signaled
that the powerful people whom Fortune’s reporters used as sources were displeased, and on the brink of
tossing away the teddy bear they had once embraced.
Right after Thanksgiving, Herbert Allen put in a call to Buffett. “I think we have a problem with Ivester,” he
said. “We picked the wrong guy,” Buffett agreed.32 “That’s about it,” said Allen. They began to lay their
plans.
They both estimated that it would take more than a year for the board to come around to their point of view
that Ivester had to go—and that, says Allen, “would have been devastating to the company. So I think we
decided, just as two individuals, to tell him the truth about how we felt.”
Allen called Ivester and said he and Buffett wanted a meeting. They agreed to get together in Chicago, where
Ivester would be stopping following a meeting with McDonald’s.
On a cool, cloudy Wednesday, the first day of December 1999, Buffett and Allen flew into Chicago. Ivester’s
well-known obstreperousness kindled Buffett’s dread of confrontation. He lashed down his anxiety, turtling
into his shell. Later, it was reported that he appeared cold. The three men got down to business without
preamble.33 Impersonally, Buffett and Allen told Ivester that they appreciated his efforts on behalf of
Coca-Cola, but he no longer had their confidence.
Still, Ivester was not actually fired. Buffett and Allen lacked the authority to fire Ivester. “He might have
won a board vote, and he knew that,” Buffett says.
Ivester took the news stoically. He rushed back to Atlanta to call an emergency telephone board meeting for
four days later, leaving the mystified board to wait in suspense.
On Sunday, Ivester told the board members that he had concluded that he was not the right person to run the
company. He would step down immediately. This was exactly as Buffett and Allen had hoped. But he also
said there would be no transition; he was leaving as of that day. As the board listened in stunned silence, he
described it as a voluntary decision, and that was true—in the sense that it is voluntary to avoid the firing
squad by walking the plank.34

Board members began asking what had happened. Was he sick? Was something terribly wrong at Coca-Cola?
Why didn’t they have any warning? Must the transition be so sudden? Ivester never wavered from his
script.35
A while back the board had insisted, against some resistance, that Ivester put a name in an envelope that said
who should succeed him if he were hit by a truck. The envelope was now opened to reveal the name of Doug
Daft, head of Coca-Cola’s Middle and Far Eastern divisions. Daft was halfway out the door to retirement, but
the board, among them Buffett and Allen, instantly made him Ivester’s successor, with apparently no serious
discussion of any alternative.
The recriminations began as the market took a hatchet to the stock.36 Investors had figured out that Ivester
was walking the plank. In private conversations with a few board members, he let on what had happened.
The board now realized with varying degrees of outrage how much their role had been usurped.
With the media howling, it became clear that the company had better become more forthcoming. Fortune
wrote an exclusive piece revealing details of the secret Chicago meeting.37 Ivester had negotiated a
staggering $115 million consolation package, which angered both his detractors and his supporters; it gave
the impression that he was either paid off or wronged. And observers now realized that an inner circle ruled
the Coke board.
“It was carried out badly, except that there wasn’t anything better that we could have carried out. It was
almost a disaster the way we did it, but if we hadn’t, it would have been a disaster for sure. I don’t think we
could have gotten the board to vote to make a change like that—bingo! I think the only way to have made a
change fast is the way we did it. And it took both of us to get it done; if either of us had done it individually,
it wouldn’t have happened.”
But by year-end, Buffett’s reputation was suffering in an even more overt way, because the biggest, most
profitable feat of stock selection that he had ever made, Coca-Cola, was down by one-third after Ivester’s
departure. That Buffett had felt forced to intervene in a particularly graceless way, which had backfired in
public on both the company and himself, left the impression not that he had ridden to the rescue—as with
Salomon—but that what he and Herbert Allen had done was the meddling of a couple of old men.
That impression compounded the worries raised when the biggest acquisition he had ever made, General Re,
coughed up a nasty surprise within days after Berkshire closed the purchase. Ron Ferguson, the CEO, had
called to say that the company had been duped out of $275 million in an enormous, elaborately designed
fraud called Unicover. Investors had been surprised, to say the least, when the first report Buffett gave them
about General Re was an apology for this foolish thing, as well as an expression of confidence in Ferguson
and the prediction that affairs would be righted. Since there had been concerns from the beginning about
whether Buffett had bought General Re only to dilute his large positions in stocks like Coca-Cola, decades of
blissful confidence in his judgment about buying businesses suddenly began to waver.
Even some of his most devoted believers were questioning his wisdom, as the stock market’s repudiation of
Buffett’s Sun Valley manifesto grew even louder in the last few months of 1999. That December, he
continued to look not just wrong about technology stocks but dead wrong and, at last, stubbornly blind to the
obvious. The Dow closed the year up twenty-five percent. The NASDAQ blasted through 4,000 points, up an
incredible eighty-six percent. The market valued Berkshire, with its burgeoning coffers of cash, at only
$56,100 per share now, for a total market capitalization of $85 billion. That compared poorly to a little online
media company called Yahoo!, which had quadrupled in the last year. Yahoo!, which captured the spirit of
the times in its name, was now valued at $115 billion.
As 1999 spun to a close, there was no doubt who was important and influential at the turn of the millennium,
and even less doubt who was not. Time magazine crowned Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos as its person of the
year, comparing him in importance to Queen Elizabeth, Charles Lindbergh, and Martin Luther King Jr.
Buffett’s personal ranking had dropped on the annual taking-stock lists, which multiplied a thousandfold that
year with the millennial summings-up and retrospectives. He had just fallen from being the second-richest to

the fourth-richest man in the world. Technophiles reveled in pointing out the great investor’s feet of clay,
saying that “if Buffett headed a mutual fund, he’d be looking at a second career.”38 Barron’s, a weekly
must-read on Wall Street, put him on its cover with the accompanying headline “Warren, What’s Wrong?”
and the comment that Berkshire stock had “stumbled” badly.39 He might as well have had a bull’s-eye
painted on his brow.
In public, Buffett repeated constantly—in almost unvarying terms—the ideas that had made him famous: the
margin of safety, the circle of competence, Mr. Market’s vagaries. He still maintained that a stock is a piece
of a business, not a bunch of numbers on a screen. All through the market’s dizzy rise, he refrained from
arguing or disputing any of the madness, except for making his now-famous speech at Sun Valley. People
thought, from the way he disciplined every syllable that exited his mouth, that he was above the criticism.
“Never,” he said, when asked if it bothered him when people called him a has-been. “Nothing bothers me
like that. You can’t do well in investing unless you think independently. And the truth is, you are neither
right nor wrong because people agree with you. You’re right because your facts and reasoning are right. In
the end, that’s what counts.”40
But these were separate issues. While he had no problem thinking independently, he was indeed miserable
over being called a has-been. Asked around then if being in the public eye for decades helped keep the
criticism in perspective, Buffett paused for a long while. “No. It never gets easier,” he said soberly. “It
always hurts just as much as the first time.” But he could not do a thing about it.
Buffett had spent his whole career competing in a contest that was impossible to win. No matter how much
money he made and no matter how long he kept it up, sooner or later he would have a bad year or the
momentum would slow down. He knew that. Over and over he had warned investors that trees don’t grow to
the sky. But that had never stopped him from climbing as fast as he could. And he had loved the climb—but
somewhat to his surprise, there was no blue ribbon waiting at the top.
His life was fascinating, his business accomplishments important, the principles through which he had
succeeded worthy of study. So far as could be determined, everyone who knew him personally liked the man.
His kaleidoscope personality perpetually revealed new facets, yet remained faithful at its core to his Inner
Scorecard. The one thing that he would always be the best at was being himself.
***
As he did every year, Buffett spent the holidays with Susie and the family at their vacation home in Emerald
Bay, the house garlanded with Christmas decorations from Susie’s huge collection.41 His work life may have
been particularly challenging then, but Christmas of 1999 was a good one for his family. Warren was satisfied
with the way his kids were maturing. Howie had settled down into life as a middle-aged farmer and successful
businessman. Big Susie had gotten him interested in photography. Now he lived on an airplane half the time,
photographing dangerous wild animals, his love of living on the edge channeled into getting bitten by a
cheetah and chased by a polar bear.
A full-time mother of two children and unpaid part-time assistant to her father, Susie Jr. had followed in her
mother’s footsteps to become a major force in Omaha philanthropy, serving on the boards of the children’s
theater, the children’s museum, and Girls Inc. Her ex-husband Allen ran the Buffett Foundation, and the two
lived a few blocks apart and shared parenting.42
After his divorce, Peter had married Jennifer Heil and was still living in Milwaukee and writing music. In the
early 1990s, he had gotten the opportunity to move to Hollywood and work in the entertainment industry.
But “I realized if I moved to L.A.,” he says, “I’d be one of thousands of me’s out there trying to get work.
My father was always into the movie The Glenn Miller Story. Glenn Miller searched and searched to find his
sound; my father used to always talk about ‘finding your sound.’” Peter stayed in Milwaukee rather than
going to L.A., and felt that his father understood the resemblance to his choice to come back to Omaha to do

things his way rather than staying in New York. Soon after, Peter was hired to compose and produce the
soundtrack for an important PBS documentary, the eight-part 500 Nations. He had also written and produced
a multimedia show as a benefit performance for Susie Jr. that became a PBS special, and toured with it for
eleven weeks.43
Howie had been working on Big Susie, convincing her that the kids were mature enough, saying, “Give us a
chance, the money is there, give us the chance to do something with it.”44 That Christmas, Susie Jr., Howie,
and Peter were shocked to receive five hundred shares of Berkshire stock in foundations that each could
manage and give to any causes they chose. The kids were elated; Susie Jr. called it “gigantic.”45
The family settled in for New Year’s Eve. You could follow the progress of the millennium’s arrival on
television, starting in the Kiribati Islands. From Sydney to Beijing to London, millions of people celebrated on
streets and beaches as a chain of fireworks shot around the globe. The Eiffel Tower’s millennium clock broke
down. But as the hours ticked by, nothing disastrous happened anywhere, even at General Re and
Coca-Cola. There was a mathematical neatness to the progression of time zones, locations, hours, that Buffett
liked. After the stressful fall he had just spent, the change of millennium was not exciting to him—it was
relaxing, and he needed that.

PART SIX
Claim Checks

53
The Genie
Omaha • 1998

Buffett was always wary of falling into what Munger called the Shoe Button Complex, pontificating on any
and all subjects merely because he was an expert on business. But by the mid-1990s, both he and Munger
were starting to receive—and answer—more and more questions about the business of life. He often treated
the athletes and college students to whom he periodically spoke to the fable of the Genie.

“When I was sixteen, I had just two things on my mind—girls and cars,” Buffett would say, taking a little
poetic license here by leaving out the part about the money. “I wasn’t very good with girls. So I thought
about cars. I thought about girls, too, but I had more luck with cars.
“Let’s say that when I turned sixteen, a genie had appeared to me. And that genie said, ‘Warren, I’m going
to give you the car of your choice. It’ll be here tomorrow morning with a big bow tied on it. Brand-new.
And it’s all yours.’
“Having heard all the genie stories, I would say, ‘What’s the catch?’ And the genie would answer, ‘There’s
only one catch. This is the last car you’re ever going to get in your life. So it’s got to last a lifetime.’
“If that had happened, I would have picked out that car. But, can you imagine, knowing it had to last a
lifetime, what I would do with it?
“I would read the manual about five times. I would always keep it garaged. If there was the least little dent
or scratch, I’d have it fixed right away because I wouldn’t want it rusting. I would baby that car, because it
would have to last a lifetime.
“That’s exactly the position you are in concerning your mind and body. You only get one mind and one
body. And it’s got to last a lifetime. Now, it’s very easy to let them ride for many years. But if you don’t take
care of that mind and that body, they’ll be a wreck forty years later, just like the car would be.
“It’s what you do right now, today, that determines how your mind and body will operate ten, twenty, and
thirty years from now.”

54
Semicolon
Omaha • January–August 2000

Buffett began the first week of the millennium in his office. In its first edition of the year, the Sunday Times
of London said, “ignoring technology seems to have made a chimp out of Buffett.”1 One of the first pieces of
correspondence was an e-mail from Ron Ferguson, CEO of General Re.
Buffett was already bracing himself. General Re had so far brought him nothing but deplorable news. A year
ago, after the company had admitted being duped in the Unicover fraud mere weeks after Berkshire bought
it, Ferguson had made a new confession. Movie producers and their lenders had talked General Re into
guaranteeing ticket sales on Hollywood films. The company said it would pay if the box office fell short,
without knowing what scripts would be filmed or who would star in them. Buffett had been incredulous when
he found out. Within weeks, lawsuits began to unreel from the film-finance fiasco faster than the failed films’
credits unfurled. It could have gone without saying that his favorite manager, the brilliant Ajit Jain, would
never have guaranteed any dumb movie deals. Although it did get said.
Then Ferguson belabored him into a nitpicking match over how to underwrite an Internet lottery called
Grab.com that Ajit was reinsuring. Buffett now realized that Ferguson had a sharply different philosophy
from his. Buffett always liked to talk about how he would rather step over one-foot bars than look for
seven-foot bars to hurdle. The Grab.com lottery deal offered an easy profit—a one-foot bar to step over.2
Ferguson didn’t want to do it because it was such a layup. General Re, he said, only did deals where it had an
underwriting edge.
