
short underlying + long call = long put
long underlying + long put = long call

Ahedger who buys a call to protect a short underlying position has effectively purchased
a put at the same exercise price. A hedger who buys a put to protect a long underlying
position has effectively purchased a call. In our example, if the firm purchases a .64 call
to protect a short Deutschemark position, the result is identical to owning a .64 put.

Figure 13-1: A Protective Call

short an underlying position
ra buy a protective call “
we
NA a
a ao
SS
_ ~ o ~
mA
NS
: Lal
~
combined position NN



260 Chapter 13

Figure 13-2: A Protective Put

a buy a protective put
y .
“

a combined position

Which protective option should a hedger buy? That depends on the amount of risk
the hedger is willing to bear, something which each market participant must determine
individually. One thing is certain. There will always be a cost associated with the
purchase of a protective option. If the insurance afforded by the option enables the
hedger to protect his financial position, the cost may be worthwhile.

COVERED WRITES

While the purchase of a protective option offers a limited and known risk, a hedger
might be willing to accept more risk in return for some other advantage. Instead of
purchasing an option to protect an existing position, a hedger might consider selling, or
writing, an option against the position. This strategy does not offer the limited risk
afforded by the purchase of a protective option but, in its favor, the strategy results in a
cash credit rather than a debit. This credit offers some, though not unlimited, protection
against an adverse move in the underlying market.

Consider a fund manager whose portfolio consists of a long position in a certain
stock. If the manager is worried about a decline in the price of the stock, he might
choose to sell a call option against the stock. The amount of protection the manager is
seeking, as well as the potential upside appreciation, will determine which call is sold,
whether in-the-money, at-the-money, or out-of-the-money. Selling an in-the-money call
offers a high degree of protection, Dut will eliminate most upside profit potential. Selling


Hedging with Options 261

an out-of-the-money call offers less protection but leaves room for large upside profit
potential.

For example, if the stock is currently trading at 100, the fund manager might sell
a 95 call. If the 95 call is trading at 614, the sale of the call will offer a high degree of
protection against a decline in the price of the stock. As long as the stock declines by no
more than 61, to 9314, the manager will do no worse than break even. Unfortunately,
if the stock begins to rise, the fund manager will not participate in the rise since the
stock will be called away when the manager is assigned on the 95 call. Still, even if the
stock rises, the manager will get to keep the 1 4-point time premium he received from
the sale of the 95 call.

If the manager wants to participate in upside movement in the stock, and is also
willing to accept less protection on the downside, he might sell a 105 call. If the 105
call is trading at two, the sale of this option will only protect him against a two-point
fall, to 98, in the price of the stock. If, however, the stock begins to rise, he will
participate point for point in this advance up to a price of 105. Above 105, he can expect
the stock to be called away.

Which option should the manager sell? Again, that is a subjective decision based
on how much risk the manager is willing to take as well as the amount of upside
appreciation in which he wants to participate. Many covered write programs involve
selling at-the-money options. Such options offer less protection than in-the-money calls,
and less profit potential than out-of-the-money options. An at-the-money option is pure
time premium. If the market sits still, a portfolio of at-the-money options have been sold
against an existing position in the underlying instrument will show the greatest
appreciation in value.

The value of typical covered writes, also known as overwrites, are shown in Figures
13-3 (covered call] and 13-4 (covered put). When the underlying is purchased and calls
are simultaneously sold against the position, a covered write is also referred to as a
buy/write. As with the purchase of a protective option, a covered write consists of a
position in the underlying and an option. It can therefore be expressed as a synthetic
position:

long underlying + short call = short put
short underlying + short put = short call

A hedger who sells a call to protect a long underlying position has effectively sold a put
at the same exercise price. A hedger who sells a put to protect a short underlying
position has effectively sold a call. In our example, if the portfolio manager sells a 100
call to protect a long stock position, the result is identical to selling a 100 put.

The purchase of a protective option and the sale of a covered option are the two
most common hedging strategies involving options. If given a choice between these
Strategies, which one should a hedger choose? In theory, the hedger ought to base his
decision on the same criteria as the pure trader: price versus value. In general, if the
Price of an option is lower than its value, then the purchase of a protective call or put
makes the most sense. If the price of an option is higher than its value, then the sale of
a covered call or put makes the most sense. By comparing implied volatility to a forecast


262 Chapter {3

Figure 13-3: A Covered Call

combined position .
4
sella covered call “
a _
~~?
a ™,
long an underlying position &
Figure 13-4: A Covered Put
Yy
_— combined position
\
a
NS .
N\ sell a covered put
~—<# \
N
N
ON eee ee ee ee
ao
SL
we me
_
& short an underlying position



Hedging with Options 263

volatility, a hedger ought to be able to make a sensible determination as to whether he
wants to buy or sell options. Of course, he is still left with the choice of exercise prices.
This will depend on the amount of adverse or favorable movement the hedger foresees,
as well as the risk he is willing to accept if he is wrong.

While theoretical considerations will often play a role in a hedger’s decision,
practical considerations may also be important. Ifa hedger knows that he will be forced
out of business if the underlying contract moves beyond a certain price, then the
purchase of a protective option at that exercise price may be the most sensible strategy,
regardless of whether the option is theoretically overpriced.!

Most hedgers find, however, that there is a psychological barrier to buying options.
“Why should I lay out money for an option when J will probably lose the premium?”
The hedger is right. Most of the time he will lose the premium because most of the time
the option will expire worthless. But the same hedger who refuses to purchase an option
to protect his business dealings would never consider leaving his home or family
uninsured. Like options, the great majority of insurance policies expire without claims
ever being made against them. Houses do not burn down; people live on; cars are not
stolen. That is the reason insurance companies make a profit. But the purchaser of an
insurance policy is willing to accept the fact that insurance companies make profits.
Unlike the insurance company, which is selling the insurance contract with the clear
intent of making a profit, the purchaser of an insurance contract is not purchasing the
contract to make money. He is purchasing it for the peace of mind which it affords. The
same philosophy should apply to the purchase of options. If a hedger needs the
protection afforded by the option, the purchase makes sense in spite of the fact that it
is likely to be a losing proposition in the long run.

FENCES

Suppose a hedger desires the limited risk afforded by the purchase ofa protective option,
but also wants to avoid the cash outlay associated with such a strategy. What can he
do? A popular strategy, known as a fence, is to simultaneously combine the purchase
of a protective option with the sale ofa covered option. For example, with an underlying
contract at 50, a hedger with a long position might choose to simultaneously sell a 55
call and purchase a 45 put. The hedger is insulated from any fall in price below 45, since
he can then exercise his put. At the same time, he can participate in any upward move
to 55, at which point his underlying position will be called away. The cost of the
complete hedge depends on the prices of the 45 put and 55 call. If they are the same,
the cost of the hedge is zero. If the price of the 55 call is greater than the price of the
45 put, the hedge can be established for a credit which the hedger gets to keep no matter
where the underlying finishes. With prices of 1.25 and 1.75 for the 45 put and 55 call,
the hedger will receive a credit of .50. This will reduce his break-even price on the
underlying position to 49.50.

1. Ofcourse, if the options are wildly overpriced, a hedger might be reluctant to buy a protective option.
But this is unlikely to happen. If option prices are high, there is usually a valid reason.


264 Chapter 13

Recalling the basic synthetic relationships, we find that a long fence (long the
underlying, short a covered call, long a protective put) is simply a bull vertical spread
done synthetically. Suppose in our example fence consisting of a long 45 put and short
55 call, we replace the 45 put with its synthetic equivalent:

long 45 put = short underlying + long 45 call
45/55 fence = long underlying + long 45 put + short 55 call
= long underlying + (short underlying + long 45 call) + short 55 call
= long 45 call + short 55 call

A short fence consists of a short underlying position together with the purchase of
a protective call and sale of a covered put. Since we can always rewrite one of the
options with its synthetic equivalent, this is simply a bear vertical spread. Long and short
fences are shown in Figures 13-5 and 13-6,

Fences are popular hedging tools because they offer known protection at a low cost,
or even a credit. At the same time, they still allow a hedger to participate, at least
partially, in favorable market movement. Fences go by a variety of names: range
forwards, tunnels, cylinders; among floor traders they are sometimes known as spilt-
price conversions and reversals.

As the borrowing and lending of funds has become more widespread, and since
such activity is often based on a floating interest rate, the use of options to hedge long
or short interest rate positions has become especially popular. A firm which borrows

Figure 13-5: A Long Fence

a
a
Vv. sell a covered call
SS combined position
— ’
* ; wo
“a
~<a. -- ~ - a a aa
‘ a
4. Ly
A LA
~- “, wn — sects oe = - _
a ‘,
; va “ ,
a“ \ buy a protective put .
“4 long an underlying position -



Hedging with Options 265

Figure 13-6: A Short Fence

| ~
bined position a
com p — sel] a covered put a
Ns a
_
~
‘
TO a ~
~
™
uo buy a protective call ~
- SN
NN
short an underlying position x

funds at a variable interest rate has a short interest rate position. A fall in interest rates
will reduce its cost of borrowing, while a rise in interest rates will increase its costs. To
cap the upside risk, the firm can purchase an interest rate call, thereby establishing a
maximum amount it will have to pay for borrowed funds. No matter how high interest
Tates rise, the borrower will never have to pay more than the cap’s exercise price.

An institution which lends funds at a variable interest rate has a long interest rate
position. A rise in interest rates will increase its returns, while a fall in interest rates will
reduce its returns, To set a floor on its downside risk, the institution can purchase an
interest rate put, thereby establishing a minimum amount it will receive for loaned
funds, no matter how low interest rates fall. No matter how low interest rates fall, the
lender will never receive less than the floor’s exercise price.

If a borrower (lender) simultaneously buys a cap (floor) and sells a floor (cap), he
has established a collar to his position. This is simply a fence done in the interest rate
market.

COMPLEX HEDGING STRATEGIES

Since most hedgers are not professional option traders, and have neither the time nor
desire to carefully analyze option prices, simple hedging strategies involving the pur-
chase or sale of single options are the most widely used. However, if one is willing to
do a more detailed analysis of options, it is possible to construct a wide variety of hedging


266 Chapter 13

strategies which involve both volatility and directional considerations. In order to do
this, a hedger must be familiar with both volatility and its impact on option values, and
the delta as a measure of directional risk. The hedger can then combine his knowledge
of options with the practical considerations of hedging.

Asa first step in choosing a strategy, a hedger might consider the following:

1. Does the hedge need to offer protection against a “worst case” scenario?
2. How much of the current directional risk should the hedge eliminate?
3. What additional risks is the hedger willing to accept?

A hedger who needs disaster insurance in order to protect against a “worst case”
Scenario only has a choice of which option(s) to buy. Even so, he still needs to decide
which exercise price to purchase and how many options. For example, suppose a hedger
has a long position in a certain underlying contract currently trading at 100. Suppose
also that the hedger decides to buy a put because he needs to limit the downside risk to
some known and fixed amount. Which put should he buy?

Suppose the hedger has determined that options are generally overpriced (implied
volatility is too high). Clearly, any option purchase will be to the hedgers’ disadvantage.
If his sole purpose is to hedge his downside risk without regard to upside profit potential,
he ought to avoid options and hedge himself in the futures or forward market. If,
however, he still wants upside profit potential, he must ask himself how much ofa long
position he wants to retain. For example, he might be willing to retain 50% of his current
long position. This simply means that he has to purchase puts with a total delta of -50.
He can do this by purchasing one at-the-money put with a delta of —50, or several
out-of-the-money puts whose deltas add up to —50. But in a high implied volatility
market one usually tries to buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as
possible, (This is analogous to constructing a ratio vertical spread.) Hence, purchasing
one put with a delta of —5O will be less costly, theoretically, than purchasing several
options with a total delta of -50. If the hedger wants to eliminate even more of the
directional risk, say 75%, under these circumstances he would be better off purchasing
one put with a delta of -75.

All other factors being equal, in a high implied volatility market a hedger
should buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as possible.
Conversely, in a low implied volatility market a hedger should buy as many
options as possible and sell as few options as possible.

This means that if all options are overpriced (implied volatility is too high}, and the
hedger decides he is willing to accept the unlimited downside risk that goes with the
sale of a covered call, in theory he ought to sell as many calls as possible to reach his
hedging objectives. If he is trying to hedge 50% of his long underlying position, he can
do a ratio write by selling several out-of-the-money calls with a total delta of 50, rather
than selling a single at-the-money call with a delta of 50.

There is an additional problem if one sells several calls against a single long
underlying position. Now the hedger not only has the unlimited downside risk which


Hedging with Options 267

goes with a covered call position, but he also has unlimited upside risk because he has
sold more calls than he can cover with the underlying. If the market moves up far
enough, he will be assigned on all the calls. Most hedgers want to restrict their unlimited
risk to one direction, usually the direction of their natural position. A hedger with a long
underlying position may be willing to accept unlimited downside risk, but he is probably
unwilling to accept unlimited upside risk. A hedger with a short underlying position may
be willing to accept unlimited upside risk, but he is probably unwilling to accept
unlimited downside risk. A hedger who constructs a position with unlimited risk in
either direction is presumably taking a volatility position. There is nothing wrong with
this, since volatility trading can be highly profitable. But a true hedger ought not lose
sight of what his ultimate goal is: to protect an existing position, and to keep the cost of
this protection as low as possible.

A hedger can also protect a position by constructing one-to-one volatility spreads
with deltas which yield the desired amount of protection. For example, a hedger who
wants to protect 50% of a short underlying position can buy or sell time spreads or
butterflies with a total delta of +50. Such spreads offer partial protection within a range.
The position still has unlimited upside risk, while it also retains unlimited downside
profit potential. Such volatility spreads also give the hedger the choice of buying or
selling volatility. If implied volatility is generally low, with the underlying market
currently at 100, the hedger might protect a short position by purchasing a 110 call time
spread (purchase a long-term 110 call, sell a short-term 110 call). This spread has a
positive delta and, at the same time, is theoretically attractive since the low implied
volatility makes a long time spread relatively inexpensive. If the 110 call time spread
has a delta of +25, to hedge 50% of his directional risk the hedger can buy two time
spreads for each short underlying position. Conversely, if implied volatility is high, the
hedger can consider selling time spreads. Now he will have to choose a lower exercise
price to achieve a positive delta. If he sells the 90 call time spread (purchase a short-term
90 call, sell a long-term 90 call), he will have a position with a positive delta and a
positive theoretical edge. If he wants to protect 75% of his position, and the spread has
a delta of +25, he can sell the spread three times for each underlying position.

In the same way, a hedger can also buy or sell vertical spreads to achieve a desired
amount of protection. Depending on whether options are generally underpriced or
Overpriced (implied volatility is too low or too high), the hedger will work around the
at-the-money option. With the underlying market currently at 100, the hedger who
Wants to protect a long position can sell a vertical call spread with a negative delta (sell
the lower exercise price call, buy the higher exercise price call). If implied volatility is
high, he will prefer to sell an at-the-money option and buy an out-of-the-money option.
If implied volatility is low, he will prefer to sell an in-the-money option and buy an
at-the-money option. Each spread will have a negative delta, but will also have a positive
theoretical edge since the at-the-money option is the most sensitive to changes in
volatility.

As is obvious, using options to hedge a position can be just as complex as using
options to construct trading strategies. Many factors go into the decision-making
process. When a potential hedger is confronted for the first time with the multitude of


268 Chapter 13

possible strategies, he can understandably feel overwhelmed, to the point where he
decides to abandon options completely. When this happens the hedger, or someone
advising the hedger, should lay out a limited number of strategies (perhaps four or five)
which make sense, and compare the various risk/reward characteristics of the strate-
gies. Given the hedger’s general market outlook, and his willingness or unwillingness
to accept certain risks, it should then be possible to make an intelligent decision. A
summary of common hedging strategies, with some of their advantages and disadvan-
tages, is given in Figure 13-7.

PORTFOLIO INSURANCE

Suppose a hedger holds a long position in a certain asset, and he wants to protect his
holding against downward movement by purchasing a put option. Unfortunately, the
hedger finds that no option market for this asset exists. Nor is any other source, such as
an option dealer, available. Is there any way the hedger can create the put option
himself?

If the hedger were really able to purchase a put, his position would be:

long underlying + long put

But we know from the synthetic relationships in Chapter 11 that a long underlying
position together with a long put is equivalent to a long call. Therefore, the hedger really
wants to own a call with the same exercise price as the put.

What would be the characteristics of this call? We could analyze the call using a
theoretical pricing model. In order to do that, we need to know what the underlying
asset is, and then we need to determine the inputs into the model. Suppose the
underlying asset is a futures contract, and that we plan to use the following inputs:

exercise price = 100

time to expiration = 10 weeks
underlying price = 101.35
interest rate = 8%

volatility = 18.3%

Feeding these inputs into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call option which
the hedger would like to own has a delta of 57. This means that if the hedger actually
owned the call (instead of owning the underlying asset together with a 100 put) in
theory he would have a position equivalent to owning 57% of his asset. Therefore, if he
wants to replicate the combination of the underlying asset and the 100 put, he must sell
off 43% of his holdings in the asset. When he does that, he will have a position
theoretically equivalent to owning a 100 call.

Now suppose a week passes and the value of his asset has risen to 102.26. What
would be the delta of the 100 call which the hedger desires to own? Again, feeding all
the inputs into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call now has a delta of 62.
If the hedger wants a position which is equivalent to a long call, he now needs to own


269

abpe jeajeioeyy eaneBou jequejod
