
Q.: When you say you started trading commodities, were you
trading retail?

A : Yeah, I was. It was back in the very bad commission days. I
was still in college and I was trading mostly copper because I was
a geology student.

Q.: What were the commissions like at that time?

A : Oh outrageous [laughter]. Yeah, it was so bad; I think it was
$50 to $100 a side or something like that. It was terrible.

Q.- and how much was each point worth?
A : It was $250 per penny.

Q:s0 copper had to basically move a penny for you to overcome
the commission costs, right?

A : That’s right, it had to be a fairly big move. Back then my broker
had to pay $600 a month for a five-minute delayed quote fee which
provided as much information as anyone can get free now. These
days, everything is so much better. The information is free, and it’s

10


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

faster. The commissions are 1 percent of what they used to be. I
can do options and the commission is a dollar fifty to both buy and
sell where it used to be like 50 bucks each. In many ways it’s never
been better than it is today to trade.

Q:p id anybody in your family trade stocks?

A : Yes, my father did as an investor. But he was a business man,
not atrader. I started off doing it myself and then, like most people,
I started with the minimum account size of $3,000 [laughter]. And
sure enough you always have to blow up when you have such a tiny
account.

Q.: How long did it take you to blow up?

A : Oh I think six months. That’s pretty good when you trade
commodities on 3,000 bucks [laughter].

Q.- That is pretty good. That’s very impressive. You really held
out. You treaded water for a long time there. The reason for the
question about family was because one of the interesting things
that we're finding is that a portion of the traders we're interview-
ing came from families with strong interest in trading. We were
wondering if that had a big impact on you or just a marginal one.
Did you and dad talk stocks when you were younger or was this
really your own personal pursuit?

A : It was mainly me reading the Wall Street Journal and when
he would talk to his friends I would pay attention.

Q.:s0 after you blew up the account in college what happened
then?

A : Well, for a while I didn’t do all that good, I'd refill the account,
blow it up again, but later when I started a company in 1988 or

1


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

1989, and I played the options on copper, I turned $2,000 into
$40,000 in about six months.

QO: How did you find time to trade while you were doing a start
up?

A : Long hours [laughter]. Plus I actually used the money to help
the company.

Q.: 80 you used your trading profits to help capitalize your
startup?

A : That’s right.

: That’s true entrepreneurial spirit. So you ran $2,000 to
$40,000. Did you catch a big trend? What happened in the copper
market?

A : It went up a lot. It went from about 57 to 85 and of course
now, you know copper finally has had its day in the sun. I was very
happy with the move because I was buying 70-cent options when
copper was at 50 cents and they had a December expiration. I think
I bought them in May—it went up a lot. [Authors’ note: Dana was
buying the right to purchase copper at 70 cents a ton when it was
only trading at 50 cents/ton. This is a highly speculative strategy
that assumes a very large price move over a short period of time]

Q..was it a one-shot deal where basically you bought options in
May and then they just matured into a very fat profit?

A : That’s right. I sold some on the way up, but I made a very,
very good profit, 2,000 percent or so.

122


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

Q.: Most people typically get out early, what made you hold on
to the trade?

A : Technical analysis. I was following a chart on it and it still
looked healthy and so I held on to it until it started losing momen-
tum.

OQ: Were you following the daily chart?

A : Yes. Now I use much finer stuff. But back then I think that
was the only thing available [laughter].

Q.. Was this trade something fundamentally researched or was
it frankly just luck that you caught a really nice move and then
managed to hold on to it? What made you go long copper at that
point?

A : Well, I thought it was undervalued, and then I watched the
chart and it dipped down, looked like it washed out, lost its down-
ward momentum, premiums on options became very small, and so
I thought quite bit about it and got lucky. I’ve done that a couple
times. I bought Boeing at the market turn in 1982. I bought 25 calls
when it was 16 and it went to 28. That was my entire stake in the
market [laughter]. I had very little money at that time, but I made
another nice killing on that trade. The stock was selling four times
the earnings, and it went up to about 28 before the November
expiry. Now that I know a lot more about options, I wouldn’t have
played them that way.

: You made a nice punt. Were they trading for teeny (one-
sixteenth of a dollar)? They must have been very cheap.

A : think it was three-eighths or maybe less, maybe an eighth,
somewhere in that range definitely under a half. Actually, I think

13


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

my percentage on the trade was 3,000 percent. But I’ve also been
wrong. One time that I was very wrong on the market was in 1998.
I read some articles which made a very good case that S&P was
way overvalued, so I started buying S&P 500 put options and I
lost a lot of money [laughter]. I quit fighting the tape The next
time, actually, I nailed it pretty good, which was in late 1999
The market was just absolutely insane and I was in on the run.
At the same point, I was involved with the dotcom startup and
we were being offered just outrageous valuations. So, I actually
thought it was going to crash in March or April 2000. I felt that
way since January, and I wasn’t alone. I think in Forbes maga-
zine, [Bob] Metcalf of 3Com and [Gordon] Moore of Moore’s Law
wrote articles about why they thought the dotcom boom was go-
ing to crash. If I had it to do over again, I could probably come
up with some options techniques, to take advantage of the crash.
But back then I didn’t feel like shorting stocks because you never
know how far it could run. Also, the option premiums were out-
rageous then. Now I think I would have done put backspread and
things like that or selling credit spreads, which are good ways to
play a runaway market. [Authors’ note: Put backspreads involve
selling put options that are close to being in the money and then
using the premium collected to purchase twice or three times as
many of far out of the money put options. The strategy works
if there is a sharp move down, breaks even if the underlying in-
strument rallies, and loses money if the instrument declines only
slightly.]

Quat that time you didn’t do anything because the premiums
were just fat right?

A : I didn’t do much in terms of shorting, so that was a
missed opportunity. I could have made a lot of money, and I
did make some. But in retrospect, I could have a done a lot
better because I really felt that what happened was going to
happen.

14


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

Q.: Basically, all the way through 2000 you're very much involved
in startups and were just doing recreational trading,

A: Yes, you can say that. It was not full time. In 1998 and 1999, I
had two years where I made 50 percent pretty much back to back,
and it wasn’t actually all that high tech. I was personally in high
tech myself. In 98 and ’99, valuations were so high. I was buying
value stocks and avoiding all the overpriced stuff, and at that point
that wasn’t the best thing to do.

Quat what time did you say to yourself I’m going to do this as a
full-time trader?

A : 2002 was the time when I really buckled down and saw some
very interesting automated trading models and found TradeSta-
tion. Actually made a lot of money off their stock too. So it was
basically September of 2002 when I really started applying systems
and doing it as a full-time job.

Q. pia you develop your own systems or did you buy other
systems and modify them?

A: I was trading my own systems, but using TradeStation software
to do it because you can actually back test the system.

Q.. why did automated trading attract you? Do you have an
engineering mindset?

A: Yes I managed software development. Plus a lot of people say
you can never have a completely automated system that will work.
But we all know one of the greatest enemies of trading is emotion.
People have a tendency to sell at the worst possible moment. I’m

1S


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

no different, but if you back test something, I think it’s just natural
for you to do a better job.

Q.:s0 currently most of your trading is systems driven?

A : It is, but I don’t have it fully automated yet, and I’m working
on that now. I can get into positions automatically. I have one
system that is very hectic—basically a crash buying system and so
you don’t know what stock you're going to be in. Using a list of over
200 stocks, it buys the worst crashes. It can go into many different
stocks all at the same time on bad market days [laughter]. So I have
to manage the positions. The system does work, but you feel like
you're losing money until you add it all up at the end day and you
end up positive.

Quis it kind of like trying to crash land a plane?

A : Yeah, and so I definitely wanted to get that automated.

Q.: were curious about the crash-based system. Clearly the
system searches the market using whatever algorithm you have
programmed and puts you in a position. We guess that’s done auto-
matically. It simply buys at whatever trigger you have. But once you
are in position, you are managing the exits manually, is that correct?

A : That is correct, and while you’re watching one, another one
might be dropping another 2 to 3 percent on you before you look
back over on that screen. So I don’t enjoy it [laughter]. Clearly it
would be better automated. The other thing is you automate the
exits—you can back test them. I have basic rules on how to get out,
just haven't been able to get them into the computer. I think that
with back testing I will find a better way of getting out of position

16


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

than by watching each stock individually. Wealthlab is what I use
now, their back testing is superb.

: The system clearly sounds like it buys dips; does it also sell
rallies?

A : My back testing indicates that it doesn’t work as well on the
short side. When they rip up, they continue to go up, so my back
testing indicates that it is two or three times better to buy crashes.
You're not buying something that’s been going down for a week.
I’m talking about interday crashes. It’s more of an extreme interday
crash and then picking up hints that the crash is coming to an end.
That’s proprietary, of course.

: Bottom line: You're primary a long-side trader in stocks
because you found that bias to be much more profitable?

A : Yes, you have to know yourself, and I do have a long bias. I
tend to buy stocks in oversold conditions, and I am not as good
at shorting. That’s another reason for automated systems. If I can
find something that works very well on back testing on the short
side, I'll be very happy to do it, but emotionally in my brain, I have
a long bias.

Q.: When you are in the midst of holding six, seven, eight posi-
tions, do you have either a mental or an automatic hard stop that
serves as your risk control? For example, is it a 5 percent move
down from your entry price, or is everything discretionary at that
point?

A : It tends more toward the discretionary side, but there’s also a
time stop. I don’t want to be in the trade overnight.

17


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: 80, for example, if at the end of the day you're still negative
on the position do you time stop yourself? Will you get out on the
close?

A : Yes. I don’t want to be in too long. I'll give you a valuable
piece of advice: The most dangerous stocks are biotech. So I avoid
biotech because they can just go down and down and down.

Q, : Because it’s very hard to gauge value in those stocks, right?
They don’t have any assets except whether the drugs either work
or don’t.

A : Exactly—they are very emotional stocks.

Q. : cenerally, you're either going to stop yourself out on time or
you're going to hopefully have a net positive move before the end
the day and take profits?

A : That is correct.

Q.: and the system is a day trading system, so you always try to
stay flat overnight?

A : Yes, probably 90 percent of the time, but sometimes the crash
occurs late in day. Those I hold.

Q.: Doe you find day trading to be more of a function of your
own psychology namely that it helps you sleep at night, or do you
believe that there is actually an edge? In other words, according to
your back tests is it better to day trade?

A : Yes. I’m just looking for that intraday bounce. I’m not looking
to pick up a position.

18


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

QO: 50 it’s kind of like a game of hot potato?

A : Yes, you are buying in effect extreme fear and then there’s a
point where that fear tends to bottom out and then maybe a little
optimism comes in and when that happens you get out. When you
get the opportunity, there are four or five distinct and different
type of behaviors in these crashes. And from experience you can
see them on the charts if you’re watching a one-minute chart. But I
consider myself an omnivore trader. I do use many, many different
methods including some long-term trades like in oil/gas stocks.
From 2003 and 2004 until now, I’ve held positions sometimes for
nine months. So I do some pure value investing and I throw trading
on top of that as I watch the stock a lot and get to know it. I get to
see the everyday things. So I might buy in and sell out 5 percent of
the position during the day from these intraday patterns that I’ve
noticed.

: How much of a bounce back do you look for? Would you
unload the position at 2 to 3 percent profit?

A : It if keeps having momentum, I'll hold it and watch it. But
it’s actually less than that. You can imagine how hard it is to follow
four or five stocks in a crash.

: Is there a cadre of stocks that you follow whose patterns and
fundamentals you know quite well?

A : Yes, there are about five to seven stocks and that will change
year to year.

Q.:and you'll be in and out of those stocks, if not on a daily basis,
then certainly once or twice a week based on this kind of a thing?

A : That is correct. If I really like the stock, ll hold it. If I just
like the technicals, then I'll get in and out. I trade different stocks
different ways.

19


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: When you buy dips, there’s always an enormous danger of
a retrace right back to negative territory after the bounce. How
do you manage your trades? Do you scale out of half, go to break
even? Do you ever allow winners to become losers again?

A : Sometimes. Of course, that’s never the plan and it depends
how far it goes. So if I’m just up a half percent, something that’s
almost down to the noise level, I won’t necessarily cash in. I am a
pattern trader. I'll watch both the 15-minute chart and one-minute
chart, and I will also watch level two and start to get a feel for it. It
takes a lot of experience to do this, to get a feel for when the stock
is running out of momentum. Once they are quieting down and
people get a bit nervous, I basically want to get out immediately at
that point. But I do use scaling a lot, both in and out.

Q_. De you use any indicators to help you? Or is just pure
observation of price action?

A : Both. I do believe in a lot of indicators. If you're in a trading
range, the stochastics work great. Also RSI. And I follow the moving
averages —the 5, 10, 20, and 100. I use that on a daily chart and
also use it on a five-minute chart. To find extreme oversold levels
I have found MoneyFlow works the best.

Q.:s0 you use all those diagnostics to help you make your deci-

sion?

A : That is correct. But also experience seeing what works and
what doesn’t work and developing a feel for it. If the position starts
to make you feel uncomfortable, then to me that’s an indication
that your mind is picking up something that’s dangerous.

Q. when you are talking about feel, it sounds like your primary
diagnostic is the level two. You really watch price, you've obviously
watched action over and over, for thousands of hours.

A : That’s correct.

20


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

Q : The moment you see something in the price action that
triggers a concern, you liquidate?

A : That is correct, yeah. And when you mentioned about feel, I
can develop a feel for five to seven stocks. But I can’t develop a
feel for 150 stocks. So that’s where you have to have an automated
system doing it for you.

: When you're doing swing trading, is it also really from pure
observation of price flow or do you look at charts? Do you have
certain technical setups that are relatively orthodox?

A : Yes, I'd say so. It’s double bottoms primarily. I am a little
bit of a bottom feeder—but I will get out, I won’t stay in if they
stay weak. My preference is to have a basket of stocks where the
fundamentals are good. There is much less danger for them to
continue to crash. One of the things I’ve found after trading from
the long side for any length of time is to avoid stocks that have debt.
The worst moves tend to be in stocks that have a lot of debt, with
drops of 50 to 75 percent. Another thing I’ve found is management
is absolutely key.

Q: s0 it sounds like, on your longer term trades, you’re much
more fundamentally oriented. You really want to know the story
behind the stock and you will hold through the day-to-day noise if
you believe in the story.

A: That is correct. In fact, I never hold a position for a long time
in a company where I don’t like the fundamentals. Now on swing or
intraday basis trading, that is pure technical. On the crash system
that I told you about, I actually don’t even know the companies,
Sometimes I have to look up to see what the stock is, never seeing
the symbol before [laughter]. And I dotry to read the press release,
see how bad the news is, and so forth, and then manage a trade
from there on out.

21


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q, : obviously biotech was one sector that you would just stay
away from, but has there been a time when a stock crashed, you’ve
read the news releases as to what caused the crash, and the news
made you say, “You know what, I don’t want to touch this, this is
just too toxic”?

A : Yes. Like if they cooked the books or someone’s been arrested.
The crashes I like best are when the earnings are good but the stock
collapses.

Q. That's a very interesting trade. So you actually like it when
you have a positive fundamental surprise, but a negative price
movement and there’s a disconnect between the fundamentals
and what the price is doing?

A : Yes, my favorite. Because people are just selling out of fear,
there’s no real reason for it. They say, “Gee, it should be going up,
it’s going down, I’m getting out.” You know.

OQ. : There's one unifying theme that tends to run through all of
your trading, be it specs in options or be it swing trading or even
intraday trading—you are most comfortable with a value based
trade. You like to buy value cheap, whether it be on an intraday
basis, swing basis, or even speculative basis and then see it rally.

A : For long term that’s 100 percent correct. One such trade I did
was in 2003. At that point we'd had a real crash just like with the
‘29 crash, very similar, and then I remembered an old Wall Street
Week episode, John Templeton was on and he said when he started
out during World War Two, he took all the $1 stocks and bought
every $1 stock on the stock exchange. So that triggered a memory
as we just had a real similar market crash—worst one since 1929.
I decided to modify it a little bit to look for companies with no
debt. I had two criteria: One that it really had to be a good growing
company, at a good value, or it used to be a decent $20 to $40 stock

22


THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES

that crashed to one. One of my biggest wins was TradeStation,
which I bought for 1.02 and ended up selling for $12. Another was
AES, a big power company that’s used to be $60 a share and was
down to $1. I got a five bagger out of that. Another one was Dow
Corning. It got over 100 and came down to a dollar, got a seven
bagger out of that. Now it’s over 20.

Q : That's fascinating.

A : Yes. There is nothing better as a trader than to see what you
think is going to happen actually happen. The market is humbling
to all though. My best results come after rough periods, where I
literally pray to God and ask Him for help and tell Him if things go
right, it’s not me. The worst results follow periods where I decide
Iam really good at this and have figured out the markets.

Q.: What is your best trade?

A : That’s easy, it was this year. Saw PTSC on a deep value
scan—magicinvestingformula.ccom—and loved the huge cash
position, no debt and high profits, bought some at .08. near New
Years 2006. It exploded almost immediately, and by March sold
the last of it on the high day at 2.10 for a 26 bagger! I wish I had
bought more of it.

Q.- Lets change tact. You told us the best trade. Now tell us the
most painful trade?

A : [laughter] Yeah there’s been several. My worse trade in terms
of losing money in a short period time was TMR. I ended up
walking away from it with a profit, but this gets back to the issue of
company management. It was an oil/gas driller down in Louisiana.
They had a tremendous new field find and they hit this well. I
think it was 33 million cubic feet a day [laughter]. I already had
a position in at a dollar, and I saw the press release come across

23


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

the screen and I took a look and there are still people offering to
sell the thing at 2.10. [laughter] I just bought everything in sight. I
ended up at one point with 70,000 shares and it did very well for
while. It actually got up to a high of nine.

Q.- You were holding the whole position at nine still?

A : Yeah, and I had actually increased along the way and I traded
in and out, because I got to know the stock and so forth. And
then they started missing wells. They had a shareholder meeting
in Texas and there were a lot of enthusiastic investors. Then they
went from 90 percent hit rate on wells to a 30 to 40 percent hit
rate on wells. The stock was trading in a channel and every time
it would hit bottom, I would buy and then sell at the top. But it
broke the channel at 7.80, I should have just gotten out right then.
But in next three days lost $150,000, so that’s the worst loss I’ve
taken. I did get out for a $150,000 profit, but three days before I
had a $300,000 profit.
