
Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

of events exists in the ever evolving moment of now—and at all
points of now, you might choose to see your result equals your
intention. Alternatively, you might choose to avoid
responsibility, especially for the noise, and then try to find
exogenous “causes.”
• Analysis leads to solving and fixing. TTP leads to dissolving and
noticing things already work right. Incontrovertible solvers
tend to use TTP as an analytical tool—until they happen to
experience a desire to solve things.
• Take responsibility for your experience and see that intentions
equals result. Deny responsibility and a delta between
intentions and results may appear.
• Your real trading system is the set of feelings you are unwilling
to experience.
• In tracking your feelings and in tracking the markets, take
whatever comes up and go with it. Trying to force a feeling is
like trying to force a market. You might find some joy in the
process of allowing feelings and markets to come and go as you
experience them.
Why does a trader as successful as Seykota spend time delving
into the subject of feelings? He has said: “It is a dominant idea in
Western society that we should separate emotion and rationality.
Advances in science show that such a separation is not only
impossible but also undesirable.”34
Seykota has known about the “advances in science” for 30
years.

Curiosity Is the Answer, Not Degrees
Can you remember how to experience simple childlike
curiosity with no agenda other than simply to know? The curiosity
I am talking about is open-ended and enthusiastic. Kids have the
same wide-eyed wonderment when they take apart their first toy to
figure out how it works.
Emotional issues aside, many traders remain fixated on
academic intelligence as their only decision-making tool. William
Eckhardt, a longtime trend follower, sees the issue:

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

“I haven’t seen much correlation between good trading and
intelligence. Some outstanding traders are quite intelligent,
but a few are not. Many outstandingly intelligent people are
horrible traders. Average intelligence is enough. Beyond
that, emotional makeup is more important.”35
When it comes to being an outstanding trader, emotional
intelligence is as important as IQ. Because we are conditioned to
appear “book smart,” we are often afraid to be curious. We think
that by asking questions, we’ll be perceived as ignorant; although in
truth, by not questioning the world, we get into more trouble. Still
others might not fear the question, but instead fear the answer,
which might be the piece of information that requires integration
into your life or worse, information that proves you wrong. Openended curiosity lets you take a step back and see everything for
what it is right now.
For most of our lives, many of us spend our time listening to
someone else feed us information. Then we are judged on how well
we can regurgitate that information back to whomever offered it in
the first place. When it comes time to taking responsibility for our
decision making, we are constantly waiting for someone else to tell
us what to do or checking to see what others are doing. Curiosity
has been pulled from us.
For example, Alan “Ace” Greenberg, former CEO of Bear
Stearns (before it imploded), in his book Memos from the
Chairman, told his employees that, “Our first desire is to promote
from within. If somebody with an MBA degree applies for the job,
we will certainly not hold it against them, but we are really looking
for people with PSD (“a poor, smart, and deep desire to be rich
degree”) degrees. They built this firm and there are plenty around
because our competition seems to be restricting themselves to
MBAs.”38
Greenberg “gets” the need for passion and curiosity, but many
would-be traders pursue pleasing others. They have spent their
lives delivering the “right” answer to their teachers to please them.
Eventually they equate pleasing people with being right. Ironically,
after they leave the academic world and are out on their own, their
need to be right often backfires.

205

Having an education is
one thing, being educated
is another.
Lee Kuan Yew,
former Prime Minister of Singapore37

When teaching children, a
good chess teacher
devises ways to get
students through the pain
of losing, since they lose a
lot when first learning the
game. One teacher
describes how there is a
“hot corner.” Students sit
with the teacher at the
board and talk chess.
They cannot move the
pieces physically, but
instead must tell the
teacher their moves. They
must play the game in
their heads. In the
beginning, the students
hate a visit to the “hot
corner.” However,
gradually they discover
that they can, in fact,
play a game of chess in
their head. More
important, what seems
like difficult mental work
requiring deep
concentration and focus
becomes intuition after a
while. By learning how to
handle defeat, the young
students can learn how
to win.39

206

Anyone with average
intelligence can learn to
trade. This is not rocket
science.
William Eckhardt

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Look at Wall Street in 2008. All of the so-called best and
brightest traders, the ones armed with the Ivy League educations
and Goldman Sachs pedigrees, now what do they do? They played
by the rules their whole life. They went to the right schools. They
were at the right investment banks. They were quickly rewarded for
playing the part, then the 2008 crash hit. Now what? Back to school
for an MBA in the hope that if they follow more rules it will all work
out right?
Ignoring the opinions and contributions of others to be “right”
is not particularly “pleasing” behavior as Faulkner points out:

Never call on intuition. It
calls on you.40

A top CEO recently spoke
before a Harvard MBA
class. After his
presentation, the students
asked questions. One of
the questions was, “What
should we do?” The CEO
replied, “Take the rest of
the money you have not
spent on tuition and do
something else.” This isn’t
to say that people with
advanced degrees cannot
be successful trend
followers, but it does say
that relying solely on your
degree for success in the
markets, or in life, for
that matter, is not a wise
strategy.

“One doesn’t have to be a student to want to please people
or want to be right. I would claim that serious students (and
professors) know there is much they don’t know, and are
less interested in what is right. On the other hand, those
that know little often feel the need to be in the right about
it. People pleasing is an entirely different dimension,
though people that need to be right are usually experienced
at ignoring others, and therefore, failing to please them.”
Sigmund Freud gets right to heart of the problem when it comes
to our lack of curiosity:
“What a distressing contrast there is between the radiant
intelligence of the child and the feeble mentality of the
average adult.”
As simplistic as it sounds, maintaining childlike wonder and
enthusiasm keeps the mental doors open. Is it possible to disengage
your ego and think of yourself as still evolving? Don’t answer “no.”

Commitment to Habitual Success
Simply reading trading philosophies and rules alone is not going
to make you hungry. It’s not going to make you want to succeed at
trading. You must be committed to winning. Because if you don’t
want to win, if you don’t have it in your gut, there’s a good chance
you won’t win.
Commitment to trend following trading is the same
commitment you would make to anything new in life. If you’re
committed, you will figure it all out one way or another.

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

Commitment to trend following is also similar to the
commitment needed to be a top athlete. If you’re going to be a
fantastic baseball player, you keep pushing. You never give up. By
the time you get to the big leagues, you have what you want.
However, the only reason you have those things is because you
made the commitment at the outset to be a winner. Everyone wants
the big leagues and big money, but are they committed to making it
happen with relentless drive? Faulkner sees it a bit differently, as he
explained to me:
“I see it more as a matter of choosing between what is in
accord with your nature or changing your nature to accord
with your dreams. Most people don’t recognize this as a
choice point. They get praised into a career, ‘You’re good
with people; you should be a sales person’ or ‘You’re good at
math; you should be a computer programmer.’ Few realize
that it is possible to hold their dreams constant and vary
their behavior until they are good at what they need to be
good at. And usually, there is a bit of both.”
If you’re going to chase success, the basic principles, the basic
psychological requirements are the same, no matter what you do in
life. You still have to wake up every day with a deep desire to be
successful. You have to be consistently focused every day. You can’t
just wake up and say, “Hey, I’m going to give a little bit of effort
today and see what happens. If it doesn’t work out for me, I can say
I tried and complain to my wife or girlfriend.” You can’t just jump
around because the newspaper or some TV analyst says, “Here’s
some get rich quick scheme or Holy Grail.”
That’s not the way it works. Act like that and you will fail. Doubt
me? Consider some very simple trading “do nots” from Amos
Hostetter, the wise sage of famed trend following incubator
Commodities Corporation:
• Don’t sacrifice your position for fluctuations.
• Don’t expect the market to end in a blaze of glory. Look out for
warnings.
• Don’t expect the tape to be a lecturer. It’s enough to see that
something is wrong.
• Never try to sell at the top. It isn’t wise. Sell after a reaction if
there is no rally.

207

We sometimes delude
ourselves that we proceed
in a rational manner and
weight all of the pros and
cons of various
alternatives. But this is
seldom the actual case.
Quite often ‘I decided in
favor of X’ is no more
than ‘I liked X’…We buy
the cars we ‘like,’ choose
the jobs and houses we
find ‘attractive,’ and then
justify these choices by
various reasons.41

208

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

• Don’t imagine that a market that has once sold at 150 must be
cheap at 130.
• Don’t buck the market trend.
• Don’t look for the breaks. Look out for warnings.
• Don’t try to make an average from a losing game.
• Never keep goods that show a loss, and sell those that show a
profit. Get out with the least loss, and sit tight for greater
profits.

The strategies of human
reason probably did not
develop, in either
evolution or any single
individual, without the
guiding force of the
mechanisms of biological
regulation, of which
emotion and feeling are
notable expressions.
Moreover, even after
reasoning strategies
become established in the
formative years, their
effective deployment
probably depends, to a
considerable extent, on
the continued ability to
experience feelings.42

Hostetter also saw the dangers in trading caused by human
nature:
• Fearful of profit and one acts too soon.
• Hope for a change in the forces against one.
• Lack of confidence in one’s own judgment.
• Never cease to do your own thinking.
• A man must not swear eternal allegiance to either the bear or
bull side.
• An individual fails to stick to facts!
• People believe what it pleases them to believe.
Think about how simple Hostetter’s wisdom appears on the
surface. However, how many investors adhere to these basics?
Imagine that those simple rules were handed out in January 2008
to every investor with their life savings in mutual funds. How much
money would they have saved?

Key Points
• Faulkner: “All of the successful traders I have met are
consciously aware that their lives are bigger than their trading.
They are very interested in the money and they are very
interested in what they get to do to get it. They embrace their
pasts, as well as who they are. Whether it’s mathematics or
music, philosophy or psychology, or baseball, their interests in
the world around them help carry them through the market,

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

and equity, changes. Every day, whether they make money or
not, they get to do what they want. I hear it really helps with
sitting with positions, too.”
• Seykota: “To freshen a room, open a window. Works for minds,
too, and for hearts.”
• Seykota: “Sometimes people gamble and lose to cover up some
other feelings they wish to avoid experiencing…guilt, for
example.”
• Seykota: “Some like to search, some like to find and some
realize they already have it.”
• If you want to be a successful trader, you must be passionate
about the learning process.
• Let the hype, crowd emotion, and “I must be right attitude” be
someone else’s problem.

209

We know of “traders”
whose public image
“looks pristine,” but their
personal lives, mental
health, and balance are
in such dire straights—
they are not capable of
any type of real success
or achievement. They
might get “the numbers,”
but their problematic
mental health keeps them
back. Bottom line—they
never get to where they
want to go. Life becomes
one big rationalization
(or excuse) for them.

• Winners take responsibility. Losers place blame.
• You have to believe from the start that you can do it. It takes
courage to do what the majority is not doing.
• Who is John Galt?
• Atul Gawande speaks directly to the importance of practice:
“There have now been many studies of elite performers—
concert violinists, chess grandmasters, professional ice-skaters,
mathematicians, and so forth—and the biggest difference
researchers find between them and lesser performers is the
amount of deliberate practice they’ve accumulated. Indeed, the
most important talent may be the talent for practice itself…the
most important role that innate factors play may be in a
person’s willingness to engage in sustained training.”
• Online personality testing can be purchased at
www.knowyourtype.com.

If you try to impose a
rigid discipline while
teaching a child or a
chimp, you are working
against the boundless
curiosity and need for
relaxed play that make
learning possible in the
first place…learning
cannot be controlled; it is
out of control by design.
Learning emerges
spontaneously, it
proceeds in an
individualistic and
unpredictable way, and it
achieves its goal in its
own good time. Once
triggered, learning will
not stop—unless it is
hijacked by conditioning.
Roger Fouts
2think.org

This page intentionally left blank

Decision Making

7

“‘Would you tell me please which way
I have to go from here?’ ‘That depends a good deal on
where you want to go,’ said the cat.”
Lewis Carroll1
“We see heuristics as the way the human mind can take
advantage of the structure of information in the environment
to arrive at reasonable decisions.”
Gerd Gigerenzer and Peter M. Todd2

Trend followers approach their trading decisions in a distinctly
different way from most traders. They keep it simple. For example,
each day thousands of traders attempt to evaluate a relentless
onslaught of confusing, contradictory, and overwhelming market
information to hopefully make profitable trading decisions (the type
of information on CNBC for example). Although they know the right
decisions should be educated and based on factual data, they often
do things they think are required for proper decision-making, even
when they are not. Confronted by deadlines and other demands on
their time, they either end up paralyzed making no decision, or
they let someone else decide for them. It’s a vicious circle.

211

Any individual decisions
can be badly thought
through, and yet be
successful, or exceedingly
well thought through, but
be unsuccessful, because
the recognized possibility
of failure in fact occurs.
But over time, more
thoughtful decisionmaking will lead to better
overall results, and more
thoughtful decisionmaking can be
encouraged by evaluating
decisions on how well
they were made rather
than on outcome.
Robert Rubin3

212

People who make
decisions for a living are
coming to realize that in
complex or chaotic
situations—a battlefield,
a trading floor, or today’s
brutally competitive
business environment—
intuition usually beats
rational analysis. And as
science looks closer, it is
coming to see that
intuition is not a gift but
a skill.6

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Terrence Odean, a researcher in the field of behavioral finance,
uses a roulette wheel to illustrate the issue. He postulates that even
if you knew the results for the last 10,000 roulette spins, knew what
materials the roulette wheel was made of, and whatever hundred
other pieces of information you could dream up as possibly being
useful, you still wouldn’t know what really matters, which is where
the ball will land next. Ed Seykota takes Odean’s thought a step
further in poking holes in fundamental analysis:4
“While fundamental analysis may help you understand how
things work, it does not tell you when, or how much. Also,
by the time a fundamental case presents, the move may
already be over. Just around the recent high in the Live
Cattle market, the fundamental reasons included Chinese
Buying, Mad Cow Disease, and The Atkins’ Diet.”5
Trend followers control what they know they can control. They
know they can choose a certain level of risk. They know they can
measure volatility. They understand the transaction costs
associated with trading. However, there is still plenty they know
they do not know, so in the face of uncertainty, what do they do?
They swing the bat. Their ability to decide is core to their trading
philosophy—that is their swinging the bat. Their decision-making
skills might seem not worthy of much discussion, but the
philosophical framework of their decision making is critical to
understanding how they trade successfully.
If I were to put their style into a baseball analogy I would ask:
Do you want to play ball or do you not want to play ball? The pitch
is coming across the plate. Decide whether to swing the bat. Know
how you will decide in advance. When the pitch comes—if it’s your
pitch, swing the bat. You want to wait for more information before
you swing? No time. Because in an uncertain world, if you wait until
the data is clear (or the ball has crossed the plate), you miss the
pitch.

Occam’s Razor
Nature operates in the
shortest way possible.
Aristotle

Tackling the challenge of making smart decisions in a real and
complicated world is hardly new. As far back as the fourteenth
century, when medieval life was as rigidly complex as its cathedrals,

Chapter 7 • Decision Making

philosophers grappled with how to make simple decisions when
time was pressing. In any scientific realm, when a new set of data
requires the creation of a new theory, many hypotheses are
proposed, studied, and rejected. Yet, even when all unfit hypotheses
are thrown out, several might remain, in some cases reaching the
same end, but having different underlying assumptions. To choose
among similar theories, scientists use Occam’s razor.
Occam’s razor is a principle attributed to logician and
Franciscan friar William of Occam. The principle states that entities
must not be multiplied unnecessarily. In its original Latin form,
Occam’s razor is “Pluralitas non est ponenda sine neccesitate.”
This underlies all scientific modeling and theory building. A
common interpretation of the principle is that the simplest of two
or more competing theories is preferable.7 Occam’s razor does not
guarantee that the simplest solution will be correct, but it does
focus priorities.

213

We could still imagine
that there is a set of laws
that determines events
completely for some
supernatural being who
could observe the present
state of the universe
without disturbing it.
However, such models of
the universe are not of
much interest to us
mortals. It seems better to
employ the principle
known as Occam’s razor
and cut out all the
features of the theory
which cannot be
observed.
Stephen Hawking9

Fast and Frugal Decision Making
In the field of cognitive science, economics, and trading, it has
always been assumed that the best decision makers have the time
and ability to process vast amounts of information. However, we are
finding out that is not true. The field of heuristics explores how to
make constructive, positive choices by simplifying the process.
Gerd Gigerenzer and Peter Todd’s Simple Heuristics That Make Us
Smart shows how we can cope with the complexities of our world
using the simplest of decision-making tools. Their premise is as
follows:
“Fast and frugal heuristics employ a minimum of time,
knowledge, and computation to make adaptive choices in
real environments.”8
For example, a component of fast and frugal heuristics is onereason decision making. This sounds remarkably like what trend
followers do when faced with a trading decision:
“One reason decision makers use only a single piece of
information for making a decision—this is their common
building block. Therefore, they can also stop their search as
soon as the first reason is found that allows a decision to be
made.”10

Heuristic: Serving to
discover; using trial and
error; teaching by
enabling pupil to find
things out.
Oxford Dictionary

214

I’m increasingly
impressed with the kind
of innovation and
knowledge that doesn’t
come from preplanned
effort, or from working
towards a fixed goal, but
from a kind of
concentration on what
one is doing. That seems
very, very important to
me. It’s the actual
process, the functioning,
the going ahead with it.
J. Kirk T. Varanedoe,
Director of Painting and Sculpture,
Museum of Modern Art, New York City,
MacArthur Award Recipient

Heart, guts, attitude, and
the ability to tolerate
uncertainty are core to
long-term winning.

To be uncertain is to be
uncomfortable, but to be
certain is to be
ridiculous.

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

In other words, whether your decisions are about life in general
or trading in particular, your decision-making process doesn’t have
to be complex for the sake of complexity. You can make a trading
decision, buy or sell, on the single piece of information of ‘price’.
However, can you allow yourself to be that confident in simplicity?
Charles Faulkner, backing the point, found that great traders he has
studied share many character traits with other successful people,
such as quick reactions or, said another way, being able to turn a
position on a dime.11
Think about it this way. When we are faced with a decision,
going with our first instinct is often the right choice. If we reflect,
consider our options and alternatives, or try to second-guess
ourselves, we might end up making the wrong decision or the same
right decision but only after taking valuable time to get there.
Gigerenzer and Todd elaborate: “[T]hat fast and frugal
heuristics can guide behavior in challenging domains when the
environment is changing rapidly (for example, in stock market
investment), when the environment requires many decisions to be
made in a successively dependent fashion. These particular features
of social environments can be exploited by heuristics that make
rapid decisions rather than gathering and processing information
over a long period during which a fleeter-minded competitor could
leap forward and gain an edge.”12
Gigerenzer makes another analogy with the simple act of
catching a baseball: “Consider how players catch a ball—in
baseball, cricket, or soccer. It may seem that they would have to
solve complex differential equations in their heads to predict the
trajectory of the ball. In fact, players use a simple heuristic. When
a ball comes in high, the player fixates the ball and starts running.
The heuristic is to adjust the running speed so that the angle of gaze
remains constant—that is, the angle between the eye and the ball.
The player can ignore all the information necessary to compute the
trajectory, such as the ball’s initial velocity, distance, and angle, and
just focus on one piece of information, the angle of gaze.”13
Former baseball catcher, now announcer, Tim McCarver drew
the same conclusion, and he is by no means a scientist: “Before
each delivery, the catcher flashes a hand signal to the pitcher
indicating the best pitch to throw. Imagine that a strong batter faces
a count of three balls and two strikes, with runners on first and
third. What should the hurler serve up, a fastball high and inside, a
