
Stocks
Long-term, such as over the last decade, there is very little correlation between stock markets and
currencies. However, since the Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009, there has been a stronger

relationship between stocks and FX, especially the U.S. dollar. The relationship is best described
as risk on/risk off (see Chapter 5 for more on risk sentiment), where stocks are considered riskseeking assets and the dollar is viewed as the safe haven asset, as investors buy USD to buy U.S.
Treasury debt, the ultimate safe harbor. In recent years, the risk on/risk off scenario has typically
played out as follows: When the overall market environment is positive, investors embrace risk
and buy stocks, reducing the demand for dollars, usually leading to dollar weakness. When the
news turns bad, however, investors have dumped stocks and fled to the safety of U.S. Treasuries
and the greenback. As long as recent financial travails plague the global economy, this relationship
seems set hold. But when economic and financial conditions begin to improve to something
resembling normalcy, I would expect the stocks/FX relationship to return to lower historical
correlations.

Updating Your Trade Plan as Time Marches
On
If you’re like most traders, after you enter a position you’re going to be keenly aware of every
single pip change in prices, at least as long as you’re watching the market. Every little price
change, and the attendant change in your unrealized profit and loss (P&L), will evoke emotions
ranging from joy to despair and everything in between. And that’s to be expected. After all, at the
end of the day, it’s the P&L that matters, and pips are how that’s measured.
But one element that tends to receive remarkably little attention from traders, at least on a
conscious level, is the passage of time. Prices may seem to stand still for extended periods —
when a currency pair may be stuck in a range (that is, it keeps trading back and forth over the same
ground) — but time is constantly moving forward.

Staying aware of time and its passing is an important skill for traders to develop. You know
where the market price is now, so the question is really: Where will the market price be in
the future? As soon as you think of the future, it becomes a question of time: When will it be
there? If you consider these questions as you formulate each trade strategy, you’ll go a long
way toward incorporating time into your overall trade planning. More important, you’ll gain
an intuitive appreciation of the importance of time in trading, and you’ll find yourself asking
when as often as why or where.
On the most concrete level, as time progresses, it brings with it routine daily events, such as
option expirations and the daily fixings, to name just two. These are specific time periods where
traders can reasonably expect a flurry of activity, though it doesn’t always materialize. (I run
through the series of regular trading day time events in Chapter 2.)
Time’s passing also brings you nearer to scheduled news or data events. The pricing in of market

expectations for major events occurs in the hours and days ahead of the event or data release. As
the release time draws closer, anticipative speculation generally declines, and price movements
can become more erratic as traders take to the sidelines ahead of the release. Prices may chop
around more, but ultimately not go anywhere. All these market reactions are as much the result of
time as they are of the event itself.
On a more objective level, as time progresses, it can add significance to, or detract significance
from, price movements that have already occurred, frequently providing trading signals as a result.
For instance, the failure of prices to make an hourly close below a break of trend-line support
suggests that it may be a false break and that prices are likely to rebound higher. But if the break
occurred at 10:12 ET, for instance, you won’t know until the next hourly close in 48 minutes.
Potentially more significant trading signals are generated from longer time periods, such as a daily
close above long-term trend-line resistance or a prior daily high.

Trend lines move over time
If you’re basing your trading strategies on trend-line analysis, you need to be aware that price
levels derived from trend lines will change depending on the slope of the trend line. The slope of
a trend line refers to the angle of a trend line relative to a horizontal line. The steeper the slope of
the trend line, the more the relevant price level will change over time; the shallower the slope, the
more gradually the price levels will change with time.
Figure 15-1 gives you a good idea of how short-term price levels based on a 15-minute trend line
will shift over the course of just a few hours. Note how steeply the trend line is sloping upward.
For prices to continue to move higher in line with this trend line, they must stay above the trend
line as it rises over time, suggesting price gains of 10 to 15 pips per hour are needed.

Figure 15-1:
Trend-line
levels can
change over
time,
depending on
their slope.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Using your charting system, you can pinpoint relatively accurately where prices must be in
the future for the trend line to remain active as a support/resistance level. To do this, slide the
cursor along the trend line, and note the time that appears on the horizontal axis at the bottom
of the chart.
The same applies with longer-term charts, but the price shifts are typically less pronounced,
meaning an hourly trend line may see levels adjust by 10 to 15 pips every 6 to 12 hours, and daily
charts may see levels shift by 10 to 30 pips over a few days. But there are no concrete rules on
this; it all depends on the slope of the trend line.
No matter what time frame you’re trading, be sure to factor in the shifting levels of trend lines, if
they’re part of your trade strategy. You may need to adjust your order levels accordingly. In
particular, consider the following:
Short-term and overnight positions: Consider where trend-line support or resistance
will be over the next 6 to 12 hours, when your position is still active but you may not be
able to actively follow the market. You may want to use a trailing stop as a proxy for
changes in trend-line-based support/resistance levels.
Limit-entry orders: If your limit buying/selling order is based on a sloping trend line,
periodically adjust your order so that it’s still in play according to changes in the trend
line. You may miss a trade entry if the trend line is eventually touched, but, in the

meantime, its level has shifted away from where you first placed the order.
Breakouts: A significant trend line that looks to be a mile away one week may suddenly
be within striking distance in the following week or two weeks, substantially altering the
market’s outlook. Alternatively, the market may be focused on a price high/low as a
breakout trigger, when a sloping trend line touching that high/low may actually be the
catalyst for a breakout.

Impending events may require trade plan adjustments
As you develop your trading plan, I strongly recommend that you look ahead to see what data and
events are scheduled during the expected life of the trade. If you follow that simple advice, you
strongly reduce the chances of having your trade strategy upset by largely predictable events. More
important, you’ll be able to anticipate likely catalysts for price shifts, which will give you greater
insight into subsequent price movements. Forewarned is forearmed.

If you’ve entered into a trade strategy based on an upcoming event — an expected weak
U.S. data report, for instance — and the market has cooperated and priced in a lower U.S.
dollar before the report is released, you may be looking at a profitable position before the
data is even released. As the release time draws near, you may consider taking some profit
off the table and holding on to the remaining partial position.
Consider the possible outcomes. If the data comes in negative for the U.S. dollar, and the market
reacts by selling the U.S. dollar, you’re still in the partial position to gain from further dollar
weakness. But what if the data comes in stronger than expected? Or what if the data comes in weak
as expected, but the market takes profit on short-dollar positions made in advance, in a “sell-therumor/buy-the-fact” reaction? You’ve protected your profit and taken some money out of the
market before the event ever transpired. Now, that’s called playing the market!

In the preceding scenario, I intentionally depict a short trade to remind you that being short
is as common as being long in currency trading. You may be more familiar with “Buy the
rumor, sell the fact.” I just want to make sure you know that it works both ways.
Before major data and events, the market also frequently goes into a sideways holding pattern. The
event speculators have all put on their positions, and the rest of the market is waiting for the data
to decide how to react. These holding patterns can develop hours or days in advance, depending
on what event is coming. Especially if you’re trading from a short-term perspective, be prepared
for these doldrums and consider whether riding through them is worthwhile.

Updating Order Levels as Prices Progress
Just because you’ve got a well-developed and considered trade plan doesn’t mean it has to be
carved in stone. Well, at least the ultimate stop-loss exit should be carved in stone. But when
you’re in a position, and the market is moving in your favor, it’s important to be flexible in
adjusting take-profit targets and amending stop-loss orders to protect your profits.

The key to being flexible in this regard is also being prudent — don’t adjust your take-profit
targets without also adjusting your stop-loss order in the same direction. If you’re long, and
you raise your take profit, raise your stop loss too. If you’re short, and you lower your take
profit, lower your stop-loss order as well.

Increasing take-profit targets
You’ve put together a well-developed trade strategy ahead of your trade, as I’ve
recommended, so now that you’re in the trade, why would you change your take-profit
objective? That’s a very good question, and you’d better make sure you have a very good
answer, because I’ve also touted the virtues of not tampering with a trade plan after the
position is opened.
So what constitutes a very good reason to extend your take-profit objective? Keep an eye out for
the following events to consider extending your take-profit targets:
Major new information: More likely than not, the new information will have to come out
of left field. If it was a scheduled event, like a data report or speech, the market
speculation surrounding it would have sopped up all the interest and muted its impact.
Major means it has to come from the very top echelons of decision-making, like the Fed
chairman, the European Central Bank (ECB) president, or other central bank chiefs; the
U.S. Treasury secretary; or, increasingly, China. Surprise interest rate changes or policy
shifts are always candidates. The more at odds the information is with current market
expectations, the better the chances that it will generate an extensive price move.
Thinner-than-usual liquidity: Reduced liquidity conditions can provoke more extensive
price movements than would otherwise occur, because fewer market participants are
involved to absorb the price shocks. Reduced liquidity is most evident during national
holidays, seasonal periods (late summer, Christmas/New Year’s), end of month, end of
quarter, and certain Fridays.
Breaks of major technical levels: Trend lines dating back several months or years,
Fibonacci retracement levels of major recent directional moves, and recent extreme highs

and lows are likely to trigger larger-than-normal price movements.
The currency pair: The more illiquid and volatile the currency pair you’re trading, the
greater the chances for an extreme move. GBP, CHF, and JPY are the most common
culprits among the majors, and the commodity currencies (AUD, CAD, NZD, and ZAR)
are also candidates.
As you can see, the list is pretty short, and there may be only a dozen or so events in the course of
a year that warrant altering your trade plan. Be careful about getting caught up in the day-to-day
noise and routinely extending your profit targets — it undermines trading discipline and the basis
for your trade strategy.

Tightening stop-loss orders to protect profits
I’m generally reluctant to extend our take-profit objectives unless there are significant grounds to
do so (see the preceding section) or I’m using a trailing stop loss. But when it comes to protecting
profits, I’m much more comfortable about adjusting stop losses to lock in gains. When you’ve got a
profit in the market, taking steps to protect it is always a smart move.

When formulating your overall trade plan, always consider what price levels need to be
surpassed to justify moving your stop loss. If it happens in the market, you’ll be ready and
know exactly what to do.
I like to focus on hourly and daily trend-line levels, highs/lows, and breaks of Fibonacci
retracement levels. When these technical support/resistance points are exceeded, it’s an indication
that the market has seen fit to move prices into a new level in the overall direction of the trade.
When that happens, consider moving your stop-loss order to levels just inside the broken technical
level. If the market has second thoughts about sustaining the break, your adjusted stop will then
take you out of the trade.
For example, say you’re long GBP/USD at 1.5250, your original stop loss is at 1.5180 below, and
your take-profit objective is above at 1.5380. Also above is resistance from yesterday’s high at
1.5335. If that level is surpassed, consider raising your stop loss to break even (where you
entered, at 1.5250) at the minimum. To more aggressively protect profits, you may raise the stop
further to 1.5315 or 1.5325, locking in 65 to 75 pips minimum, on the basis that 1.5335 should
now act as support.

The risk with adjusting stops too aggressively is that the market may come back to test the
break level (1.5335, in this example), triggering your adjusted stop loss if it’s too close, and
then go on to make fresh gains. But the trade-off in that situation is between something and
more of something, or potentially nothing and more of nothing. I prefer to have something to

show for my efforts.

Another way to lock in profits in a more dynamic fashion is by using a trailing stop-loss
order (see Chapter 4). After a technical level in the direction of your trade is overcome,
similar to the preceding example, you may consider instituting a trailing stop to replace your
fixed stop-loss order. Set the trailing distance to account for the distance between the current
market and the other side of the technical break level, possibly allowing for a margin of error
in case the break level is retested.

Chapter 16

Closing the Position and Evaluating Your
Results
In This Chapter
Closing out trades to maximize results
Taking profits and stopping losses
Exiting trades at the right time and price
Looking at your trading results to improve performance
Deciding how and when to exit, or close out, an open currency position is obviously one of the last
steps in any currency strategy, but it’s also one of the most important. In my trading experience, no
other part of a trading strategy has the potential to stir up greater feelings of self-recrimination by
traders.
The classic trader’s lament is “coulda, woulda, shoulda.” And at no time is that sentiment more
palpable than after a trade is closed out because that’s when the profit or loss has been registered
and you’re looking at real money made or lost.
Coulda, woulda, shoulda refers to actions you may have taken in the market, but for some reason
didn’t. In the context of exiting a position, it captures after-the-fact thoughts like “I could’ve taken
profit when it was testing x level,” “I would’ve cut my losses sooner if I’d known it was going to
keep going,” or “I should’ve stayed in longer for the big move.” The key is to understand
beforehand that you’re never going to know with 100 percent certainty how the actions you take
now will pan out in the future. In currency trading, you’re going to be making more decisions in an
hour or a day than most people make in a month, and that’s half the excitement.

In terms of maintaining a positive trading attitude, you have to accept that you’re not going
to be right all the time, so why should you kick yourself when a trade doesn’t work out? The
answer is, you shouldn’t — unless you failed to actively plan and monitor your trades. If you
didn’t do that, you have every reason to blame yourself.
If you ever find yourself thinking coulda, woulda, shoulda — and everyone does — you need to
look back not at what you failed to do, but at why you failed to do it. This chapter covers some of
the main considerations you face when it’s time to close out a position.

Closing Out the Trade
If you’ve embraced the idea of always trading with a plan — and I hope you have — you’re way
ahead of most of the market. Developing a thorough trading plan (trade size; entry levels; and exit
levels, both stop-loss and take-profit) while you have a clear head (no open market risk and its
attendant emotional distractions) is the first step to actively trading in the currency market.

Taking profit and stopping out
On the most basic level, every trade ends with either a profit or a loss. Sure, some trades finish
flat, which is when you exit the trade at the same price you entered, producing no gain or loss.
Most of the time, though, you’ll be dealing with the agony of being stopped out or the ecstasy of
taking profit.

Taking profit too soon or not at all
Taking profit is usually a positive experience for most traders. But if the market continues to move
in the direction of your trade after you’ve squared up and taken profit, you may begin to feel as
though you’re missing out or even losing money. This is where traders may begin to fear they’ve
taken profit too soon. The emotional element can become very strong, and past trading experience
can begin to color your current thinking. The alternative is usually not taking profit at all, which
ultimately leaves you exposed to continued market risk.
The important factor to remember is that you took profit based on your trade plan, whether it was
based on a technical level being reached or an event playing out. You identified a trade
opportunity and went with it, so enjoy the fact that you’ve got something to show for it. And don’t
get greedy. No trader ever captures 100 percent of any price movement, so keep your gains in
perspective and remember: The market is not there to give you money. That’s why it’s called
taking profit.

Above all, avoid making rash trading decisions after you’ve taken profit. The market may
continue to move in the direction of your earlier position, and you may be tempted to reenter
the same position. In some cases, reentering the same position may be the right thing to do,
but until you reevaluate the market objectively and without the emotional baggage of
previously being right (but not as right as you could’ve been), you run the risk of overstaying
your welcome.
Also, avoid the urge to suddenly take a position in the opposite direction. If you were short and
prices moved lower, for example, and your analysis and strategy have led you to buy back that
short, you may be tempted to venture into a long position. After all, if you were right that prices
would move lower, and you’re now buying back your position, it stands to reason that the market

may begin to move up — otherwise, why would you be buying now? But this trade is another trade
entirely and not the one you identified earlier.

Treat each trade independently, and recognize that the outcome of one trade has no bearing
on the next trade. Instead, take a step back and reassess the market after you’ve regained the
objectivity that comes from being square.

Taking partial profits
One way in which traders are able to stay in the market with a profitable position and hang on for
a potentially larger move is to take partial profits on the overall position. Of course, taking partial
profits requires the ability to trade in multiple lots — at least two. The idea is that as prices move
in favor of your trading position, you take profit on just a portion of your total position.
For example, you may have bought 15 mini-lots for a total position size of 150,000. If prices begin
to move higher, you may sell out pieces of the overall position, realizing profit on a part of your
position, but hold on to the rest if prices continue to move in your favor. If prices reverse course,
you’ve reduced your market exposure and may still have a profit to show for the overall trade. If
prices continue to rise, you can continue to take profit until your position is completely closed out.

Whenever you’re taking partial profits, you need to modify the size of your stop-loss and
other take-profit orders to account for the reduction in your total position size. Some online
brokers offer a position-based order-entry system, where your order size automatically
adjusts based on any changes to the overall position.

Depending on the jurisdiction in which you’re trading, closing partial positions may be
treated differently. In the United States, forex providers are required to account for your
trades on a first-in, first-out, (FIFO) basis. For example, if you buy one lot at 30, one at 20,
and one at 10, you’re long 3 lots at an average of 20. When you close out your first lot, you’re
going to be selling the one you first bought at 30. In most other jurisdictions, you’re able to
choose which individual lot you want to close.

There’s no practical difference on your margin balance between the two, but some traders
like the idea of closing out the lots with the most profit. The key here is that you’ve averaged
into a position, and the market needs to reverse beyond your average for you to realize a
profit under either system. If you take profit only on those lots that are in the money, you’re
still exposed to a loss from the ones that remain out of the money. If the market never fully
reverses, it means it’s still moving against you, and you’ll need an exit strategy.
