
: You’ve talked a lot about these systems that you're trading.
Do you typically have your favorite system for the week that you're
trading or are there a some systems that only give a few signals every
so often, and that’s why you're okay with trading multiple systems
at one time? How do you manage that, because there are so many
different indicators out there and there’s so many different ways
that people could trade, potentially creating a lot of counteracting
signals?

A : Pl only really focus on two different strategies at the same
time. That is, I'll have two strategies that I’m willing to trade and
one strategy at least that’s sort of in the laboratory being ready to
replace a strategy that I’m no longer comfortable with for a variety
of reasons. I might be bored with it. My schedule might not be able
to accommodate that strategy any longer. Or, quite frankly, it might
not be profitable any longer. It might have gone outside of the
statistical deviation of where it’s supposed to be producing results.

My short-term system on any given currency pair like the
euro/Canadian dollar will produce anywhere between 5 and 10
trades per week that last anywhere from 15 minutes to 12 to 18
hours at the very most on the far outside of the bell curve.

Then on the longer term I'll really only be opening trades two
or three times a week at the very most. Those are generally going
to be on the British pound/U.S. dollar or the U.S. dollar/Swiss
franc or maybe even the Canadian dollar/Japanese yen currency

62


THE 100-PIP TRADER

pairs. So I'll be somewhat diversified and I'll be waiting on one
timeframe chart for the longer-term system to play out, and on the
short-term charts, I'll have some activity that I can take advantage
of and everything else just gets blocked out. Like I said, I’m a back
tester as a career, so the majority of the time is spent verifying
that what I’m doing is falling within the statistical norm of what I
should be expecting.

I also experiment with new versions of the systems, all the time,
to make sure I’m getting the most out of each of them. And very
little time is actually spent in scanning the charts and hoping that
I see something that I like. I've always found it to be far more
detrimental to my trading to open up the charts in the morning
and just look around for some action than it is to say here’s the
timeframe I watch, here’s the system I use, and that’s it, that’s all
I am going to focus on. There could be a thousand pips out there
on every other timeframe chart, but I don’t care about it. When I
hear people say that they missed a trade on the U.S. dollar/South
African rand because they weren’t looking at that chart, and they've
got 25 currency pairs on their screen and they're missing trades all
the time, I always tell them that I missed on dating Julia Roberts
in college, but then I never even met her. I never had a chance
anyway. We're sometimes expecting to be able to take advantage
of opportunities that our schedule really doesn’t allow for, our
mental capacity really doesn’t allow for, and our trading capital
really doesn’t allow for. But we still get involved in it because we
want to have a piece of the action. This fear of “missing out” on
market action is what gets traders into trouble because we start to
make trades out of a desire to make money, instead of reasonable
analysis.

If you think of other professions, you can realize where
specialization and focus come into play. The best lawyers are spe-
cialists in one type of law. The same for doctors and accountants.
Successful traders are the same, so why should it be any different
for a retail Forex trader if I specialize in the British pound/U.S.
dollar in the long term and the euro/Canadian dollar in the short
term? If it does well and pays the bills then there shouldn't really
be a whole lot of temptation to experiment with real money on
any other timeframe or currency pair.

63


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: s0 you like to only trade the New York session, which is 7
A.M. to 12 P.M. EST. Do you ever place a trade afterwards?

A : I'm willing to place trades afterwards, based on the tested
results of the system that I use, but it is very rare that the
euro/Canadian dollar, for example, will create a New York ses-
sion box trade after 12 noon. So I'll either miss that trade or take it
later in the very rare circumstances that it occurs outside of the 12
noon time, which is usually between one and two times a month at
the most, and that’s my main short-term trading time. I’m gener-
ally always available during that time to take trades. In the longer
term I’m opening trades anytime day or night because my setup
only happens two to three times a week at the very most and I can
see them setting up from a mile away. I publish the idea, I actually
plan ahead for it. I know that it’s coming. I set alarms and I’ve got
a PDA that can tell me when the price is getting close to the entry
and I make myself available. I make the sacrifice and I make sure
that two or three times a week. I’m available and it’s usually not
that inconvenient for me to be up an hour early, or wake up in the
middle of the night for a few moments to make sure that the entry
has triggered, and it’s what I expected it to look like. Then I just
let it sit and I don’t worry about it after that.

Q.:on your shorter-term trades, do you ever use longer time-
frames for verification? Do you care about what’s happening on
the daily charts at all, or do you just focus primarily on your own
short-term signals?

A : [have a reputation for saying that confirmation is for Catholics
that are 12 years old. In seminars I like to ask why people look at
other indicators and they always say confirmation, cause that’s the
“ce” word. I generally say that the difficulty in actually agreeing
to place a trade increases proportionally to the number of time-
frames that a trader will look at. Meaning the more timeframes
and currency pairs that a trader looks at in order to actually jus-
tify taking the trade, the more confused that trader generally be-
comes because there could be conflicting signals. There would be a

64


THE 100-PIP TRADER

completely justifiable short-term buy trade on the British pound
that would conflict completely with what someone might see on
the 240-minute chart. What that does in my estimation is create a
little bit of a conflict but if through testing and statistical evidence
I can prove that incorporating a longer timeframe chart into my
shorter timeframe trading makes it more profitable, then I’m per-
fectly willing to do it. Like I said before, I think nothing is really
valid or invalid in trading, only testing makes it so. That’s one of my
favorite quotes that I made up. You have people walking around
all the time saying never do this and never do that, well testing is
really what makes the difference in whether something works or
not. So I am willing to do that. I’ve on occasion actually traded
short-term from the long-term charts. Meaning instead of looking
at the long-term trend and then picking an entry on the short-term
charts, I’ve actually looked at the long-term charts and basically
just traded for the very short-term when it hits a major level of
support and resistance. So it was actually sort of the opposite of
looking for confirmation.

Q: 50 do you have any alarms or any beepers by your bed to tell
you if things are happening over night?

A : I've tried the whole gamut. I’ve tried the baby monitor thing.
I've tried the making my computer make some horrendous loud
noise in the middle of the night, and what I do now is I essentially
set the computer to send an e-mail to my PDA and it just buzzes
or vibrates and I’m sent a text message to the PDA.

Q. what kind of equipment do you use?

A : [do 99 percent of my work on a Dell laptop. No extra monitors
or anything. I do have a desktop that I can hook four monitors up
to, but I usually have it running a music service or cable TV. At the
office, I also have a few televisions and lots of food and music and
other traders around me. It’s a great environment for testing and
trading.

65


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- what was your best trade ever?

A : On December 4, 2003, I bought the euro/U.S. dollar at 1.2150,
and I held on for 300 points. Every 25 or 50 pips, I added to the
position. The euro was a rocket ship at that time, and I held on for
dear life because I kept adding to the trade, and it moved so fast,
I didn’t have to hold it for long. This was one of the big lessons for
me to realize that if I got the trade idea right, I needed to capitalize
on it and instead of taking money off the table during the trade, I
needed to move my stops up with the move, and then add more
to the position. The key was to be aggressive when I was right. In
this particular trade, I was very fortunate to seize the moment and
pounce on the trade because we don’t get long trends every day
or every week in Forex—but when we do get a trend, it’s really
important that we get the most out of it.

I should have held that trade a lot longer if you look at it from
a historical perspective, but there were not a lot of us back then
that thought 1.3000 itself was a reachable goal.

Q.: what was your worst trade ever?

A : My first account, it was that first trade that lost 90 percent
in 72 hours. I had bought the euro, and I was enjoying a 10 or 20
pip gain on the trade, when I read some commentary online from
some guy that said that euro was going to fall. I trusted someone
else’s convictions without testing anything for myself. Trusting in
the analysis of a person I’d never met, I shorted the ever-loving
heck out of the euro/U.S. dollar, and I held on because I was sure
that he would never be handing out advice that was not top-notch.
He would surely never be wrong and he positively knew what he
was talking about.

Of course, his idea was garbage and I had done no testing to
prove that he knew what he was doing. Of course, I took double
the size of my regular trade. Of course, as the trade went against
me I added more. Of course, as it really started to go against me, I
sunk away and acted like it wasn’t happening. It was a demoralizing
experience to say the least. My friend who invested in the account

66


THE 100-PIP TRADER

with me was very supportive and basically said, “Never do that
again.” We remained friends.

Q.- what is your favorite part of trading?

A : I think it’s solving the pieces of the puzzle. It’s approaching a
problem and each trading system that I build or each trade that I
take is really the foundation of having taken a complex set of infor-
mation or data and coming up with a solution and then getting some
what immediate feedback. So I like that process of the immediate
feedback loop and putting together the pieces of a puzzle.

Q: Do you think it is more about entries or exits?

A : It’s about both. It’s about money management, and entries,
and exits, and being disciplined. It’s a complete package. I hear
nonsense all the time about, “It’s not where you enter, it’s where
you exit.” And I have been guilty of saying those types of things
myself and I was wrong if I ever did say it. Trading successfully is
more like surgery or flying a plane. You've got to get all of it right.
You can’t say as a surgeon, it’s not about the incision, it’s about the
stitches later on—that would mean it’s ok to cut a leg off to do a
skin graft. As a pilot, it’s about the takeoff and the landing. You’ve
got to get both right.

And how do you get them right? You test. You never trade
anything before you test it.

Q.- Lets talk a bit about the business of trading. How often do
you pay yourself or extract your trading profits?

A : Every two weeks. I actually am set up as a business, and I
am an employee of the company. I get paid and taxes are withheld
automatically. This makes it a lot easier at the end of the year. We
are paying taxes along the way. I’ve been told a thousand times that
this is not the most economical way to do it, but I live well, I don’t
ever have to worry about it, and I am very happy.

67


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: what do you do about medical bills? Insurance? Basic life
expenses?

A : We run the medical insurance through the company. And I
have very few basic life expenses. My wife and I try to be very
frugal. We try not to spend a lot of money, and a lot of rooms in
our house don’t have furniture. To put it succinctly, we've tried to
live below our means.

To put it less succinctly, a wise trader told me that when I was
learning to trade that I should not attempt to live like a successful
trader. I see a lot of successful traders who have doors on sawhorses
for desks, or work on an old computer, or who still drive a used
car. I also see a lot of unsuccessful traders who are driving new
cars, have lots of credit cards, have brand new computers, and who
spend a lot of money as if they've already started to make a lot of
money, It’s a matter of personal preference, of course, but I prefer
not to spend money.

Q.: Right now you do some coaching and mentoring, correct?
How many people have you coached and mentored?

A: 1,057.

Q.: How many of those are profitable?

A : At any given time, I’m in close touch with or I’m tracking the
performance and communicating with any where between 550 to
600 of those traders. This means I’m not receiving an e-mail from
them every day, but they're updating their performance on my
Web site or I’m in touch with them often enough to understand
how they're doing. So I can’t speak necessarily for all 1,057 of them
in every moment of the day, especially the ones that I worked with
in 2002 or 2003 that are long gone and just basically moved on,
whether they're either doing well or not, but in that 550 to 600 per-
sons, you've got a group that’s about 50 percent strong. That is they
are actually profitable week in and week out or at least at the end of

68


THE 100-PIP TRADER

the month. Meaning they're able to produce a consistent amount
of profits on a regular basis, not 1,000 pips a week but something
reasonable. For example, there’s one individual who does between
400 and 600 pips a week. There’s another individual who I worked
with in New York, she recently discovered that she was really a 20
pip a week trader and consistently since early summer this year,
every single week, week in and week out, counting the losses and
wins every week, she comes out net 20. She’s absolutely positively
consistent with that and has been able to increase the size of her
trades to make 20 pips worth more money. Then there’s a group of
people in the 30 percent range that are still struggling at breakeven
or up slightly better or slightly worse. These are individuals who
work full time, who have external pressures, who are new to the
training, and who don’t have a background in trading at all and are
having a seriously difficult time working with the terminology or
just the fundamentals. Finally, there’s the remaining group that for
a variety of reasons, because my training isn’t adequate for them
or because they simply weren't as serious about it as they thought
they were or because they're impulsive or because of whatever
other reasons, they're still losing money, or because I am not help-
ing them in the way that they will respond to. ’'m making some
changes to the way that I train people to do a better job of con-
quering some of the deepest trading problems that some of this
group have. I have flown unsuccessful students out to my office
and put them up so that I can work with them personally. I haven't
been able to make every single trader a hedge fund manager, but I
have done a good job of laying the groundwork for a lot of people.

Quits there any strong characteristic of a person that gives you
a sense that they're not going to make it? Or is not cut out for
trading?

A : I don’t know the right way to put this, and I guess I can be
as immodest about this as I need to be to explain it, and I don’t
mean it to be that way. But I can generally tell from the beginning
if someone’s goals are somewhat outlandish, meaning if someone

69


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

on day one of the training writes to me and tells me their goals for
the training are to make between 1,000 and 2,000 pips per month
or to take a 10,000 account and double that account before the end
of the month, I can then really tell from some of those types of
catch phases that I’m working with an individual who needs some
deprogramming, So I invite them to consider some alternative
perspectives so that they can approach trading from a different
mind set. Those people don’t always listen, though, because they're
under some type of external pressure. When you're trading to pay
your bills, it’s significantly more difficult to stop when you’re ahead
by $20, especially when your gas bill in the winter is $250. They've
got pressures on them that are more than just what an average
impulsive individual would have. The second type of individual
who’s a little bit behind on the curve is going to be somebody who's
just naturally impulsive. Someone who naturally makes decisions
that are significant, really quickly, doesn’t put a lot of thought
into it, talks a lot about how their gut reaction to something is,
XYZ, and they have a feeling that it’s going to go up or down.
Those types of individuals I invite as well to consider a different
mindset and perspective. The people whom I can recognize are
more successful at times are the people who seem to be very laid
back about the training, meaning they're not as severe or have a
type-A personality about the training or trading in general, but who
are the type of people who enjoy testing and enjoy experimentation
and are interested in validating or verifying the success of a system
before they actually implement it with real money.

Q.- you mentioned earlier that you have a network of traders that
you trade with or communicate with. Are these all former students
or external colleagues?

A : Ninety percent of them are former students. The rest of them
would be professionals in the industry whom I trust, whom I might
write and say, you know, I’m in the middle of this trade right now,
and it’s just awful, or it’s going well, etc. Basically people who have
different experience and can offer me a little bit of perspective. So

70


THE 100-PIP TRADER

there are people outside that range, but I feel really comfortable
working with people who are former students. I am in the office
right now in West Virginia, and here with me there’s an individual
from London, there are two people from Florida, two people from
Arizona, and they're all former students and they just come out to
hang out and test and trade. They're at varying levels of success, but
that’s really actually irrelevant. It’s really about having a group of
people to interact with, collaborate with; we sit down in front of the
white board and we project the charts onto the white board where
we can write on it. We actually back test together on a regular basis
and make it a part of our daily routine. These types of people, they
come and go as they please in the office, which is perfect since the
office was open for that type of thing to take place.

Q.: That's great. Does your wife trade at all?

A: No.

Q: she has no interest?

A : No interest whatsoever. She attended the French Culinary
Institute in Manhattan and she’s a pastry chef, so she has interests
that lie in different areas.

Q.: Wasn't she working at a hedge fund before, when did she

become a chef?

A : Kind of off topic, but not so far off the topic. She worked two
and half to three jobs the entire time that I was in law school to
pay the bills, and she got up at four o’clock in the morning to go
downtown to San Francisco to reconcile trades for a hedge fund,
and this hedge fund manager lost between $70 and $80 million in
one day on OEX options. My wife was reconciling the trades the
day after all these option trades blew up and that represented at

71


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

least 35 or 40 percent of the total assets in the fund at that time.
So she worked all kinds of jobs and worked just a ton of hours to

help us get by.

Q.-why did you decide to settle in West Virginia?

A : I'm in Wheeling, which is outside of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
and this is a long version of the story, but I sold a business to a
group of people in Charleston, West Virginia. I traveled to West
Virginia, loved the state, loved the pace of life. I'd lived in big cities
my whole life, so my wife and I visited here and settled down to
live in a place that was safe, quiet, close enough to a big city that
we could get everything we wanted.

Q.: do you think that having children has changed your trading

style at all or at least the times that you can trade?

A: Significantly. In some respects it’s like anything else that would
take your focus away, but in another respect I want my to spend
time with them instead of doing other things, so it’s not like having
a regular job where you don’t want to be there and you're thinking
about trading. With having kids, I could care less about the charts
and I just want to focus on them. Before I was much more used
to getting up earlier and taking far more short-term trades. But as
soon we adopted our first son, I became much more focused on
developing systems and trading from the longer term charts.

Q.- pia you ever play any sports?

A : I was a wrestler, but I was 0 and 1 and the only reason I
scored any points was because the guy kept throwing me outside
that circle and every time he threw me outside that circle they gave
me two points. Which I guess was the penalty for throwing the guy

72


THE 100-PIP TRADER

outside the circle. So, actually, at one point in that match I was
ahead of him, because he’d throw me outside the circle so many
times and then he pinned me and it was over.

: So do you think this ultimately sums up the whole fact that
you don’t have to feel competitive with other people?

A : I’m not sure that this one experience did anything except hurt
my pride for a few years. But now I’m very competitive with myself
and I hope that I could be described as the type of person who is
not very competitive with other people. I do believe that. I don’t
really care if somebody does better than I do [laughter]. It doesn’t
matter, I’m happy for them. Trading is never about the money,
it is about the quality of life and whether I can continue to solve
the puzzle, so to speak. I am not one to hang myself over losses.
One trade is one in a thousand that I took before and a thousand
that will come after. It is a lifestyle. For example, I managed some
accounts for a while and they didn’t go as well as I would have
liked, and I let that go. I found that I dwelt on the losses more
when it was other people’s money, and I was far more emotionally
stable when I traded my own funds. Trading my own account is a
career choice I made. The losses and ups and downs come as part
of the experience. I’m a better trader than I was last year, and the
year before, and so on. And I’m going to be a better trader next
year and the year afterward. It’s a process. You don’t just walk into
a law firm one day and decide that you're going to be the managing
partner. You gotta work your way up. Through it all, P’'ve never
really honestly considered giving it up just because I wasn’t doing
as well as somebody else.
